






CHAPTER XXV



"WE BEGAN TO MARRY THEM, MY GOOD FELLOW!"



Lord Dunholm and his eldest son, Lord Westholt, sauntered

together smoking their after-dinner cigars on the broad-

turfed terrace overlooking park and gardens which seemed to

sweep without boundary line into the purplish land beyond. 

The grey mass of the castle stood clear-cut against the blue of

a sky whose twilight was still almost daylight, though in the

purity of its evening stillness a star already hung, here and

there, and a young moon swung low.  The great spaces about

them held a silence whose exquisite entirety was marked at

intervals by the distant bark of a shepherd dog driving his

master's sheep to the fold, their soft, intermittent plaints--the

mother ewes' mellow answering to the tender, fretful lambs--

floated on the air, a lovely part of the ending day's repose. 

Where two who are friends stroll together at such hours, the

great beauty makes for silence or for thoughtful talk.  These

two men--father and son--were friends and intimates, and

had been so from Westholt's first memory of the time when

his childish individuality began to detach itself from the

background of misty and indistinct things.  They had liked each

other, and their liking and intimacy had increased with the

onward moving and change of years.  After sixty sane and

decently spent active years of life, Lord Dunholm, in either

country tweed or evening dress, was a well-built and handsome

man; at thirty-three his son was still like him.



"Have you seen her?" he was saying.



"Only at a distance.  She was driving Lady Anstruthers

across the marshes in a cart.  She drove well and----" he

laughed as he flicked the ash from his cigar--"the back of her

head and shoulders looked handsome."



"The American young woman is at present a factor which

is without doubt to be counted with," Lord Dunholm put the

matter without lightness.  "Any young woman is a factor, but

the American young woman just now--just now----"  He

paused a moment as though considering.  "It did not seem at

all necessary to count with them at first, when they began to

appear among us.  They were generally curiously exotic, funny

little creatures with odd manners and voices.  They were often

most amusing, and one liked to hear them chatter and see the

airy lightness with which they took superfluous, and sometimes

unsuperfluous, conventions, as a hunter takes a five-barred

gate.  But it never occurred to us to marry them.  We did not

take them seriously enough.  But we began to marry them--

we began to marry them, my good fellow!"



The final words broke forth with such a suggestion of sudden

anxiety that, in spite of himself, Westholt laughed

involuntarily, and his father, turning to look at him, laughed

also.  But he recovered his seriousness.



"It was all rather a muddle at first," he went on.  "Things

were not fairly done, and certain bad lots looked on it as a

paying scheme on the one side, while it was a matter of silly,

little ambitions on the other.  But that it is an extraordinary

country there is no sane denying--huge, fabulously resourceful

in every way--area, variety of climate, wealth of minerals,

products of all sorts, soil to grow anything, and sun and rain

enough to give each thing what it needs; last, or rather first, a

people who, considered as a nation, are in the riot of youth, and

who began by being English--which we Englishmen have an

innocent belief is the one method of `owning the earth.'  That

figure of speech is an Americanism I carefully committed to

memory.  Well, after all, look at the map--look at the map! 

There we are."



They had frequently discussed together the question of the

development of international relations.  Lord Dunholm, a man

of far-reaching and clear logic, had realised that the oddly

unaccentuated growth of intercourse between the two countries

might be a subject to be reflected on without lightness.



"The habit we have of regarding America and Americans

as rather a joke," he had once said, "has a sort of parallel in

the condescendingly amiable amusement of a parent at the

precocity or whimsicalness of a child.  But the child is shooting

up amazingly--amazingly.  In a way which suggests divers

possibilities."



The exchange of visits between Dunholm and Stornham had

been rare and formal.  From the call made upon the younger

Lady Anstruthers on her marriage, the Dunholms had returned

with a sense of puzzled pity for the little American bride, with

her wonderful frock and her uneasy, childish eyes.  For some

years Lady Anstruthers had been too delicate to make or return

calls.  One heard painful accounts of her apparent wretched

ill-health and of the condition of her husband's estate.



"As the relations between the two families have evidently

been strained for years," Lord Dunholm said, "it is interesting

to hear of the sudden advent of the sister.  It seems to point to

reconciliation.  And you say the girl is an unusual person.



"From what one hears, she would be unusual if she were

an English girl who had spent her life on an English estate. 

That an American who is making her first visit to England

should seem to see at once the practical needs of a neglected

place is a thing to wonder at.  What can she know about it,

one thinks.  But she apparently does know.  They say she has

made no mistakes--even with the village people.  She is managing,

in one way or another, to give work to every man who

wants it.  Result, of course--unbounded rustic enthusiasm."



Lord Dunholm laughed between the soothing whiffs of his cigar.



"How clever of her!  And what sensible good feeling! 

Yes--yes!  She evidently has learned things somewhere.  Perhaps

New York has found it wise to begin to give young

women professional training in the management of English

estates.  Who knows?  Not a bad idea."



It was the rustic enthusiasm, Westholt explained, which had

in a manner spread her fame.  One heard enlightening and

illustrative anecdotes of her.  He related several well worth

hearing.  She had evidently a sense of humour and unexpected

perceptions.



"One detail of the story of old Doby's meerschaum,"

Westholt said, "pleased me enormously.  She managed to convey

to him--without hurting his aged feelings or overwhelming him

with embarrassment--that if he preferred a clean churchwarden

or his old briarwood, he need not feel obliged to smoke the

new pipe.  He could regard it as a trophy.  Now, how did

she do that without filling him with fright and confusion, lest

she might think him not sufficiently grateful for her present? 

But they tell me she did it, and that old Doby is rapturously

happy and takes the meerschaum to bed with him, but only

smokes it on Sundays--sitting at his window blowing great

clouds when his neighbours are coming from church.  It was

a clever girl who knew that an old fellow might secretly like

his old pipe best."



"It was a deliciously clever girl," said Lord Dunholm. 

"One wants to know and make friends with her.  We must

drive over and call.  I confess, I rather congratulate myself

that Anstruthers is not at home."



"So do I," Westholt answered.  "One wonders a little

how far he and his sister-in-law will `foregather' when he

returns.  He's an unpleasant beggar."



A few days later Mrs. Brent, returning from a call on Mrs.

Charley Jenkins, was passed by a carriage whose liveries she

recognised half way up the village street.  It was the carriage

from Dunholm Castle.  Lord and Lady Dunholm and Lord

Westholt sat in it.  They were, of course, going to call at the

Court.  Miss Vanderpoel was beginning to draw people.  She

naturally would.  She would be likely to make quite a difference

in the neighbourhood now that it had heard of her and

Lady Anstruthers had been seen driving with her, evidently

no longer an unvisitable invalid, but actually decently clothed

and in her right mind.  Mrs. Brent slackened her steps that

she might have the pleasure of receiving and responding

gracefully to salutations from the important personages in the

landau.  She felt that the Dunholms were important.  There

were earldoms AND earldoms, and that of Dunholm was dignified

and of distinction.



A common-looking young man on a bicycle, who had wheeled

into the village with the carriage, riding alongside it for a

hundred yards or so, stopped before the Clock Inn and

dismounted, just as Mrs. Brent neared him.  He saw her looking

after the equipage, and lifting his cap spoke to her civilly.



"This is Stornham village, ain't it, ma'am?" he inquired.



"Yes, my man."  His costume and general aspect seemed to

indicate that he was of the class one addressed as "my man,"

though there was something a little odd about him.



"Thank you.  That wasn't Miss Vanderpoel's eldest sister

in that carriage, was it?"



"Miss Vanderpoel's----" Mrs. Brent hesitated.  "Do you

mean Lady Anstruthers?"



"I'd forgotten her name.  I know Miss Vanderpoel's

eldest sister lives at Stornham--Reuben S. Vanderpoel's

daughter."



"Lady Anstruthers' younger sister is a Miss Vanderpoel,

and she is visiting at Stornham Court now."  Mrs. Brent could

not help adding, curiously, "Why do you ask?"



"I am going to see her.  I'm an American."



Mrs. Brent coughed to cover a slight gasp.  She had heard

remarkable things of the democratic customs of America.  It

was painful not to be able to ask questions.



"The lady in the carriage was the Countess of Dunholm,"

she said rather grandly.  "They are going to the Court to

call on Miss Vanderpoel."



"Then Miss Vanderpoel's there yet.  That's all right. 

Thank you, ma'am," and lifting his cap again he turned into

the little public house.



The Dunholm party had been accustomed on their rare

visits to Stornham to be received by the kind of man-servant

in the kind of livery which is a manifest, though unwilling,

confession.  The men who threw open the doors were of regulation

height, well dressed, and of trained bearing.  The entrance hall

had lost its hopeless shabbiness.  It was a complete and

picturesquely luxurious thing.  The change suggested

magic.  The magic which had been used, Lord Dunholm

reflected, was the simplest and most powerful on earth.  Given

surroundings, combined with a gift for knowing values of

form and colour, if you have the power to spend thousands

of guineas on tiger skins, Oriental rugs, and other beauties,

barrenness is easily transformed.



The drawing-room wore a changed aspect, and at a first glance it

was to be seen that in poor little Lady Anstruthers, as she had

generally been called, there was to be noted alteration

also.  In her case the change, being in its first stages,

could not perhaps be yet called transformation, but, aided by

softly pretty arrangement of dress and hair, a light in her

eyes, and a suggestion of pink under her skin, one recalled that

she had once been a pretty little woman, and that after all

she was only about thirty-two years old



That her sister, Miss Vanderpoel, had beauty, it was not

necessary to hesitate in deciding.  Neither Lord Dunholm nor

his wife nor their son did hesitate.  A girl with long limbs

an alluring profile, and extraordinary black lashes set round

lovely Irish-blue eyes, possesses physical capital not to be

argued about.



She was not one of the curious, exotic little creatures, whose

thin, though sometimes rather sweet, and always gay, high-

pitched young voices Lord Dunholm had been so especially

struck by in the early days of the American invasion.  Her

voice had a tone one would be likely to remember with pleasure. 

How well she moved--how well her black head was set

on her neck!  Yes, she was of the new type--the later generation.



These amazing, oddly practical people had evolved it-- planned

it, perhaps, bought--figuratively speaking--the architects

and material to design and build it--bought them in

whatever country they found them, England, France, Italy

Germany--pocketing them coolly and carrying them back

home to develop, complete, and send forth into the world when

their invention was a perfected thing.  Struck by the humour

of his fancy, Lord Dunholm found himself smiling into the

Irish-blue eyes.  They smiled back at him in a way which

warmed his heart.  There were no pauses in the conversation

which followed.  In times past, calls at Stornham had generally

held painfully blank moments.  Lady Dunholm was as 

pleased as her husband.  A really charming girl was an enormous

acquisition to the neighbourhood.



Westholt, his father saw, had found even more than the

story of old Doby's pipe had prepared him to expect.



Country calls were not usually interesting or stimulating,

and this one was.  Lord Dunholm laid subtly brilliant plans

to lead Miss Vanderpoel to talk of her native land and her

views of it.  He knew that she would say things worth hearing. 

Incidentally one gathered picturesque detail.  To have

vibrated between the two continents since her thirteenth year,

to have spent a few years at school in one country, a few

years in another, and yet a few years more in still another,

as part of an arranged educational plan; to have crossed the

Atlantic for the holidays, and to have journeyed thousands of

miles with her father in his private car; to make the visits of a

man of great schemes to his possessions of mines, railroads, and

lands which were almost principalities--these things had been

merely details of her life, adding interest and variety, it was

true, but seeming the merely normal outcome of existence. 

They were normal to Vanderpoels and others of their class

who were abnormalities in themselves when compared with the

rest of the world.



Her own very lack of any abnormality reached, in Lord

Dunholm's mind, the highest point of illustration of the phase

of life she beautifully represented--for beautiful he felt its

rare charms were.



When they strolled out to look at the gardens he found

talk with her no less a stimulating thing.  She told her story

of Kedgers, and showed the chosen spot where thickets of lilies

were to bloom, with the giants lifting white archangel trumpets

above them in the centre.



"He can be trusted," she said.  "I feel sure he can be

trusted.  He loves them.  He could not love them so much

and not be able to take care of them."  And as she looked at

him in frank appeal for sympathy, Lord Dunholm felt that

for the moment she looked like a tall, queenly child.



But pleased as he was, he presently gave up his place at her

side to Westholt.  He must not be a selfish old fellow and

monopolise her.  He hoped they would see each other often, he

said charmingly.  He thought she would be sure to like Dunholm,

which was really a thoroughly English old place, marked

by all the features she seemed so much attracted by.  There

were some beautiful relics of the past there, and some rather

shocking ones--certain dungeons, for instance, and a gallows

mount, on which in good old times the family gallows had

stood.  This had apparently been a working adjunct to the

domestic arrangements of every respectable family, and that

irritating persons should dangle from it had been a simple

domestic necessity, if one were to believe old stories.



"It was then that nobles were regarded with respect," he

said, with his fine smile.  "In the days when a man appeared

with clang of arms and with javelins and spears before, and

donjon keeps in the background, the attitude of bent knees

and awful reverence were the inevitable results.  When one

could hang a servant on one's own private gallows, or chop

off his hand for irreverence or disobedience--obedience and

reverence were a rule.  Now, a month's notice is the extremity

of punishment, and the old pomp of armed servitors suggests

comic opera.  But we can show you relics of it at Dunholm."



He joined his wife and began at once to make himself so

delightful to Rosy that she ceased to be afraid of him, and

ended by talking almost gaily of her London visit.



Betty and Westholt walked together.  The afternoon being

lovely, they had all sauntered into the park to look at certain

views, and the sun was shining between the trees.  Betty

thought the young man almost as charming as his father,

which was saying much.  She had fallen wholly in love with

Lord Dunholm--with his handsome, elderly face, his voice,

his erect bearing, his fine smile, his attraction of manner,

his courteous ease and wit.  He was one of the men who

stood for the best of all they had been born to represent. 

Her own father, she felt, stood for the best of all such an

American as himself should be.  Lord Westholt would in time

be what his father was.  He had inherited from him good

looks, good feeling, and a sense of humour.  Yes, he had been

given from the outset all that the other man had been denied. 

She was thinking of Mount Dunstan as "the other man," and

spoke of him.



"You know Lord Mount Dunstan?" she said.



Westholt hesitated slightly.



"Yes--and no," he answered, after the hesitation.  "No

one knows him very well.  You have not met him?" with a

touch of surprise in his tone.



"He was a passenger on the Meridiana when I last crossed

the Atlantic.  There was a slight accident and we were thrown

together for a few moments.  Afterwards I met him by chance

again.  I did not know who he was."



Lord Westholt showed signs of hesitation anew.  In fact,

he was rather disturbed.  She evidently did not know anything

whatever of the Mount Dunstans.  She would not be

likely to hear the details of the scandal which had obliterated

them, as it were, from the decent world.



The present man, though he had not openly been mixed up

with the hideous thing, had borne the brand because he had

not proved himself to possess any qualities likely to recommend

him.  It was generally understood that he was a bad lot also. 

To such a man the allurements such a young woman as Miss

Vanderpoel would present would be extraordinary.  It was

unfortunate that she should have been thrown in his way.  At

the same time it was not possible to state the case clearly

during one's first call on a beautiful stranger.



"His going to America was rather spirited," said the

mellow voice beside him.  "I thought only Americans took their

fates in their hands in that way.  For a man of his class to face

a rancher's life means determination.  It means the spirit----"

with a low little laugh at the leap of her imagination--"of the

men who were Mount Dunstans in early days and went forth

to fight for what they meant to have.  He went to fight.  He

ought to have won.  He will win some day."



"I do not know about fighting," Lord Westholt answered. 

Had the fellow been telling her romantic stories?  "The general

impression was that he went to America to amuse himself."



"No, he did not do that," said Betty, with simple finality. 

"A sheep ranch is not amusing----"  She stopped short and

stood still for a moment.  They had been walking down the

avenue, and she stopped because her eyes had been caught by

a figure half sitting, half lying in the middle of the road, a

prostrate bicycle near it.  It was the figure of a cheaply

dressed young man, who, as she looked, seemed to make an

ineffectual effort to rise.



"Is that man ill?" she exclaimed.  "I think he must be." 

They went towards him at once, and when they reached him he

lifted a dazed white face, down which a stream of blood was

trickling from a cut on his forehead.  He was, in fact, very

white indeed, and did not seem to know what he was doing.



"I am afraid you are hurt," Betty said, and as she spoke

the rest of the party joined them.  The young man vacantly

smiled, and making an unconscious-looking pass across his face

with his hand, smeared the blood over his features painfully. 

Betty kneeled down, and drawing out her handkerchief, lightly

wiped the gruesome smears away.  Lord Westholt saw what

had happened, having given a look at the bicycle.



"His chain broke as he was coming down the incline, and

as he fell he got a nasty knock on this stone," touching with his

foot a rather large one, which had evidently fallen from some

cartload of building material.



The young man, still vacantly smiling, was fumbling at his

breast pocket.  He began to talk incoherently in good, nasal

New York, at the mere sound of which Lady Anstruthers

made a little yearning step forward.



"Superior any other," he muttered.  "Tabulator spacer--

marginal release key--call your 'tention--instantly--'justable

--Delkoff--no equal on market."  And having found what he

had fumbled for, he handed a card to Miss Vanderpoel and

sank unconscious on her breast.



"Let me support him, Miss Vanderpoel," said Westholt,

starting forward.



"Never mind, thank you," said Betty.  "If he has fainted

I suppose he must be laid flat on the ground.  Will you please

to read the card.



It was the card Mount Dunstan had read the day before.



                       J. BURRIDGE & SON,

                      DELKOFF TYPEWRITER CO.

              BROADWAY, NEW YORK.     G. SELDEN.





"He is probably G. Selden," said Westholt.  "Travelling

in the interests of his firm, poor chap.  The clue is not of much

immediate use, however."



They were fortunately not far from the house, and Westholt

went back quickly to summon servants and send for the

village doctor.  The Dunholms were kindly sympathetic, and

each of the party lent a handkerchief to staunch the bleeding. 

Lord Dunholm helped Miss Vanderpoel to lay the young man

down carefully.



"I am afraid," he said; "I am really afraid his leg is broken. 

It was twisted under him.  What can be done with him?"



Miss Vanderpoel looked at her sister.



"Will you allow him to be carried to the house temporarily,

Rosy?" she asked.  "There is apparently nothing else to be done."



"Yes, yes," said Lady Anstruthers.  "How could one send

him away, poor fellow!  Let him be carried to the house."



Miss Vanderpoel smiled into Lord Dunholm's much approving,

elderly eyes.



"G. Selden is a compatriot," she said.  "Perhaps he heard

I was here and came to sell me a typewriter."



Lord Westholt returning with two footmen and a light

mattress, G. Selden was carried with cautious care to the house. 

The afternoon sun, breaking through the branches of the

ancestral oaks, kindly touched his keen-featured, white young

face.  Lord Dunholm and Lord Westholt each lent a friendly

hand, and Miss Vanderpoel, keeping near, once or twice wiped

away an insistent trickle of blood which showed itself from

beneath the handkerchiefs.  Lady Dunholm followed with

Lady Anstruthers.



Afterwards, during his convalescence, G. Selden frequently

felt with regret that by his unconsciousness of the dignity of

his cortege at the moment he had missed feeling himself to be

for once in a position he would have designated as "out of

sight" in the novelty of its importance.  To have beheld him,

borne by nobles and liveried menials, accompanied by ladies

of title, up the avenue of an English park on his way to be

cared for in baronial halls, would, he knew, have added a joy

to the final moments of his grandmother, which the consolations

of religion could scarcely have met equally in competition. 

His own point of view, however, would not, it is true,

have been that of the old woman in the black net cap and

purple ribbons, but of a less reverent nature.  His enjoyment, in

fact, would have been based upon that transatlantic sense of

humour, whose soul is glee at the incompatible, which would

have been full fed by the incongruity of "Little Willie being

yanked along by a bunch of earls, and Reuben S. Vanderpoel's

daughters following the funeral."  That he himself should have

been unconscious of the situation seemed to him like "throwing

away money."



The doctor arriving after he had been put to bed found

slight concussion of the brain and a broken leg.  With Lady

Anstruthers' kind permission, it would certainly be best that

he should remain for the present where he was.  So, in a

bedroom whose windows looked out upon spreading lawns and

broad-branched trees, he was as comfortably established as was

possible.  G. Selden, through the capricious intervention of

Fate, if he had not "got next" to Reuben S. Vanderpoel himself,

had most undisputably "got next" to his favourite daughter.



As the Dunholm carriage rolled down the avenue there

reigned for a few minutes a reflective silence.  It was Lady

Dunholm who broke it.  "That," she said in her softly

decided voice, "that is a nice girl."



Lord Dunholm's agreeable, humorous smile flickered into

evidence.



"That is it," he said.  "Thank you, Eleanor, for supplying

me with a quite delightful early Victorian word.  I believe

I wanted it.  She is a beauty and she is clever.  She is a

number of other things--but she is also a nice girl.  If you will

allow me to say so, I have fallen in love with her."



"If you will allow me to say so," put in Westholt, "so have

I--quite fatally."



"That," said his father, with speculation in his eye, "is

more serious."
