








CHAPTER XXXI



NO, SHE WOULD NOT



Sir Nigel did not invite Rosalie to accompany them, when the

next morning, after breakfast, he reminded Betty of his

suggestion of the night before, that she should walk over the

place with him, and show him what had been done.  He preferred

to make his study of his sister-in-law undisturbed.



There was no detail whose significance he missed as they went

about together.  He had keen eyes and was a quite sufficiently

practical person on such matters as concerned his own

interests.  In this case it was to his interest to make up his

mind as to what he might gain or lose by the appearance of his

wife's family.  He did not mean to lose--if it could be helped--

anything either of personal importance or material benefit.  And

it could only be helped by his comprehending clearly what he had

to deal with.  Betty was, at present, the chief factor in the

situation, and he was sufficiently astute to see that she might

not be easy to read.  His personal theories concerning women

presented to him two or three effective ways of managing them. 

You made love to them, you flattered them either subtly or

grossly, you roughly or smoothly bullied them, or you harrowed

them with haughty indifference--if your love-making had produced

its proper effect--when it was necessary to lure or drive

or trick them into submission.  Women should be made useful

in one way or another.  Little fool as she was, Rosalie had been

useful.  He had, after all was said and done, had some

comparatively easy years as the result of her existence.  But she

had not been useful enough, and there had even been moments

when he had wondered if he had made a mistake in separating

her entirely from her family.  There might have been more

to be gained if he had allowed them to visit her and had played

the part of a devoted husband in their presence.  A great bore,



of course, but they could not have spent their entire lives at

Stornham.  Twelve years ago, however, he had known very

little of Americans, and he had lost his temper.  He was really

very fond of his temper, and rather enjoyed referring to it with

tolerant regret as being a bad one and beyond his control--with

a manner which suggested that the attribute was the inevitable

result of strength of character and masculine spirit.  The luxury

of giving way to it was a great one, and it was exasperating

as he walked about with this handsome girl to find himself

beginning to suspect that, where she was concerned, some self-

control might be necessary.  He was led to this thought because

the things he took in on all sides could only have been achieved

by a person whose mind was a steadily-balanced thing.  In one's

treatment of such a creature, methods must be well chosen. 

The crudest had sufficed to overwhelm Rosalie.  He tried two

or three little things as experiments during their walk.



The first was to touch with dignified pathos on the subject of

Ughtred.  Betty, he intimated gently, could imagine what a man's

grief and disappointment might be on finding his son and heir

deformed in such a manner.  The delicate reserve with which he

managed to convey his fear that Rosalie's own uncontrolled

hysteric attacks had been the cause of the misfortune was very

well done.  She had, of course, been very young and much spoiled,

and had not learned self-restraint, poor girl.



It was at this point that Betty first realised a certain hideous

thing.  She must actually remain silent--there would be at

the outset many times when she could only protect her sister

by refraining from either denial or argument.  If she turned

upon him now with refutation, it was Rosy who would be

called upon to bear the consequences.  He would go at once to

Rosy, and she herself would have done what she had said she

would not do--she would have brought trouble upon the poor

girl before she was strong enough to bear it.  She suspected

also that his intention was to discover how much she had heard,

and if she might be goaded into betraying her attitude in the

matter.



But she was not to be so goaded.  He watched her closely

and her very colour itself seemed to be under her own control. 

He had expected--if she had heard hysteric, garbled stories

from his wife--to see a flame of scarlet leap up on the cheek he

was admiring.  There was no such leap, which was baffling in

itself.  Could it be that experience had taught Rosalie the

discretion of keeping her mouth shut?



"I am very fond of Ughtred," was the sole comment he was

granted.  "We made friends from the first.  As he grows

older and stronger, his misfortune may be less apparent.  He

will be a very clever man."



"He will be a very clever man if he is at all like----"  He

checked himself with a slight movement of his shoulders.  "I

was going to say a thing utterly banal.  I beg your pardon.  I

forgot for the moment that I was not talking to an English girl."



It was so stupid that she turned and looked at him,

smiling faintly.  But her answer was quite mild and soft.



"Do not deprive me of compliments because I am a mere American,"

she said.  "I am very fond of them, and respond at once."



"You are very daring," he said, looking straight into her

eyes--"deliciously so.  American women always are, I think."



"The young devil," he was saying internally.  "The

beautiful young devil!  She throws one off the track."



He found himself more and more attracted and exasperated

as they made their rounds.  It was his sense of being attracted

which was the cause of his exasperation.  A girl who could stir

one like this would be a dangerous enemy.  Even as a friend

she would not be safe, because one faced the absurd peril of

losing one's head a little and forgetting the precautions one

should never lose sight of where a woman was concerned--the

precautions which provided for one's holding a good taut rein

in one's own hands.



They went from gardens to greenhouses, from greenhouses

to stables, and he was on the watch for the moment when she

would reveal some little feminine pose or vanity, but, this

morning, at least, she laid none bare.  She did not strike him

as a being of angelic perfections, but she was very modern and

not likely to show easily any openings in her armour.



"Of course, I continue to be amazed," he commented,

"though one ought not to be amazed at anything which evolves

from your extraordinary country.  In spite of your impersonal

air, I shall persist in regarding you as my benefactor.  But, to

be frank, I always told Rosalie that if she would write to your

father he would certainly put things in order."



"She did write once, you will remember," answered Betty.



"Did she?" with courteous vagueness.  "Really, I am

afraid I did not hear of it.  My poor wife has her own little

ideas about the disposal of her income."



And Betty knew that she was expected to believe that Rosy

had hoarded the money sent to restore the place, and from

sheer weak miserliness had allowed her son's heritage to fall

to ruin.  And but for Rosy's sake, she might have stopped upon

the path and, looking at him squarely, have said, "You are

lying to me.  And I know the truth."



He continued to converse amiably.



"Of course, it is you one must thank, not only for rousing

in the poor girl some interest in her personal appearance, but

also some interest in her neighbours.  Some women, after they

marry and pass girlhood, seem to release their hold on all desire

to attract or retain friends.  For years Rosalie has given

herself up to a chronic semi-invalidism.  When the mistress of a

house is always depressed and languid and does not return visits,

neighbours become discouraged and drop off, as it were."



If his wife had told stories to gain her sympathy his companion

would be sure to lose her temper and show her hand.  If he could

make her openly lose her temper, he would have made an advance.



"One can quite understand that," she said.  "It is a great

happiness to me to see Rosy gaining ground every day.  She

has taken me out with her a good many times, and people are

beginning to realise that she likes to see them at Stornham."



"You are very delightful," he said, "with your `She has

taken me out.'  When I glanced at the magnificent array of

cards on the salver in the hall, I realised a number of things,

and quite vulgarly lost my breath.  The Dunholms have been

very amiable in recalling our existence.  But charming

Americans--of your order--arouse amiable emotions."



"I am very amiable myself," said Betty.



It was he who flushed now.  He was losing patience at feeling

himself held with such lightness at arm's length, and at

being, in spite of himself, somehow compelled to continue to

assume a jocular courtesy.



"No, you are not," he answered.



"Not?" repeated Betty, with an incredulous lifting of her brows.



"You are charming and clever, but I rather suspect you of

being a vixen.  At all events you are a spirited young woman

and quick-witted enough to understand the attraction you must

have for the sordid herd."



And then he became aware--if not of an opening in her

armour--at least of a joint in it.  For he saw, near her ear, a

deepening warmth.  That was it.  She was quick-witted, and

she hid somewhere a hot pride.



"I confess, however," he proceeded cheerfully, "that

notwithstanding my own experience of the habits of the sordid

herd, I saw one card I was surprised to find, though really"

--shrugging his shoulders--"I ought to have been less surprised

to find it than to find any other.  But it was bold.  I

suppose the fellow is desperate."



"You are speaking of----?" suggested Betty.



"Of Mount Dunstan.  Hang it all, it WAS bold!"  As if

in half-amused disgust.



As she had walked through the garden paths, Betty had at

intervals bent and gathered a flower, until she held in one hand

a loose, fair sheaf.  At this moment she stooped to break off a

spire of pale blue campanula.  And she was--as with a shock

--struck with a consciousness that she bent because she must--

because to do so was a refuge--a concealment of something she

must hide.  It had come upon her without a second's warning. 

Sir Nigel was right.  She was a vixen--a virago.  She was in

such a rage that her heart sprang up and down and her cheek

and eyes were on fire.  Her long-trained control of herself

was gone.  And her shock was a lightning-swift awakening to

the fact that she felt all this--she must hide her face--because

it was this one man--just this one and no other--who was

being dragged into this thing with insult.



It was an awakening, and she broke off, rather slowly, one--

two--three--even four campanula stems before she stood upright

again.



As for Nigel Anstruthers--he went on talking in his low-

pitched, disgusted voice.



"Surely he might count himself out of the running.  There

will be a good deal of running, my dear Betty.  You fair

Americans have learned that by this time.  But that a man who

has not even a decent name to offer--who is blackballed by his

county--should coolly present himself as a pretendant is an

insolence he should be kicked for."



Betty arranged her campanulas carefully.  There was no

exterior reason why she should draw sword in Lord Mount

Dunstan's defence.  He had certainly not seemed to expect

anything intimately interested from her.  His manner she had

generally felt to be rather restrained.  But one could, in a

measure, express one's self.



"Whatsoever the `running,' " she remarked, "no pretendant

has complimented me by presenting himself, so far--and Lord

Mount Dunstan is physically an unusually strong man."



"You mean it would be difficult to kick him?  Is this

partisanship?  I hope not.  Am I to understand," he added with

deliberation, "that Rosalie has received him here?"



"Yes."



"And that you have received him, also--as you have received

Lord Westholt?"



"Quite."



"Then I must discuss the matter with Rosalie.  It is not to

be discussed with you."



"You mean that you will exercise your authority in the matter?"



"In England, my dear girl, the master of a house is still

sometimes guilty of exercising authority in matters which concern

the reputation of his female relatives.  In the absence of

your father, I shall not allow you, while you are under my roof,

to endanger your name in any degree.  I am, at least, your

brother by marriage.  I intend to protect you."



"Thank you," said Betty.



"You are young and extremely handsome, you will have an

enormous fortune, and you have evidently had your own way

all your life.  A girl, such as you are, may either make a

magnificent marriage or a ridiculous and humiliating one. 

Neither American young women, nor English young men, are as

disinterested as they were some years ago.  Each has begun to

learn what the other has to give."



"I think that is true," commented Betty.



"In some cases there is a good deal to be exchanged on both

sides.  You have a great deal to give, and should get exchange

worth accepting.  A beggared estate and a tainted title are not

good enough."



"That is businesslike," Betty made comment again.



Sir Nigel laughed quietly.



"The fact is--I hope you won't misunderstand my saying

it--you do not strike me as being UN-businesslike, yourself."



"I am not," answered Betty.



"I thought not," rather narrowing his eyes as he watched

her, because he believed that she must involuntarily show her

hand if he irritated her sufficiently.  "You do not impress me

as being one of the girls who make unsuccessful marriages. 

You are a modern New York beauty--not an early Victorian

sentimentalist."  He did not despair of results from his process

of irritation.  To gently but steadily convey to a beautiful and

spirited young creature that no man could approach her without

ulterior motive was rather a good idea.  If one could make

it clear--with a casual air of sensibly taking it for granted--

that the natural power of youth, wit, and beauty were rendered

impotent by a greatness of fortune whose proportions obliterated

all else; if one simply argued from the premise that young love

was no affair of hers, since she must always be regarded as a

gilded chattel, whose cost was writ large in plain figures,

what girl, with blood in her veins, could endure it long without

wincing?  This girl had undue, and, as he regarded such

matters, unseemly control over her temper and her nerves,

but she had blood enough in her veins, and presently she would

say or do something which would give him a lead.



"When you marry----" he began.



She lifted her head delicately, but ended the sentence for

him with eyes which were actually not unsmiling.



"When I marry, I shall ask something in exchange for what I have

to give."



"If the exchange is to be equal, you must ask a great deal,"

he answered.  "That is why you must be protected from such

fellows as Mount Dunstan."



"If it becomes necessary, perhaps I shall be able to protect

myself," she said.



"Ah!" regretfully, "I am afraid I have annoyed you--

and that you need protection more than you suspect."  If

she were flesh and blood, she could scarcely resist resenting

the implication contained in this.  But resist it she did, and

with a cool little smile which stirred him to sudden, if

irritated, admiration.



She paused a second, and used the touch of gentle regret

herself.



"You have wounded my vanity by intimating that my

admirers do not love me for myself alone."



He paused, also, and, narrowing his eyes again, looked

straight between her lashes.



"They ought to love you for yourself alone," he said, in a

low voice.  "You are a deucedly attractive girl."



"Oh, Betty," Rosy had pleaded, "don't make him angry

--don't make him angry."



So Betty lifted her shoulders slightly without comment.



"Shall we go back to the house now?" she said.  "Rosalie

will naturally be anxious to hear that what has been done in

your absence has met with your approval."



In what manner his approval was expressed to Rosalie, Betty

did not hear this morning, at least.  Externally cool though

she had appeared, the process had not been without its results,

and she felt that she would prefer to be alone.



"I must write some letters to catch the next steamer,"

she said, as she went upstairs.



When she entered her room, she went to her writing table

and sat down, with pen and paper before her.  She drew the

paper towards her and took up the pen, but the next moment

she laid it down and gave a slight push to the paper.  As she

did so she realised that her hand trembled.



"I must not let myself form the habit of falling into

rages--or I shall not be able to keep still some day, when

I ought to do it," she whispered.  "I am in a fury--a fury." 

And for a moment she covered her face.



She was a strong girl, but a girl, notwithstanding her

powers.  What she suddenly saw was that, as if by one movement

of some powerful unseen hand, Rosy, who had been the centre

of all things, had been swept out of her thought.  Her

anger at the injustice done to Rosy had been as nothing

before the fire which had flamed in her at the insult flung

at the other.  And all that was undue and unbalanced.  One

might as well look the thing straightly in the face.  Her old

child hatred of Nigel Anstruthers had sprung up again in

ten-fold strength.  There was, it was true, something

abominable about him, something which made his words more

abominable than they would have been if another man had

uttered them--but, though it was inevitable that his method

should rouse one, where those of one's own blood were

concerned, it was not enough to fill one with raging flame when

his malignity was dealing with those who were almost

strangers.  Mount Dunstan was almost a stranger--she had met

Lord Westholt oftener.  Would she have felt the same hot

beat of the blood, if Lord Westholt had been concerned? 

No, she answered herself frankly, she would not.
