





CHAPTER X. - MONEY - ITS USE AND ABUSE







"Not for to hide it in a hedge,

Nor for a train attendant,

But for the glorious privilege

Of being independent." - Burns.



"Neither a borrower nor a lender be:

For loan oft loses both itself and friend;

And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry." - Shakepeare.



Never treat money affairs with levity - Money is character. - Sir

E. L. Bulwer Lytton.





How a man uses money - makes it, saves it, and spends it - is

perhaps one of the best tests of practical wisdom.  Although money

ought by no means to be regarded as a chief end of man's life,

neither is it a trifling matter, to be held in philosophic

contempt, representing as it does to so large an extent, the means

of physical comfort and social well-being.  Indeed, some of the

finest qualities of human nature are intimately related to the

right use of money; such as generosity, honesty, justice, and self-

sacrifice; as well as the practical virtues of economy and

providence.  On the other hand, there are their counterparts of

avarice, fraud, injustice, and selfishness, as displayed by the

inordinate lovers of gain; and the vices of thriftlessness,

extravagance, and improvidence, on the part of those who misuse and

abuse the means entrusted to them.  "So that," as is wisely

observed by Henry Taylor in his thoughtful 'Notes from Life,' "a

right measure and manner in getting, saving, spending, giving,

taking, lending, borrowing, and bequeathing, would almost argue a

perfect man."



Comfort in worldly circumstances is a con ion which every man is

justified in striving to attain by all worthy means.  It secures

that physical satisfaction, which is necessary for the culture of

the better part of his nature; and enables him to provide for those

of his own household, without which, says the Apostle, a man is

"worse than an infidel."  Nor ought the duty to be any the less

indifferent to us, that the respect which our fellow-men entertain

for us in no slight degree depends upon the manner in which we

exercise the opportunities which present themselves for our

honourable advancement in life.  The very effort required to be

made to succeed in life with this object, is of itself an

education; stimulating a man's sense of self-respect, bringing out

his practical qualities, and disciplining him in the exercise of

patience, perseverance, and such like virtues.  The provident and

careful man must necessarily be a thoughtful man, for he lives not

merely for the present, but with provident forecast makes

arrangements for the future.  He must also be a temperate man, and

exercise the virtue of self-denial, than which nothing is so much

calculated to give strength to the character.  John Sterling says

truly, that "the worst education which teaches self denial, is

better than the best which teaches everything else, and not that."

The Romans rightly employed the same word (virtus) to designate

courage, which is in a physical sense what the other is in a moral;

the highest virtue of all being victory over ourselves.



Hence the lesson of self-denial - the sacrificing of a present

gratification for a future good - is one of the last that is

learnt.  Those classes which work the hardest might naturally be

expected to value the most the money which they earn.  Yet the

readiness with which so many are accustomed to eat up and drink up

their earnings as they go, renders them to a great extent helpless

and dependent upon the frugal.  There are large numbers of persons

among us who, though enjoying sufficient means of comfort and

independence, are often found to be barely a day's march ahead of

actual want when a time of pressure occurs; and hence a great cause

of social helplessness and suffering.  On one occasion a deputation

waited on Lord John Russell, respecting the taxation levied on the

working classes of the country, when the noble lord took the

opportunity of remarking, "You may rely upon it that the Government

of this country durst not tax the working classes to anything like

the extent to which they tax themselves in their expenditure upon

intoxicating drinks alone!"  Of all great public questions, there

is perhaps none more important than this, - no great work of reform

calling more loudly for labourers.  But it must be admitted that

"self-denial and self-help" would make a poor rallying cry for the

hustings; and it is to be feared that the patriotism of this day

has but little regard for such common things as individual economy

and providence, although it is by the practice of such virtues only

that the genuine independence of the industrial classes is to be

secured.  "Prudence, frugality, and good management," said Samuel

Drew, the philosophical shoemaker, "are excellent artists for

mending bad times:  they occupy but little room in any dwelling,

but would furnish a more effectual remedy for the evils of life

than any Reform Bill that ever passed the Houses of Parliament."

Socrates said, "Let him that would move the world move first

himself.  " Or as the old rhyme runs -





"If every one would see

To his own reformation,

How very easily

You might reform a nation."





It is, however, generally felt to be a far easier thing to reform

the Church and the State than to reform the least of our own bad

habits; and in such matters it is usually found more agreeable to

our tastes, as it certainly is the common practice, to begin with

our neighbours rather than with ourselves.



Any class of men that lives from hand to mouth will ever be an

inferior class.  They will necessarily remain impotent and

helpless, hanging on to the skirts of society, the sport of times

and seasons.  Having no respect for themselves, they will fail in

securing the respect of others.  In commercial crises, such men

must inevitably go to the wall.  Wanting that husbanded power which

a store of savings, no matter how small, invariably gives them,

they will be at every man's mercy, and, if possessed of right

feelings, they cannot but regard with fear and trembling the future

possible fate of their wives and children.  "The world," once said

Mr. Cobden to the working men of Huddersfield, "has always been

divided into two classes, - those who have saved, and those who

have spent - the thrifty and the extravagant.  The building of all

the houses, the mills, the bridges, and the ships, and the

accomplishment of all other great works which have rendered man

civilized and happy, has been done by the savers, the thrifty; and

those who have wasted their resources have always been their

slaves.  It has been the law of nature and of Providence that this

should be so; and I were an impostor if I promised any class that

they would advance themselves if they were improvident,

thoughtless, and idle."



Equally sound was the advice given by Mr. Bright to an assembly of

working men at Rochdale, in 1847, when, after expressing his belief

that, "so far as honesty was concerned, it was to be found in

pretty equal amount among all classes," he used the following

words:- "There is only one way that is safe for any man, or any

number of men, by which they can maintain their present position if

it be a good one, or raise themselves above it if it be a bad one,

- that is, by the practice of the virtues of industry, frugality,

temperance, and honesty.  There is no royal road by which men can

raise themselves from a position which they feel to be

uncomfortable and unsatisfactory, as regards their mental or

physical condition, except by the practice of those virtues by

which they find numbers amongst them are continually advancing and

bettering themselves."



There is no reason why the condition of the average workman should

not be a useful, honourable, respectable, and happy one.  The whole

body of the working classes might, (with few exceptions) be as

frugal, virtuous, well-informed, and well-conditioned as many

individuals of the same class have already made themselves.  What

some men are, all without difficulty might be.  Employ the same

means, and the same results will follow.  That there should be a

class of men who live by their daily labour in every state is the

ordinance of God, and doubtless is a wise and righteous one; but

that this class should be otherwise than frugal, contented,

intelligent, and happy, is not the design of Providence, but

springs solely from the weakness, self-indulgence, and perverseness

of man himself.  The healthy spirit of self-help created amongst

working people would more than any other measure serve to raise

them as a class, and this, not by pulling down others, but by

levelling them up to a higher and still advancing standard of

religion, intelligence, and virtue.  "All moral philosophy," says

Montaigne, "is as applicable to a common and private life as to the

most splendid.  Every man carries the entire form of the human

condition within him."



When a man casts his glance forward, he will find that the three

chief temporal contingencies for which he has to provide are want

of employment, sickness, and death.  The two first he may escape,

but the last is inevitable.  It is, however, the duty of the

prudent man so to live, and so to arrange, that the pressure of

suffering, in event of either contingency occurring, shall be

mitigated to as great an extent as possible, not only to himself,

but also to those who are dependent upon him for their comfort and

subsistence.  Viewed in this light the honest earning and the

frugal use of money are of the greatest importance.  Rightly

earned, it is the representative of patient industry and untiring

effort, of temptation resisted, and hope rewarded; and rightly

used, it affords indications of prudence, forethought and self-

denial - the true basis of manly character.  Though money

represents a crowd of objects without any real worth or utility, it

also represents many things of great value; not only food,

clothing, and household satisfaction, but personal self-respect and

independence.  Thus a store of savings is to the working man as a

barricade against want; it secures him a footing, and enables him

to wait, it may be in cheerfulness and hope, until better days come

round.  The very endeavour to gain a firmer position in the world

has a certain dignity in it, and tends to make a man stronger and

better.  At all events it gives him greater freedom of action, and

enables him to husband his strength for future effort.



But the man who is always hovering on the verge of want is in a

state not far removed from that of slavery.  He is in no sense his

own master, but is in constant peril of falling under the bondage

of others, and accepting the terms which they dictate to him.  He

cannot help being, in a measure, servile, for he dares not look the

world boldly in the face; and in adverse times he must look either

to alms or the poor's rates.  If work fails him altogether, he has

not the means of moving to another field of employment; he is fixed

to his parish like a limpet to its rock, and can neither migrate

nor emigrate.



To secure independence, the practice of simple economy is all that

is necessary.  Economy requires neither superior courage nor

eminent virtue; it is satisfied with ordinary energy, and the

capacity of average minds.  Economy, at bottom, is but the spirit

of order applied in the administration of domestic affairs:  it

means management, regularity, prudence, and the avoidance of waste.

The spirit of economy was expressed by our Divine Master in the

words 'Gather up the fragments that remain, so that nothing may be

lost.'  His omnipotence did not disdain the small things of life;

and even while revealing His infinite power to the multitude, he

taught the pregnant lesson of carefulness of which all stand so

much in need.



Economy also means the power of resisting present gratification for

the purpose of securing a future good, and in this light it

represents the ascendancy of reason over the animal instincts.  It

is altogether different from penuriousness:  for it is economy that

can always best afford to be generous.  It does not make money an

idol, but regards it as a useful agent.  As Dean Swift observes,

"we must carry money in the head, not in the heart."  Economy may

be styled the daughter of Prudence, the sister of Temperance, and

the mother of Liberty.  It is evidently conservative - conservative

of character, of domestic happiness, and social well-being.  It is,

in short, the exhibition of self-help in one of its best forms.



Francis Horner's father gave him this advice on entering life:-

"Whilst I wish you to be comfortable in every respect, I cannot too

strongly inculcate economy.  It is a necessary virtue to all; and

however the shallow part of mankind may despise it, it certainly

leads to independence, which is a grand object to every man of a

high spirit."  Burns' lines, quoted at the head of this chapter,

contain the right idea; but unhappily his strain of song was higher

than his practice; his ideal better than his habit.  When laid on

his death-bed he wrote to a friend, "Alas! Clarke, I begin to feel

the worst.  Burns' poor widow, and half a dozen of his dear little

ones helpless orphans; - there I am weak as a woman's tear.  Enough

of this; - 'tis half my disease."



Every man ought so to contrive as to live within his means.  This

practice is of the very essence of honesty.  For if a man do not

manage honestly to live within his own means, he must necessarily

be living dishonestly upon the means of somebody else.  Those who

are careless about personal expenditure, and consider merely their

own gratification, without regard for the comfort of others,

generally find out the real uses of money when it is too late.

Though by nature generous, these thriftless persons are often

driven in the end to do very shabby things.  They waste their money

as they do their time; draw bills upon the future; anticipate their

earnings; and are thus under the necessity of dragging after them a

load of debts and obligations which seriously affect their action

as free and independent men.



It was a maxim of Lord Bacon, that when it was necessary to

economize, it was better to look after petty savings than to

descend to petty gettings.  The loose cash which many persons throw

away uselessly, and worse, would often form a basis of fortune and

independence for life.  These wasters are their own worst enemies,

though generally found amongst the ranks of those who rail at the

injustice of "the world."  But if a man will not be his own friend,

how can he expect that others will?  Orderly men of moderate means

have always something left in their pockets to help others; whereas

your prodigal and careless fellows who spend all never find an

opportunity for helping anybody.  It is poor economy, however, to

be a scrub.  Narrowmindedness in living and in dealing is generally

short-sighted, and leads to failure.  The penny soul, it is said,

never came to twopence.  Generosity and liberality, like honesty,

prove the best policy after all.  Though Jenkinson, in the 'Vicar

of Wakefield,' cheated his kind-hearted neighbour Flamborough in

one way or another every year, "Flamborough," said he, "has been

regularly growing in riches, while I have come to poverty and a

gaol."  And practical life abounds in cases of brilliant results

from a course of generous and honest policy.



The proverb says that "an empty bag cannot stand upright;" neither

can a man who is in debt.  It is also difficult for a man who is in

debt to be truthful; hence it is said that lying rides on debt's

back.  The debtor has to frame excuses to his creditor for

postponing payment of the money he owes him; and probably also to

contrive falsehoods.  It is easy enough for a man who will exercise

a healthy resolution, to avoid incurring the first obligation; but

the facility with which that has been incurred often becomes a

temptation to a second; and very soon the unfortunate borrower

becomes so entangled that no late exertion of industry can set him

free.  The first step in debt is like the first step in falsehood;

almost involving the necessity of proceeding in the same course,

debt following debt, as lie follows lie.  Haydon, the painter,

dated his decline from the day on which he first borrowed money.

He realized the truth of the proverb, "Who goes a-borrowing, goes

a-sorrowing."  The significant entry in his diary is:  "Here began

debt and obligation, out of which I have never been and never shall

be extricated as long as I live."  His Autobiography shows but too

painfully how embarrassment in money matters produces poignant

distress of mind, utter incapacity for work, and constantly

recurring humiliations.  The written advice which he gave to a

youth when entering the navy was as follows:  "Never purchase any

enjoyment if it cannot be procured without borrowing of others.

Never borrow money:  it is degrading.  I do not say never lend, but

never lend if by lending you render yourself unable to pay what you

owe; but under any circumstances never borrow."  Fichte, the poor

student, refused to accept even presents from his still poorer

parents.



Dr. Johnson held that early debt is ruin.  His words on the subject

are weighty, and worthy of being held in remembrance.  "Do not,"

said he, "accustom yourself to consider debt only as an

inconvenience; you will find it a calamity.  Poverty takes away so

many means of doing good, and produces so much inability to resist

evil, both natural and moral, that it is by all virtuous means to

be avoided. . . . Let it be your first care, then, not to be in any

man's debt.  Resolve not to be poor; whatever you have spend less.

Poverty is a great enemy to human happiness; it certainly destroys

liberty, and it makes some virtues impracticable and others

extremely difficult.  Frugality is not only the basis of quiet, but

of beneficence.  No man can help others that wants help himself; we

must have enough before we have to spare."



It is the bounden duty of every man to look his affairs in the

face, and to keep an account of his incomings and outgoings in

money matters.  The exercise of a little simple arithmetic in this

way will be found of great value.  Prudence requires that we shall

pitch our scale of living a degree below our means, rather than up

to them; but this can only be done by carrying out faithfully a

plan of living by which both ends may be made to meet.  John Locke

strongly advised this course:  "Nothing," said he, "is likelier to

keep a man within compass than having constantly before his eyes

the state of his affairs in a regular course of account."  The Duke

of Wellington kept an accurate detailed account of all the moneys

received and expended by him.  "I make a point," said he to Mr.

Gleig, "of paying my own bills, and I advise every one to do the

same; formerly I used to trust a confidential servant to pay them,

but I was cured of that folly by receiving one morning, to my great

surprise, duns of a year or two's standing.  The fellow had

speculated with my money, and left my bills unpaid."  Talking of

debt his remark was, "It makes a slave of a man.  I have often

known what it was to be in want of money, but I never got into

debt."  Washington was as particular as Wellington was, in matters

of business detail; and it is a remarkable fact, that he did not

disdain to scrutinize the smallest outgoings of his household -

determined as he was to live honestly within his means - even while

holding the high office of President of the American Union.



Admiral Jervis, Earl St. Vincent, has told the story of his early

struggles, and, amongst other things, of his determination to keep

out of debt.  "My father had a very large family," said he, "with

limited means.  He gave me twenty pounds at starting, and that was

all he ever gave me.  After I had been a considerable time at the

station [at sea], I drew for twenty more, but the bill came back

protested.  I was mortified at this rebuke, and made a promise,

which I have ever kept, that I would never draw another bill

without a certainty of its being paid.  I immediately changed my

mode of living, quitted my mess, lived alone, and took up the

ship's allowance, which I found quite sufficient; washed and mended

my own clothes; made a pair of trousers out of the ticking of my

bed; and having by these means saved as much money as would redeem

my honour, I took up my bill, and from that time to this I have

taken care to keep within my means."  Jervis for six years endured

pinching privation, but preserved his integrity, studied his

profession with success, and gradually and steadily rose by merit

and bravery to the highest rank.



Mr. Hume hit the mark when he once stated in the House of Commons -

though his words were followed by "laughter" - that the tone of

living in England is altogether too high.  Middle-class people are

too apt to live up to their incomes, if not beyond them:  affecting

a degree of "style" which is most unhealthy in its effects upon

society at large.  There is an ambition to bring up boys as

gentlemen, or rather "genteel" men; though the result frequently

is, only to make them gents.  They acquire a taste for dress,

style, luxuries, and amusements, which can never form any solid

foundation for manly or gentlemanly character; and the result is,

that we have a vast number of gingerbread young gentry thrown upon

the world, who remind one of the abandoned hulls sometimes picked

up at sea, with only a monkey on board.



There is a dreadful ambition abroad for being "genteel."  We keep

up appearances, too often at the expense of honesty; and, though we

may not be rich, yet we must seem to be so.  We must be

"respectable," though only in the meanest sense - in mere vulgar

outward show.  We have not the courage to go patiently onward in

the condition of life in which it has pleased God to call us; but

must needs live in some fashionable state to which we ridiculously

please to call ourselves, and all to gratify the vanity of that

unsubstantial genteel world of which we form a part.  There is a

constant struggle and pressure for front seats in the social

amphitheatre; in the midst of which all noble self-denying resolve

is trodden down, and many fine natures are inevitably crushed to

death.  What waste, what misery, what bankruptcy, come from all

this ambition to dazzle others with the glare of apparent worldly

success, we need not describe.  The mischievous results show

themselves in a thousand ways - in the rank frauds committed by men

who dare to be dishonest, but do not dare to seem poor; and in the

desperate dashes at fortune, in which the pity is not so much for

those who fail, as for the hundreds of innocent families who are so

often involved in their ruin.




The late Sir Charles Napier, in taking leave of his command in

India, did a bold and honest thing in publishing his strong

protest, embodied in his last General Order to the officers of the

Indian army, against the "fast" life led by so many young officers

in that service, involving them in ignominious obligations.  Sir

Charles strongly urged, in that famous document - what had almost

been lost sight of that "honesty is inseparable from the character

of a thorough-bred gentleman;" and that "to drink unpaid-for

champagne and unpaid-for beer, and to ride unpaid-for horses, is to

be a cheat, and not a gentleman."  Men who lived beyond their means

and were summoned, often by their own servants, before Courts of

Requests for debts contracted in extravagant living, might be

officers by virtue of their commissions, but they were not

gentlemen.  The habit of being constantly in debt, the Commander-

in-chief held, made men grow callous to the proper feelings of a

gentleman.  It was not enough that an officer should be able to

fight:  that any bull-dog could do.  But did he hold his word

inviolate? - did he pay his debts?  These were among the points of

honour which, he insisted, illuminated the true gentleman's and

soldier's career.  As Bayard was of old, so would Sir Charles

Napier have all British officers to be.  He knew them to be

"without fear," but he would also have them "without reproach."

There are, however, many gallant young fellows, both in India and

at home, capable of mounting a breach on an emergency amidst

belching fire, and of performing the most desperate deeds of

valour, who nevertheless cannot or will not exercise the moral

courage necessary to enable them to resist a petty temptation

presented to their senses.  They cannot utter their valiant "No,"

or "I can't afford it," to the invitations of pleasure and self-

enjoyment; and they are found ready to brave death rather than the

ridicule of their companions.



The young man, as he passes through life, advances through a long

line of tempters ranged on either side of him; and the inevitable

effect of yielding, is degradation in a greater or a less degree.

Contact with them tends insensibly to draw away from him some

portion of the divine electric element with which his nature is

charged; and his only mode of resisting them is to utter and to act

out his "no" manfully and resolutely.  He must decide at once, not

waiting to deliberate and balance reasons; for the youth, like "the

woman who deliberates, is lost."  Many deliberate, without

deciding; but "not to resolve, IS to resolve."  A perfect knowledge

of man is in the prayer, "Lead us not into temptation."  But

temptation will come to try the young man's strength; and once

yielded to, the power to resist grows weaker and weaker.  Yield

once, and a portion of virtue has gone.  Resist manfully, and the

first decision will give strength for life; repeated, it will

become a habit.  It is in the outworks of the habits formed in

early life that the real strength of the defence must lie; for it

has been wisely ordained, that the machinery of moral existence

should be carried on principally through the medium of the habits,

so as to save the wear and tear of the great principles within.  It

is good habits, which insinuate themselves into the thousand

inconsiderable acts of life, that really constitute by far the

greater part of man's moral conduct.



Hugh Miller has told how, by an act of youthful decision, he saved

himself from one of the strong temptations so peculiar to a life of

toil.  When employed as a mason, it was usual for his fellow-

workmen to have an occasional treat of drink, and one day two

glasses of whisky fell to his share, which he swallowed.  When he

reached home, he found, on opening his favourite book - 'Bacon's

Essays' - that the letters danced before his eyes, and that he

could no longer master the sense.  "The condition," he says, "into

which I had brought myself was, I felt, one of degradation.  I had

sunk, by my own act, for the time, to a lower level of intelligence

than that on which it was my privilege to be placed; and though the

state could have been no very favourable one for forming a

resolution, I in that hour determined that I should never again

sacrifice my capacity of intellectual enjoyment to a drinking

usage; and, with God's help, I was enabled to hold by the

determination."  It is such decisions as this that often form the

turning-points in a man's life, and furnish the foundation of his

future character.  And this rock, on which Hugh Miller might have

been wrecked, if he had not at the right moment put forth his moral

strength to strike away from it, is one that youth and manhood

alike need to be constantly on their guard against.  It is about

one of the worst and most deadly, as well as extravagant,

temptations which lie in the way of youth.  Sir Walter Scott used

to say that "of all vices drinking is the most incompatible with

greatness."  Not only so, but it is incompatible with economy,

decency, health, and honest living.  When a youth cannot restrain,

he must abstain.  Dr. Johnson's case is the case of many.  He said,

referring to his own habits, "Sir, I can abstain; but I can't be

moderate."



But to wrestle vigorously and successfully with any vicious habit,

we must not merely be satisfied with contending on the low ground

of worldly prudence, though that is of use, but take stand upon a

higher moral elevation.  Mechanical aids, such as pledges, may be

of service to some, but the great thing is to set up a high

standard of thinking and acting, and endeavour to strengthen and

purify the principles as well as to reform the habits.  For this

purpose a youth must study himself, watch his steps, and compare

his thoughts and acts with his rule.  The more knowledge of himself

he gains, the more humble will he be, and perhaps the less

confident in his own strength.  But the discipline will be always

found most valuable which is acquired by resisting small present

gratifications to secure a prospective greater and higher one.  It

is the noblest work in self-education - for





"Real glory

Springs from the silent conquest of ourselves,

And without that the conqueror is nought

But the first slave."





Many popular books have been written for the purpose of

communicating to the public the grand secret of making money.  But

there is no secret whatever about it, as the proverbs of every

nation abundantly testify.  "Take care of the pennies and the

pounds will take care of themselves."  "Diligence is the mother of

good luck."  "No pains no gains."  "No sweat no sweet."  "Work and

thou shalt have."  "The world is his who has patience and

industry."  "Better go to bed supperless than rise in debt."  Such

are specimens of the proverbial philosophy, embodying the hoarded

experience of many generations, as to the best means of thriving in

the world.  They were current in people's mouths long before books

were invented; and like other popular proverbs they were the first

codes of popular morals.  Moreover they have stood the test of

time, and the experience of every day still bears witness to their

accuracy, force, and soundness.  The proverbs of Solomon are full

of wisdom as to the force of industry, and the use and abuse of

money:- "He that is slothful in work is brother to him that is a

great waster."  "Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways,

and be wise."  Poverty, says the preacher, shall come upon the

idler, "as one that travelleth, and want as an armed man;" but of

the industrious and upright, "the hand of the diligent maketh

rich."  "The drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty; and

drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags."  "Seest thou a man

diligent in his business? he shall stand before kings."  But above

all, "It is better to get wisdom than gold; for wisdom is better

than rubies, and all the things that may be desired are not to be

compared to it."



Simple industry and thrift will go far towards making any person of

ordinary working faculty comparatively independent in his means.

Even a working man may be so, provided he will carefully husband

his resources, and watch the little outlets of useless expenditure.

A penny is a very small matter, yet the comfort of thousands of

families depends upon the proper spending and saving of pennies.

If a man allows the little pennies, the results of his hard work,

to slip out of his fingers - some to the beershop, some this way

and some that - he will find that his life is little raised above

one of mere animal drudgery.  On the other hand, if he take care of

the pennies - putting some weekly into a benefit society or an

insurance fund, others into a savings' bank, and confiding the rest

to his wife to be carefully laid out, with a view to the

comfortable maintenance and education of his family - he will soon

find that this attention to small matters will abundantly repay

him, in increasing means, growing comfort at home, and a mind

comparatively free from fears as to the future.  And if a working

man have high ambition and possess richness in spirit, - a kind of

wealth which far transcends all mere worldly possessions - he may

not only help himself, but be a profitable helper of others in his

path through life.  That this is no impossible thing even for a

common labourer in a workshop, may be illustrated by the remarkable

career of Thomas Wright of Manchester, who not only attempted but

succeeded in the reclamation of many criminals while working for

weekly wages in a foundry.



Accident first directed Thomas Wright's attention to the difficulty

encountered by liberated convicts in returning to habits of honest

industry.  His mind was shortly possessed by the subject; and to

remedy the evil became the purpose of his life.  Though he worked

from six in the morning till six at night, still there were leisure

minutes that he could call his own - more especially his Sundays -

and these he employed in the service of convicted criminals; a

class then far more neglected than they are now.  But a few minutes

a day, well employed, can effect a great deal; and it will scarcely

be credited, that in ten years this working man, by steadfastly

holding to his purpose, succeeded in rescuing not fewer than three

hundred felons from continuance in a life of villany!  He came to

be regarded as the moral physician of the Manchester Old Bailey;

and where the Chaplain and all others failed, Thomas Wright often

succeeded.  Children he thus restored reformed to their parents;

sons and daughters otherwise lost, to their homes; and many a

returned convict did he contrive to settle down to honest and

industrious pursuits.  The task was by no means easy.  It required

money, time, energy, prudence, and above all, character, and the

confidence which character invariably inspires.  The most

remarkable circumstance was that Wright relieved many of these poor

outcasts out of the comparatively small wages earned by him at

foundry work.  He did all this on an income which did not average,

during his working career, 100L. per annum; and yet, while he was

able to bestow substantial aid on criminals, to whom he owed no

more than the service of kindness which every human being owes to

another, he also maintained his family in comfort, and was, by

frugality and carefulness, enabled to lay by a store of savings

against his approaching old age.  Every week he apportioned his

income with deliberate care; so much for the indispensable

necessaries of food and clothing, so much for the landlord, so much

for the schoolmaster, so much for the poor and needy; and the lines

of distribution were resolutely observed.  By such means did this

humble workman pursue his great work, with the results we have so

briefly described.  Indeed, his career affords one of the most

remarkable and striking illustrations of the force of purpose in a

man, of the might of small means carefully and sedulously applied,

and, above all, of the power which an energetic and upright

character invariably exercises upon the lives and conduct of

others.



There is no discredit, but honour, in every right walk of industry,

whether it be in tilling the ground, making tools, weaving fabrics,

or selling the products behind a counter.  A youth may handle a

yard-stick, or measure a piece of ribbon; and there will be no

discredit in doing so, unless he allows his mind to have no higher

range than the stick and ribbon; to be as short as the one, and as

narrow as the other.  "Let not those blush who HAVE," said Fuller,

"but those who HAVE NOT a lawful calling."  And Bishop Hall said,

"Sweet is the destiny of all trades, whether of the brow or of the

mind."  Men who have raised themselves from a humble calling, need

not be ashamed, but rather ought to be proud of the difficulties

they have surmounted.  An American President, when asked what was

his coat-of-arms, remembering that he had been a hewer of wood in

his youth, replied, "A pair of shirt sleeves."  A French doctor

once taunted Flechier, Bishop of Nismes, who had been a tallow-

chandler in his youth, with the meanness of his origin, to which

Flechier replied, "If you had been born in the same condition that

I was, you would still have been but a maker of candles."



Nothing is more common than energy in money-making, quite

independent of any higher object than its accumulation.  A man who

devotes himself to this pursuit, body and soul, can scarcely fail

to become rich.  Very little brains will do; spend less than you

earn; add guinea to guinea; scrape and save; and the pile of gold

will gradually rise.  Osterwald, the Parisian banker, began life a

poor man.  He was accustomed every evening to drink a pint of beer

for supper at a tavern which he visited, during which he collected

and pocketed all the corks that he could lay his hands on.  In

eight years he had collected as many corks as sold for eight louis

d'ors.  With that sum he laid the foundations of his fortune -

gained mostly by stock-jobbing; leaving at his death some three

millions of francs.  John Foster has cited a striking illustration

of what this kind of determination will do in money-making.  A

young man who ran through his patrimony, spending it in profligacy,

was at length reduced to utter want and despair.  He rushed out of

his house intending to put an end to his life, and stopped on

arriving at an eminence overlooking what were once his estates.  He

sat down, ruminated for a time, and rose with the determination

that he would recover them.  He returned to the streets, saw a load

of coals which had been shot out of a cart on to the pavement

before a house, offered to carry them in, and was employed.  He

thus earned a few pence, requested some meat and drink as a

gratuity, which was given him, and the pennies were laid by.

Pursuing this menial labour, he earned and saved more pennies;

accumulated sufficient to enable him to purchase some cattle, the

value of which he understood, and these he sold to advantage.  He

proceeded by degrees to undertake larger transactions, until at

length he became rich.  The result was, that he more than recovered

his possessions, and died an inveterate miser.  When he was buried,

mere earth went to earth.  With a nobler spirit, the same

determination might have enabled such a man to be a benefactor to

others as well as to himself.  But the life and its end in this

case were alike sordid.



To provide for others and for our own comfort and independence in

old age, is honourable, and greatly to be commended; but to hoard

for mere wealth's sake is the characteristic of the narrow-souled

and the miserly.  It is against the growth of this habit of

inordinate saving that the wise man needs most carefully to guard

himself:  else, what in youth was simple economy, may in old age

grow into avarice, and what was a duty in the one case, may become

a vice in the other.  It is the LOVE of money - not money itself -

which is "the root of evil," - a love which narrows and contracts

the soul, and closes it against generous life and action.  Hence,

Sir Walter Scott makes one of his characters declare that "the

penny siller slew more souls than the naked sword slew bodies."  It

is one of the defects of business too exclusively followed, that it

insensibly tends to a mechanism of character.  The business man

gets into a rut, and often does not look beyond it.  If he lives

for himself only, he becomes apt to regard other human beings only

in so far as they minister to his ends.  Take a leaf from such

men's ledger and you have their life.



Worldly success, measured by the accumulation of money, is no doubt

a very dazzling thing; and all men are naturally more or less the

admirers of worldly success.  But though men of persevering, sharp,

dexterous, and unscrupulous habits, ever on the watch to push

opportunities, may and do "get on" in the world, yet it is quite

possible that they may not possess the slightest elevation of

character, nor a particle of real goodness.  He who recognizes no

higher logic than that of the shilling, may become a very rich man,

and yet remain all the while an exceedingly poor creature.  For

riches are no proof whatever of moral worth; and their glitter

often serves only to draw attention to the worthlessness of their

possessor, as the light of the glowworm reveals the grub.



The manner in which many allow themselves to be sacrificed to their

love of wealth reminds one of the cupidity of the monkey - that

caricature of our species.  In Algiers, the Kabyle peasant attaches

a gourd, well fixed, to a tree, and places within it some rice.

The gourd has an opening merely sufficient to admit the monkey's

paw.  The creature comes to the tree by night, inserts his paw, and

grasps his booty.  He tries to draw it back, but it is clenched,

and he has not the wisdom to unclench it.  So there he stands till

morning, when he is caught, looking as foolish as may be, though

with the prize in his grasp.  The moral of this little story is

capable of a very extensive application in life.



The power of money is on the whole over-estimated.  The greatest

things which have been done for the world have not been

accomplished by rich men, nor by subscription lists, but by men

generally of small pecuniary means.  Christianity was propagated

over half the world by men of the poorest class; and the greatest

thinkers, discoverers, inventors, and artists, have been men of

moderate wealth, many of them little raised above the condition of

manual labourers in point of worldly circumstances.  And it will

always be so.  Riches are oftener an impediment than a stimulus to

action; and in many cases they are quite as much a misfortune as a

blessing.  The youth who inherits wealth is apt to have life made

too easy for him, and he soon grows sated with it, because he has

nothing left to desire.  Having no special object to struggle for,

he finds time hang heavy on his hands; he remains morally and

spiritually asleep; and his position in society is often no higher

than that of a polypus over which the tide floats.





"His only labour is to kill the time,

And labour dire it is, and weary woe."





Yet the rich man, inspired by a right spirit, will spurn idleness

as unmanly; and if he bethink himself of the responsibilities which

attach to the possession of wealth and property he will feel even a

higher call to work than men of humbler lot.  This, however, must

be admitted to be by no means the practice of life.  The golden

mean of Agur's perfect prayer is, perhaps, the best lot of all, did

we but know it:  "Give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with

food convenient for me."  The late Joseph Brotherton, M.P., left a

fine motto to be recorded upon his monument in the Peel Park at

Manchester, - the declaration in his case being strictly true:  "My

richness consisted not in the greatness of my possessions, but in

the smallness of my wants."  He rose from the humblest station,

that of a factory boy, to an eminent position of usefulness, by the

simple exercise of homely honesty, industry, punctuality, and self-

denial.  Down to the close of his life, when not attending

Parliament, he did duty as minister in a small chapel in Manchester

to which he was attached; and in all things he made it appear, to

those who knew him in private life, that the glory he sought was

NOT "to be seen of men," or to excite their praise, but to earn the

consciousness of discharging the every-day duties of life, down to

the smallest and humblest of them, in an honest, upright, truthful,

and loving spirit.



"Respectability," in its best sense, is good.  The respectable man

is one worthy of regard, literally worth turning to look at.  But

the respectability that consists in merely keeping up appearances

is not worth looking at in any sense.  Far better and more

respectable is the good poor man than the bad rich one - better the

humble silent man than the agreeable well-appointed rogue who keeps

his gig.  A well balanced and well-stored mind, a life full of

useful purpose, whatever the position occupied in it may be, is of

far greater importance than average worldly respectability.  The

highest object of life we take to be, to form a manly character,

and to work out the best development possible, of body and spirit -

of mind, conscience, heart, and soul.  This is the end:  all else

ought to be regarded but as the means.  Accordingly, that is not

the most successful life in which a man gets the most pleasure, the

most money, the most power or place, honour or fame; but that in

which a man gets the most manhood, and performs the greatest amount

of useful work and of human duty.  Money is power after its sort,

it is true; but intelligence, public spirit, and moral virtue, are

powers too, and far nobler ones.  "Let others plead for pensions,"

wrote Lord Collingwood to a friend; "I can be rich without money,

by endeavouring to be superior to everything poor.  I would have my

services to my country unstained by any interested motive; and old

Scott (27) and I can go on in our cabbage-garden without much

greater expense than formerly."  On another occasion he said, "I

have motives for my conduct which I would not give in exchange for

a hundred pensions."



The making of a fortune may no doubt enable some people to "enter

society," as it is called; but to be esteemed there, they must

possess qualities of mind, manners, or heart, else they are merely

rich people, nothing more.  There are men "in society" now, as rich

as Croesus, who have no consideration extended towards them, and

elicit no respect.  For why?  They are but as money-bags:  their

only power is in their till.  The men of mark in society - the

guides and rulers of opinion - the really successful and useful men

- are not necessarily rich men; but men of sterling character, of

disciplined experience, and of moral excellence.  Even the poor

man, like Thomas Wright, though he possess but little of this

world's goods, may, in the enjoyment of a cultivated nature, of

opportunities used and not abused, of a life spent to the best of

his means and ability, look down, without the slightest feeling of

envy, upon the person of mere worldly success, the man of money-

bags and acres.

