





CHAPTER XIII. - CHARACTER - THE TRUE GENTLEMAN







"For who can always act? but he,

To whom a thousand memories call,

Not being less but more than all

The gentleness he seemed to be,



But seemed the thing he was, and joined

Each office of the social hour

To noble manners, as the flower

And native growth of noble mind;



And thus he bore without abuse

The grand old name of Gentleman." - Tennyson.



"Es bildet ein Talent sich in der Stille,

Sich ein Charakter in dem Strom der Welt." - Goethe.



"That which raises a country, that which strengthens a country, and

that which dignifies a country, - that which spreads her power,

creates her moral influence, and makes her respected and submitted

to, bends the hearts of millions, and bows down the pride of

nations to her - the instrument of obedience, the fountain of

supremacy, the true throne, crown, and sceptre of a nation; - this

aristocracy is not an aristocracy of blood, not an aristocracy of

fashion, not an aristocracy of talent only; it is an aristocracy of

Character.  That is the true heraldry of man." - The Times.





The crown and glory of life is Character.  It is the noblest

possession of a man, constituting a rank in itself, and an estate

in the general goodwill; dignifying every station, and exalting

every position in society.  It exercises a greater power than

wealth, and secures all the honour without the jealousies of fame.

It carries with it an influence which always tells; for it is the

result of proved honour, rectitude, and consistency - qualities

which, perhaps more than any other, command the general confidence

and respect of mankind.



Character is human nature in its best form.  It is moral order

embodied in the individual.  Men of character are not only the

conscience of society, but in every well-governed State they are

its best motive power; for it is moral qualities in the main which

rule the world.  Even in war, Napoleon said the moral is to the

physical as ten to one.  The strength, the industry, and the

civilisation of nations - all depend upon individual character; and

the very foundations of civil security rest upon it.  Laws and

institutions are but its outgrowth.  In the just balance of nature,

individuals, nations, and races, will obtain just so much as they

deserve, and no more.  And as effect finds its cause, so surely

does quality of character amongst a people produce its befitting

results.



Though a man have comparatively little culture, slender abilities,

and but small wealth, yet, if his character be of sterling worth,

he will always command an influence, whether it be in the workshop,

the counting-house, the mart, or the senate.  Canning wisely wrote

in 1801, "My road must be through Character to power; I will try no

other course; and I am sanguine enough to believe that this course,

though not perhaps the quickest, is the surest."  You may admire

men of intellect; but something more is necessary before you will

trust them.  Hence Lord John Russell once observed in a sentence

full of truth, "It is the nature of party in England to ask the

assistance of men of genius, but to follow the guidance of men of

character."  This was strikingly illustrated in the career of the

late Francis Horner - a man of whom Sydney Smith said that the Ten

Commandments were stamped upon his countenance.  "The valuable and

peculiar light," says Lord Cockburn, "in which his history is

calculated to inspire every right-minded youth, is this.  He died

at the age of thirty-eight; possessed of greater public influence

than any other private man; and admired, beloved, trusted, and

deplored by all, except the heartless or the base.  No greater

homage was ever paid in Parliament to any deceased member.  Now let

every young man ask - how was this attained?  By rank?  He was the

son of an Edinburgh merchant.  By wealth?  Neither he, nor any of

his relations, ever had a superfluous sixpence.  By office?  He

held but one, and only for a few years, of no influence, and with

very little pay.  By talents?  His were not splendid, and he had no

genius.  Cautious and slow, his only ambition was to be right.  By

eloquence?  He spoke in calm, good taste, without any of the

oratory that either terrifies or seduces.  By any fascination of

manner?  His was only correct and agreeable.  By what, then, was

it?  Merely by sense, industry, good principles, and a good heart -

qualities which no well-constituted mind need ever despair of

attaining.  It was the force of his character that raised him; and

this character not impressed upon him by nature, but formed, out of

no peculiarly fine elements, by himself.  There were many in the

House of Commons of far greater ability and eloquence.  But no one

surpassed him in the combination of an adequate portion of these

with moral worth.  Horner was born to show what moderate powers,

unaided by anything whatever except culture and goodness, may

achieve, even when these powers are displayed amidst the

competition and jealousy of public life."



Franklin, also, attributed his success as a public man, not to his

talents or his powers of speaking - for these were but moderate -

but to his known integrity of character.  Hence it was, he says,

"that I had so much weight with my fellow citizens.  I was but a

bad speaker, never eloquent, subject to much hesitation in my

choice of words, hardly correct in language, and yet I generally

carried my point."  Character creates confidence in men in high

station as well as in humble life.  It was said of the first

Emperor Alexander of Russia, that his personal character was

equivalent to a constitution.  During the wars of the Fronde,

Montaigne was the only man amongst the French gentry who kept his

castle gates unbarred; and it was said of him, that his personal

character was a better protection for him than a regiment of horse

would have been.



That character is power, is true in a much higher sense than that

knowledge is power.  Mind without heart, intelligence without

conduct, cleverness without goodness, are powers in their way, but

they may be powers only for mischief.  We may be instructed or

amused by them; but it is sometimes as difficult to admire them as

it would be to admire the dexterity of a pickpocket or the

horsemanship of a highwayman.



Truthfulness, integrity, and goodness - qualities that hang not on

any man's breath - form the essence of manly character, or, as one

of our old writers has it, "that inbred loyalty unto Virtue which

can serve her without a livery."  He who possesses these qualities,

united with strength of purpose, carries with him a power which is

irresistible.  He is strong to do good, strong to resist evil, and

strong to bear up under difficulty and misfortune.  When Stephen of

Colonna fell into the hands of his base assailants, and they asked

him in derision, "Where is now your fortress?"  "Here," was his

bold reply, placing his hand upon his heart.  It is in misfortune

that the character of the upright man shines forth with the

greatest lustre; and when all else fails, he takes stand upon his

integrity and his courage.



The rules of conduct followed by Lord Erskine - a man of sterling

independence of principle and scrupulous adherence to truth - are

worthy of being engraven on every young man's heart.  "It was a

first command and counsel of my earliest youth," he said, "always

to do what my conscience told me to be a duty, and to leave the

consequence to God.  I shall carry with me the memory, and I trust

the practice, of this parental lesson to the grave.  I have

hitherto followed it, and I have no reason to complain that my

obedience to it has been a temporal sacrifice.  I have found it, on

the contrary, the road to prosperity and wealth, and I shall point

out the same path to my children for their pursuit."



Every man is bound to aim at the possession of a good character as

one of the highest objects of life.  The very effort to secure it

by worthy means will furnish him with a motive for exertion; and

his idea of manhood, in proportion as it is elevated, will steady

and animate his motive.  It is well to have a high standard of

life, even though we may not be able altogether to realize it.

"The youth," says Mr. Disraeli, "who does not look up will look

down; and the spirit that does not soar is destined perhaps to

grovel."  George Herbert wisely writes,





"Pitch thy behaviour low, thy projects high,

So shall thou humble and magnanimous be.

Sink not in spirit; who aimeth at the sky

Shoots higher much than he that means a tree."





He who has a high standard of living and thinking will certainly do

better than he who has none at all.  "Pluck at a gown of gold,"

says the Scotch proverb, "and you may get a sleeve o't."  Whoever

tries for the highest results cannot fail to reach a point far in

advance of that from which he started; and though the end attained

may fall short of that proposed, still, the very effort to rise, of

itself cannot fail to prove permanently beneficial.



There are many counterfeits of character, but the genuine article

is difficult to be mistaken.  Some, knowing its money value, would

assume its disguise for the purpose of imposing upon the unwary.

Colonel Charteris said to a man distinguished for his honesty, "I

would give a thousand pounds for your good name."  "Why?"  "Because

I could make ten thousand by it," was the knave's reply.



Integrity in word and deed is the backbone of character; and loyal

adherence to veracity its most prominent characteristic.  One of

the finest testimonies to the character of the late Sir Robert Peel

was that borne by the Duke of Wellington in the House of Lords, a

few days after the great statesman's death.  "Your lordships," he

said, "must all feel the high and honourable character of the late

Sir Robert Peel.  I was long connected with him in public life.  We

were both in the councils of our Sovereign together, and I had long

the honour to enjoy his private friendship.  In all the course of

my acquaintance with him I never knew a man in whose truth and

justice I had greater confidence, or in whom I saw a more

invariable desire to promote the public service.  In the whole

course of my communication with him, I never knew an instance in

which he did not show the strongest attachment to truth; and I

never saw in the whole course of my life the smallest reason for

suspecting that he stated anything which he did not firmly believe

to be the fact."  And this high-minded truthfulness of the

statesman was no doubt the secret of no small part of his influence

and power.



There is a truthfulness in action as well as in words, which is

essential to uprightness of character.  A man must really be what

he seems or purposes to be.  When an American gentleman wrote to

Granville Sharp, that from respect for his great virtues he had

named one of his sons after him, Sharp replied:  "I must request

you to teach him a favourite maxim of the family whose name you

have given him - ALWAYS ENDEAVOUR TO BE REALLY WHAT YOU WOULD WISH

TO APPEAR.  This maxim, as my father informed me, was carefully and

humbly practised by HIS father, whose sincerity, as a plain and

honest man, thereby became the principal feature of his character,

both in public and private life."  Every man who respects himself,

and values the respect of others, will carry out the maxim in act -

doing honestly what he proposes to do - putting the highest

character into his work, scamping nothing, but priding himself upon

his integrity and conscientiousness.  Once Cromwell said to

Bernard, - a clever but somewhat unscrupulous lawyer, "I understand

that you have lately been vastly wary in your conduct; do not be

too confident of this; subtlety may deceive you, integrity never

will."  Men whose acts are at direct variance with their words,

command no respect, and what they say has but little weight; even

truths, when uttered by them, seem to come blasted from their lips.



The true character acts rightly, whether in secret or in the sight

of men.  That boy was well trained who, when asked why he did not

pocket some pears, for nobody was there to see, replied, "Yes,

there was:  I was there to see myself; and I don't intend ever to

see myself do a dishonest thing." - This is a simple but not

inappropriate illustration of principle, or conscience, dominating

in the character, and exercising a noble protectorate over it; not

merely a passive influence, but an active power regulating the

life.  Such a principle goes on moulding the character hourly and

daily, growing with a force that operates every moment.  Without

this dominating influence, character has no protection, but is

constantly liable to fall away before temptation; and every such

temptation succumbed to, every act of meanness or dishonesty,

however slight, causes self-degradation.  It matters not whether

the act be successful or not, discovered or concealed; the culprit

is no longer the same, but another person; and he is pursued by a

secret uneasiness, by self-reproach, or the workings of what we

call conscience, which is the inevitable doom of the guilty.



And here it may be observed how greatly the character may be

strengthened and supported by the cultivation of good habits.  Man,

it has been said, is a bundle of habits; and habit is second

nature.  Metastasio entertained so strong an opinion as to the

power of repetition in act and thought, that he said, "All is habit

in mankind, even virtue itself."  Butler, in his 'Analogy,'

impresses the importance of careful self-discipline and firm

resistance to temptation, as tending to make virtue habitual, so

that at length it may become more easy to be good than to give way

to sin.  "As habits belonging to the body," he says, "are produced

by external acts, so habits of the mind are produced by the

execution of inward practical purposes, i.e., carrying them into

act, or acting upon them - the principles of obedience, veracity,

justice, and charity."  And again, Lord Brougham says, when

enforcing the immense importance of training and example in youth,

"I trust everything under God to habit, on which, in all ages, the

lawgiver, as well as the schoolmaster, has mainly placed his

reliance; habit, which makes everything easy, and casts the

difficulties upon the deviation from a wonted course."  Thus, make

sobriety a habit, and intemperance will be hateful; make prudence a

habit, and reckless profligacy will become revolting to every

principle of conduct which regulates the life of the individual.

Hence the necessity for the greatest care and watchfulness against

the inroad of any evil habit; for the character is always weakest

at that point at which it has once given way; and it is long before

a principle restored can become so firm as one that has never been

moved.  It is a fine remark of a Russian writer, that "Habits are a

necklace of pearls:  untie the knot, and the whole unthreads."



Wherever formed, habit acts involuntarily, and without effort; and,

it is only when you oppose it, that you find how powerful it has

become.  What is done once and again, soon gives facility and

proneness.  The habit at first may seem to have no more strength

than a spider's web; but, once formed, it binds as with a chain of

iron.  The small events of life, taken singly, may seem exceedingly

unimportant, like snow that falls silently, flake by flake; yet

accumulated, these snow-flakes form the avalanche.



Self-respect, self-help, application, industry, integrity - all are

of the nature of habits, not beliefs.  Principles, in fact, are but

the names which we assign to habits; for the principles are words,

but the habits are the things themselves:  benefactors or tyrants,

according as they are good or evil.  It thus happens that as we

grow older, a portion of our free activity and individuality

becomes suspended in habit; our actions become of the nature of

fate; and we are bound by the chains which we have woven around

ourselves.



It is indeed scarcely possible to over-estimate the importance of

training the young to virtuous habits.  In them they are the

easiest formed, and when formed they last for life; like letters

cut on the bark of a tree they grow and widen with age.  "Train up

a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not

depart from it."  The beginning holds within it the end; the first

start on the road of life determines the direction and the

destination of the journey; CE N'EST QUE LE PREMIER PAS QUI COUTE.

"Remember," said Lord Collingwood to a young man whom he loved,

"before you are five-and-twenty you must establish a character that

will serve you all your life."  As habit strengthens with age, and

character becomes formed, any turning into a new path becomes more

and more difficult.  Hence, it is often harder to unlearn than to

learn; and for this reason the Grecian flute-player was justified

who charged double fees to those pupils who had been taught by an

inferior master.  To uproot an old habit is sometimes a more

painful thing, and vastly more difficult, than to wrench out a

tooth.  Try and reform a habitually indolent, or improvident, or

drunken person, and in a large majority of cases you will fail.

For the habit in each case has wound itself in and through the life

until it has become an integral part of it, and cannot be uprooted.

Hence, as Mr. Lynch observes, "the wisest habit of all is the habit

of care in the formation of good habits."



Even happiness itself may become habitual.  There is a habit of

looking at the bright side of things, and also of looking at the

dark side.  Dr. Johnson has said that the habit of looking at the

best side of a thing is worth more to a man than a thousand pounds

a year.  And we possess the power, to a great extent, of so

exercising the will as to direct the thoughts upon objects

calculated to yield happiness and improvement rather than their

opposites.  In this way the habit of happy thought may be made to

spring up like any other habit.  And to bring up men or women with

a genial nature of this sort, a good temper, and a happy frame of

mind, is perhaps of even more importance, in many cases, than to

perfect them in much knowledge and many accomplishments.



As daylight can be seen through very small holes, so little things

will illustrate a person's character.  Indeed character consists in

little acts, well and honourably performed; daily life being the

quarry from which we build it up, and rough-hew the habits which

form it.  One of the most marked tests of character is the manner

in which we conduct ourselves towards others.  A graceful behaviour

towards superiors, inferiors, and equals, is a constant source of

pleasure.  It pleases others because it indicates respect for their

personality; but it gives tenfold more pleasure to ourselves.

Every man may to a large extent be a self-educator in good

behaviour, as in everything else; he can be civil and kind, if he

will, though he have not a penny in his purse.  Gentleness in

society is like the silent influence of light, which gives colour

to all nature; it is far more powerful than loudness or force, and

far more fruitful.  It pushes its way quietly and persistently,

like the tiniest daffodil in spring, which raises the clod and

thrusts it aside by the simple persistency of growing.



Even a kind look will give pleasure and confer happiness.  In one

of Robertson of Brighton's letters, he tells of a lady who related

to him "the delight, the tears of gratitude, which she had

witnessed in a poor girl to whom, in passing, I gave a kind look on

going out of church on Sunday.  What a lesson!  How cheaply

happiness can be given!  What opportunities we miss of doing an

angel's work!  I remember doing it, full of sad feelings, passing

on, and thinking no more about it; and it gave an hour's sunshine

to a human life, and lightened the load of life to a human heart

for a time!" (35)



Morals and manners, which give colour to life, are of much greater

importance than laws, which are but their manifestations.  The law

touches us here and there, but manners are about us everywhere,

pervading society like the air we breathe.  Good manners, as we

call them, are neither more nor less than good behaviour;

consisting of courtesy and kindness; benevolence being the

preponderating element in all kinds of mutually beneficial and

pleasant intercourse amongst human beings.  "Civility," said Lady

Montague, "costs nothing and buys everything."  The cheapest of all

things is kindness, its exercise requiring the least possible

trouble and self-sacrifice.  "Win hearts," said Burleigh to Queen

Elizabeth, "and you have all men's hearts and purses."  If we would

only let nature act kindly, free from affectation and artifice, the

results on social good humour and happiness would be incalculable.

The little courtesies which form the small change of life, may

separately appear of little intrinsic value, but they acquire their

importance from repetition and accumulation.  They are like the

spare minutes, or the groat a day, which proverbially produce such

momentous results in the course of a twelvemonth, or in a lifetime.



Manners are the ornament of action; and there is a way of speaking

a kind word, or of doing a kind thing, which greatly enhances their

value.  What seems to be done with a grudge, or as an act of

condescension, is scarcely accepted as a favour.  Yet there are men

who pride themselves upon their gruffness; and though they may

possess virtue and capacity, their manner is often such as to

render them almost insupportable.  It is difficult to like a man

who, though he may not pull your nose, habitually wounds your self-

respect, and takes a pride in saying disagreeable things to you.

There are others who are dreadfully condescending, and cannot avoid

seizing upon every small opportunity of making their greatness

felt.  When Abernethy was canvassing for the office of surgeon to

St. Bartholomew Hospital, he called upon such a person - a rich

grocer, one of the governors.  The great man behind the counter

seeing the great surgeon enter, immediately assumed the grand air

towards the supposed suppliant for his vote.  "I presume, Sir, you

want my vote and interest at this momentous epoch of your life?"

Abernethy, who hated humbugs, and felt nettled at the tone,

replied:  "No, I don't:  I want a pennyworth of figs; come, look

sharp and wrap them up; I want to be off!"



The cultivation of manner - though in excess it is foppish and

foolish - is highly necessary in a person who has occasion to

negociate with others in matters of business.  Affability and good

breeding may even be regarded as essential to the success of a man

in any eminent station and enlarged sphere of life; for the want of

it has not unfrequently been found in a great measure to neutralise

the results of much industry, integrity, and honesty of character.

There are, no doubt, a few strong tolerant minds which can bear

with defects and angularities of manner, and look only to the more

genuine qualities; but the world at large is not so forbearant, and

cannot help forming its judgments and likings mainly according to

outward conduct.



Another mode of displaying true politeness is consideration for the

opinions of others.  It has been said of dogmatism, that it is only

puppyism come to its full growth; and certainly the worst form this

quality can assume, is that of opinionativeness and arrogance.  Let

men agree to differ, and, when they do differ, bear and forbear.

Principles and opinions may be maintained with perfect suavity,

without coming to blows or uttering hard words; and there are

circumstances in which words are blows, and inflict wounds far less

easy to heal.  As bearing upon this point, we quote an instructive

little parable spoken some time since by an itinerant preacher of

the Evangelical Alliance on the borders of Wales:- "As I was going

to the hills," said he, "early one misty morning, I saw something

moving on a mountain side, so strange looking that I took it for a

monster.  When I came nearer to it I found it was a man.  When I

came up to him I found he was my brother."



The inbred politeness which springs from right-heartedness and

kindly feelings, is of no exclusive rank or station.  The mechanic

who works at the bench may possess it, as well as the clergyman or

the peer.  It is by no means a necessary condition of labour that

it should, in any respect, be either rough or coarse.  The

politeness and refinement which distinguish all classes of the

people in many continental countries show that those qualities

might become ours too - as doubtless they will become with

increased culture and more general social intercourse - without

sacrificing any of our more genuine qualities as men.  From the

highest to the lowest, the richest to the poorest, to no rank or

condition in life has nature denied her highest boon - the great

heart.  There never yet existed a gentleman but was lord of a great

heart.  And this may exhibit itself under the hodden grey of the

peasant as well as under the laced coat of the noble.  Robert Burns

was once taken to task by a young Edinburgh blood, with whom he was

walking, for recognising an honest farmer in the open street.  "Why

you fantastic gomeral," exclaimed Burns, "it was not the great

coat, the scone bonnet, and the saunders-boot hose that I spoke to,

but THE MAN that was in them; and the man, sir, for true worth,

would weigh down you and me, and ten more such, any day."  There

may be a homeliness in externals, which may seem vulgar to those

who cannot discern the heart beneath; but, to the right-minded,

character will always have its clear insignia.



William and Charles Grant were the sons of a farmer in Inverness-

shire, whom a sudden flood stripped of everything, even to the very

soil which he tilled.  The farmer and his sons, with the world

before them where to choose, made their way southward in search of

employment until they arrived in the neighbourhood of Bury in

Lancashire.  From the crown of the hill near Walmesley they

surveyed the wide extent of country which lay before them, the

river Irwell making its circuitous course through the valley.  They

were utter strangers in the neighbourhood, and knew not which way

to turn.  To decide their course they put up a stick, and agreed to

pursue the direction in which it fell.  Thus their decision was

made, and they journeyed on accordingly until they reached the

village of Ramsbotham, not far distant.  They found employment in a

print-work, in which William served his apprenticeship; and they

commanded themselves to their employers by their diligence,

sobriety, and strict integrity.  They plodded on, rising from one

station to another, until at length the two men themselves became

employers, and after many long years of industry, enterprise, and

benevolence, they became rich, honoured, and respected by all who

knew them.  Their cotton-mills and print-works gave employment to a

large population.  Their well-directed diligence made the valley

teem with activity, joy, health, and opulence.  Out of their

abundant wealth they gave liberally to all worthy objects, erecting

churches, founding schools, and in all ways promoting the well-

being of the class of working-men from which they had sprung.  They

afterwards erected, on the top of the hill above Walmesley, a lofty

tower in commemoration of the early event in their history which

had determined the place of their settlement.  The brothers Grant

became widely celebrated for their benevolence and their various

goodness, and it is said that Mr. Dickens had them in his mind's

eye when delineating the character of the brothers Cheeryble.  One

amongst many anecdotes of a similar kind may be cited to show that

the character was by no means exaggerated.  A Manchester

warehouseman published an exceedingly scurrilous pamphlet against

the firm of Grant Brothers, holding up the elder partner to

ridicule as "Billy Button."  William was informed by some one of

the nature of the pamphlet, and his observation was that the man

would live to repent of it.  "Oh!" said the libeller, when informed

of the remark, "he thinks that some time or other I shall be in his

debt; but I will take good care of that."  It happens, however,

that men in business do not always foresee who shall be their

creditor, and it so turned out that the Grants' libeller became a

bankrupt, and could not complete his certificate and begin business

again without obtaining their signature.  It seemed to him a

hopeless case to call upon that firm for any favour, but the

pressing claims of his family forced him to make the application.

He appeared before the man whom he had ridiculed as "Billy Button"

accordingly.  He told his tale and produced his certificate.  "You

wrote a pamphlet against us once?" said Mr. Grant.  The supplicant

expected to see his document thrown into the fire; instead of which

Grant signed the name of the firm, and thus completed the necessary

certificate.  "We make it a rule," said he, handing it back, "never

to refuse signing the certificate of an honest tradesman, and we

have never heard that you were anything else."  The tears started

into the man's eyes.  "Ah," continued Mr. Grant, "you see my saying

was true, that you would live to repent writing that pamphlet.  I

did not mean it as a threat - I only meant that some day you would

know us better, and repent having tried to injure us."  "I do, I

do, indeed, repent it."  "Well, well, you know us now.  But how do

you get on - what are you going to do?"  The poor man stated that

he had friends who would assist him when his certificate was

obtained.  "But how are you off in the mean time?"  The answer was,

that, having given up every farthing to his creditors, he had been

compelled to stint his family in even the common necessaries of

life, that he might be enabled to pay for his certificate.  "My

good fellow, this will never do; your wife and family must not

suffer in this way; be kind enough to take this ten-pound note to

your wife from me:  there, there, now - don't cry, it will be all

well with you yet; keep up your spirits, set to work like a man,

and you will raise your head among the best of us yet."  The

overpowered man endeavoured with choking utterance to express his

gratitude, but in vain; and putting his hand to his face, he went

out of the room sobbing like a child.



The True Gentleman is one whose nature has been fashioned after the

highest models.  It is a grand old name, that of Gentleman, and has

been recognized as a rank and power in all stages of society.  "The

Gentleman is always the Gentleman," said the old French General to

his regiment of Scottish gentry at Rousillon, "and invariably

proves himself such in need and in danger."  To possess this

character is a dignity of itself, commanding the instinctive homage

of every generous mind, and those who will not bow to titular rank,

will yet do homage to the gentleman.  His qualities depend not upon

fashion or manners, but upon moral worth - not on personal

possessions, but on personal qualities.  The Psalmist briefly

describes him as one "that walketh uprightly, and worketh

righteousness, and speaketh the truth in his heart."



The gentleman is eminently distinguished for his self-respect.  He

values his character, - not so much of it only as can be seen of

others, but as he sees it himself; having regard for the approval

of his inward monitor.  And, as he respects himself, so, by the

same law, does he respect others.  Humanity is sacred in his eyes:

and thence proceed politeness and forbearance, kindness and

charity.  It is related of Lord Edward Fitzgerald that, while

travelling in Canada, in company with the Indians, he was shocked

by the sight of a poor squaw trudging along laden with her

husband's trappings, while the chief himself walked on

unencumbered.  Lord Edward at once relieved the squaw of her pack

by placing it upon his own shoulders, - a beautiful instance of

what the French call POLITESSE DE COEUR - the inbred politeness of

the true gentleman.



The true gentleman has a keen sense of honour, - scrupulously

avoiding mean actions.  His standard of probity in word and action

is high.  He does not shuffle or prevaricate, dodge or skulk; but

is honest, upright, and straightforward.  His law is rectitude -

action in right lines.  When he says YES, it is a law:  and he

dares to say the valiant NO at the fitting season.  The gentleman

will not be bribed; only the low-minded and unprincipled will sell

themselves to those who are interested in buying them.  When the

upright Jonas Hanway officiated as commissioner in the victualling

department, he declined to receive a present of any kind from a

contractor; refusing thus to be biassed in the performance of his

public duty.  A fine trait of the same kind is to be noted in the

life of the Duke of Wellington.  Shortly after the battle of

Assaye, one morning the Prime Minister of the Court of Hyderabad

waited upon him for the purpose of privately ascertaining what

territory and what advantages had been reserved for his master in

the treaty of peace between the Mahratta princes and the Nizam.  To

obtain this information the minister offered the general a very

large sum - considerably above 100,000L.  Looking at him quietly

for a few seconds, Sir Arthur said, "It appears, then, that you are

capable of keeping a secret?"  "Yes, certainly," replied the

minister.  "THEN SO AM I," said the English general, smiling, and

bowed the minister out.  It was to Wellington's great honour, that

though uniformly successful in India, and with the power of earning

in such modes as this enormous wealth, he did not add a farthing to

his fortune, and returned to England a comparatively poor man.



A similar sensitiveness and high-mindedness characterised his noble

relative, the Marquis of Wellesley, who, on one occasion,

positively refused a present of 100,000L. proposed to be given him

by the Directors of the East India Company on the conquest of

Mysore.  "It is not necessary," said he, "for me to allude to the

independence of my character, and the proper dignity attaching to

my office; other reasons besides these important considerations

lead me to decline this testimony, which is not suitable to me.  I

THINK OF NOTHING BUT OUR ARMY.  I should be much distressed to

curtail the share of those brave soldiers."  And the Marquis's

resolution to refuse the present remained unalterable.



Sir Charles Napier exhibited the same noble self-denial in the

course of his Indian career.  He rejected all the costly gifts

which barbaric princes were ready to lay at his feet, and said with

truth, "Certainly I could have got 30,000L. since my coming to

Scinde, but my hands do not want washing yet.  Our dear father's

sword which I wore in both battles (Meanee and Hyderabad) is

unstained."



Riches and rank have no necessary connexion with genuine

gentlemanly qualities.  The poor man may be a true gentleman, - in

spirit and in daily life.  He may be honest, truthful, upright,

polite, temperate, courageous, self-respecting, and self-helping, -

that is, be a true gentleman.  The poor man with a rich spirit is

in all ways superior to the rich man with a poor spirit.  To borrow

St. Paul's words, the former is as "having nothing, yet possessing

all things," while the other, though possessing all things, has

nothing.  The first hopes everything, and fears nothing; the last

hopes nothing, and fears everything.  Only the poor in spirit are

really poor.  He who has lost all, but retains his courage,

cheerfulness, hope, virtue, and self-respect, is still rich.  For

such a man, the world is, as it were, held in trust; his spirit

dominating over its grosser cares, he can still walk erect, a true

gentleman.



Occasionally, the brave and gentle character may be found under the

humblest garb.  Here is an old illustration, but a fine one.  Once

on a time, when the Adige suddenly overflowed its banks, the bridge

of Verona was carried away, with the exception of the centre arch,

on which stood a house, whose inhabitants supplicated help from the

windows, while the foundations were visibly giving way.  "I will

give a hundred French louis," said the Count Spolverini, who stood

by, "to any person who will venture to deliver these unfortunate

people."  A young peasant came forth from the crowd, seized a boat,

and pushed into the stream.  He gained the pier, received the whole

family into the boat, and made for the shore, where he landed them

in safety.  "Here is your money, my brave young fellow," said the

count.  "No," was the answer of the young man, "I do not sell my

life; give the money to this poor family, who have need of it."

Here spoke the true spirit of the gentleman, though he was but in

the garb of a peasant.



Not less touching was the heroic conduct of a party of Deal boatmen

in rescuing the crew of a collier-brig in the Downs but a short

time ago. (36)  A sudden storm which set in from the north-east

drove several ships from their anchors, and it being low water, one

of them struck the ground at a considerable distance from the

shore, when the sea made a clean breach over her.  There was not a

vestige of hope for the vessel, such was the fury of the wind and

the violence of the waves.  There was nothing to tempt the boatmen

on shore to risk their lives in saving either ship or crew, for not

a farthing of salvage was to be looked for.  But the daring

intrepidity of the Deal boatmen was not wanting at this critical

moment.  No sooner had the brig grounded than Simon Pritchard, one

of the many persons assembled along the beach, threw off his coat

and called out, "Who will come with me and try to save that crew?"

Instantly twenty men sprang forward, with "I will," "and I."  But

seven only were wanted; and running down a galley punt into the

surf, they leaped in and dashed through the breakers, amidst the

cheers of those on shore.  How the boat lived in such a sea seemed

a miracle; but in a few minutes, impelled by the strong arms of

these gallant men, she flew on and reached the stranded ship,

"catching her on the top of a wave"; and in less than a quarter of

an hour from the time the boat left the shore, the six men who

composed the crew of the collier were landed safe on Walmer Beach.

A nobler instance of indomitable courage and disinterested heroism

on the part of the Deal boatmen - brave though they are always

known to be - perhaps cannot be cited; and we have pleasure in here

placing it on record.



Mr. Turnbull, in his work on 'Austria,' relates an anecdote of the

late Emperor Francis, in illustration of the manner in which the

Government of that country has been indebted, for its hold upon the


people, to the personal qualities of its princes.  "At the time

when the cholera was raging at Vienna, the emperor, with an aide-

de-camp, was strolling about the streets of the city and suburbs,

when a corpse was dragged past on a litter unaccompanied by a

single mourner.  The unusual circumstance attracted his attention,

and he learnt, on inquiry, that the deceased was a poor person who

had died of cholera, and that the relatives had not ventured on

what was then considered the very dangerous office of attending the

body to the grave.  'Then,' said Francis, 'we will supply their

place, for none of my poor people should go to the grave without

that last mark of respect;' and he followed the body to the distant

place of interment, and, bare-headed, stood to see every rite and

observance respectfully performed."



Fine though this illustration may be of the qualities of the

gentleman, we can match it by another equally good, of two English

navvies in Paris, as related in a morning paper a few years ago.

"One day a hearse was observed ascending the steep Rue de Clichy on

its way to Montmartre, bearing a coffin of poplar wood with its

cold corpse.  Not a soul followed - not even the living dog of the

dead man, if he had one.  The day was rainy and dismal; passers by

lifted the hat as is usual when a funeral passes, and that was all.

At length it passed two English navvies, who found themselves in

Paris on their way from Spain.  A right feeling spoke from beneath

their serge jackets.  'Poor wretch!' said the one to the other, 'no

one follows him; let us two follow!'  And the two took off their

hats, and walked bare-headed after the corpse of a stranger to the

cemetery of Montmartre."



Above all, the gentleman is truthful.  He feels that truth is the

"summit of being," and the soul of rectitude in human affairs.

Lord Chesterfield declared that Truth made the success of a

gentleman.  The Duke of Wellington, writing to Kellerman, on the

subject of prisoners on parole, when opposed to that general in the

peninsula, told him that if there was one thing on which an English

officer prided himself more than another, excepting his courage, it

was his truthfulness.  "When English officers," said he, "have

given their parole of honour not to escape, be sure they will not

break it.  Believe me - trust to their word; the word of an English

officer is a surer guarantee than the vigilance of sentinels."



True courage and gentleness go hand in hand.  The brave man is

generous and forbearant, never unforgiving and cruel.  It was

finely said of Sir John Franklin by his friend Parry, that "he was

a man who never turned his back upon a danger, yet of that

tenderness that he would not brush away a mosquito."  A fine trait

of character - truly gentle, and worthy of the spirit of Bayard -

was displayed by a French officer in the cavalry combat of El Bodon

in Spain.  He had raised his sword to strike Sir Felton Harvey, but

perceiving his antagonist had only one arm, he instantly stopped,

brought down his sword before Sir Felton in the usual salute, and

rode past.  To this may be added a noble and gentle deed of Ney

during the same Peninsular War.  Charles Napier was taken prisoner

at Corunna, desperately wounded; and his friends at home did not

know whether he was alive or dead.  A special messenger was sent

out from England with a frigate to ascertain his fate.  Baron

Clouet received the flag, and informed Ney of the arrival.  "Let

the prisoner see his friends," said Ney, "and tell them he is well,

and well treated."  Clouet lingered, and Ney asked, smiling, "what

more he wanted"?  "He has an old mother, a widow, and blind."  "Has

he? then let him go himself and tell her he is alive."  As the

exchange of prisoners between the countries was not then allowed,

Ney knew that he risked the displeasure of the Emperor by setting

the young officer at liberty; but Napoleon approved the generous

act.



Notwithstanding the wail which we occasionally hear for the

chivalry that is gone, our own age has witnessed deeds of bravery

and gentleness - of heroic self-denial and manly tenderness - which

are unsurpassed in history.  The events of the last few years have

shown that our countrymen are as yet an undegenerate race.  On the

bleak plateau of Sebastopol, in the dripping perilous trenches of

that twelvemonth's leaguer, men of all classes proved themselves

worthy of the noble inheritance of character which their

forefathers have bequeathed to them.  But it was in the hour of the

great trial in India that the qualities of our countrymen shone

forth the brightest.  The march of Neill on Cawnpore, of Havelock

on Lucknow - officers and men alike urged on by the hope of

rescuing the women and the children - are events which the whole

history of chivalry cannot equal.  Outram's conduct to Havelock, in

resigning to him, though his inferior officer, the honour of

leading the attack on Lucknow, was a trait worthy of Sydney, and

alone justifies the title which has been awarded to him of, "the

Bayard of India."  The death of Henry Lawrence - that brave and

gentle spirit - his last words before dying, "Let there be no fuss

about me; let me be buried WITH THE MEN," - the anxious solicitude

of Sir Colin Campbell to rescue the beleaguered of Lucknow, and to

conduct his long train of women and children by night from thence

to Cawnpore, which he reached amidst the all but overpowering

assault of the enemy, - the care with which he led them across the

perilous bridge, never ceasing his charge over them until he had

seen the precious convoy safe on the road to Allahabad, and then

burst upon the Gwalior contingent like a thunder-clap; - such

things make us feel proud of our countrymen and inspire the

conviction that the best and purest glow of chivalry is not dead,

but vigorously lives among us yet.



Even the common soldiers proved themselves gentlemen under their

trials.  At Agra, where so many poor fellows had been scorched and

wounded in their encounter with the enemy, they were brought into

the fort, and tenderly nursed by the ladies; and the rough, gallant

fellows proved gentle as any children.  During the weeks that the

ladies watched over their charge, never a word was said by any

soldier that could shock the ear of the gentlest.  And when all was

over - when the mortally-wounded had died, and the sick and maimed

who survived were able to demonstrate their gratitude - they

invited their nurses and the chief people of Agra to an

entertainment in the beautiful gardens of the Taj, where, amidst

flowers and music, the rough veterans, all scarred and mutilated as

they were, stood up to thank their gentle countrywomen who had

clothed and fed them, and ministered to their wants during their

time of sore distress.  In the hospitals at Scutari, too, many

wounded and sick blessed the kind English ladies who nursed them;

and nothing can be finer than the thought of the poor sufferers,

unable to rest through pain, blessing the shadow of Florence

Nightingale as it fell upon their pillow in the night watches.



The wreck of the BIRKENHEAD off the coast of Africa on the 27th of

February, 1852, affords another memorable illustration of the

chivalrous spirit of common men acting in this nineteenth century,

of which any age might be proud.  The vessel was steaming along the

African coast with 472 men and 166 women and children on board.

The men belonged to several regiments then serving at the Cape, and

consisted principally of recruits who had been only a short time in

the service.  At two o'clock in the morning, while all were asleep

below, the ship struck with violence upon a hidden rock which

penetrated her bottom; and it was at once felt that she must go

down.  The roll of the drums called the soldiers to arms on the

upper deck, and the men mustered as if on parade.  The word was

passed to SAVE THE WOMEN AND CHILDREN; and the helpless creatures

were brought from below, mostly undressed, and handed silently into

the boats.  When they had all left the ship's side, the commander

of the vessel thoughtlessly called out, "All those that can swim,

jump overboard and make for the boats."  But Captain Wright, of the

91st Highlanders, said, "No! if you do that, THE BOATS WITH THE

WOMEN MUST BE SWAMPED;" and the brave men stood motionless.  There

was no boat remaining, and no hope of safety; but not a heart

quailed; no one flinched from his duty in that trying moment.

"There was not a murmur nor a cry amongst them," said Captain

Wright, a survivor, "until the vessel made her final plunge."  Down

went the ship, and down went the heroic band, firing A FEU DE JOIE

as they sank beneath the waves.  Glory and honour to the gentle and

the brave!  The examples of such men never die, but, like their

memories, are immortal.



There are many tests by which a gentleman may be known; but there

is one that never fails - How does he EXERCISE POWER over those

subordinate to him?  How does he conduct himself towards women and

children?  How does the officer treat his men, the employer his

servants, the master his pupils, and man in every station those who

are weaker than himself?  The discretion, forbearance, and

kindliness, with which power in such cases is used, may indeed be

regarded as the crucial test of gentlemanly character.  When La

Motte was one day passing through a crowd, he accidentally trod

upon the foot of a young fellow, who forthwith struck him on the

face:  "Ah, sire," said La Motte, "you will surely be sorry for

what you have done, when you know that I AM BLIND."  He who bullies

those who are not in a position to resist may be a snob, but cannot

be a gentleman.  He who tyrannizes over the weak and helpless may

be a coward, but no true man.  The tyrant, it has been said, is but

a slave turned inside out.  Strength, and the consciousness of

strength, in a right-hearted man, imparts a nobleness to his

character; but he will be most careful how he uses it; for





"It is excellent

To have a giant's strength; but it is tyrannous

To use it like a giant."





Gentleness is indeed the best test of gentlemanliness.  A

consideration for the feelings of others, for his inferiors and

dependants as well as his equals, and respect for their self-

respect, will pervade the true gentleman's whole conduct.  He will

rather himself suffer a small injury, than by an uncharitable

construction of another's behaviour, incur the risk of committing a

great wrong.  He will be forbearant of the weaknesses, the

failings, and the errors, of those whose advantages in life have

not been equal to his own.  He will be merciful even to his beast.

He will not boast of his wealth, or his strength, or his gifts.  He

will not be puffed up by success, or unduly depressed by failure.

He will not obtrude his views on others, but speak his mind freely

when occasion calls for it.  He will not confer favours with a

patronizing air.  Sir Walter Scott once said of Lord Lothian, "He

is a man from whom one may receive a favour, and that's saying a

great deal in these days."



Lord Chatham has said that the gentleman is characterised by his

sacrifice of self and preference of others to himself in the little

daily occurrences of life.  In illustration of this ruling spirit

of considerateness in a noble character, we may cite the anecdote

of the gallant Sir Ralph Abercromby, of whom it is related, that

when mortally wounded in the battle of Aboukir, he was carried in a

litter on board the 'Foudroyant;' and, to ease his pain, a

soldier's blanket was placed under his head, from which he

experienced considerable relief.  He asked what it was.  "It's only

a soldier's blanket," was the reply.  "WHOSE blanket is it?" said

he, half lifting himself up.  "Only one of the men's."  "I wish to

know the name of the man whose blanket this is."  "It is Duncan

Roy's, of the 42nd, Sir Ralph."  "Then see that Duncan Roy gets his

blanket this very night." (37) Even to ease his dying agony the

general would not deprive the private soldier of his blanket for

one night.  The incident is as good in its way as that of the dying

Sydney handing his cup of water to the private soldier on the field

of Zutphen.



The quaint old Fuller sums up in a few words the character of the

true gentleman and man of action in describing that of the great

admiral, Sir Francis Drake:  "Chaste in his life, just in his

dealings, true of his word; merciful to those that were under him,

and hating nothing so much as idlenesse; in matters especially of

moment, he was never wont to rely on other men's care, how trusty

or skilful soever they might seem to be, but, always contemning

danger, and refusing no toyl, he was wont himself to be one

(whoever was a second) at every turn, where courage, skill, or

industry, was to be employed."
