





CHAPTER II. - LEADERS OF INDUSTRY - INVENTORS AND PRODUCERS







"Le travail et la Science sont desormais les maitres du monde." -

De Salvandy.



"Deduct all that men of the humbler classes have done for England

in the way of inventions only, and see where she would have been

but for them." - Arthur Helps.





One of the most strongly-marked features of the English people is

their spirit of industry, standing out prominent and distinct in

their past history, and as strikingly characteristic of them now as

at any former period.  It is this spirit, displayed by the commons

of England, which has laid the foundations and built up the

industrial greatness of the empire.  This vigorous growth of the

nation has been mainly the result of the free energy of

individuals, and it has been contingent upon the number of hands

and minds from time to time actively employed within it, whether as

cultivators of the soil, producers of articles of utility,

contrivers of tools and machines, writers of books, or creators of

works of art.  And while this spirit of active industry has been

the vital principle of the nation, it has also been its saving and

remedial one, counteracting from time to time the effects of errors

in our laws and imperfections in our constitution.



The career of industry which the nation has pursued, has also

proved its best education.  As steady application to work is the

healthiest training for every individual, so is it the best

discipline of a state.  Honourable industry travels the same road

with duty; and Providence has closely linked both with happiness.

The gods, says the poet, have placed labour and toil on the way

leading to the Elysian fields.  Certain it is that no bread eaten

by man is so sweet as that earned by his own labour, whether bodily

or mental.  By labour the earth has been subdued, and man redeemed

from barbarism; nor has a single step in civilization been made

without it.  Labour is not only a necessity and a duty, but a

blessing:  only the idler feels it to be a curse.  The duty of work

is written on the thews and muscles of the limbs, the mechanism of

the hand, the nerves and lobes of the brain - the sum of whose

healthy action is satisfaction and enjoyment.  In the school of

labour is taught the best practical wisdom; nor is a life of manual

employment, as we shall hereafter find, incompatible with high

mental culture.



Hugh Miller, than whom none knew better the strength and the

weakness belonging to the lot of labour, stated the result of his

experience to be, that Work, even the hardest, is full of pleasure

and materials for self-improvement.  He held honest labour to be

the best of teachers, and that the school of toil is the noblest of

schools - save only the Christian one, - that it is a school in

which the ability of being useful is imparted, the spirit of

independence learnt, and the habit of persevering effort acquired.

He was even of opinion that the training of the mechanic, - by the

exercise which it gives to his observant faculties, from his daily

dealing with things actual and practical, and the close experience

of life which he acquires, - better fits him for picking his way

along the journey of life, and is more favourable to his growth as

a Man, emphatically speaking, than the training afforded by any

other condition.



The array of great names which we have already cursorily cited, of

men springing from the ranks of the industrial classes, who have

achieved distinction in various walks of life - in science,

commerce, literature, and art - shows that at all events the

difficulties interposed by poverty and labour are not

insurmountable.  As respects the great contrivances and inventions

which have conferred so much power and wealth upon the nation, it

is unquestionable that for the greater part of them we have been

indebted to men of the humblest rank.  Deduct what they have done

in this particular line of action, and it will be found that very

little indeed remains for other men to have accomplished.



Inventors have set in motion some of the greatest industries of the

world.  To them society owes many of its chief necessaries,

comforts, and luxuries; and by their genius and labour daily life

has been rendered in all respects more easy as well as enjoyable.

Our food, our clothing, the furniture of our homes, the glass which

admits the light to our dwellings at the same time that it excludes

the cold, the gas which illuminates our streets, our means of

locomotion by land and by sea, the tools by which our various

articles of necessity and luxury are fabricated, have been the

result of the labour and ingenuity of many men and many minds.

Mankind at large are all the happier for such inventions, and are

every day reaping the benefit of them in an increase of individual

well-being as well as of public enjoyment.



Though the invention of the working steam-engine - the king of

machines - belongs, comparatively speaking, to our own epoch, the

idea of it was born many centuries ago.  Like other contrivances

and discoveries, it was effected step by step - one man

transmitting the result of his labours, at the time apparently

useless, to his successors, who took it up and carried it forward

another stage, - the prosecution of the inquiry extending over many

generations.  Thus the idea promulgated by Hero of Alexandria was

never altogether lost; but, like the grain of wheat hid in the hand

of the Egyptian mummy, it sprouted and again grew vigorously when

brought into the full light of modern science.  The steam-engine

was nothing, however, until it emerged from the state of theory,

and was taken in hand by practical mechanics; and what a noble

story of patient, laborious investigation, of difficulties

encountered and overcome by heroic industry, does not that

marvellous machine tell of!  It is indeed, in itself, a monument of

the power of self-help in man.  Grouped around it we find Savary,

the military engineer; Newcomen, the Dartmouth blacksmith; Cawley,

the glazier; Potter, the engine-boy; Smeaton, the civil engineer;

and, towering above all, the laborious, patient, never-tiring James

Watt, the mathematical-instrument maker.



Watt was one of the most industrious of men; and the story of his

life proves, what all experience confirms, that it is not the man

of the greatest natural vigour and capacity who achieves the

highest results, but he who employs his powers with the greatest

industry and the most carefully disciplined skill - the skill that

comes by labour, application, and experience.  Many men in his time

knew far more than Watt, but none laboured so assiduously as he did

to turn all that he did know to useful practical purposes.  He was,

above all things, most persevering in the pursuit of facts.  He

cultivated carefully that habit of active attention on which all

the higher working qualities of the mind mainly depend.  Indeed,

Mr. Edgeworth entertained the opinion, that the difference of

intellect in men depends more upon the early cultivation of this

HABIT OF ATTENTION, than upon any great disparity between the

powers of one individual and another.



Even when a boy, Watt found science in his toys.  The quadrants

lying about his father's carpenter's shop led him to the study of

optics and astronomy; his ill health induced him to pry into the

secrets of physiology; and his solitary walks through the country

attracted him to the study of botany and history.  While carrying

on the business of a mathematical-instrument maker, he received an

order to build an organ; and, though without an ear for music, he

undertook the study of harmonics, and successfully constructed the

instrument.  And, in like manner, when the little model of

Newcomen's steam-engine, belonging to the University of Glasgow,

was placed in his hands to repair, he forthwith set himself to

learn all that was then known about heat, evaporation, and

condensation, - at the same time plodding his way in mechanics and

the science of construction, - the results of which he at length

embodied in his condensing steam-engine.



For ten years he went on contriving and inventing - with little

hope to cheer him, and with few friends to encourage him.  He went

on, meanwhile, earning bread for his family by making and selling

quadrants, making and mending fiddles, flutes, and musical

instruments; measuring mason-work, surveying roads, superintending

the construction of canals, or doing anything that turned up, and

offered a prospect of honest gain.  At length, Watt found a fit

partner in another eminent leader of industry - Matthew Boulton, of

Birmingham; a skilful, energetic, and far-seeing man, who

vigorously undertook the enterprise of introducing the condensing-

engine into general use as a working power; and the success of both

is now matter of history. (5)



Many skilful inventors have from time to time added new power to

the steam-engine; and, by numerous modifications, rendered it

capable of being applied to nearly all the purposes of manufacture

- driving machinery, impelling ships, grinding corn, printing

books, stamping money, hammering, planing, and turning iron; in

short, of performing every description of mechanical labour where

power is required.  One of the most useful modifications in the

engine was that devised by Trevithick, and eventually perfected by

George Stephenson and his son, in the form of the railway

locomotive, by which social changes of immense importance have been

brought about, of even greater consequence, considered in their

results on human progress and civilization, than the condensing-

engine of Watt.



One of the first grand results of Watt's invention, - which placed

an almost unlimited power at the command of the producing classes,

- was the establishment of the cotton-manufacture.  The person most

closely identified with the foundation of this great branch of

industry was unquestionably Sir Richard Arkwright, whose practical

energy and sagacity were perhaps even more remarkable than his

mechanical inventiveness.  His originality as an inventor has

indeed been called in question, like that of Watt and Stephenson.

Arkwright probably stood in the same relation to the spinning-

machine that Watt did to the steam-engine and Stephenson to the

locomotive.  He gathered together the scattered threads of

ingenuity which already existed, and wove them, after his own

design, into a new and original fabric.  Though Lewis Paul, of

Birmingham, patented the invention of spinning by rollers thirty

years before Arkwright, the machines constructed by him were so

imperfect in their details, that they could not be profitably

worked, and the invention was practically a failure.  Another

obscure mechanic, a reed-maker of Leigh, named Thomas Highs, is

also said to have invented the water-frame and spinning-jenny; but

they, too, proved unsuccessful.



When the demands of industry are found to press upon the resources

of inventors, the same idea is usually found floating about in many

minds; - such has been the case with the steam-engine, the safety-

lamp, the electric telegraph, and other inventions.  Many ingenious

minds are found labouring in the throes of invention, until at

length the master mind, the strong practical man, steps forward,

and straightway delivers them of their idea, applies the principle

successfully, and the thing is done.  Then there is a loud outcry

among all the smaller contrivers, who see themselves distanced in

the race; and hence men such as Watt, Stephenson, and Arkwright,

have usually to defend their reputation and their rights as

practical and successful inventors.



Richard Arkwright, like most of our great mechanicians, sprang from

the ranks.  He was born in Preston in 1732.  His parents were very

poor, and he was the youngest of thirteen children.  He was never

at school:  the only education he received he gave to himself; and

to the last he was only able to write with difficulty.  When a boy,

he was apprenticed to a barber, and after learning the business, he

set up for himself in Bolton, where he occupied an underground

cellar, over which he put up the sign, "Come to the subterraneous

barber - he shaves for a penny."  The other barbers found their

customers leaving them, and reduced their prices to his standard,

when Arkwright, determined to push his trade, announced his

determination to give "A clean shave for a halfpenny."  After a few

years he quitted his cellar, and became an itinerant dealer in

hair.  At that time wigs were worn, and wig-making formed an

important branch of the barbering business.  Arkwright went about

buying hair for the wigs.  He was accustomed to attend the hiring

fairs throughout Lancashire resorted to by young women, for the

purpose of securing their long tresses; and it is said that in

negotiations of this sort he was very successful.  He also dealt in

a chemical hair dye, which he used adroitly, and thereby secured a

considerable trade.  But he does not seem, notwithstanding his

pushing character, to have done more than earn a bare living.



The fashion of wig-wearing having undergone a change, distress fell

upon the wig-makers; and Arkwright, being of a mechanical turn, was

consequently induced to turn machine inventor or "conjurer," as the

pursuit was then popularly termed.  Many attempts were made about

that time to invent a spinning-machine, and our barber determined

to launch his little bark on the sea of invention with the rest.

Like other self-taught men of the same bias, he had already been

devoting his spare time to the invention of a perpetual-motion

machine; and from that the transition to a spinning-machine was

easy.  He followed his experiments so assiduously that he neglected

his business, lost the little money he had saved, and was reduced

to great poverty.  His wife - for he had by this time married - was

impatient at what she conceived to be a wanton waste of time and

money, and in a moment of sudden wrath she seized upon and

destroyed his models, hoping thus to remove the cause of the family

privations.  Arkwright was a stubborn and enthusiastic man, and he

was provoked beyond measure by this conduct of his wife, from whom

he immediately separated.



In travelling about the country, Arkwright had become acquainted

with a person named Kay, a clockmaker at Warrington, who assisted

him in constructing some of the parts of his perpetual-motion

machinery.  It is supposed that he was informed by Kay of the

principle of spinning by rollers; but it is also said that the idea

was first suggested to him by accidentally observing a red-hot

piece of iron become elongated by passing between iron rollers.

However this may be, the idea at once took firm possession of his

mind, and he proceeded to devise the process by which it was to be

accomplished, Kay being able to tell him nothing on this point.

Arkwright now abandoned his business of hair collecting, and

devoted himself to the perfecting of his machine, a model of which,

constructed by Kay under his directions, he set up in the parlour

of the Free Grammar School at Preston.  Being a burgess of the

town, he voted at the contested election at which General Burgoyne

was returned; but such was his poverty, and such the tattered state

of his dress, that a number of persons subscribed a sum sufficient

to have him put in a state fit to appear in the poll-room.  The

exhibition of his machine in a town where so many workpeople lived

by the exercise of manual labour proved a dangerous experiment;

ominous growlings were heard outside the school-room from time to

time, and Arkwright, - remembering the fate of Kay, who was mobbed

and compelled to fly from Lancashire because of his invention of

the fly-shuttle, and of poor Hargreaves, whose spinning-jenny had

been pulled to pieces only a short time before by a Blackburn mob,

- wisely determined on packing up his model and removing to a less

dangerous locality.  He went accordingly to Nottingham, where he

applied to some of the local bankers for pecuniary assistance; and

the Messrs. Wright consented to advance him a sum of money on

condition of sharing in the profits of the invention.  The machine,

however, not being perfected so soon as they had anticipated, the

bankers recommended Arkwright to apply to Messrs. Strutt and Need,

the former of whom was the ingenious inventor and patentee of the

stocking-frame.  Mr. Strutt at once appreciated the merits of the

invention, and a partnership was entered into with Arkwright, whose

road to fortune was now clear.  The patent was secured in the name

of "Richard Arkwright, of Nottingham, clockmaker," and it is a

circumstance worthy of note, that it was taken out in 1769, the

same year in which Watt secured the patent for his steam-engine.  A

cotton-mill was first erected at Nottingham, driven by horses; and

another was shortly after built, on a much larger scale, at

Cromford, in Derbyshire, turned by a water-wheel, from which

circumstance the spinning-machine came to be called the water-

frame.



Arkwright's labours, however, were, comparatively speaking, only

begun.  He had still to perfect all the working details of his

machine.  It was in his hands the subject of constant modification

and improvement, until eventually it was rendered practicable and

profitable in an eminent degree.  But success was only secured by

long and patient labour:  for some years, indeed, the speculation

was disheartening and unprofitable, swallowing up a very large

amount of capital without any result.  When success began to appear

more certain, then the Lancashire manufacturers fell upon

Arkwright's patent to pull it in pieces, as the Cornish miners fell

upon Boulton and Watt to rob them of the profits of their steam-

engine.  Arkwright was even denounced as the enemy of the working

people; and a mill which he built near Chorley was destroyed by a

mob in the presence of a strong force of police and military.  The

Lancashire men refused to buy his materials, though they were

confessedly the best in the market.  Then they refused to pay

patent-right for the use of his machines, and combined to crush him

in the courts of law.  To the disgust of right-minded people,

Arkwright's patent was upset.  After the trial, when passing the

hotel at which his opponents were staying, one of them said, loud

enough to be heard by him, "Well, we've done the old shaver at

last;" to which he coolly replied, "Never mind, I've a razor left

that will shave you all."  He established new mills in Lancashire,

Derbyshire, and at New Lanark, in Scotland.  The mills at Cromford

also came into his hands at the expiry of his partnership with

Strutt, and the amount and the excellence of his products were

such, that in a short time he obtained so complete a control of the

trade, that the prices were fixed by him, and he governed the main

operations of the other cotton-spinners.



Arkwright was a man of great force of character, indomitable

courage, much worldly shrewdness, with a business faculty almost

amounting to genius.  At one period his time was engrossed by

severe and continuous labour, occasioned by the organising and

conducting of his numerous manufactories, sometimes from four in

the morning till nine at night.  At fifty years of age he set to

work to learn English grammar, and improve himself in writing and

orthography.  After overcoming every obstacle, he had the

satisfaction of reaping the reward of his enterprise.  Eighteen

years after he had constructed his first machine, he rose to such

estimation in Derbyshire that he was appointed High Sheriff of the

county, and shortly after George III. conferred upon him the honour

of knighthood.  He died in 1792.  Be it for good or for evil,

Arkwright was the founder in England of the modern factory system,

a branch of industry which has unquestionably proved a source of

immense wealth to individuals and to the nation.



All the other great branches of industry in Britain furnish like

examples of energetic men of business, the source of much benefit

to the neighbourhoods in which they have laboured, and of increased

power and wealth to the community at large.  Amongst such might be

cited the Strutts of Belper; the Tennants of Glasgow; the Marshalls

and Gotts of Leeds; the Peels, Ashworths, Birleys, Fieldens,

Ashtons, Heywoods, and Ainsworths of South Lancashire, some of

whose descendants have since become distinguished in connection

with the political history of England.  Such pre-eminently were the

Peels of South Lancashire.



The founder of the Peel family, about the middle of last century,

was a small yeoman, occupying the Hole House Farm, near Blackburn,

from which he afterwards removed to a house situated in Fish Lane

in that town.  Robert Peel, as he advanced in life, saw a large

family of sons and daughters growing up about him; but the land

about Blackburn being somewhat barren, it did not appear to him

that agricultural pursuits offered a very encouraging prospect for

their industry.  The place had, however, long been the seat of a

domestic manufacture - the fabric called "Blackburn greys,"

consisting of linen weft and cotton warp, being chiefly made in

that town and its neighbourhood.  It was then customary - previous

to the introduction of the factory system - for industrious yeomen

with families to employ the time not occupied in the fields in

weaving at home; and Robert Peel accordingly began the domestic

trade of calico-making.  He was honest, and made an honest article;

thrifty and hardworking, and his trade prospered.  He was also

enterprising, and was one of the first to adopt the carding

cylinder, then recently invented.



But Robert Peel's attention was principally directed to the

PRINTING of calico - then a comparatively unknown art - and for

some time he carried on a series of experiments with the object of

printing by machinery.  The experiments were secretly conducted in

his own house, the cloth being ironed for the purpose by one of the

women of the family.  It was then customary, in such houses as the

Peels, to use pewter plates at dinner.  Having sketched a figure or

pattern on one of the plates, the thought struck him that an

impression might be got from it in reverse, and printed on calico

with colour.  In a cottage at the end of the farm-house lived a

woman who kept a calendering machine, and going into her cottage,

he put the plate with colour rubbed into the figured part and some

calico over it, through the machine, when it was found to leave a

satisfactory impression.  Such is said to have been the origin of

roller printing on calico.  Robert Peel shortly perfected his

process, and the first pattern he brought out was a parsley leaf;

hence he is spoken of in the neighbourhood of Blackburn to this day

as "Parsley Peel."  The process of calico printing by what is

called the mule machine - that is, by means of a wooden cylinder in

relief, with an engraved copper cylinder - was afterwards brought

to perfection by one of his sons, the head of the firm of Messrs.

Peel and Co., of Church.  Stimulated by his success, Robert Peel

shortly gave up farming, and removing to Brookside, a village about

two miles from Blackburn, he devoted himself exclusively to the

printing business.  There, with the aid of his sons, who were as

energetic as himself, he successfully carried on the trade for

several years; and as the young men grew up towards manhood, the

concern branched out into various firms of Peels, each of which

became a centre of industrial activity and a source of remunerative

employment to large numbers of people.



From what can now be learnt of the character of the original and

untitled Robert Peel, he must have been a remarkable man - shrewd,

sagacious, and far-seeing.  But little is known of him excepting

from traditions and the sons of those who knew him are fast passing

away.  His son, Sir Robert, thus modestly spoke of him:- "My father

may be truly said to have been the founder of our family; and he so

accurately appreciated the importance of commercial wealth in a

national point of view, that he was often heard to say that the

gains to individuals were small compared with the national gains

arising from trade."



Sir Robert Peel, the first baronet and the second manufacturer of

the name, inherited all his father's enterprise, ability, and

industry.  His position, at starting in life, was little above that

of an ordinary working man; for his father, though laying the

foundations of future prosperity, was still struggling with the

difficulties arising from insufficient capital.  When Robert was

only twenty years of age, he determined to begin the business of

cotton-printing, which he had by this time learnt from his father,

on his own account.  His uncle, James Haworth, and William Yates of

Blackburn, joined him in his enterprise; the whole capital which

they could raise amongst them amounting to only about 500L., the

principal part of which was supplied by William Yates.  The father

of the latter was a householder in Blackburn, where he was well

known and much respected; and having saved money by his business,

he was willing to advance sufficient to give his son a start in the

lucrative trade of cotton-printing, then in its infancy.  Robert

Peel, though comparatively a mere youth, supplied the practical

knowledge of the business; but it was said of him, and proved true,

that he "carried an old head on young shoulders."  A ruined corn-

mill, with its adjoining fields, was purchased for a comparatively

small sum, near the then insignificant town of Bury, where the

works long after continued to be known as "The Ground;" and a few

wooden sheds having been run up, the firm commenced their cotton-

printing business in a very humble way in the year 1770, adding to

it that of cotton-spinning a few years later.  The frugal style in

which the partners lived may be inferred from the following

incident in their early career.  William Yates, being a married man

with a family, commenced housekeeping on a small scale, and, to

oblige Peel, who was single, he agreed to take him as a lodger.

The sum which the latter first paid for board and lodging was only

8S. a week; but Yates, considering this too little, insisted on the

weekly payment being increased a shilling, to which Peel at first

demurred, and a difference between the partners took place, which

was eventually compromised by the lodger paying an advance of

sixpence a week.  William Yates's eldest child was a girl named

Ellen, and she very soon became an especial favourite with the

young lodger.  On returning from his hard day's work at "The

Ground," he would take the little girl upon his knee, and say to

her, "Nelly, thou bonny little dear, wilt be my wife?" to which the

child would readily answer "Yes," as any child would do.  "Then

I'll wait for thee, Nelly; I'll wed thee, and none else."  And

Robert Peel did wait.  As the girl grew in beauty towards

womanhood, his determination to wait for her was strengthened; and

after the lapse of ten years - years of close application to

business and rapidly increasing prosperity - Robert Peel married

Ellen Yates when she had completed her seventeenth year; and the

pretty child, whom her mother's lodger and father's partner had

nursed upon his knee, became Mrs. Peel, and eventually Lady Peel,

the mother of the future Prime Minister of England.  Lady Peel was

a noble and beautiful woman, fitted to grace any station in life.

She possessed rare powers of mind, and was, on every emergency, the

high-souled and faithful counsellor of her husband.  For many years

after their marriage, she acted as his amanuensis, conducting the

principal part of his business correspondence, for Mr. Peel himself

was an indifferent and almost unintelligible writer.  She died in

1803, only three years after the Baronetcy had been conferred upon

her husband.  It is said that London fashionable life - so unlike

what she had been accustomed to at home - proved injurious to her

health; and old Mr. Yates afterwards used to say, "if Robert hadn't

made our Nelly a 'Lady,' she might ha' been living yet."



The career of Yates, Peel, & Co., was throughout one of great and

uninterrupted prosperity.  Sir Robert Peel himself was the soul of

the firm; to great energy and application uniting much practical

sagacity, and first-rate mercantile abilities - qualities in which

many of the early cotton-spinners were exceedingly deficient.  He

was a man of iron mind and frame, and toiled unceasingly.  In

short, he was to cotton printing what Arkwright was to cotton-

spinning, and his success was equally great.  The excellence of the

articles produced by the firm secured the command of the market,

and the character of the firm stood pre-eminent in Lancashire.

Besides greatly benefiting Bury, the partnership planted similar

extensive works in the neighbourhood, on the Irwell and the Roch;

and it was cited to their honour, that, while they sought to raise

to the highest perfection the quality of their manufactures, they

also endeavoured, in all ways, to promote the well-being and

comfort of their workpeople; for whom they contrived to provide

remunerative employment even in the least prosperous times.



Sir Robert Peel readily appreciated the value of all new processes

and inventions; in illustration of which we may allude to his

adoption of the process for producing what is called RESIST WORK in

calico printing.  This is accomplished by the use of a paste, or

resist, on such parts of the cloth as were intended to remain

white.  The person who discovered the paste was a traveller for a

London house, who sold it to Mr. Peel for an inconsiderable sum.

It required the experience of a year or two to perfect the system

and make it practically useful; but the beauty of its effect, and

the extreme precision of outline in the pattern produced, at once

placed the Bury establishment at the head of all the factories for

calico printing in the country.  Other firms, conducted with like

spirit, were established by members of the same family at Burnley,

Foxhill bank, and Altham, in Lancashire; Salley Abbey, in

Yorkshire; and afterwards at Burton-on-Trent, in Staffordshire;

these various establishments, whilst they brought wealth to their

proprietors, setting an example to the whole cotton trade, and

training up many of the most successful printers and manufacturers

in Lancashire.



Among other distinguished founders of industry, the Rev. William

Lee, inventor of the Stocking Frame, and John Heathcoat, inventor

of the Bobbin-net Machine, are worthy of notice, as men of great

mechanical skill and perseverance, through whose labours a vast

amount of remunerative employment has been provided for the

labouring population of Nottingham and the adjacent districts.  The

accounts which have been preserved of the circumstances connected

with the invention of the Stocking Frame are very confused, and in

many respects contradictory, though there is no doubt as to the

name of the inventor.  This was William Lee, born at Woodborough, a

village some seven miles from Nottingham, about the year 1563.

According to some accounts, he was the heir to a small freehold,

while according to others he was a poor scholar, (6) and had to

struggle with poverty from his earliest years.  He entered as a

sizar at Christ College, Cambridge, in May, 1579, and subsequently

removed to St. John's, taking his degree of B.A. in 1582-3.  It is

believed that he commenced M.A. in 1586; but on this point there

appears to be some confusion in the records of the University.  The

statement usually made that he was expelled for marrying contrary

to the statutes, is incorrect, as he was never a Fellow of the

University, and therefore could not be prejudiced by taking such a

step.



At the time when Lee invented the Stocking Frame he was officiating

as curate of Calverton, near Nottingham; and it is alleged by some

writers that the invention had its origin in disappointed

affection.  The curate is said to have fallen deeply in love with a

young lady of the village, who failed to reciprocate his

affections; and when he visited her, she was accustomed to pay much

more attention to the process of knitting stockings and instructing

her pupils in the art, than to the addresses of her admirer.  This

slight is said to have created in his mind such an aversion to

knitting by hand, that he formed the determination to invent a

machine that should supersede it and render it a gainless

employment.  For three years he devoted himself to the prosecution

of the invention, sacrificing everything to his new idea.  At the

prospect of success opened before him, he abandoned his curacy, and

devoted himself to the art of stocking making by machinery.  This

is the version of the story given by Henson (7) on the authority of

an old stocking-maker, who died in Collins's Hospital, Nottingham,

aged ninety-two, and was apprenticed in the town during the reign

of Queen Anne.  It is also given by Deering and Blackner as the

traditional account in the neighbourhood, and it is in some measure

borne out by the arms of the London Company of Frame-Work Knitters,

which consists of a stocking frame without the wood-work, with a

clergyman on one side and a woman on the other as supporters. (8)



Whatever may have been the actual facts as to the origin of the

invention of the Stocking Loom, there can be no doubt as to the

extraordinary mechanical genius displayed by its inventor.  That a

clergyman living in a remote village, whose life had for the most

part been spent with books, should contrive a machine of such

delicate and complicated movements, and at once advance the art of

knitting from the tedious process of linking threads in a chain of

loops by three skewers in the fingers of a woman, to the beautiful

and rapid process of weaving by the stocking frame, was indeed an

astonishing achievement, which may be pronounced almost unequalled

in the history of mechanical invention.  Lee's merit was all the

greater, as the handicraft arts were then in their infancy, and

little attention had as yet been given to the contrivance of

machinery for the purposes of manufacture.  He was under the

necessity of extemporising the parts of his machine as he best

could, and adopting various expedients to overcome difficulties as

they arose.  His tools were imperfect, and his materials imperfect;

and he had no skilled workmen to assist him.  According to

tradition, the first frame he made was a twelve gauge, without lead

sinkers, and it was almost wholly of wood; the needles being also

stuck in bits of wood.  One of Lee's principal difficulties

consisted in the formation of the stitch, for want of needle eyes;

but this he eventually overcame by forming eyes to the needles with

a three-square file. (9)  At length, one difficulty after another

was successfully overcome, and after three years' labour the

machine was sufficiently complete to be fit for use.  The quondam

curate, full of enthusiasm for his art, now began stocking weaving

in the village of Calverton, and he continued to work there for

several years, instructing his brother James and several of his

relations in the practice of the art.



Having brought his frame to a considerable degree of perfection,

and being desirous of securing the patronage of Queen Elizabeth,

whose partiality for knitted silk stockings was well known, Lee

proceeded to London to exhibit the loom before her Majesty.  He

first showed it to several members of the court, among others to

Sir William (afterwards Lord) Hunsdon, whom he taught to work it

with success; and Lee was, through their instrumentality, at length

admitted to an interview with the Queen, and worked the machine in

her presence.  Elizabeth, however, did not give him the

encouragement that he had expected; and she is said to have opposed

the invention on the ground that it was calculated to deprive a

large number of poor people of their employment of hand knitting.

Lee was no more successful in finding other patrons, and

considering himself and his invention treated with contempt, he

embraced the offer made to him by Sully, the sagacious minister of

Henry IV., to proceed to Rouen and instruct the operatives of that

town - then one of the most important manufacturing centres of

France - in the construction and use of the stocking-frame.  Lee

accordingly transferred himself and his machines to France, in

1605, taking with him his brother and seven workmen.  He met with a

cordial reception at Rouen, and was proceeding with the manufacture

of stockings on a large scale - having nine of his frames in full

work, - when unhappily ill fortune again overtook him.  Henry IV.,

his protector, on whom he had relied for the rewards, honours, and

promised grant of privileges, which had induced Lee to settle in

France, was murdered by the fanatic Ravaillac; and the

encouragement and protection which had heretofore been extended to

him were at once withdrawn.  To press his claims at court, Lee

proceeded to Paris; but being a protestant as well as a foreigner,

his representations were treated with neglect; and worn out with

vexation and grief, this distinguished inventor shortly after died

at Paris, in a state of extreme poverty and distress.



Lee's brother, with seven of the workmen, succeeded in escaping

from France with their frames, leaving two behind.  On James Lee's

return to Nottinghamshire, he was joined by one Ashton, a miller of

Thoroton, who had been instructed in the art of frame-work knitting

by the inventor himself before he left England.  These two, with

the workmen and their frames, began the stocking manufacture at

Thoroton, and carried it on with considerable success.  The place

was favourably situated for the purpose, as the sheep pastured in

the neighbouring district of Sherwood yielded a kind of wool of the

longest staple.  Ashton is said to have introduced the method of

making the frames with lead sinkers, which was a great improvement.

The number of looms employed in different parts of England

gradually increased; and the machine manufacture of stockings

eventually became an important branch of the national industry.



One of the most important modifications in the Stocking-Frame was

that which enabled it to be applied to the manufacture of lace on a

large scale.  In 1777, two workmen, Frost and Holmes, were both

engaged in making point-net by means of the modifications they had

introduced in the stocking-frame; and in the course of about thirty

years, so rapid was the growth of this branch of production that

1500 point-net frames were at work, giving employment to upwards of

15,000 people.  Owing, however, to the war, to change of fashion,

and to other circumstances, the Nottingham lace manufacture rapidly

fell off; and it continued in a decaying state until the invention

of the Bobbin-net Machine by John Heathcoat, late M.P. for

Tiverton, which had the effect of at once re-establishing the

manufacture on solid foundations.



John Heathcoat was the youngest son of a respectable small farmer

at Duffield, Derbyshire, where he was born in 1783.  When at school

he made steady and rapid progress, but was early removed from it to

be apprenticed to a frame-smith near Loughborough.  The boy soon

learnt to handle tools with dexterity, and he acquired a minute

knowledge of the parts of which the stocking-frame was composed, as

well as of the more intricate warp-machine.  At his leisure he

studied how to introduce improvements in them, and his friend, Mr.

Bazley, M.P., states that as early as the age of sixteen, he

conceived the idea of inventing a machine by which lace might be

made similar to Buckingham or French lace, then all made by hand.

The first practical improvement he succeeded in introducing was in

the warp-frame, when, by means of an ingenious apparatus, he

succeeded in producing "mitts" of a lacy appearance, and it was

this success which determined him to pursue the study of mechanical

lace-making.  The stocking-frame had already, in a modified form,

been applied to the manufacture of point-net lace, in which the

mesh was LOOPED as in a stocking, but the work was slight and

frail, and therefore unsatisfactory.  Many ingenious Nottingham

mechanics had, during a long succession of years, been labouring at

the problem of inventing a machine by which the mesh of threads

should be TWISTED round each other on the formation of the net.

Some of these men died in poverty, some were driven insane, and all

alike failed in the object of their search.  The old warp-machine

held its ground.



When a little over twenty-one years of age, Heathcoat went to

Nottingham, where he readily found employment, for which he soon

received the highest remuneration, as a setter-up of hosiery and

warp-frames, and was much respected for his talent for invention,

general intelligence, and the sound and sober principles that

governed his conduct.  He also continued to pursue the subject on

which his mind had before been occupied, and laboured to compass

the contrivance of a twist traverse-net machine.  He first studied

the art of making the Buckingham or pillow-lace by hand, with the

object of effecting the same motions by mechanical means.  It was a

long and laborious task, requiring the exercise of great

perseverance and ingenuity.  His master, Elliot, described him at

that time as inventive, patient, self-denying, and taciturn,

undaunted by failures and mistakes, full of resources and

expedients, and entertaining the most perfect confidence that his

application of mechanical principles would eventually be crowned

with success.



It is difficult to describe in words an invention so complicated as

the bobbin-net machine.  It was, indeed, a mechanical pillow for

making lace, imitating in an ingenious manner the motions of the

lace-maker's fingers in intersecting or tying the meshes of the

lace upon her pillow.  On analysing the component parts of a piece

of hand-made lace, Heathcoat was enabled to classify the threads

into longitudinal and diagonal.  He began his experiments by fixing

common pack-threads lengthwise on a sort of frame for the warp, and

then passing the weft threads between them by common plyers,

delivering them to other plyers on the opposite side; then, after

giving them a sideways motion and twist, the threads were repassed

back between the next adjoining cords, the meshes being thus tied

in the same way as upon pillows by hand.  He had then to contrive a

mechanism that should accomplish all these nice and delicate

movements, and to do this cost him no small amount of mental toil.

Long after he said, "The single difficulty of getting the diagonal

threads to twist in the allotted space was so great that if it had

now to be done, I should probably not attempt its accomplishment."

His next step was to provide thin metallic discs, to be used as

bobbins for conducting the threads backwards and forwards through

the warp.  These discs, being arranged in carrier-frames placed on

each side of the warp, were moved by suitable machinery so as to

conduct the threads from side to side in forming the lace.  He

eventually succeeded in working out his principle with

extraordinary skill and success; and, at the age of twenty-four, he

was enabled to secure his invention by a patent.



During this time his wife was kept in almost as great anxiety as

himself, for she well knew of his trials and difficulties while he

was striving to perfect his invention.  Many years after they had

been successfully overcome, the conversation which took place one

eventful evening was vividly remembered.  "Well," said the anxious

wife, "will it work?"  "No," was the sad answer; "I have had to

take it all to pieces again."  Though he could still speak

hopefully and cheerfully, his poor wife could restrain her feelings

no longer, but sat down and cried bitterly.  She had, however, only

a few more weeks to wait, for success long laboured for and richly

deserved, came at last, and a proud and happy man was John

Heathcoat when he brought home the first narrow strip of bobbin-net

made by his machine, and placed it in the hands of his wife.



As in the case of nearly all inventions which have proved

productive, Heathcoat's rights as a patentee were disputed, and his

claims as an inventor called in question.  On the supposed

invalidity of the patent, the lace-makers boldly adopted the

bobbin-net machine, and set the inventor at defiance.  But other

patents were taken out for alleged improvements and adaptations;

and it was only when these new patentees fell out and went to law

with each other that Heathcoat's rights became established.  One

lace-manufacturer having brought an action against another for an

alleged infringement of his patent, the jury brought in a verdict

for the defendant, in which the judge concurred, on the ground that

BOTH the machines in question were infringements of Heathcoat's

patent.  It was on the occasion of this trial, "Boville v. Moore,"

that Sir John Copley (afterwards Lord Lyndhurst), who was retained

for the defence in the interest of Mr. Heathcoat, learnt to work

the bobbin-net machine in order that he might master the details of

the invention.  On reading over his brief, he confessed that he did

not quite understand the merits of the case; but as it seemed to

him to be one of great importance, he offered to go down into the

country forthwith and study the machine until he understood it;

"and then," said he, "I will defend you to the best of my ability."

He accordingly put himself into that night's mail, and went down to

Nottingham to get up his case as perhaps counsel never got it up

before.  Next morning the learned sergeant placed himself in a

lace-loom, and he did not leave it until he could deftly make a

piece of bobbin-net with his own hands, and thoroughly understood

the principle as well as the details of the machine.  When the case

came on for trial, the learned sergeant was enabled to work the

model on the table with such case and skill, and to explain the

precise nature of the invention with such felicitous clearness, as

to astonish alike judge, jury, and spectators; and the thorough

conscientiousness and mastery with which he handled the case had no

doubt its influence upon the decision of the court.



After the trial was over, Mr. Heathcoat, on inquiry, found about

six hundred machines at work after his patent, and he proceeded to

levy royalty upon the owners of them, which amounted to a large

sum.  But the profits realised by the manufacturers of lace were

very great, and the use of the machines rapidly extended; while the

price of the article was reduced from five pounds the square yard

to about five pence in the course of twenty-five years.  During the

same period the average annual returns of the lace-trade have been

at least four millions sterling, and it gives remunerative

employment to about 150,000 workpeople.



To return to the personal history of Mr. Heathcoat.  In 1809 we

find him established as a lace-manufacturer at Loughborough, in

Leicestershire.  There he carried on a prosperous business for

several years, giving employment to a large number of operatives,

at wages varying from 5L. to 10L. a week.  Notwithstanding the

great increase in the number of hands employed in lace-making

through the introduction of the new machines, it began to be

whispered about among the workpeople that they were superseding

labour, and an extensive conspiracy was formed for the purpose of

destroying them wherever found.  As early as the year 1811 disputes

arose between the masters and men engaged in the stocking and lace

trades in the south-western parts of Nottinghamshire and the

adjacent parts of Derbyshire and Leicestershire, the result of

which was the assembly of a mob at Sutton, in Ashfield, who

proceeded in open day to break the stocking and lace-frames of the

manufacturers.  Some of the ringleaders having been seized and

punished, the disaffected learnt caution; but the destruction of

the machines was nevertheless carried on secretly wherever a safe

opportunity presented itself.  As the machines were of so delicate

a construction that a single blow of a hammer rendered them

useless, and as the manufacture was carried on for the most part in

detached buildings, often in private dwellings remote from towns,

the opportunities of destroying them were unusually easy.  In the

neighbourhood of Nottingham, which was the focus of turbulence, the

machine-breakers organized themselves in regular bodies, and held

nocturnal meetings at which their plans were arranged.  Probably

with the view of inspiring confidence, they gave out that they were

under the command of a leader named Ned Ludd, or General Ludd, and

hence their designation of Luddites.  Under this organization

machine-breaking was carried on with great vigour during the winter

of 1811, occasioning great distress, and throwing large numbers of

workpeople out of employment.  Meanwhile, the owners of the frames

proceeded to remove them from the villages and lone dwellings in

the country, and brought them into warehouses in the towns for

their better protection.



The Luddites seem to have been encouraged by the lenity of the

sentences pronounced on such of their confederates as had been

apprehended and tried; and, shortly after, the mania broke out

afresh, and rapidly extended over the northern and midland

manufacturing districts.  The organization became more secret; an

oath was administered to the members binding them to obedience to

the orders issued by the heads of the confederacy; and the betrayal

of their designs was decreed to be death.  All machines were doomed

by them to destruction, whether employed in the manufacture of

cloth, calico, or lace; and a reign of terror began which lasted

for years.  In Yorkshire and Lancashire mills were boldly attacked

by armed rioters, and in many cases they were wrecked or burnt; so

that it became necessary to guard them by soldiers and yeomanry.

The masters themselves were doomed to death; many of them were

assaulted, and some were murdered.  At length the law was

vigorously set in motion; numbers of the misguided Luddites were

apprehended; some were executed; and after several years' violent

commotion from this cause, the machine-breaking riots were at

length quelled.



Among the numerous manufacturers whose works were attacked by the

Luddites, was the inventor of the bobbin-net machine himself.  One

bright sunny day, in the summer of 1816, a body of rioters entered

his factory at Loughborough with torches, and set fire to it,

destroying thirty-seven lace-machines, and above 10,000L. worth of

property.  Ten of the men were apprehended for the felony, and

eight of them were executed.  Mr. Heathcoat made a claim upon the

county for compensation, and it was resisted; but the Court of

Queen's Bench decided in his favour, and decreed that the county

must make good his loss of 10,000L.  The magistrates sought to

couple with the payment of the damage the condition that Mr.

Heathcoat should expend the money in the county of Leicester; but

to this he would not assent, having already resolved on removing

his manufacture elsewhere.  At Tiverton, in Devonshire, he found a

large building which had been formerly used as a woollen

manufactory; but the Tiverton cloth trade having fallen into decay,

the building remained unoccupied, and the town itself was generally

in a very poverty-stricken condition.  Mr. Heathcoat bought the old

mill, renovated and enlarged it, and there recommenced the

manufacture of lace upon a larger scale than before; keeping in

full work as many as three hundred machines, and employing a large

number of artisans at good wages.  Not only did he carry on the

manufacture of lace, but the various branches of business connected

with it - yarn-doubling, silk-spinning, net-making, and finishing.

He also established at Tiverton an iron-foundry and works for the

manufacture of agricultural implements, which proved of great

convenience to the district.  It was a favourite idea of his that

steam power was capable of being applied to perform all the heavy

drudgery of life, and he laboured for a long time at the invention

of a steam-plough.  In 1832 he so far completed his invention as to

be enabled to take out a patent for it; and Heathcoat's steam-

plough, though it has since been superseded by Fowler's, was

considered the best machine of the kind that had up to that time

been invented.



Mr. Heathcoat was a man of great natural gifts.  He possessed a

sound understanding, quick perception, and a genius for business of

the highest order.  With these he combined uprightness, honesty,

and integrity - qualities which are the true glory of human

character.  Himself a diligent self-educator, he gave ready

encouragement to deserving youths in his employment, stimulating

their talents and fostering their energies.  During his own busy

life, he contrived to save time to master French and Italian, of

which he acquired an accurate and grammatical knowledge.  His mind

was largely stored with the results of a careful study of the best

literature, and there were few subjects on which he had not formed

for himself shrewd and accurate views.  The two thousand workpeople

in his employment regarded him almost as a father, and he carefully

provided for their comfort and improvement.  Prosperity did not

spoil him, as it does so many; nor close his heart against the

claims of the poor and struggling, who were always sure of his

sympathy and help.  To provide for the education of the children of

his workpeople, he built schools for them at a cost of about 6000L.

He was also a man of singularly cheerful and buoyant disposition, a

favourite with men of all classes and most admired and beloved by

those who knew him best.



In 1831 the electors of Tiverton, of which town Mr. Heathcoat had

proved himself so genuine a benefactor, returned him to represent

them in Parliament, and he continued their member for nearly thirty

years.  During a great part of that time he had Lord Palmerston for

his colleague, and the noble lord, on more than one public

occasion, expressed the high regard which he entertained for his

venerable friend.  On retiring from the representation in 1859,

owing to advancing age and increasing infirmities, thirteen hundred

of his workmen presented him with a silver inkstand and gold pen,

in token of their esteem.  He enjoyed his leisure for only two more

years, dying in January, 1861, at the age of seventy-seven, and

leaving behind him a character for probity, virtue, manliness, and

mechanical genius, of which his descendants may well be proud.



We next turn to a career of a very different kind, that of the

illustrious but unfortunate Jacquard, whose life also illustrates

in a remarkable manner the influence which ingenious men, even of

the humblest rank, may exercise upon the industry of a nation.

Jacquard was the son of a hard-working couple of Lyons, his father

being a weaver, and his mother a pattern reader.  They were too

poor to give him any but the most meagre education.  When he was of

age to learn a trade, his father placed him with a book-binder.  An

old clerk, who made up the master's accounts, gave Jacquard some

lessons in mathematics.  He very shortly began to display a

remarkable turn for mechanics, and some of his contrivances quite

astonished the old clerk, who advised Jacquard's father to put him

to some other trade, in which his peculiar abilities might have

better scope than in bookbinding.  He was accordingly put

apprentice to a cutler; but was so badly treated by his master,

that he shortly afterwards left his employment, on which he was

placed with a type-founder.



His parents dying, Jacquard found himself in a measure compelled to

take to his father's two looms, and carry on the trade of a weaver.

He immediately proceeded to improve the looms, and became so

engrossed with his inventions that he forgot his work, and very

soon found himself at the end of his means.  He then sold the looms

to pay his debts, at the same time that he took upon himself the

burden of supporting a wife.  He became still poorer, and to

satisfy his creditors, he next sold his cottage.  He tried to find

employment, but in vain, people believing him to be an idler,

occupied with mere dreams about his inventions.  At length he

obtained employment with a line-maker of Bresse, whither he went,

his wife remaining at Lyons, earning a precarious living by making

straw bonnets.



We hear nothing further of Jacquard for some years, but in the

interval he seems to have prosecuted his improvement in the

drawloom for the better manufacture of figured fabrics; for, in

1790, he brought out his contrivance for selecting the warp

threads, which, when added to the loom, superseded the services of

a draw-boy.  The adoption of this machine was slow but steady, and

in ten years after its introduction, 4000 of them were found at

work in Lyons.  Jacquard's pursuits were rudely interrupted by the

Revolution, and, in 1792, we find him fighting in the ranks of the

Lyonnaise Volunteers against the Army of the Convention under the

command of Dubois Crance.  The city was taken; Jacquard fled and

joined the Army of the Rhine, where he rose to the rank of

sergeant.  He might have remained a soldier, but that, his only son

having been shot dead at his side, he deserted and returned to

Lyons to recover his wife.  He found her in a garret still employed

at her old trade of straw-bonnet making.  While living in

concealment with her, his mind reverted to the inventions over

which he had so long brooded in former years; but he had no means

wherewith to prosecute them.  Jacquard found it necessary, however,

to emerge from his hiding-place and try to find some employment.

He succeeded in obtaining it with an intelligent manufacturer, and

while working by day he went on inventing by night.  It had

occurred to him that great improvements might still be introduced

in looms for figured goods, and he incidentally mentioned the

subject one day to his master, regretting at the same time that his

limited means prevented him from carrying out his ideas.  Happily

his master appreciated the value of the suggestions, and with

laudable generosity placed a sum of money at his disposal, that he

might prosecute the proposed improvements at his leisure.



In three months Jacquard had invented a loom to substitute

mechanical action for the irksome and toilsome labour of the

workman.  The loom was exhibited at the Exposition of National

Industry at Paris in 1801, and obtained a bronze medal.  Jacquard

was further honoured by a visit at Lyons from the Minister Carnot,

who desired to congratulate him in person on the success of his

invention.  In the following year the Society of Arts in London

offered a prize for the invention of a machine for manufacturing

fishing-nets and boarding-netting for ships.  Jacquard heard of

this, and while walking one day in the fields according to his

custom, he turned the subject over in his mind, and contrived the

plan of a machine for the purpose.  His friend, the manufacturer,

again furnished him with the means of carrying out his idea, and in

three weeks Jacquard had completed his invention.



Jacquard's achievement having come to the knowledge of the Prefect

of the Department, he was summoned before that functionary, and, on

his explanation of the working of the machine, a report on the

subject was forwarded to the Emperor.  The inventor was forthwith

summoned to Paris with his machine, and brought into the presence

of the Emperor, who received him with the consideration due to his

genius.  The interview lasted two hours, during which Jacquard,

placed at his ease by the Emperor's affability, explained to him

the improvements which he proposed to make in the looms for weaving

figured goods.  The result was, that he was provided with

apartments in the Conservatoire des Arts et Metiers, where he had

the use of the workshop during his stay, and was provided with a

suitable allowance for his maintenance.



Installed in the Conservatoire, Jacquard proceeded to complete the

details of his improved loom.  He had the advantage of minutely

inspecting the various exquisite pieces of mechanism contained in

that great treasury of human ingenuity.  Among the machines which

more particularly attracted his attention, and eventually set him

upon the track of his discovery, was a loom for weaving flowered

silk, made by Vaucanson the celebrated automaton-maker.



Vaucanson was a man of the highest order of constructive genius.

The inventive faculty was so strong in him that it may almost be

said to have amounted to a passion, and could not be restrained.

The saying that the poet is born, not made, applies with equal

force to the inventor, who, though indebted, like the other, to

culture and improved opportunities, nevertheless contrives and

constructs new combinations of machinery mainly to gratify his own

instinct.  This was peculiarly the case with Vaucanson; for his

most elaborate works were not so much distinguished for their

utility as for the curious ingenuity which they displayed.  While a

mere boy attending Sunday conversations with his mother, he amused

himself by watching, through the chinks of a partition wall, part

of the movements of a clock in the adjoining apartment.  He

endeavoured to understand them, and by brooding over the subject,

after several months he discovered the principle of the escapement.



From that time the subject of mechanical invention took complete

possession of him.  With some rude tools which he contrived, he

made a wooden clock that marked the hours with remarkable

exactness; while he made for a miniature chapel the figures of some

angels which waved their wings, and some priests that made several

ecclesiastical movements.  With the view of executing some other

automata he had designed, he proceeded to study anatomy, music, and

mechanics, which occupied him for several years.  The sight of the

Flute-player in the Gardens of the Tuileries inspired him with the

resolution to invent a similar figure that should PLAY; and after

several years' study and labour, though struggling with illness, he

succeeded in accomplishing his object.  He next produced a

Flageolet-player, which was succeeded by a Duck - the most

ingenious of his contrivances, - which swam, dabbled, drank, and

quacked like a real duck.  He next invented an asp, employed in the

tragedy of 'Cleopatre,' which hissed and darted at the bosom of the

actress.



Vaucanson, however, did not confine himself merely to the making of

automata.  By reason of his ingenuity, Cardinal de Fleury appointed

him inspector of the silk manufactories of France; and he was no

sooner in office, than with his usual irrepressible instinct to

invent, he proceeded to introduce improvements in silk machinery.

One of these was his mill for thrown silk, which so excited the

anger of the Lyons operatives, who feared the loss of employment

through its means, that they pelted him with stones and had nearly

killed him.  He nevertheless went on inventing, and next produced a

machine for weaving flowered silks, with a contrivance for giving a

dressing to the thread, so as to render that of each bobbin or

skein of an equal thickness.



When Vaucanson died in 1782, after a long illness, he bequeathed

his collection of machines to the Queen, who seems to have set but

small value on them, and they were shortly after dispersed.  But

his machine for weaving flowered silks was happily preserved in the

Conservatoire des Arts et Metiers, and there Jacquard found it

among the many curious and interesting articles in the collection.

It proved of the utmost value to him, for it immediately set him on

the track of the principal modification which he introduced in his

improved loom.



One of the chief features of Vaucanson's machine was a pierced

cylinder which, according to the holes it presented when revolved,

regulated the movement of certain needles, and caused the threads

of the warp to deviate in such a manner as to produce a given

design, though only of a simple character.  Jacquard seized upon

the suggestion with avidity, and, with the genius of the true

inventor, at once proceeded to improve upon it.  At the end of a

month his weaving-machine was completed.  To the cylinder of

Vancanson, he added an endless piece of pasteboard pierced with a

number of holes, through which the threads of the warp were

presented to the weaver; while another piece of mechanism indicated

to the workman the colour of the shuttle which he ought to throw.

Thus the drawboy and the reader of designs were both at once

superseded.  The first use Jacquard made of his new loom was to

weave with it several yards of rich stuff which he presented to the

Empress Josephine.  Napoleon was highly gratified with the result

of the inventor's labours, and ordered a number of the looms to be

constructed by the best workmen, after Jacquard's model, and

presented to him; after which he returned to Lyons.



There he experienced the frequent fate of inventors.  He was

regarded by his townsmen as an enemy, and treated by them as Kay,

Hargreaves, and Arkwright had been in Lancashire.  The workmen

looked upon the new loom as fatal to their trade, and feared lest

it should at once take the bread from their mouths.  A tumultuous

meeting was held on the Place des Terreaux, when it was determined

to destroy the machines.  This was however prevented by the

military.  But Jacquard was denounced and hanged in effigy.  The

'Conseil des prud'hommes' in vain endeavoured to allay the

excitement, and they were themselves denounced.  At length, carried

away by the popular impulse, the prud'hommes, most of whom had been

workmen and sympathized with the class, had one of Jacquard's looms

carried off and publicly broken in pieces.  Riots followed, in one

of which Jacquard was dragged along the quay by an infuriated mob

intending to drown him, but he was rescued.



The great value of the Jacquard loom, however, could not be denied,

and its success was only a question of time.  Jacquard was urged by

some English silk manufacturers to pass over into England and

settle there.  But notwithstanding the harsh and cruel treatment he

had received at the hands of his townspeople, his patriotism was

too strong to permit him to accept their offer.  The English

manufacturers, however, adopted his loom.  Then it was, and only

then, that Lyons, threatened to be beaten out of the field, adopted

it with eagerness; and before long the Jacquard machine was

employed in nearly all kinds of weaving.  The result proved that

the fears of the workpeople had been entirely unfounded.  Instead

of diminishing employment, the Jacquard loom increased it at least

tenfold.  The number of persons occupied in the manufacture of

figured goods in Lyons, was stated by M. Leon Faucher to have been

60,000 in 1833; and that number has since been considerably

increased.



As for Jacquard himself, the rest of his life passed peacefully,

excepting that the workpeople who dragged him along the quay to

drown him were shortly after found eager to bear him in triumph

along the same route in celebration of his birthday.  But his

modesty would not permit him to take part in such a demonstration.

The Municipal Council of Lyons proposed to him that he should

devote himself to improving his machine for the benefit of the

local industry, to which Jacquard agreed in consideration of a

moderate pension, the amount of which was fixed by himself.  After

perfecting his invention accordingly, he retired at sixty to end

his days at Oullins, his father's native place.  It was there that

he received, in 1820, the decoration of the Legion of Honour; and

it was there that he died and was buried in 1834.  A statue was

erected to his memory, but his relatives remained in poverty; and

twenty years after his death, his two nieces were under the

necessity of selling for a few hundred francs the gold medal

bestowed upon their uncle by Louis XVIII.  "Such," says a French

writer, "was the gratitude of the manufacturing interests of Lyons

to the man to whom it owes so large a portion of its splendour."



It would be easy to extend the martyrology of inventors, and to

cite the names of other equally distinguished men who have, without

any corresponding advantage to themselves, contributed to the

industrial progress of the age, - for it has too often happened

that genius has planted the tree, of which patient dulness has

gathered the fruit; but we will confine ourselves for the present

to a brief account of an inventor of comparatively recent date, by

way of illustration of the difficulties and privations which it is

so frequently the lot of mechanical genius to surmount.  We allude

to Joshua Heilmann, the inventor of the Combing Machine.



Heilmann was born in 1796 at Mulhouse, the principal seat of the

Alsace cotton manufacture.  His father was engaged in that

business; and Joshua entered his office at fifteen.  He remained

there for two years, employing his spare time in mechanical

drawing.  He afterwards spent two years in his uncle's banking-

house in Paris, prosecuting the study of mathematics in the

evenings.  Some of his relatives having established a small cotton-

spinning factory at Mulhouse, young Heilmann was placed with

Messrs. Tissot and Rey, at Paris, to learn the practice of that

firm.  At the same time he became a student at the Conservatoire

des Arts et Metiers, where he attended the lectures, and studied

the machines in the museum.  He also took practical lessons in

turning from a toymaker.  After some time, thus diligently

occupied, he returned to Alsace, to superintend the construction of

the machinery for the new factory at Vieux-Thann, which was shortly

finished and set to work.  The operations of the manufactory were,

however, seriously affected by a commercial crisis which occurred,

and it passed into other hands, on which Heilmann returned to his

family at Mulhouse.



He had in the mean time been occupying much of his leisure with


inventions, more particularly in connection with the weaving of

cotton and the preparation of the staple for spinning.  One of his

earliest contrivances was an embroidering-machine, in which twenty

needles were employed, working simultaneously; and he succeeded in

accomplishing his object after about six months' labour.  For this

invention, which he exhibited at the Exposition of 1834, he

received a gold medal, and was decorated with the Legion of Honour.

Other inventions quickly followed - an improved loom, a machine for

measuring and folding fabrics, an improvement of the "bobbin and

fly frames" of the English spinners, and a weft winding-machine,

with various improvements in the machinery for preparing, spinning,

and weaving silk and cotton.  One of his most ingenious

contrivances was his loom for weaving simultaneously two pieces of

velvet or other piled fabric, united by the pile common to both,

with a knife and traversing apparatus for separating the two

fabrics when woven.  But by far the most beautiful and ingenious of

his inventions was the combing-machine, the history of which we now

proceed shortly to describe.



Heilmann had for some years been diligently studying the

contrivance of a machine for combing long-stapled cotton, the

ordinary carding-machine being found ineffective in preparing the

raw material for spinning, especially the finer sorts of yarn,

besides causing considerable waste.  To avoid these imperfections,

the cotton-spinners of Alsace offered a prize of 5000 francs for an

improved combing-machine, and Heilmann immediately proceeded to

compete for the reward.  He was not stimulated by the desire of

gain, for he was comparatively rich, having acquired a considerable

fortune by his wife.  It was a saying of his that "one will never

accomplish great things who is constantly asking himself, how much

gain will this bring me?"  What mainly impelled him was the

irrepressible instinct of the inventor, who no sooner has a

mechanical problem set before him than he feels impelled to

undertake its solution.  The problem in this case was, however,

much more difficult than he had anticipated.  The close study of

the subject occupied him for several years, and the expenses in

which he became involved in connection with it were so great, that

his wife's fortune was shortly swallowed up, and he was reduced to

poverty, without being able to bring his machine to perfection.

From that time he was under the necessity of relying mainly on the

help of his friends to enable him to prosecute the invention.



While still struggling with poverty and difficulties, Heilmann's

wife died, believing her husband ruined; and shortly after he

proceeded to England and settled for a time at Manchester, still

labouring at his machine.  He had a model made for him by the

eminent machine-makers, Sharpe, Roberts, and Company; but still he

could not make it work satisfactorily, and he was at length brought

almost to the verge of despair.  He returned to France to visit his

family, still pursuing his idea, which had obtained complete

possession of his mind.  While sitting by his hearth one evening,

meditating upon the hard fate of inventors and the misfortunes in

which their families so often become involved, he found himself

almost unconsciously watching his daughters coming their long hair

and drawing it out at full length between their fingers.  The

thought suddenly struck him that if he could successfully imitate

in a machine the process of combing out the longest hair and

forcing back the short by reversing the action of the comb, it

might serve to extricate him from his difficulty.  It may be

remembered that this incident in the life of Heilmann has been made

the subject of a beautiful picture by Mr. Elmore, R.A., which was

exhibited at the Royal Academy Exhibition of 1862.



Upon this idea he proceeded, introduced the apparently simple but

really most intricate process of machine-combing, and after great


labour he succeeded in perfecting the invention.  The singular

beauty of the process can only be appreciated by those who have

witnessed the machine at work, when the similarity of its movements

to that of combing the hair, which suggested the invention, is at

once apparent.  The machine has been described as "acting with

almost the delicacy of touch of the human fingers."  It combs the

lock of cotton AT BOTH ENDS, places the fibres exactly parallel

with each other, separates the long from the short, and unites the

long fibres in one sliver and the short ones in another.  In fine,

the machine not only acts with the delicate accuracy of the human

fingers, but apparently with the delicate intelligence of the human

mind.



The chief commercial value of the invention consisted in its

rendering the commoner sorts of cotton available for fine spinning.

The manufacturers were thereby enabled to select the most suitable

fibres for high-priced fabrics, and to produce the finer sorts of

yarn in much larger quantities.  It became possible by its means to

make thread so fine that a length of 334 miles might be spun from a

single pound weight of the prepared cotton, and, worked up into the

finer sorts of lace, the original shilling's worth of cotton-wool,

before it passed into the hands of the consumer, might thus be

increased to the value of between 300L. and 400L. sterling.



The beauty and utility of Heilmann's invention were at once

appreciated by the English cotton-spinners.  Six Lancashire firms

united and purchased the patent for cotton-spinning for England for

the sum of 30,000L; the wool-spinners paid the same sum for the

privilege of applying the process to wool; and the Messrs.

Marshall, of Leeds, 20,000L. for the privilege of applying it to

flax.  Thus wealth suddenly flowed in upon poor Heilmann at last.

But he did not live to enjoy it.  Scarcely had his long labours

been crowned by success than he died, and his son, who had shared

in his privations, shortly followed him.



It is at the price of lives such as these that the wonders of

civilisation are achieved.


