





CHAPTER IX. - MEN OF BUSINESS







"Seest thou a man diligent in his business? he shall stand before

kings." - Proverbs of Solomon.



"That man is but of the lower part of the world that is not brought

up to business and affairs." - Owen Feltham





Hazlitt, in one of his clever essays, represents the man of

business as a mean sort of person put in a go-cart, yoked to a

trade or profession; alleging that all he has to do is, not to go

out of the beaten track, but merely to let his affairs take their

own course.  "The great requisite," he says, "for the prosperous

management of ordinary business is the want of imagination, or of

any ideas but those of custom and interest on the narrowest scale."

(24)  But nothing could be more one-sided, and in effect untrue,

than such a definition.  Of course, there are narrow-minded men of

business, as there are narrow-minded scientific men, literary men,

and legislators; but there are also business men of large and

comprehensive minds, capable of action on the very largest scale.

As Burke said in his speech on the India Bill, he knew statesmen

who were pedlers, and merchants who acted in the spirit of

statesmen.



If we take into account the qualities necessary for the successful

conduct of any important undertaking, - that it requires special

aptitude, promptitude of action on emergencies, capacity for

organizing the labours often of large numbers of men, great tact

and knowledge of human nature, constant self-culture, and growing

experience in the practical affairs of life, - it must, we think,

be obvious that the school of business is by no means so narrow as

some writers would have us believe.  Mr. Helps had gone much nearer

the truth when he said that consummate men of business are as rare

almost as great poets, - rarer, perhaps, than veritable saints and

martyrs.  Indeed, of no other pursuit can it so emphatically be

said, as of this, that "Business makes men."



It has, however, been a favourite fallacy with dunces in all times,

that men of genius are unfitted for business, as well as that

business occupations unfit men for the pursuits of genius.  The

unhappy youth who committed suicide a few years since because he

had been "born to be a man and condemned to be a grocer," proved by

the act that his soul was not equal even to the dignity of grocery.

For it is not the calling that degrades the man, but the man that

degrades the calling.  All work that brings honest gain is

honourable, whether it be of hand or mind.  The fingers may be

soiled, yet the heart remain pure; for it is not material so much

as moral dirt that defiles - greed far more than grime, and vice

than verdigris.



The greatest have not disdained to labour honestly and usefully for

a living, though at the same time aiming after higher things.

Thales, the first of the seven sages, Solon, the second founder of

Athens, and Hyperates, the mathematician, were all traders.  Plato,

called the Divine by reason of the excellence of his wisdom,

defrayed his travelling expenses in Egypt by the profits derived

from the oil which he sold during his journey.  Spinoza maintained

himself by polishing glasses while he pursued his philosophical

investigations.  Linnaeus, the great botanist, prosecuted his

studies while hammering leather and making shoes.  Shakespeare was

a successful manager of a theatre - perhaps priding himself more

upon his practical qualities in that capacity than on his writing

of plays and poetry.  Pope was of opinion that Shakespeare's

principal object in cultivating literature was to secure an honest

independence.  Indeed he seems to have been altogether indifferent

to literary reputation.  It is not known that he superintended the

publication of a single play, or even sanctioned the printing of

one; and the chronology of his writings is still a mystery.  It is

certain, however, that he prospered in his business, and realized

sufficient to enable him to retire upon a competency to his native

town of Stratford-upon-Avon.



Chaucer was in early life a soldier, and afterwards an effective

Commissioner of Customs, and Inspector of Woods and Crown Lands.

Spencer was Secretary to the Lord Deputy of Ireland, was afterwards

Sheriff of Cork, and is said to have been shrewd and attentive in

matters of business.  Milton, originally a schoolmaster, was

elevated to the post of Secretary to the Council of State during

the Commonwealth; and the extant Order-book of the Council, as well

as many of Milton's letters which are preserved, give abundant

evidence of his activity and usefulness in that office.  Sir Isaac

Newton proved himself an efficient Master of the Mint; the new

coinage of 1694 having been carried on under his immediate personal

superintendence.  Cowper prided himself upon his business

punctuality, though he confessed that he "never knew a poet, except

himself, who was punctual in anything."  But against this we may

set the lives of Wordsworth and Scott - the former a distributor of

stamps, the latter a clerk to the Court of Session, - both of whom,

though great poets, were eminently punctual and practical men of

business.  David Ricardo, amidst the occupations of his daily

business as a London stock-jobber, in conducting which he acquired

an ample fortune, was able to concentrate his mind upon his

favourite subject - on which he was enabled to throw great light -

the principles of political economy; for he united in himself the

sagacious commercial man and the profound philosopher.  Baily, the

eminent astronomer, was another stockbroker; and Allen, the

chemist, was a silk manufacturer.



We have abundant illustrations, in our own day, of the fact that

the highest intellectual power is not incompatible with the active

and efficient performance of routine duties.  Grote, the great

historian of Greece, was a London banker.  And it is not long since

John Stuart Mill, one of our greatest living thinkers, retired from

the Examiner's department of the East India Company, carrying with

him the admiration and esteem of his fellow officers, not on

account of his high views of philosophy, but because of the high

standard of efficiency which he had established in his office, and

the thoroughly satisfactory manner in which he had conducted the

business of his department.



The path of success in business is usually the path of common

sense.  Patient labour and application are as necessary here as in

the acquisition of knowledge or the pursuit of science.  The old

Greeks said, "to become an able man in any profession, three things

are necessary - nature, study, and practice."  In business,

practice, wisely and diligently improved, is the great secret of

success.  Some may make what are called "lucky hits," but like

money earned by gambling, such "hits" may only serve to lure one to

ruin.  Bacon was accustomed to say that it was in business as in

ways - the nearest way was commonly the foulest, and that if a man

would go the fairest way he must go somewhat about.  The journey

may occupy a longer time, but the pleasure of the labour involved

by it, and the enjoyment of the results produced, will be more

genuine and unalloyed.  To have a daily appointed task of even

common drudgery to do makes the rest of life feel all the sweeter.



The fable of the labours of Hercules is the type of all human doing

and success.  Every youth should be made to feel that his happiness

and well-doing in life must necessarily rely mainly on himself and

the exercise of his own energies, rather than upon the help and

patronage of others.  The late Lord Melbourne embodied a piece of

useful advice in a letter which he wrote to Lord John Russell, in

reply to an application for a provision for one of Moore the poet's

sons:  "My dear John," he said, "I return you Moore's letter.  I

shall be ready to do what you like about it when we have the means.

I think whatever is done should be done for Moore himself.  This is

more distinct, direct, and intelligible.  Making a small provision

for young men is hardly justifiable; and it is of all things the

most prejudicial to themselves.  They think what they have much

larger than it really is; and they make no exertion.  The young

should never hear any language but this:  'You have your own way to

make, and it depends upon your own exertions whether you starve or

not.'  Believe me, &c., MELBOURNE."



Practical industry, wisely and vigorously applied, always produces

its due effects.  It carries a man onward, brings out his

individual character, and stimulates the action of others.  All may

not rise equally, yet each, on the whole, very much according to

his deserts.  "Though all cannot live on the piazza," as the Tuscan

proverb has it, "every one may feel the sun."



On the whole, it is not good that human nature should have the road

of life made too easy.  Better to be under the necessity of working

hard and faring meanly, than to have everything done ready to our

hand and a pillow of down to repose upon.  Indeed, to start in life

with comparatively small means seems so necessary as a stimulus to

work, that it may almost be set down as one of the conditions

essential to success in life.  Hence, an eminent judge, when asked

what contributed most to success at the bar, replied, "Some succeed

by great talent, some by high connexions, some by miracle, but the

majority by commencing without a shilling."



We have heard of an architect of considerable accomplishments, - a

man who had improved himself by long study, and travel in the

classical lands of the East, - who came home to commence the

practice of his profession.  He determined to begin anywhere,

provided he could be employed; and he accordingly undertook a

business connected with dilapidations, - one of the lowest and

least remunerative departments of the architect's calling.  But he

had the good sense not to be above his trade, and he had the

resolution to work his way upward, so that he only got a fair

start.  One hot day in July a friend found him sitting astride of a

house roof occupied with his dilapidation business.  Drawing his

hand across his perspiring countenance, he exclaimed, "Here's a

pretty business for a man who has been all over Greece!"  However,

he did his work, such as it was, thoroughly and well; he persevered

until he advanced by degrees to more remunerative branches of

employment, and eventually he rose to the highest walks of his

profession.



The necessity of labour may, indeed, be regarded as the main root

and spring of all that we call progress in individuals, and

civilization in nations; and it is doubtful whether any heavier

curse could be imposed on man than the complete gratification of

all his wishes without effort on his part, leaving nothing for his

hopes, desires or struggles.  The feeling that life is destitute of

any motive or necessity for action, must be of all others the most

distressing and insupportable to a rational being.  The Marquis de

Spinola asking Sir Horace Vere what his brother died of, Sir Horace

replied, "He died, Sir, of having nothing to do."  "Alas!" said

Spinola, "that is enough to kill any general of us all."



Those who fail in life are however very apt to assume a tone of

injured innocence, and conclude too hastily that everybody

excepting themselves has had a hand in their personal misfortunes.

An eminent writer lately published a book, in which he described

his numerous failures in business, naively admitting, at the same

time, that he was ignorant of the multiplication table; and he came

to the conclusion that the real cause of his ill-success in life

was the money-worshipping spirit of the age.  Lamartine also did

not hesitate to profess his contempt for arithmetic; but, had it

been less, probably we should not have witnessed the unseemly

spectacle of the admirers of that distinguished personage engaged

in collecting subscriptions for his support in his old age.



Again, some consider themselves born to ill luck, and make up their

minds that the world invariably goes against them without any fault

on their own part.  We have heard of a person of this sort, who

went so far as to declare his belief that if he had been a hatter

people would have been born without heads!  There is however a

Russian proverb which says that Misfortune is next door to

Stupidity; and it will often be found that men who are constantly

lamenting their luck, are in some way or other reaping the

consequences of their own neglect, mismanagement, improvidence, or

want of application.  Dr. Johnson, who came up to London with a

single guinea in his pocket, and who once accurately described

himself in his signature to a letter addressed to a noble lord, as

IMPRANSUS, or Dinnerless, has honestly said, "All the complaints

which are made of the world are unjust; I never knew a man of merit

neglected; it was generally by his own fault that he failed of

success."



Washington Irying, the American author, held like views.  "As for

the talk," said he, "about modest merit being neglected, it is too

often a cant, by which indolent and irresolute men seek to lay

their want of success at the door of the public.  Modest merit is,

however, too apt to be inactive, or negligent, or uninstructed

merit.  Well matured and well disciplined talent is always sure of

a market, provided it exerts itself; but it must not cower at home

and expect to be sought for.  There is a good deal of cant too

about the success of forward and impudent men, while men of

retiring worth are passed over with neglect.  But it usually

happens that those forward men have that valuable quality of

promptness and activity without which worth is a mere inoperative

property.  A barking dog is often more useful than a sleeping

lion."



Attention, application, accuracy, method, punctuality, and

despatch, are the principal qualities required for the efficient

conduct of business of any sort.  These, at first sight, may appear

to be small matters; and yet they are of essential importance to

human happiness, well-being, and usefulness.  They are little

things, it is true; but human life is made up of comparative

trifles.  It is the repetition of little acts which constitute not

only the sum of human character, but which determine the character

of nations.  And where men or nations have broken down, it will

almost invariably be found that neglect of little things was the

rock on which they split.  Every human being has duties to be

performed, and, therefore, has need of cultivating the capacity for

doing them; whether the sphere of action be the management of a

household, the conduct of a trade or profession, or the government

of a nation.



The examples we have already given of great workers in various

branches of industry, art, and science, render it unnecessary

further to enforce the importance of persevering application in any

department of life.  It is the result of every-day experience that

steady attention to matters of detail lies at the root of human

progress; and that diligence, above all, is the mother of good

luck.  Accuracy is also of much importance, and an invariable mark

of good training in a man.  Accuracy in observation, accuracy in

speech, accuracy in the transaction of affairs.  What is done in

business must be well done; for it is better to accomplish

perfectly a small amount of work, than to half-do ten times as

much.  A wise man used to say, "Stay a little, that we may make an

end the sooner."



Too little attention, however, is paid to this highly important

quality of accuracy.  As a man eminent in practical science lately

observed to us, "It is astonishing how few people I have met with

in the course of my experience, who can DEFINE A FACT accurately."

Yet in business affairs, it is the manner in which even small

matters are transacted, that often decides men for or against you.

With virtue, capacity, and good conduct in other respects, the

person who is habitually inaccurate cannot be trusted; his work has

to be gone over again; and he thus causes an infinity of annoyance,

vexation, and trouble.



It was one of the characteristic qualities of Charles James Fox,

that he was thoroughly pains-taking in all that he did.  When

appointed Secretary of State, being piqued at some observation as

to his bad writing, he actually took a writing-master, and wrote

copies like a schoolboy until he had sufficiently improved himself.

Though a corpulent man, he was wonderfully active at picking up cut

tennis balls, and when asked how he contrived to do so, he

playfully replied, "Because I am a very pains-taking man."  The

same accuracy in trifling matters was displayed by him in things of

greater importance; and he acquired his reputation, like the

painter, by "neglecting nothing."



Method is essential, and enables a larger amount of work to be got

through with satisfaction.  "Method," said the Reverend Richard

Cecil, "is like packing things in a box; a good packer will get in

half as much again as a bad one."  Cecil's despatch of business was

extraordinary, his maxim being, "The shortest way to do many things

is to do only one thing at once;" and he never left a thing undone

with a view of recurring to it at a period of more leisure.  When

business pressed, he rather chose to encroach on his hours of meals

and rest than omit any part of his work.  De Witt's maxim was like

Cecil's:  "One thing at a time."  "If," said he, "I have any

necessary despatches to make, I think of nothing else till they are

finished; if any domestic affairs require my attention, I give

myself wholly up to them till they are set in order."



A French minister, who was alike remarkable for his despatch of

business and his constant attendance at places of amusement, being

asked how he contrived to combine both objects, replied, "Simply by

never postponing till to-morrow what should be done to-day."  Lord

Brougham has said that a certain English statesman reversed the

process, and that his maxim was, never to transact to-day what

could be postponed till to-morrow.  Unhappily, such is the practice

of many besides that minister, already almost forgotten; the

practice is that of the indolent and the unsuccessful.  Such men,

too, are apt to rely upon agents, who are not always to be relied

upon.  Important affairs must be attended to in person.  "If you

want your business done," says the proverb, "go and do it; if you

don't want it done, send some one else."



An indolent country gentleman had a freehold estate producing about

five hundred a-year.  Becoming involved in debt, he sold half the

estate, and let the remainder to an industrious farmer for twenty

years.  About the end of the term the farmer called to pay his

rent, and asked the owner whether he would sell the farm.  "Will

YOU buy it?" asked the owner, surprised.  "Yes, if we can agree

about the price."  "That is exceedingly strange," observed the

gentleman; "pray, tell me how it happens that, while I could not

live upon twice as much land for which I paid no rent, you are

regularly paying me two hundred a-year for your farm, and are able,

in a few years, to purchase it."  "The reason is plain," was the

reply; "you sat still and said GO, I got up and said COME; you laid

in bed and enjoyed your estate, I rose in the morning and minded my

business."



Sir Walter Scott, writing to a youth who had obtained a situation

and asked for his advice, gave him in reply this sound counsel:

"Beware of stumbling over a propensity which easily besets you from

not having your time fully employed - I mean what the women call

DAWDLING.  Your motto must be, HOC AGE.  Do instantly whatever is

to be done, and take the hours of recreation after business, never

before it.  When a regiment is under march, the rear is often

thrown into confusion because the front do not move steadily and

without interruption.  It is the same with business.  If that which

is first in hand is not instantly, steadily, and regularly

despatched, other things accumulate behind, till affairs begin to

press all at once, and no human brain can stand the confusion."



Promptitude in action may be stimulated by a due consideration of

the value of time.  An Italian philosopher was accustomed to call

time his estate:  an estate which produces nothing of value without

cultivation, but, duly improved, never fails to recompense the

labours of the diligent worker.  Allowed to lie waste, the product

will be only noxious weeds and vicious growths of all kinds.  One

of the minor uses of steady employment is, that it keeps one out of

mischief, for truly an idle brain is the devil's workshop, and a

lazy man the devil's bolster.  To be occupied is to be possessed as

by a tenant, whereas to be idle is to be empty; and when the doors

of the imagination are opened, temptation finds a ready access, and

evil thoughts come trooping in.  It is observed at sea, that men

are never so much disposed to grumble and mutiny as when least

employed.  Hence an old captain, when there was nothing else to do,

would issue the order to "scour the anchor!"



Men of business are accustomed to quote the maxim that Time is

money; but it is more; the proper improvement of it is self-

culture, self-improvement, and growth of character.  An hour wasted

daily on trifles or in indolence, would, if devoted to self-

improvement, make an ignorant man wise in a few years, and employed

in good works, would make his life fruitful, and death a harvest of

worthy deeds.  Fifteen minutes a day devoted to self-improvement,

will be felt at the end of the year.  Good thoughts and carefully

gathered experience take up no room, and may be carried about as

our companions everywhere, without cost or incumbrance.  An

economical use of time is the true mode of securing leisure:  it

enables us to get through business and carry it forward, instead of

being driven by it.  On the other hand, the miscalculation of time

involves us in perpetual hurry, confusion, and difficulties; and

life becomes a mere shuffle of expedients, usually followed by

disaster.  Nelson once said, "I owe all my success in life to

having been always a quarter of an hour before my time."



Some take no thought of the value of money until they have come to

an end of it, and many do the same with their time.  The hours are

allowed to flow by unemployed, and then, when life is fast waning,

they bethink themselves of the duty of making a wiser use of it.

But the habit of listlessness and idleness may already have become

confirmed, and they are unable to break the bonds with which they

have permitted themselves to become bound.  Lost wealth may be

replaced by industry, lost knowledge by study, lost health by

temperance or medicine, but lost time is gone for ever.



A proper consideration of the value of time, will also inspire

habits of punctuality.  "Punctuality," said Louis XIV., "is the

politeness of kings."  It is also the duty of gentlemen, and the

necessity of men of business.  Nothing begets confidence in a man

sooner than the practice of this virtue, and nothing shakes

confidence sooner than the want of it.  He who holds to his

appointment and does not keep you waiting for him, shows that he

has regard for your time as well as for his own.  Thus punctuality

is one of the modes by which we testify our personal respect for

those whom we are called upon to meet in the business of life.  It

is also conscientiousness in a measure; for an appointment is a

contract, express or implied, and he who does not keep it breaks

faith, as well as dishonestly uses other people's time, and thus

inevitably loses character.  We naturally come to the conclusion

that the person who is careless about time will be careless about

business, and that he is not the one to be trusted with the

transaction of matters of importance.  When Washington's secretary

excused himself for the lateness of his attendance and laid the

blame upon his watch, his master quietly said, "Then you must get

another watch, or I another secretary."



The person who is negligent of time and its employment is usually

found to be a general disturber of others' peace and serenity.  It

was wittily said by Lord Chesterfield of the old Duke of Newcastle

- "His Grace loses an hour in the morning, and is looking for it

all the rest of the day."  Everybody with whom the unpunctual man

has to do is thrown from time to time into a state of fever:  he is

systematically late; regular only in his irregularity.  He conducts

his dawdling as if upon system; arrives at his appointment after

time; gets to the railway station after the train has started;

posts his letter when the box has closed.  Thus business is thrown

into confusion, and everybody concerned is put out of temper.  It

will generally be found that the men who are thus habitually behind

time are as habitually behind success; and the world generally

casts them aside to swell the ranks of the grumblers and the

railers against fortune.



In addition to the ordinary working qualities the business man of

the highest class requires quick perception and firmness in the

execution of his plans.  Tact is also important; and though this is

partly the gift of nature, it is yet capable of being cultivated

and developed by observation and experience.  Men of this quality

are quick to see the right mode of action, and if they have

decision of purpose, are prompt to carry out their undertakings to

a successful issue.  These qualities are especially valuable, and

indeed indispensable, in those who direct the action of other men

on a large scale, as for instance, in the case of the commander of

an army in the field.  It is not merely necessary that the general

should be great as a warrior but also as a man of business.  He

must possess great tact, much knowledge of character, and ability

to organize the movements of a large mass of men, whom he has to

feed, clothe, and furnish with whatever may be necessary in order

that they may keep the field and win battles.  In these respects

Napoleon and Wellington were both first-rate men of business.



Though Napoleon had an immense love for details, he had also a

vivid power of imagination, which enabled him to look along

extended lines of action, and deal with those details on a large

scale, with judgment and rapidity.  He possessed such knowledge of

character as enabled him to select, almost unerringly, the best

agents for the execution of his designs.  But he trusted as little

as possible to agents in matters of great moment, on which

important results depended.  This feature in his character is

illustrated in a remarkable degree by the 'Napoleon

Correspondence,' now in course of publication, and particularly by

the contents of the 15th volume, (25) which include the letters,

orders, and despatches, written by the Emperor at Finkenstein, a

little chateau on the frontier of Poland in the year 1807, shortly

after the victory of Eylau.



The French army was then lying encamped along the river Passarge

with the Russians before them, the Austrians on their right flank,

and the conquered Prussians in their rear.  A long line of

communications had to be maintained with France, through a hostile

country; but so carefully, and with such foresight was this

provided for, that it is said Napoleon never missed a post.  The

movements of armies, the bringing up of reinforcements from remote

points in France, Spain, Italy, and Germany, the opening of canals

and the levelling of roads to enable the produce of Poland and

Prussia to be readily transported to his encampments, had his

unceasing attention, down to the minutest details.  We find him

directing where horses were to be obtained, making arrangements for

an adequate supply of saddles, ordering shoes for the soldiers, and

specifying the number of rations of bread, biscuit, and spirits,

that were to be brought to camp, or stored in magazines for the use

of the troops.  At the same time we find him writing to Paris

giving directions for the reorganization of the French College,

devising a scheme of public education, dictating bulletins and

articles for the 'Moniteur,' revising the details of the budgets,

giving instructions to architects as to alterations to be made at

the Tuileries and the Church of the Madelaine, throwing an

occasional sarcasm at Madame de Stael and the Parisian journals,

interfering to put down a squabble at the Grand Opera, carrying on

a correspondence with the Sultan of Turkey and the Schah of Persia,

so that while his body was at Finkenstein, his mind seemed to be

working at a hundred different places in Paris, in Europe, and

throughout the world.



We find him in one letter asking Ney if he has duly received the

muskets which have been sent him; in another he gives directions to

Prince Jerome as to the shirts, greatcoats, clothes, shoes, shakos,

and arms, to be served out to the Wurtemburg regiments; again he

presses Cambaceres to forward to the army a double stock of corn -

"The IFS and the BUTS," said he, "are at present out of season, and

above all it must be done with speed."  Then he informs Daru that

the army want shirts, and that they don't come to hand.  To Massena

he writes, "Let me know if your biscuit and bread arrangements are

yet completed."  To the Grand due de Berg, he gives directions as

to the accoutrements of the cuirassiers - "They complain that the

men want sabres; send an officer to obtain them at Posen.  It is

also said they want helmets; order that they be made at Ebling. . .

. It is not by sleeping that one can accomplish anything."  Thus no

point of detail was neglected, and the energies of all were

stimulated into action with extraordinary power.  Though many of

the Emperor's days were occupied by inspections of his troops, - in

the course of which he sometimes rode from thirty to forty leagues

a day, - and by reviews, receptions, and affairs of state, leaving

but little time for business matters, he neglected nothing on that

account; but devoted the greater part of his nights, when

necessary, to examining budgets, dictating dispatches, and

attending to the thousand matters of detail in the organization and

working of the Imperial Government; the machinery of which was for

the most part concentrated in his own head.



Like Napoleon, the Duke of Wellington was a first-rate man of

business; and it is not perhaps saying too much to aver that it was

in no small degree because of his possession of a business faculty

amounting to genius, that the Duke never lost a battle.



While a subaltern, he became dissatisfied with the slowness of his

promotion, and having passed from the infantry to the cavalry

twice, and back again, without advancement, he applied to Lord

Camden, then Viceroy of Ireland, for employment in the Revenue or

Treasury Board.  Had he succeeded, no doubt he would have made a

first-rate head of a department, as he would have made a first-rate

merchant or manufacturer.  But his application failed, and he

remained with the army to become the greatest of British generals.



The Duke began his active military career under the Duke of York

and General Walmoden, in Flanders and Holland, where he learnt,

amidst misfortunes and defeats, how bad business arrangements and

bad generalship serve to ruin the MORALE of an army.  Ten years

after entering the army we find him a colonel in India, reported by

his superiors as an officer of indefatigable energy and

application.  He entered into the minutest details of the service,

and sought to raise the discipline of his men to the highest

standard.  "The regiment of Colonel Wellesley," wrote General

Harris in 1799, "is a model regiment; on the score of soldierly

bearing, discipline, instruction, and orderly behaviour it is above

all praise."  Thus qualifying himself for posts of greater

confidence, he was shortly after nominated governor of the capital

of Mysore.  In the war with the Mahrattas he was first called upon

to try his hand at generalship; and at thirty-four he won the

memorable battle of Assaye, with an army composed of 1500 British

and 5000 sepoys, over 20,000 Mahratta infantry and 30,000 cavalry.

But so brilliant a victory did not in the least disturb his

equanimity, or affect the perfect honesty of his character.



Shortly after this event the opportunity occurred for exhibiting

his admirable practical qualities as an administrator.  Placed in

command of an important district immediately after the capture of

Seringapatam, his first object was to establish rigid order and

discipline among his own men.  Flushed with victory, the troops

were found riotous and disorderly.  "Send me the provost marshal,"

said he, "and put him under my orders:  till some of the marauders

are hung, it is impossible to expect order or safety."  This rigid

severity of Wellington in the field, though it was the dread,

proved the salvation of his troops in many campaigns.  His next

step was to re-establish the markets and re-open the sources of

supply.  General Harris wrote to the Governor-general, strongly

commending Colonel Wellesley for the perfect discipline he had

established, and for his "judicious and masterly arrangements in

respect to supplies, which opened an abundant free market, and

inspired confidence into dealers of every description."  The same

close attention to, and mastery of details, characterized him

throughout his Indian career; and it is remarkable that one of his

ablest despatches to Lord Clive, full of practical information as

to the conduct of the campaign, was written whilst the column he

commanded was crossing the Toombuddra, in the face of the vastly

superior army of Dhoondiah, posted on the opposite bank, and while

a thousand matters of the deepest interest were pressing upon the

commander's mind.  But it was one of his most remarkable

characteristics, thus to be able to withdraw himself temporarily

from the business immediately in hand, and to bend his full powers

upon the consideration of matters totally distinct; even the most

difficult circumstances on such occasions failing to embarrass or

intimidate him.



Returned to England with a reputation for generalship, Sir Arthur

Wellesley met with immediate employment.  In 1808 a corps of 10,000

men destined to liberate Portugal was placed under his charge.  He

landed, fought, and won two battles, and signed the Convention of

Cintra.  After the death of Sir John Moore he was entrusted with

the command of a new expedition to Portugal.  But Wellington was

fearfully overmatched throughout his Peninsular campaigns.  From

1809 to 1813 he never had more than 30,000 British troops under his

command, at a time when there stood opposed to him in the Peninsula

some 350,000 French, mostly veterans, led by some of Napoleon's

ablest generals.  How was he to contend against such immense forces

with any fair prospect of success?  His clear discernment and

strong common sense soon taught him that he must adopt a different

policy from that of the Spanish generals, who were invariably

beaten and dispersed whenever they ventured to offer battle in the

open plains.  He perceived he had yet to create the army that was

to contend against the French with any reasonable chance of

success.  Accordingly, after the battle of Talavera in 1809, when

he found himself encompassed on all sides by superior forces of

French, he retired into Portugal, there to carry out the settled

policy on which he had by this time determined.  It was, to

organise a Portuguese army under British officers, and teach them

to act in combination with his own troops, in the mean time

avoiding the peril of a defeat by declining all engagements.  He

would thus, he conceived, destroy the MORALE of the French, who

could not exist without victories; and when his army was ripe for

action, and the enemy demoralized, he would then fall upon them

with all his might.



The extraordinary qualities displayed by Lord Wellington throughout

these immortal campaigns, can only be appreciated after a perusal

of his despatches, which contain the unvarnished tale of the

manifold ways and means by which he laid the foundations of his

success.  Never was man more tried by difficulty and opposition,

arising not less from the imbecility, falsehoods and intrigues of

the British Government of the day, than from the selfishness,

cowardice, and vanity of the people he went to save.  It may,

indeed, be said of him, that he sustained the war in Spain by his

individual firmness and self-reliance, which never failed him even

in the midst of his great discouragements.  He had not only to

fight Napoleon's veterans, but also to hold in check the Spanish

juntas and the Portuguese regency.  He had the utmost difficulty in

obtaining provisions and clothing for his troops; and it will

scarcely be credited that, while engaged with the enemy in the

battle of Talavera, the Spaniards, who ran away, fell upon the

baggage of the British army, and the ruffians actually plundered

it!  These and other vexations the Duke bore with a sublime

patience and self-control, and held on his course, in the face of

ingratitude, treachery, and opposition, with indomitable firmness.

He neglected nothing, and attended to every important detail of

business himself.  When he found that food for his troops was not

to be obtained from England, and that he must rely upon his own

resources for feeding them, he forthwith commenced business as a

corn merchant on a large scale, in copartnery with the British

Minister at Lisbon.  Commissariat bills were created, with which

grain was bought in the ports of the Mediterranean and in South

America.  When he had thus filled his magazines, the overplus was

sold to the Portuguese, who were greatly in want of provisions.  He

left nothing whatever to chance, but provided for every

contingency.  He gave his attention to the minutest details of the

service; and was accustomed to concentrate his whole energies, from

time to time, on such apparently ignominious matters as soldiers'

shoes, camp-kettles, biscuits and horse fodder.  His magnificent

business qualities were everywhere felt, and there can be no doubt

that, by the care with which he provided for every contingency, and

the personal attention which he gave to every detail, he laid the

foundations of his great success. (26)  By such means he

transformed an army of raw levies into the best soldiers in Europe,

with whom he declared it to be possible to go anywhere and do

anything.



We have already referred to his remarkable power of abstracting

himself from the work, no matter how engrossing, immediately in

hand, and concentrating his energies upon the details of some

entirely different business.  Thus Napier relates that it was while

he was preparing to fight the battle of Salamanca that he had to

expose to the Ministers at home the futility of relying upon a

loan; it was on the heights of San Christoval, on the field of

battle itself, that he demonstrated the absurdity of attempting to

establish a Portuguese bank; it was in the trenches of Burgos that

he dissected Funchal's scheme of finance, and exposed the folly of

attempting the sale of church property; and on each occasion, he

showed himself as well acquainted with these subjects as with the

minutest detail in the mechanism of armies.



Another feature in his character, showing the upright man of

business, was his thorough honesty.  Whilst Soult ransacked and

carried away with him from Spain numerous pictures of great value,

Wellington did not appropriate to himself a single farthing's worth

of property.  Everywhere he paid his way, even when in the enemy's

country.  When he had crossed the French frontier, followed by

40,000 Spaniards, who sought to "make fortunes" by pillage and

plunder, he first rebuked their officers, and then, finding his

efforts to restrain them unavailing, he sent them back into their

own country.  It is a remarkable fact, that, even in France the

peasantry fled from their own countrymen, and carried their

valuables within the protection of the British lines!  At the very

same time, Wellington was writing home to the British Ministry, "We

are overwhelmed with debts, and I can scarcely stir out of my house

on account of public creditors waiting to demand payment of what is

due to them."  Jules Maurel, in his estimate of the Duke's

character, says, "Nothing can be grander or more nobly original

than this admission.  This old soldier, after thirty years'

service, this iron man and victorious general, established in an

enemy's country at the head of an immense army, is afraid of his

creditors!  This is a kind of fear that has seldom troubled the

mind of conquerors and invaders; and I doubt if the annals of war

could present anything comparable to this sublime simplicity."  But

the Duke himself, had the matter been put to him, would most

probably have disclaimed any intention of acting even grandly or

nobly in the matter; merely regarding the punctual payment of his

debts as the best and most honourable mode of conducting his

business.



The truth of the good old maxim, that "Honesty is the best policy,"

is upheld by the daily experience of life; uprightness and

integrity being found as successful in business as in everything

else.  As Hugh Miller's worthy uncle used to advise him, "In all

your dealings give your neighbour the cast of the bank - 'good

measure, heaped up, and running over,' - and you will not lose by

it in the end."  A well-known brewer of beer attributed his success

to the liberality with which he used his malt.  Going up to the vat

and tasting it, he would say, "Still rather poor, my lads; give it

another cast of the malt."  The brewer put his character into his

beer, and it proved generous accordingly, obtaining a reputation in

England, India, and the colonies, which laid the foundation of a

large fortune.  Integrity of word and deed ought to be the very

cornerstone of all business transactions.  To the tradesman, the

merchant, and manufacturer, it should be what honour is to the

soldier, and charity to the Christian.  In the humblest calling

there will always be found scope for the exercise of this

uprightness of character.  Hugh Miller speaks of the mason with

whom he served his apprenticeship, as one who "PUT HIS CONSCIENCE

INTO EVERY STONE THAT HE LAID."  So the true mechanic will pride

himself upon the thoroughness and solidity of his work, and the

high-minded contractor upon the honesty of performance of his

contract in every particular.  The upright manufacturer will find

not only honour and reputation, but substantial success, in the

genuineness of the article which he produces, and the merchant in

the honesty of what he sells, and that it really is what it seems

to be.  Baron Dupin, speaking of the general probity of Englishmen,

which he held to be a principal cause of their success, observed,

"We may succeed for a time by fraud, by surprise, by violence; but

we can succeed permanently only by means directly opposite.  It is

not alone the courage, the intelligence, the activity, of the

merchant and manufacturer which maintain the superiority of their

productions and the character of their country; it is far more

their wisdom, their economy, and, above all, their probity.  If

ever in the British Islands the useful citizen should lose these

virtues, we may be sure that, for England, as for every other

country, the vessels of a degenerate commerce, repulsed from every

shore, would speedily disappear from those seas whose surface they

now cover with the treasures of the universe, bartered for the

treasures of the industry of the three kingdoms."



It must be admitted, that Trade tries character perhaps more

severely than any other pursuit in life.  It puts to the severest

tests honesty, self-denial, justice, and truthfulness; and men of

business who pass through such trials unstained are perhaps worthy

of as great honour as soldiers who prove their courage amidst the

fire and perils of battle.  And, to the credit of the multitudes of

men engaged in the various departments of trade, we think it must

be admitted that on the whole they pass through their trials nobly.

If we reflect but for a moment on the vast amount of wealth daily

entrusted even to subordinate persons, who themselves probably earn

but a bare competency - the loose cash which is constantly passing

through the hands of shopmen, agents, brokers, and clerks in

banking houses, - and note how comparatively few are the breaches

of trust which occur amidst all this temptation, it will probably

be admitted that this steady daily honesty of conduct is most

honourable to human nature, if it do not even tempt us to be proud

of it.  The same trust and confidence reposed by men of business in

each other, as implied by the system of Credit, which is mainly

based upon the principle of honour, would be surprising if it were

not so much a matter of ordinary practice in business transactions.

Dr. Chalmers has well said, that the implicit trust with which

merchants are accustomed to confide in distant agents, separated

from them perhaps by half the globe - often consigning vast wealth

to persons, recommended only by their character, whom perhaps they

have never seen - is probably the finest act of homage which men

can render to one another.



Although common honesty is still happily in the ascendant amongst

common people, and the general business community of England is

still sound at heart, putting their honest character into their

respective callings, - there are unhappily, as there have been in

all times, but too many instances of flagrant dishonesty and fraud,

exhibited by the unscrupulous, the over-speculative, and the

intensely selfish in their haste to be rich.  There are tradesmen

who adulterate, contractors who "scamp," manufacturers who give us

shoddy instead of wool, "dressing" instead of cotton, cast-iron

tools instead of steel, needles without eyes, razors made only "to

sell," and swindled fabrics in many shapes.  But these we must hold

to be the exceptional cases, of low-minded and grasping men, who,

though they may gain wealth which they probably cannot enjoy, will

never gain an honest character, nor secure that without which

wealth is nothing - a heart at peace.  "The rogue cozened not me,

but his own conscience," said Bishop Latimer of a cutler who made

him pay twopence for a knife not worth a penny.  Money, earned by

screwing, cheating, and overreaching, may for a time dazzle the

eyes of the unthinking; but the bubbles blown by unscrupulous

rogues, when full-blown, usually glitter only to burst.  The

Sadleirs, Dean Pauls, and Redpaths, for the most part, come to a

sad end even in this world; and though the successful swindles of

others may not be "found out," and the gains of their roguery may

remain with them, it will be as a curse and not as a blessing.



It is possible that the scrupulously honest man may not grow rich

so fast as the unscrupulous and dishonest one; but the success will

be of a truer kind, earned without fraud or injustice.  And even

though a man should for a time be unsuccessful, still he must be

honest:  better lose all and save character.  For character is

itself a fortune; and if the high-principled man will but hold on

his way courageously, success will surely come, - nor will the

highest reward of all be withheld from him.  Wordsworth well

describes the "Happy Warrior," as he





"Who comprehends his trust, and to the same

Keeps faithful with a singleness of aim;

And therefore does not stoop, nor lie in wait

For wealth, or honour, or for worldly state;

Whom they must follow, on whose head must fall,

Like showers of manna, if they come at all."





As an example of the high-minded mercantile man trained in upright

habits of business, and distinguished for justice, truthfulness,

and honesty of dealing in all things, the career of the well-known

David Barclay, grandson of Robert Barclay, of Ury, the author of

the celebrated 'Apology for the Quakers,' may be briefly referred

to.  For many years he was the head of an extensive house in

Cheapside, chiefly engaged in the American trade; but like

Granville Sharp, he entertained so strong an opinion against the

war with our American colonies, that he determined to retire

altogether from the trade.  Whilst a merchant, he was as much

distinguished for his talents, knowledge, integrity, and power, as

he afterwards was for his patriotism and munificent philanthropy.

He was a mirror of truthfulness and honesty; and, as became the

good Christian and true gentleman, his word was always held to be

as good as his bond.  His position, and his high character, induced

the Ministers of the day on many occasions to seek his advice; and,

when examined before the House of Commons on the subject of the

American dispute, his views were so clearly expressed, and his

advice was so strongly justified by the reasons stated by him, that

Lord North publicly acknowledged that he had derived more

information from David Barclay than from all others east of Temple

Bar.  On retiring from business, it was not to rest in luxurious

ease, but to enter upon new labours of usefulness for others.  With

ample means, he felt that he still owed to society the duty of a

good example.  He founded a house of industry near his residence at

Walthamstow, which he supported at a heavy outlay for several

years, until at length he succeeded in rendering it a source of

comfort as well as independence to the well-disposed families of

the poor in that neighbourhood.  When an estate in Jamaica fell to

him, he determined, though at a cost of some 10,000L., at once to

give liberty to the whole of the slaves on the property.  He sent

out an agent, who hired a ship, and he had the little slave

community transported to one of the free American states, where

they settled down and prospered.  Mr. Barclay had been assured that

the negroes were too ignorant and too barbarous for freedom, and it

was thus that he determined practically to demonstrate the fallacy

of the assertion.  In dealing with his accumulated savings, he made

himself the executor of his own will, and instead of leaving a

large fortune to be divided among his relatives at his death, he

extended to them his munificent aid during his life, watched and

aided them in their respective careers, and thus not only laid the

foundation, but lived to see the maturity, of some of the largest

and most prosperous business concerns in the metropolis.  We

believe that to this day some of our most eminent merchants - such

as the Gurneys, Hanburys, and Buxtons - are proud to acknowledge

with gratitude the obligations they owe to David Barclay for the

means of their first introduction to life, and for the benefits of

his counsel and countenance in the early stages of their career.

Such a man stands as a mark of the mercantile honesty and integrity

of his country, and is a model and example for men of business in

all time to come.

