






CHAPTER III. - THE GREAT POTTERS - PALISSY, BOTTGHER, WEDGWOOD







"Patience is the finest and worthiest part of fortitude, and the

rarest too . . . Patience lies at the root of all pleasures, as

well as of all powers.  Hope herself ceases to be happiness when

Impatience companions her." - John Ruskin.



"Il y a vingt et cinq ans passez qu'il ne me fut monstre une coupe

de terre, tournee et esmaillee d'une telle beaute que . . .

deslors, sans avoir esgard que je n'avois nulle connoissance des

terres argileuses, je me mis a chercher les emaux, comme un homme

qui taste en tenebres." - Bernard Palissy.





It so happens that the history of Pottery furnishes some of the

most remarkable instances of patient perseverance to be found in

the whole range of biography.  Of these we select three of the most

striking, as exhibited in the lives of Bernard Palissy, the

Frenchman; Johann Friedrich Bottgher, the German; and Josiah

Wedgwood, the Englishman.



Though the art of making common vessels of clay was known to most

of the ancient nations, that of manufacturing enamelled earthenware

was much less common.  It was, however, practised by the ancient

Etruscans, specimens of whose ware are still to be found in

antiquarian collections.  But it became a lost art, and was only

recovered at a comparatively recent date.  The Etruscan ware was

very valuable in ancient times, a vase being worth its weight in

gold in the time of Augustus.  The Moors seem to have preserved

amongst them a knowledge of the art, which they were found

practising in the island of Majorca when it was taken by the Pisans

in 1115. Among the spoil carried away were many plates of Moorish

earthenware, which, in token of triumph, were embedded in the walls

of several of the ancient churches of Pisa, where they are to be

seen to this day.  About two centuries later the Italians began to

make an imitation enamelled ware, which they named Majolica, after

the Moorish place of manufacture.



The reviver or re-discoverer of the art of enamelling in Italy was

Luca della Robbia, a Florentine sculptor.  Vasari describes him as

a man of indefatigable perseverance, working with his chisel all

day and practising drawing during the greater part of the night.

He pursued the latter art with so much assiduity, that when working

late, to prevent his feet from freezing with the cold, he was

accustomed to provide himself with a basket of shavings, in which

he placed them to keep himself warm and enable him to proceed with

his drawings.  "Nor," says Vasari, "am I in the least astonished at

this, since no man ever becomes distinguished in any art whatsoever

who does not early begin to acquire the power of supporting heat,

cold, hunger, thirst, and other discomforts; whereas those persons

deceive themselves altogether who suppose that when taking their

ease and surrounded by all the enjoyments of the world they may

still attain to honourable distinction, - for it is not by

sleeping, but by waking, watching, and labouring continually, that

proficiency is attained and reputation acquired."



But Luca, notwithstanding all his application and industry, did not

succeed in earning enough money by sculpture to enable him to live

by the art, and the idea occurred to him that he might nevertheless

be able to pursue his modelling in some material more facile and

less dear than marble.  Hence it was that he began to make his

models in clay, and to endeavour by experiment so to coat and bake

the clay as to render those models durable.  After many trials he

at length discovered a method of covering the clay with a material,

which, when exposed to the intense heat of a furnace, became

converted into an almost imperishable enamel.  He afterwards made

the further discovery of a method of imparting colour to the

enamel, thus greatly adding to its beauty.



The fame of Luca's work extended throughout Europe, and specimens

of his art became widely diffused.  Many of them were sent into

France and Spain, where they were greatly prized.  At that time

coarse brown jars and pipkins were almost the only articles of

earthenware produced in France; and this continued to be the case,

with comparatively small improvement, until the time of Palissy - a

man who toiled and fought against stupendous difficulties with a

heroism that sheds a glow almost of romance over the events of his

chequered life.



Bernard Palissy is supposed to have been born in the south of

France, in the diocese of Agen, about the year 1510.  His father

was probably a worker in glass, to which trade Bernard was brought

up.  His parents were poor people - too poor to give him the

benefit of any school education.  "I had no other books," said he

afterwards, "than heaven and earth, which are open to all."  He

learnt, however, the art of glass-painting, to which he added that

of drawing, and afterwards reading and writing.



When about eighteen years old, the glass trade becoming decayed,

Palissy left his father's house, with his wallet on his back, and

went out into the world to search whether there was any place in it

for him.  He first travelled towards Gascony, working at his trade

where he could find employment, and occasionally occupying part of

his time in land-measuring.  Then he travelled northwards,

sojourning for various periods at different places in France,

Flanders, and Lower Germany.



Thus Palissy occupied about ten more years of his life, after which

he married, and ceased from his wanderings, settling down to

practise glass-painting and land-measuring at the small town of

Saintes, in the Lower Charente.  There children were born to him;

and not only his responsibilities but his expenses increased,

while, do what he could, his earnings remained too small for his

needs.  It was therefore necessary for him to bestir himself.

Probably he felt capable of better things than drudging in an

employment so precarious as glass-painting; and hence he was

induced to turn his attention to the kindred art of painting and

enamelling earthenware.  Yet on this subject he was wholly

ignorant; for he had never seen earth baked before he began his

operations.  He had therefore everything to learn by himself,

without any helper.  But he was full of hope, eager to learn, of

unbounded perseverance and inexhaustible patience.



It was the sight of an elegant cup of Italian manufacture - most

probably one of Luca della Robbia's make - which first set Palissy

a-thinking about the new art.  A circumstance so apparently

insignificant would have produced no effect upon an ordinary mind,

or even upon Palissy himself at an ordinary time; but occurring as

it did when he was meditating a change of calling, he at once

became inflamed with the desire of imitating it.  The sight of this

cup disturbed his whole existence; and the determination to

discover the enamel with which it was glazed thenceforward

possessed him like a passion.  Had he been a single man he might

have travelled into Italy in search of the secret; but he was bound

to his wife and his children, and could not leave them; so he

remained by their side groping in the dark in the hope of finding

out the process of making and enamelling earthenware.



At first he could merely guess the materials of which the enamel

was composed; and he proceeded to try all manner of experiments to

ascertain what they really were.  He pounded all the substances

which he supposed were likely to produce it.  Then he bought common

earthen pots, broke them into pieces, and, spreading his compounds

over them, subjected them to the heat of a furnace which he erected

for the purpose of baking them.  His experiments failed; and the

results were broken pots and a waste of fuel, drugs, time, and

labour.  Women do not readily sympathise with experiments whose

only tangible effect is to dissipate the means of buying clothes

and food for their children; and Palissy's wife, however dutiful in

other respects, could not be reconciled to the purchase of more

earthen pots, which seemed to her to be bought only to be broken.

Yet she must needs submit; for Palissy had become thoroughly

possessed by the determination to master the secret of the enamel,

and would not leave it alone.



For many successive months and years Palissy pursued his

experiments.  The first furnace having proved a failure, he

proceeded to erect another out of doors.  There he burnt more wood,

spoiled more drugs and pots, and lost more time, until poverty

stared him and his family in the face.  "Thus," said he, "I fooled

away several years, with sorrow and sighs, because I could not at

all arrive at my intention."  In the intervals of his experiments

he occasionally worked at his former callings, painting on glass,

drawing portraits, and measuring land; but his earnings from these

sources were very small.  At length he was no longer able to carry

on his experiments in his own furnace because of the heavy cost of

fuel; but he bought more potsherds, broke them up as before into

three or four hundred pieces, and, covering them with chemicals,

carried them to a tile-work a league and a half distant from

Saintes, there to be baked in an ordinary furnace.  After the

operation he went to see the pieces taken out; and, to his dismay,

the whole of the experiments were failures.  But though

disappointed, he was not yet defeated; for he determined on the

very spot to "begin afresh."



His business as a land-measurer called him away for a brief season

from the pursuit of his experiments.  In conformity with an edict

of the State, it became necessary to survey the salt-marshes in the

neighbourhood of Saintes for the purpose of levying the land-tax.

Palissy was employed to make this survey, and prepare the requisite

map.  The work occupied him some time, and he was doubtless well

paid for it; but no sooner was it completed than he proceeded, with

redoubled zeal, to follow up his old investigations "in the track

of the enamels."  He began by breaking three dozen new earthen

pots, the pieces of which he covered with different materials which

he had compounded, and then took them to a neighbouring glass-

furnace to be baked.  The results gave him a glimmer of hope.  The

greater heat of the glass-furnace had melted some of the compounds;

but though Palissy searched diligently for the white enamel he

could find none.



For two more years he went on experimenting without any

satisfactory result, until the proceeds of his survey of the salt-

marshes having become nearly spent, he was reduced to poverty

again.  But he resolved to make a last great effort; and he began

by breaking more pots than ever.  More than three hundred pieces of

pottery covered with his compounds were sent to the glass-furnace;

and thither he himself went to watch the results of the baking.

Four hours passed, during which he watched; and then the furnace

was opened.  The material on ONE only of the three hundred pieces

of potsherd had melted, and it was taken out to cool.  As it

hardened, it grew white-white and polished!  The piece of potsherd

was covered with white enamel, described by Palissy as "singularly

beautiful!"  And beautiful it must no doubt have been in his eyes

after all his weary waiting.  He ran home with it to his wife,

feeling himself, as he expressed it, quite a new creature.  But the

prize was not yet won - far from it.  The partial success of this

intended last effort merely had the effect of luring him on to a

succession of further experiments and failures.



In order that he might complete the invention, which he now

believed to be at hand, he resolved to build for himself a glass-

furnace near his dwelling, where he might carry on his operations

in secret.  He proceeded to build the furnace with his own hands,

carrying the bricks from the brick-field upon his back.  He was

bricklayer, labourer, and all.  From seven to eight more months

passed.  At last the furnace was built and ready for use.  Palissy

had in the mean time fashioned a number of vessels of clay in

readiness for the laying on of the enamel.  After being subjected

to a preliminary process of baking, they were covered with the

enamel compound, and again placed in the furnace for the grand

crucial experiment.  Although his means were nearly exhausted,

Palissy had been for some time accumulating a great store of fuel

for the final effort; and he thought it was enough.  At last the

fire was lit, and the operation proceeded.  All day he sat by the

furnace, feeding it with fuel.  He sat there watching and feeding

all through the long night.  But the enamel did not melt.  The sun

rose upon his labours.  His wife brought him a portion of the

scanty morning meal, - for he would not stir from the furnace, into

which he continued from time to time to heave more fuel.  The

second day passed, and still the enamel did not melt.  The sun set,

and another night passed.  The pale, haggard, unshorn, baffled yet

not beaten Palissy sat by his furnace eagerly looking for the

melting of the enamel.  A third day and night passed - a fourth, a

fifth, and even a sixth, - yes, for six long days and nights did

the unconquerable Palissy watch and toil, fighting against hope;

and still the enamel would not melt.



It then occurred to him that there might be some defect in the

materials for the enamel - perhaps something wanting in the flux;

so he set to work to pound and compound fresh materials for a new

experiment.  Thus two or three more weeks passed.  But how to buy

more pots? - for those which he had made with his own hands for the

purposes of the first experiment were by long baking irretrievably

spoilt for the purposes of a second.  His money was now all spent;

but he could borrow.  His character was still good, though his wife

and the neighbours thought him foolishly wasting his means in

futile experiments.  Nevertheless he succeeded.  He borrowed

sufficient from a friend to enable him to buy more fuel and more

pots, and he was again ready for a further experiment.  The pots

were covered with the new compound, placed in the furnace, and the

fire was again lit.



It was the last and most desperate experiment of the whole.  The

fire blazed up; the heat became intense; but still the enamel did

not melt.  The fuel began to run short!  How to keep up the fire?

There were the garden palings:  these would burn.  They must be

sacrificed rather than that the great experiment should fail.  The

garden palings were pulled up and cast into the furnace.  They were

burnt in vain!  The enamel had not yet melted.  Ten minutes more

heat might do it.  Fuel must be had at whatever cost.  There

remained the household furniture and shelving.  A crashing noise

was heard in the house; and amidst the screams of his wife and

children, who now feared Palissy's reason was giving way, the

tables were seized, broken up, and heaved into the furnace.  The

enamel had not melted yet!  There remained the shelving.  Another

noise of the wrenching of timber was heard within the house; and

the shelves were torn down and hurled after the furniture into the

fire.  Wife and children then rushed from the house, and went

frantically through the town, calling out that poor Palissy had

gone mad, and was breaking up his very furniture for firewood! (10)



For an entire month his shirt had not been off his back, and he was

utterly worn out - wasted with toil, anxiety, watching, and want of

food.  He was in debt, and seemed on the verge of ruin.  But he had

at length mastered the secret; for the last great burst of heat had

melted the enamel.  The common brown household jars, when taken out

of the furnace after it had become cool, were found covered with a

white glaze!  For this he could endure reproach, contumely, and

scorn, and wait patiently for the opportunity of putting his

discovery into practice as better days came round.



Palissy next hired a potter to make some earthen vessels after

designs which he furnished; while he himself proceeded to model

some medallions in clay for the purpose of enamelling them.  But

how to maintain himself and his family until the wares were made

and ready for sale?  Fortunately there remained one man in Saintes

who still believed in the integrity, if not in the judgment, of

Palissy - an inn-keeper, who agreed to feed and lodge him for six

months, while he went on with his manufacture.  As for the working

potter whom he had hired, Palissy soon found that he could not pay

him the stipulated wages.  Having already stripped his dwelling, he

could but strip himself; and he accordingly parted with some of his

clothes to the potter, in part payment of the wages which he owed

him.



Palissy next erected an improved furnace, but he was so unfortunate

as to build part of the inside with flints.  When it was heated,

these flints cracked and burst, and the spiculae were scattered

over the pieces of pottery, sticking to them.  Though the enamel

came out right, the work was irretrievably spoilt, and thus six

more months' labour was lost.  Persons were found willing to buy

the articles at a low price, notwithstanding the injury they had

sustained; but Palissy would not sell them, considering that to

have done so would be to "decry and abate his honour;" and so he

broke in pieces the entire batch.  "Nevertheless," says he, "hope

continued to inspire me, and I held on manfully; sometimes, when

visitors called, I entertained them with pleasantry, while I was

really sad at heart. . . . Worst of all the sufferings I had to

endure, were the mockeries and persecutions of those of my own

household, who were so unreasonable as to expect me to execute work

without the means of doing so.  For years my furnaces were without

any covering or protection, and while attending them I have been

for nights at the mercy of the wind and the rain, without help or

consolation, save it might be the wailing of cats on the one side

and the howling of dogs on the other.  Sometimes the tempest would

beat so furiously against the furnaces that I was compelled to

leave them and seek shelter within doors.  Drenched by rain, and in

no better plight than if I had been dragged through mire, I have

gone to lie down at midnight or at daybreak, stumbling into the

house without a light, and reeling from one side to another as if I

had been drunken, but really weary with watching and filled with

sorrow at the loss of my labour after such long toiling.  But alas!

my home proved no refuge; for, drenched and besmeared as I was, I

found in my chamber a second persecution worse than the first,

which makes me even now marvel that I was not utterly consumed by

my many sorrows."



At this stage of his affairs, Palissy became melancholy and almost

hopeless, and seems to have all but broken down.  He wandered

gloomily about the fields near Saintes, his clothes hanging in

tatters, and himself worn to a skeleton.  In a curious passage in

his writings he describes how that the calves of his legs had

disappeared and were no longer able with the help of garters to

hold up his stockings, which fell about his heels when he walked.

(11)  The family continued to reproach him for his recklessness,

and his neighbours cried shame upon him for his obstinate folly.

So he returned for a time to his former calling; and after about a

year's diligent labour, during which he earned bread for his

household and somewhat recovered his character among his

neighbours, he again resumed his darling enterprise.  But though he

had already spent about ten years in the search for the enamel, it

cost him nearly eight more years of experimental plodding before he

perfected his invention.  He gradually learnt dexterity and

certainty of result by experience, gathering practical knowledge

out of many failures.  Every mishap was a fresh lesson to him,

teaching him something new about the nature of enamels, the

qualities of argillaceous earths, the tempering of clays, and the

construction and management of furnaces.



At last, after about sixteen years' labour, Palissy took heart and

called himself Potter.  These sixteen years had been his term of

apprenticeship to the art; during which he had wholly to teach

himself, beginning at the very beginning.  He was now able to sell

his wares and thereby maintain his family in comfort.  But he never

rested satisfied with what he had accomplished.  He proceeded from

one step of improvement to another; always aiming at the greatest

perfection possible.  He studied natural objects for patterns, and

with such success that the great Buffon spoke of him as "so great a

naturalist as Nature only can produce."  His ornamental pieces are

now regarded as rare gems in the cabinets of virtuosi, and sell at

almost fabulous prices. (12)  The ornaments on them are for the

most part accurate models from life, of wild animals, lizards, and

plants, found in the fields about Saintes, and tastefully combined

as ornaments into the texture of a plate or vase.  When Palissy had

reached the height of his art he styled himself "Ouvrier de Terre

et Inventeur des Rustics Figulines."



We have not, however, come to an end of the sufferings of Palissy,

respecting which a few words remain to be said.  Being a

Protestant, at a time when religious persecution waxed hot in the

south of France, and expressing his views without fear, he was

regarded as a dangerous heretic.  His enemies having informed

against him, his house at Saintes was entered by the officers of

"justice," and his workshop was thrown open to the rabble, who

entered and smashed his pottery, while he himself was hurried off

by night and cast into a dungeon at Bordeaux, to wait his turn at

the stake or the scaffold.  He was condemned to be burnt; but a

powerful noble, the Constable de Montmorency, interposed to save

his life - not because he had any special regard for Palissy or his

religion, but because no other artist could be found capable of

executing the enamelled pavement for his magnificent chateau then

in course of erection at Ecouen, about four leagues from Paris.  By

his influence an edict was issued appointing Palissy Inventor of

Rustic Figulines to the King and to the Constable, which had the

effect of immediately removing him from the jurisdiction of

Bourdeaux.  He was accordingly liberated, and returned to his home

at Saintes only to find it devastated and broken up. His workshop

was open to the sky, and his works lay in ruins.  Shaking the dust

of Saintes from his feet he left the place never to return to it,

and removed to Paris to carry on the works ordered of him by the

Constable and the Queen Mother, being lodged in the Tuileries (13)

while so occupied.



Besides carrying on the manufacture of pottery, with the aid of his

two sons, Palissy, during the latter part of his life, wrote and

published several books on the potter's art, with a view to the

instruction of his countrymen, and in order that they might avoid

the many mistakes which he himself had made.  He also wrote on

agriculture, on fortification, and natural history, on which latter

subject he even delivered lectures to a limited number of persons.

He waged war against astrology, alchemy, witchcraft, and like

impostures.  This stirred up against him many enemies, who pointed

the finger at him as a heretic, and he was again arrested for his

religion and imprisoned in the Bastille.  He was now an old man of

seventy-eight, trembling on the verge of the grave, but his spirit

was as brave as ever.  He was threatened with death unless he

recanted; but he was as obstinate in holding to his religion as he

had been in hunting out the secret of the enamel.  The king, Henry

III., even went to see him in prison to induce him to abjure his

faith.  "My good man," said the King, "you have now served my

mother and myself for forty-five years.  We have put up with your

adhering to your religion amidst fires and massacres:  now I am so

pressed by the Guise party as well as by my own people, that I am

constrained to leave you in the hands of your enemies, and to-

morrow you will be burnt unless you become converted."  "Sire,"

answered the unconquerable old man, "I am ready to give my life for

the glory of God.  You have said many times that you have pity on

me; and now I have pity on you, who have pronounced the words I AM

CONSTRAINED!  It is not spoken like a king, sire; it is what you,

and those who constrain you, the Guisards and all your people, can

never effect upon me, for I know how to die." (14)  Palissy did

indeed die shortly after, a martyr, though not at the stake.  He

died in the Bastille, after enduring about a year's imprisonment, -

there peacefully terminating a life distinguished for heroic

labour, extraordinary endurance, inflexible rectitude, and the

exhibition of many rare and noble virtues. (15)



The life of John Frederick Bottgher, the inventor of hard

porcelain, presents a remarkable contrast to that of Palissy;

though it also contains many points of singular and almost romantic

interest.  Bottgher was born at Schleiz, in the Voightland, in

1685, and at twelve years of age was placed apprentice with an

apothecary at Berlin.  He seems to have been early fascinated by

chemistry, and occupied most of his leisure in making experiments.

These for the most part tended in one direction - the art of

converting common on metals into gold.  At the end of several

years, Bottgher pretended to have discovered the universal solvent

of the alchemists, and professed that he had made gold by its

means.  He exhibited its powers before his master, the apothecary

Zorn, and by some trick or other succeeded in making him and

several other witnesses believe that he had actually converted

copper into gold.



The news spread abroad that the apothecary's apprentice had

discovered the grand secret, and crowds collected about the shop to

get a sight of the wonderful young "gold-cook."  The king himself

expressed a wish to see and converse with him, and when Frederick

I. was presented with a piece of the gold pretended to have been

converted from copper, he was so dazzled with the prospect of

securing an infinite quantity of it - Prussia being then in great

straits for money - that he determined to secure Bottgher and

employ him to make gold for him within the strong fortress of

Spandau.  But the young apothecary, suspecting the king's

intention, and probably fearing detection, at once resolved on

flight, and he succeeded in getting across the frontier into

Saxony.



A reward of a thousand thalers was offered for Bottgher's

apprehension, but in vain.  He arrived at Wittenberg, and appealed

for protection to the Elector of Saxony, Frederick Augustus I.

(King of Poland), surnamed "the Strong."  Frederick was himself

very much in want of money at the time, and he was overjoyed at the

prospect of obtaining gold in any quantity by the aid of the young

alchemist.  Bottgher was accordingly conveyed in secret to Dresden,

accompanied by a royal escort.  He had scarcely left Wittenberg

when a battalion of Prussian grenadiers appeared before the gates

demanding the gold-maker's extradition.  But it was too late:

Bottgher had already arrived in Dresden, where he was lodged in the

Golden House, and treated with every consideration, though strictly

watched and kept under guard.



The Elector, however, must needs leave him there for a time, having

to depart forthwith to Poland, then almost in a state of anarchy.

But, impatient for gold, he wrote Bottgher from Warsaw, urging him

to communicate the secret, so that he himself might practise the

art of commutation.  The young "gold-cook," thus pressed, forwarded

to Frederick a small phial containing "a reddish fluid," which, it

was asserted, changed all metals, when in a molten state, into

gold.  This important phial was taken in charge by the Prince Furst

von Furstenburg, who, accompanied by a regiment of Guards, hurried

with it to Warsaw.  Arrived there, it was determined to make

immediate trial of the process.  The King and the Prince locked

themselves up in a secret chamber of the palace, girt themselves

about with leather aprons, and like true "gold-cooks" set to work

melting copper in a crucible and afterwards applying to it the red

fluid of Bottgher.  But the result was unsatisfactory; for

notwithstanding all that they could do, the copper obstinately

remained copper.  On referring to the alchemist's instructions,

however, the King found that, to succeed with the process, it was

necessary that the fluid should be used "in great purity of heart;"

and as his Majesty was conscious of having spent the evening in

very bad company he attributed the failure of the experiment to

that cause.  A second trial was followed by no better results, and

then the King became furious; for he had confessed and received

absolution before beginning the second experiment.



Frederick Augustus now resolved on forcing Bottgher to disclose the

golden secret, as the only means of relief from his urgent

pecuniary difficulties.  The alchemist, hearing of the royal

intention, again determined to fly.  He succeeded in escaping his

guard, and, after three days' travel, arrived at Ens in Austria,

where he thought himself safe.  The agents of the Elector were,

however, at his heels; they had tracked him to the "Golden Stag,"

which they surrounded, and seizing him in his bed, notwithstanding

his resistance and appeals to the Austrian authorities for help,

they carried him by force to Dresden.  From this time he was more

strictly watched than ever, and he was shortly after transferred to

the strong fortress of Koningstein.  It was communicated to him

that the royal exchequer was completely empty, and that ten

regiments of Poles in arrears of pay were waiting for his gold.

The King himself visited him, and told him in a severe tone that if

he did not at once proceed to make gold, he would be hung!  ("THU

MIR ZURECHT, BOTTGHER, SONST LASS ICH DICH HANGEN").



Years passed, and still Bottgher made no gold; but he was not hung.

It was reserved for him to make a far more important discovery than

the conversion of copper into gold, namely, the conversion of clay

into porcelain.  Some rare specimens of this ware had been brought

by the Portuguese from China, which were sold for more than their

weight in gold.  Bottgher was first induced to turn his attention

to the subject by Walter von Tschirnhaus, a maker of optical

instruments, also an alchemist.  Tschirnhaus was a man of education

and distinction, and was held in much esteem by Prince Furstenburg

as well as by the Elector.  He very sensibly said to Bottgher,

still in fear of the gallows - "If you can't make gold, try and do

something else; make porcelain."



The alchemist acted on the hint, and began his experiments, working

night and day.  He prosecuted his investigations for a long time

with great assiduity, but without success.  At length some red

clay, brought to him for the purpose of making his crucibles, set

him on the right track.  He found that this clay, when submitted to

a high temperature, became vitrified and retained its shape; and

that its texture resembled that of porcelain, excepting in colour

and opacity.  He had in fact accidentally discovered red porcelain,

and he proceeded to manufacture it and sell it as porcelain.



Bottgher was, however, well aware that the white colour was an

essential property of true porcelain; and he therefore prosecuted

his experiments in the hope of discovering the secret.  Several

years thus passed, but without success; until again accident stood

his friend, and helped him to a knowledge of the art of making

white porcelain.  One day, in the year 1707, he found his perruque

unusually heavy, and asked of his valet the reason.  The answer

was, that it was owing to the powder with which the wig was

dressed, which consisted of a kind of earth then much used for hair

powder.  Bottgher's quick imagination immediately seized upon the

idea.  This white earthy powder might possibly be the very earth of

which he was in search - at all events the opportunity must not be

let slip of ascertaining what it really was.  He was rewarded for

his painstaking care and watchfulness; for he found, on experiment,

that the principal ingredient of the hair-powder consisted of

KAOLIN, the want of which had so long formed an insuperable

difficulty in the way of his inquiries.



The discovery, in Bottgher's intelligent hands, led to great

results, and proved of far greater importance than the discovery of

the philosopher's stone would have been.  In October, 1707, he

presented his first piece of porcelain to the Elector, who was

greatly pleased with it; and it was resolved that Bottgher should

be furnished with the means necessary for perfecting his invention.

Having obtained a skilled workman from Delft, he began to TURN

porcelain with great success.  He now entirely abandoned alchemy

for pottery, and inscribed over the door of his workshop this

distich:-





"ES MACHTE GOTT, DER GROSSE SCHOPFER,

AUS EINEM GOLDMACHER EINEN TOPFER." (16)





Bottgher, however, was still under strict surveillance, for fear

lest he should communicate his secret to others or escape the

Elector's control.  The new workshops and furnaces which were

erected for him, were guarded by troops night and day, and six

superior officers were made responsible for the personal security

of the potter.



Bottgher's further experiments with his new furnaces proving very

successful, and the porcelain which he manufactured being found to

fetch large prices, it was next determined to establish a Royal

Manufactory of porcelain.  The manufacture of delft ware was known

to have greatly enriched Holland.  Why should not the manufacture

of porcelain equally enrich the Elector?  Accordingly, a decree

went forth, dated the 23rd of January, 1710, for the establishment

of "a large manufactory of porcelain" at the Albrechtsburg in

Meissen.  In this decree, which was translated into Latin, French,

and Dutch, and distributed by the Ambassadors of the Elector at all

the European Courts, Frederick Augustus set forth that to promote

the welfare of Saxony, which had suffered much through the Swedish

invasion, he had "directed his attention to the subterranean

treasures (UNTERIRDISCHEN SCHATZE)" of the country, and having

employed some able persons in the investigation, they had succeeded

in manufacturing "a sort of red vessels (EINE ART ROTHER GEFASSE)

far superior to the Indian terra sigillata;" (17) as also "coloured

ware and plates (BUNTES GESCHIRR UND TAFELN) which may be cut,

ground, and polished, and are quite equal to Indian vessels," and

finally that "specimens of white porcelain (PROBEN VON WEISSEM

PORZELLAN)" had already been obtained, and it was hoped that this

quality, too, would soon be manufactured in considerable

quantities.  The royal decree concluded by inviting "foreign

artists and handicraftmen" to come to Saxony and engage as

assistants in the new factory, at high wages, and under the

patronage of the King.  This royal edict probably gives the best

account of the actual state of Bottgher's invention at the time.



It has been stated in German publications that Bottgher, for the

great services rendered by him to the Elector and to Saxony, was

made Manager of the Royal Porcelain Works, and further promoted to

the dignity of Baron.  Doubtless he deserved these honours; but his

treatment was of an altogether different character, for it was

shabby, cruel, and inhuman.  Two royal officials, named Matthieu

and Nehmitz, were put over his head as directors of the factory,

while he himself only held the position of foreman of potters, and

at the same time was detained the King's prisoner.  During the

erection of the factory at Meissen, while his assistance was still

indispensable, he was conducted by soldiers to and from Dresden;

and even after the works were finished, he was locked up nightly in

his room.  All this preyed upon his mind, and in repeated letters

to the King he sought to obtain mitigation of his fate.  Some of

these letters are very touching.  "I will devote my whole soul to

the art of making porcelain," he writes on one occasion, "I will do

more than any inventor ever did before; only give me liberty,

liberty!"



To these appeals, the King turned a deaf ear.  He was ready to

spend money and grant favours; but liberty he would not give.  He

regarded Bottgher as his slave.  In this position, the persecuted

man kept on working for some time, till, at the end of a year or

two, he grew negligent.  Disgusted with the world and with himself,

he took to drinking.  Such is the force of example, that it no

sooner became known that Bottgher had betaken himself to this vice,

than the greater number of the workmen at the Meissen factory

became drunkards too.  Quarrels and fightings without end were the

consequence, so that the troops were frequently called upon to

interfere and keep peace among the "Porzellanern," as they were

nicknamed.  After a while, the whole of them, more than three

hundred, were shut up in the Albrechtsburg, and treated as

prisoners of state.



Bottgher at last fell seriously ill, and in May, 1713, his

dissolution was hourly expected.  The King, alarmed at losing so

valuable a slave, now gave him permission to take carriage exercise

under a guard; and, having somewhat recovered, he was allowed

occasionally to go to Dresden.  In a letter written by the King in

April, 1714, Bottgher was promised his full liberty; but the offer

came too late.  Broken in body and mind, alternately working and

drinking, though with occasional gleams of nobler intention, and

suffering under constant ill-health, the result of his enforced

confinement, Bottgher lingered on for a few years more, until death

freed him from his sufferings on the 13th March, 1719, in the

thirty-fifth year of his age.  He was buried AT NIGHT - as if he

had been a dog - in the Johannis Cemetery of Meissen.  Such was the

treatment and such the unhappy end, of one of Saxony's greatest

benefactors.



The porcelain manufacture immediately opened up an important source

of public revenue, and it became so productive to the Elector of

Saxony, that his example was shortly after followed by most

European monarchs.  Although soft porcelain had been made at St.

Cloud fourteen years before Bottgher's discovery, the superiority

of the hard porcelain soon became generally recognised.  Its

manufacture was begun at Sevres in 1770, and it has since almost

entirely superseded the softer material.  This is now one of the

most thriving branches of French industry, of which the high

quality of the articles produced is certainly indisputable.



The career of Josiah Wedgwood, the English potter, was less

chequered and more prosperous than that of either Palissy or

Bottgher, and his lot was cast in happier times.  Down to the

middle of last century England was behind most other nations of the

first order in Europe in respect of skilled industry.  Although

there were many potters in Staffordshire - and Wedgwood himself

belonged to a numerous clan of potters of the same name - their

productions were of the rudest kind, for the most part only plain

brown ware, with the patterns scratched in while the clay was wet.

The principal supply of the better articles of earthenware came

from Delft in Holland, and of drinking stone pots from Cologne.

Two foreign potters, the brothers Elers from Nuremberg, settled for

a time in Staffordshire, and introduced an improved manufacture,

but they shortly after removed to Chelsea, where they confined

themselves to the manufacture of ornamental pieces.  No porcelain

capable of resisting a scratch with a hard point had yet been made

in England; and for a long time the "white ware" made in

Staffordshire was not white, but of a dirty cream colour.  Such, in

a few words, was the condition of the pottery manufacture when

Josiah Wedgwood was born at Burslem in 1730.  By the time that he

died, sixty-four years later, it had become completely changed.  By

his energy, skill, and genius, he established the trade upon a new

and solid foundation; and, in the words of his epitaph, "converted

a rude and inconsiderable manufacture into an elegant art and an

important branch of national commerce."



Josiah Wedgwood was one of those indefatigable men who from time to

time spring from the ranks of the common people, and by their

energetic character not only practically educate the working

population in habits of industry, but by the example of diligence

and perseverance which they set before them, largely influence the

public activity in all directions, and contribute in a great degree

to form the national character.  He was, like Arkwright, the

youngest of a family of thirteen children.  His grandfather and

granduncle were both potters, as was also his father who died when

he was a mere boy, leaving him a patrimony of twenty pounds.  He

had learned to read and write at the village school; but on the

death of his father he was taken from it and set to work as a

"thrower" in a small pottery carried on by his elder brother.

There he began life, his working life, to use his own words, "at

the lowest round of the ladder," when only eleven years old.  He

was shortly after seized by an attack of virulent smallpox, from

the effects of which he suffered during the rest of his life, for

it was followed by a disease in the right knee, which recurred at

frequent intervals, and was only got rid of by the amputation of

the limb many years later.  Mr. Gladstone, in his eloquent Eloge on

Wedgwood recently delivered at Burslem, well observed that the

disease from which he suffered was not improbably the occasion of

his subsequent excellence.  "It prevented him from growing up to be

the active, vigorous English workman, possessed of all his limbs,

and knowing right well the use of them; but it put him upon

considering whether, as he could not be that, he might not be

something else, and something greater.  It sent his mind inwards;

it drove him to meditate upon the laws and secrets of his art.  The

result was, that he arrived at a perception and a grasp of them

which might, perhaps, have been envied, certainly have been owned,

by an Athenian potter." (18)



When he had completed his apprenticeship with his brother, Josiah

joined partnership with another workman, and carried on a small

business in making knife-hafts, boxes, and sundry articles for

domestic use.  Another partnership followed, when he proceeded to

make melon table plates, green pickle leaves, candlesticks,

snuffboxes, and such like articles; but he made comparatively

little progress until he began business on his own account at

Burslem in the year 1759.  There he diligently pursued his calling,

introducing new articles to the trade, and gradually extending his

business.  What he chiefly aimed at was to manufacture cream-

coloured ware of a better quality than was then produced in

Staffordshire as regarded shape, colour, glaze, and durability.  To

understand the subject thoroughly, he devoted his leisure to the

study of chemistry; and he made numerous experiments on fluxes,

glazes, and various sorts of clay.  Being a close inquirer and

accurate observer, he noticed that a certain earth containing

silica, which was black before calcination, became white after

exposure to the heat of a furnace.  This fact, observed and

pondered on, led to the idea of mixing silica with the red powder

of the potteries, and to the discovery that the mixture becomes

white when calcined.  He had but to cover this material with a

vitrification of transparent glaze, to obtain one of the most

important products of fictile art - that which, under the name of

English earthenware, was to attain the greatest commercial value

and become of the most extensive utility.



Wedgwood was for some time much troubled by his furnaces, though

nothing like to the same extent that Palissy was; and he overcame

his difficulties in the same way - by repeated experiments and

unfaltering perseverance.  His first attempts at making porcelain

for table use was a succession of disastrous failures, - the

labours of months being often destroyed in a day.  It was only

after a long series of trials, in the course of which he lost time,

money, and labour, that he arrived at the proper sort of glaze to

be used; but he would not be denied, and at last he conquered

success through patience.  The improvement of pottery became his

passion, and was never lost sight of for a moment.  Even when he

had mastered his difficulties, and become a prosperous man -

manufacturing white stone ware and cream-coloured ware in large

quantities for home and foreign use - he went forward perfecting

his manufactures, until, his example extending in all directions,

the action of the entire district was stimulated, and a great

branch of British industry was eventually established on firm

foundations.  He aimed throughout at the highest excellence,

declaring his determination "to give over manufacturing any

article, whatsoever it might be, rather than to degrade it."



Wedgwood was cordially helped by many persons of rank and

influence; for, working in the truest spirit, he readily commanded

the help and encouragement of other true workers.  He made for

Queen Charlotte the first royal table-service of English

manufacture, of the kind afterwards called "Queen's-ware," and was

appointed Royal Potter; a title which he prized more than if he had

been made a baron.  Valuable sets of porcelain were entrusted to

him for imitation, in which he succeeded to admiration.  Sir

William Hamilton lent him specimens of ancient art from

Herculaneum, of which he produced accurate and beautiful copies.

The Duchess of Portland outbid him for the Barberini Vase when that

article was offered for sale.  He bid as high as seventeen hundred

guineas for it:  her grace secured it for eighteen hundred; but

when she learnt Wedgwood's object she at once generously lent him

the vase to copy.  He produced fifty copies at a cost of about

2500L., and his expenses were not covered by their sale; but he

gained his object, which was to show that whatever had been done,

that English skill and energy could and would accomplish.



Wedgwood called to his aid the crucible of the chemist, the

knowledge of the antiquary, and the skill of the artist.  He found

out Flaxman when a youth, and while he liberally nurtured his

genius drew from him a large number of beautiful designs for his

pottery and porcelain; converting them by his manufacture into

objects of taste and excellence, and thus making them instrumental

in the diffusion of classical art amongst the people.  By careful

experiment and study he was even enabled to rediscover the art of

painting on porcelain or earthenware vases and similar articles -

an art practised by the ancient Etruscans, but which had been lost

since the time of Pliny.  He distinguished himself by his own

contributions to science, and his name is still identified with the

Pyrometer which he invented.  He was an indefatigable supporter of

all measures of public utility; and the construction of the Trent

and Mersey Canal, which completed the navigable communication

between the eastern and western sides of the island, was mainly due

to his public-spirited exertions, allied to the engineering skill

of Brindley.  The road accommodation of the district being of an

execrable character, he planned and executed a turnpike-road

through the Potteries, ten miles in length.  The reputation he

achieved was such that his works at Burslem, and subsequently those

at Etruria, which he founded and built, became a point of

attraction to distinguished visitors from all parts of Europe.



The result of Wedgwood's labours was, that the manufacture of

pottery, which he found in the very lowest condition, became one of

the staples of England; and instead of importing what we needed for

home use from abroad, we became large exporters to other countries,

supplying them with earthenware even in the face of enormous

prohibitory duties on articles of British produce.  Wedgwood gave

evidence as to his manufactures before Parliament in 1785, only

some thirty years after he had begun his operations; from which it

appeared, that instead of providing only casual employment to a

small number of inefficient and badly remunerated workmen, about

20,000 persons then derived their bread directly from the

manufacture of earthenware, without taking into account the

increased numbers to which it gave employment in coal-mines, and in

the carrying trade by land and sea, and the stimulus which it gave

to employment in many ways in various parts of the country.  Yet,

important as had been the advances made in his time, Mr. Wedgwood

was of opinion that the manufacture was but in its infancy, and

that the improvements which he had effected were of but small

amount compared with those to which the art was capable of

attaining, through the continued industry and growing intelligence

of the manufacturers, and the natural facilities and political

advantages enjoyed by Great Britain; an opinion which has been

fully borne out by the progress which has since been effected in

this important branch of industry.  In 1852 not fewer than

84,000,000 pieces of pottery were exported from England to other

countries, besides what were made for home use.  But it is not

merely the quantity and value of the produce that is entitled to

consideration, but the improvement of the condition of the

population by whom this great branch of industry is conducted.

When Wedgwood began his labours, the Staffordshire district was

only in a half-civilized state.  The people were poor,

uncultivated, and few in number.  When Wedgwood's manufacture was

firmly established, there was found ample employment at good wages

for three times the number of population; while their moral

advancement had kept pace with their material improvement.



Men such as these are fairly entitled to take rank as the

Industrial Heroes of the civilized world.  Their patient self-

reliance amidst trials and difficulties, their courage and

perseverance in the pursuit of worthy objects, are not less heroic

of their kind than the bravery and devotion of the soldier and the

sailor, whose duty and pride it is heroically to defend what these

valiant leaders of industry have so heroically achieved.

