





CHAPTER VII. - INDUSTRY AND THE PEERAGE







"He either fears his fate too much,

Or his deserts are small,

That dares not put it to the touch,

To gain or lose it all." - Marquis of Montrose.



"He hath put down the mighty from their seats; and exalted them of

low degree." - St. Luke.





We have already referred to some illustrious Commoners raised from

humble to elevated positions by the power of application and

industry; and we might point to even the Peerage itself as

affording equally instructive examples.  One reason why the Peerage

of England has succeeded so well in holding its own, arises from

the fact that, unlike the peerages of other countries, it has been

fed, from time to time, by the best industrial blood of the country

- the very "liver, heart, and brain of Britain."  Like the fabled

Antaeus, it has been invigorated and refreshed by touching its

mother earth, and mingling with that most ancient order of nobility

- the working order.



The blood of all men flows from equally remote sources; and though

some are unable to trace their line directly beyond their

grandfathers, all are nevertheless justified in placing at the head

of their pedigree the great progenitors of the race, as Lord

Chesterfield did when he wrote, "ADAM DE STANHOPE - EVE DE

STANHOPE."  No class is ever long stationary.  The mighty fall, and

the humble are exalted.  New families take the place of the old,

who disappear among the ranks of the common people.  Burke's

'Vicissitudes of Families' strikingly exhibit this rise and fall of

families, and show that the misfortunes which overtake the rich and

noble are greater in proportion than those which overwhelm the

poor.  This author points out that of the twenty-five barons

selected to enforce the observance of Magna Charta, there is not

now in the House of Peers a single male descendant.  Civil wars and

rebellions ruined many of the old nobility and dispersed their

families.  Yet their descendants in many cases survive, and are to

be found among the ranks of the people.  Fuller wrote in his

'Worthies,' that "some who justly hold the surnames of Bohuns,

Mortimers, and Plantagenets, are hid in the heap of common men."

Thus Burke shows that two of the lineal descendants of the Earl of

Kent, sixth son of Edward I., were discovered in a butcher and a

toll-gatherer; that the great grandson of Margaret Plantagenet,

daughter of the Duke of Clarance, sank to the condition of a

cobbler at Newport, in Shropshire; and that among the lineal

descendants of the Duke of Gloucester, son of Edward III., was the

late sexton of St George's, Hanover Square.  It is understood that

the lineal descendant of Simon de Montfort, England's premier

baron, is a saddler in Tooley Street.  One of the descendants of

the "Proud Percys," a claimant of the title of Duke of

Northumberland, was a Dublin trunk-maker; and not many years since

one of the claimants for the title of Earl of Perth presented

himself in the person of a labourer in a Northumberland coal-pit.

Hugh Miller, when working as a stone-mason near Edinburgh, was

served by a hodman, who was one of the numerous claimants for the

earldom of Crauford - all that was wanted to establish his claim

being a missing marriage certificate; and while the work was going

on, the cry resounded from the walls many times in the day, of -

"John, Yearl Crauford, bring us anither hod o'lime."  One of Oliver

Cromwell's great grandsons was a grocer on Snow Hill, and others of

his descendants died in great poverty.  Many barons of proud names

and titles have perished, like the sloth, upon their family tree,

after eating up all the leaves; while others have been overtaken by

adversities which they have been unable to retrieve, and sunk at

last into poverty and obscurity.  Such are the mutabilities of rank

and fortune.



The great bulk of our peerage is comparatively modern, so far as

the titles go; but it is not the less noble that it has been

recruited to so large an extent from the ranks of honourable

industry.  In olden times, the wealth and commerce of London,

conducted as it was by energetic and enterprising men, was a

prolific source of peerages.  Thus, the earldom of Cornwallis was

founded by Thomas Cornwallis, the Cheapside merchant; that of Essex

by William Capel, the draper; and that of Craven by William Craven,

the merchant tailor.  The modern Earl of Warwick is not descended

from the "King-maker," but from William Greville, the woolstapler;

whilst the modern dukes of Northumberland find their head, not in

the Percies, but in Hugh Smithson, a respectable London apothecary.

The founders of the families of Dartmouth, Radnor, Ducie, and

Pomfret, were respectively a skinner, a silk manufacturer, a

merchant tailor, and a Calais merchant; whilst the founders of the

peerages of Tankerville, Dormer, and Coventry, were mercers.  The

ancestors of Earl Romney, and Lord Dudley and Ward, were goldsmiths

and jewellers; and Lord Dacres was a banker in the reign of Charles

I., as Lord Overstone is in that of Queen Victoria.  Edward

Osborne, the founder of the Dukedom of Leeds, was apprentice to

William Hewet, a rich clothworker on London Bridge, whose only

daughter he courageously rescued from drowning, by leaping into the

Thames after her, and eventually married.  Among other peerages

founded by trade are those of Fitzwilliam, Leigh, Petre, Cowper,

Darnley, Hill, and Carrington.  The founders of the houses of Foley

and Normanby were remarkable men in many respects, and, as

furnishing striking examples of energy of character, the story of

their lives is worthy of preservation.



The father of Richard Foley, the founder of the family, was a small

yeoman living in the neighbourhood of Stourbridge in the time of

Charles I.  That place was then the centre of the iron manufacture

of the midland districts, and Richard was brought up to work at one

of the branches of the trade - that of nail-making.  He was thus a

daily observer of the great labour and loss of time caused by the

clumsy process then adopted for dividing the rods of iron in the

manufacture of nails.  It appeared that the Stourbridge nailers

were gradually losing their trade in consequence of the importation

of nails from Sweden, by which they were undersold in the market.

It became known that the Swedes were enabled to make their nails so

much cheaper, by the use of splitting mills and machinery, which

had completely superseded the laborious process of preparing the

rods for nail-making then practised in England.



Richard Foley, having ascertained this much, determined to make

himself master of the new process.  He suddenly disappeared from

the neighbourhood of Stourbridge, and was not heard of for several

years.  No one knew whither he had gone, not even his own family;

for he had not informed them of his intention, lest he should fail.

He had little or no money in his pocket, but contrived to get to

Hull, where he engaged himself on board a ship bound for a Swedish

port, and worked his passage there.  The only article of property

which he possessed was his fiddle, and on landing in Sweden he

begged and fiddled his way to the Dannemora mines, near Upsala.  He

was a capital musician, as well as a pleasant fellow, and soon

ingratiated himself with the iron-workers.  He was received into

the works, to every part of which he had access; and he seized the

opportunity thus afforded him of storing his mind with

observations, and mastering, as he thought, the mechanism of iron

splitting.  After a continued stay for this purpose, he suddenly

disappeared from amongst his kind friends the miners - no one knew

whither.



Returned to England, he communicated the results of his voyage to

Mr. Knight and another person at Stourbridge, who had sufficient

confidence in him to advance the requisite funds for the purpose of

erecting buildings and machinery for splitting iron by the new

process.  But when set to work, to the great vexation and

disappointment of all, and especially of Richard Foley, it was

found that the machinery would not act - at all events it would not

split the bars of iron.  Again Foley disappeared.  It was thought

that shame and mortification at his failure had driven him away for

ever.  Not so!  Foley had determined to master this secret of iron-

splitting, and he would yet do it.  He had again set out for

Sweden, accompanied by his fiddle as before, and found his way to

the iron works, where he was joyfully welcomed by the miners; and,

to make sure of their fiddler, they this time lodged him in the

very splitting-mill itself.  There was such an apparent absence of

intelligence about the man, except in fiddle-playing, that the

miners entertained no suspicions as to the object of their

minstrel, whom they thus enabled to attain the very end and aim of

his life.  He now carefully examined the works, and soon discovered

the cause of his failure.  He made drawings or tracings of the

machinery as well as he could, though this was a branch of art

quite new to him; and after remaining at the place long enough to

enable him to verify his observations, and to impress the

mechanical arrangements clearly and vividly on his mind, he again

left the miners, reached a Swedish port, and took ship for England.

A man of such purpose could not but succeed.  Arrived amongst his

surprised friends, he now completed his arrangements, and the

results were entirely successful.  By his skill and his industry he

soon laid the foundations of a large fortune, at the same time that

he restored the business of an extensive district.  He himself

continued, during his life, to carry on his trade, aiding and

encouraging all works of benevolence in his neighbourhood.  He

founded and endowed a school at Stourbridge; and his son Thomas (a

great benefactor of Kidderminster), who was High Sheriff of

Worcestershire in the time of "The Rump," founded and endowed an

hospital, still in existence, for the free education of children at

Old Swinford.  All the early Foleys were Puritans.  Richard Baxter

seems to have been on familiar and intimate terms with various

members of the family, and makes frequent mention of them in his

'Life and Times.'  Thomas Foley, when appointed high sheriff of the

county, requested Baxter to preach the customary sermon before him;

and Baxter in his 'Life' speaks of him as "of so just and blameless

dealing, that all men he ever had to do with magnified his great

integrity and honesty, which were questioned by none."  The family

was ennobled in the reign of Charles the Second.



William Phipps, the founder of the Mulgrave or Normanby family, was

a man quite as remarkable in his way as Richard Foley.  His father

was a gunsmith - a robust Englishman settled at Woolwich, in Maine,

then forming part of our English colonies in America.  He was born

in 1651, one of a family of not fewer than twenty-six children (of

whom twenty-one were sons), whose only fortune lay in their stout

hearts and strong arms.  William seems to have had a dash of the

Danish-sea blood in his veins, and did not take kindly to the quiet

life of a shepherd in which he spent his early years.  By nature

bold and adventurous, he longed to become a sailor and roam through

the world.  He sought to join some ship; but not being able to find

one, he apprenticed himself to a shipbuilder, with whom he

thoroughly learnt his trade, acquiring the arts of reading and

writing during his leisure hours.  Having completed his

apprenticeship and removed to Boston, he wooed and married a widow

of some means, after which he set up a little shipbuilding yard of

his own, built a ship, and, putting to sea in her, he engaged in

the lumber trade, which he carried on in a plodding and laborious

way for the space of about ten years.



It happened that one day, whilst passing through the crooked

streets of old Boston, he overheard some sailors talking to each

other of a wreck which had just taken place off the Bahamas; that

of a Spanish ship, supposed to have much money on board.  His

adventurous spirit was at once kindled, and getting together a

likely crew without loss of time, he set sail for the Bahamas.  The

wreck being well in-shore, he easily found it, and succeeded in

recovering a great deal of its cargo, but very little money; and

the result was, that he barely defrayed his expenses.  His success

had been such, however, as to stimulate his enterprising spirit;

and when he was told of another and far more richly laden vessel

which had been wrecked near Port de la Plata more than half a

century before, he forthwith formed the resolution of raising the

wreck, or at all events of fishing up the treasure.



Being too poor, however, to undertake such an enterprise without

powerful help, he set sail for England in the hope that he might

there obtain it.  The fame of his success in raising the wreck off

the Bahamas had already preceded him.  He applied direct to the

Government.  By his urgent enthusiasm, he succeeded in overcoming

the usual inertia of official minds; and Charles II. eventually

placed at his disposal the "Rose Algier," a ship of eighteen guns

and ninety-five men, appointing him to the chief command.



Phipps then set sail to find the Spanish ship and fish up the

treasure.  He reached the coast of Hispaniola in safety; but how to

find the sunken ship was the great difficulty.  The fact of the

wreck was more than fifty years old; and Phipps had only the

traditionary rumours of the event to work upon.  There was a wide

coast to explore, and an outspread ocean without any trace whatever

of the argosy which lay somewhere at its bottom.  But the man was

stout in heart and full of hope.  He set his seamen to work to drag

along the coast, and for weeks they went on fishing up sea-weed,

shingle, and bits of rock.  No occupation could be more trying to

seamen, and they began to grumble one to another, and to whisper

that the man in command had brought them on a fool's errand.



At length the murmurers gained head, and the men broke into open

mutiny.  A body of them rushed one day on to the quarter-deck, and

demanded that the voyage should be relinquished.  Phipps, however,

was not a man to be intimidated; he seized the ringleaders, and

sent the others back to their duty.  It became necessary to bring

the ship to anchor close to a small island for the purpose of

repairs; and, to lighten her, the chief part of the stores was

landed.  Discontent still increasing amongst the crew, a new plot

was laid amongst the men on shore to seize the ship, throw Phipps

overboard, and start on a piratical cruize against the Spaniards in

the South Seas.  But it was necessary to secure the services of the

chief ship carpenter, who was consequently made privy to the pilot.

This man proved faithful, and at once told the captain of his

danger.  Summoning about him those whom he knew to be loyal, Phipps

had the ship's guns loaded which commanded the shore, and ordered

the bridge communicating with the vessel to be drawn up.  When the

mutineers made their appearance, the captain hailed them, and told

the men he would fire upon them if they approached the stores

(still on land), - when they drew back; on which Phipps had the

stores reshipped under cover of his guns.  The mutineers, fearful

of being left upon the barren island, threw down their arms and

implored to be permitted to return to their duty.  The request was

granted, and suitable precautions were taken against future

mischief.  Phipps, however, took the first opportunity of landing

the mutinous part of the crew, and engaging other men in their

places; but, by the time that he could again proceed actively with

his explorations, he found it absolutely necessary to proceed to

England for the purpose of repairing the ship.  He had now,

however, gained more precise information as to the spot where the

Spanish treasure ship had sunk; and, though as yet baffled, he was

more confident than ever of the eventual success of his enterprise.



Returned to London, Phipps reported the result of his voyage to the

Admiralty, who professed to be pleased with his exertions; but he

had been unsuccessful, and they would not entrust him with another

king's ship.  James II. was now on the throne, and the Government

was in trouble; so Phipps and his golden project appealed to them

in vain.  He next tried to raise the requisite means by a public

subscription.  At first he was laughed at; but his ceaseless

importunity at length prevailed, and after four years' dinning of

his project into the ears of the great and influential - during

which time he lived in poverty - he at length succeeded.  A company

was formed in twenty shares, the Duke of Albermarle, son of General

Monk, taking the chief interest in it, and subscribing the

principal part of the necessary fund for the prosecution of the

enterprise.



Like Foley, Phipps proved more fortunate in his second voyage than

in his first.  The ship arrived without accident at Port de la

Plata, in the neighbourhood of the reef of rocks supposed to have

been the scene of the wreck.  His first object was to build a stout

boat capable of carrying eight or ten oars, in constructing which

Phipps used the adze himself.  It is also said that he constructed

a machine for the purpose of exploring the bottom of the sea

similar to what is now known as the Diving Bell.  Such a machine

was found referred to in books, but Phipps knew little of books,

and may be said to have re-invented the apparatus for his own use.

He also engaged Indian divers, whose feats of diving for pearls,

and in submarine operations, were very remarkable.  The tender and

boat having been taken to the reef, the men were set to work, the

diving bell was sunk, and the various modes of dragging the bottom

of the sea were employed continuously for many weeks, but without

any prospect of success.  Phipps, however, held on valiantly,

hoping almost against hope.  At length, one day, a sailor, looking

over the boat's side down into the clear water, observed a curious

sea-plant growing in what appeared to be a crevice of the rock; and

he called upon an Indian diver to go down and fetch it for him.  On

the red man coming up with the weed, he reported that a number of

ships guns were lying in the same place.  The intelligence was at

first received with incredulity, but on further investigation it

proved to be correct.  Search was made, and presently a diver came

up with a solid bar of silver in his arms.  When Phipps was shown

it, he exclaimed, "Thanks be to God! we are all made men."  Diving

bell and divers now went to work with a will, and in a few days,

treasure was brought up to the value of about 300,000 pounds, with

which Phipps set sail for England.  On his arrival, it was urged

upon the king that he should seize the ship and its cargo, under

the pretence that Phipps, when soliciting his Majesty's permission,

had not given accurate information respecting the business.  But

the king replied, that he knew Phipps to be an honest man, and that

he and his friends should divide the whole treasure amongst them,

even though he had returned with double the value.  Phipps's share

was about 20,000 pounds, and the king, to show his approval of his

energy and honesty in conducting the enterprise, conferred upon him

the honour of knighthood.  He was also made High Sheriff of New

England; and during the time he held the office, he did valiant

service for the mother country and the colonists against the

French, by expeditions against Port Royal and Quebec.  He also held

the post of Governor of Massachusetts, from which he returned to

England, and died in London in 1695.



Phipps throughout the latter part of his career, was not ashamed to

allude to the lowness of his origin, and it was matter of honest

pride to him that he had risen from the condition of common ship

carpenter to the honours of knighthood and the government of a

province.  When perplexed with public business, he would often

declare that it would be easier for him to go back to his broad axe

again.  He left behind him a character for probity, honesty,

patriotism, and courage, which is certainly not the least noble

inheritance of the house of Normanby.



William Petty, the founder of the house of Lansdowne, was a man of

like energy and public usefulness in his day.  He was the son of a

clothier in humble circumstances, at Romsey, in Hampshire, where he

was born in 1623.  In his boyhood he obtained a tolerable education

at the grammar school of his native town; after which he determined

to improve himself by study at the University of Caen, in Normandy.

Whilst there he contrived to support himself unassisted by his

father, carrying on a sort of small pedler's trade with "a little

stock of merchandise."  Returning to England, he had himself bound

apprentice to a sea captain, who "drubbed him with a rope's end"

for the badness of his sight.  He left the navy in disgust, taking

to the study of medicine.  When at Paris he engaged in dissection,

during which time he also drew diagrams for Hobbes, who was then

writing his treatise on Optics.  He was reduced to such poverty

that he subsisted for two or three weeks entirely on walnuts.  But

again he began to trade in a small way, turning an honest penny,

and he was enabled shortly to return to England with money in his

pocket.  Being of an ingenious mechanical turn, we find him taking

out a patent for a letter-copying machine.  He began to write upon

the arts and sciences, and practised chemistry and physic with such

success that his reputation shortly became considerable.

Associating with men of science, the project of forming a Society

for its prosecution was discussed, and the first meetings of the

infant Royal Society were held at his lodgings.  At Oxford he acted

for a time as deputy to the anatomical professor there, who had a

great repugnance to dissection.  In 1652 his industry was rewarded

by the appointment of physician to the army in Ireland, whither he

went; and whilst there he was the medical attendant of three

successive lords-lieutenant, Lambert, Fleetwood, and Henry

Cromwell.  Large grants of forfeited land having been awarded to

the Puritan soldiery, Petty observed that the lands were very

inaccurately measured; and in the midst of his many avocations he

undertook to do the work himself.  His appointments became so

numerous and lucrative that he was charged by the envious with

corruption, and removed from them all; but he was again taken into

favour at the Restoration.



Petty was a most indefatigable contriver, inventor, and organizer

of industry.  One of his inventions was a double-bottomed ship, to

sail against wind and tide.  He published treatises on dyeing, on

naval philosophy, on woollen cloth manufacture, on political

arithmetic, and many other subjects.  He founded iron works, opened

lead mines, and commenced a pilchard fishery and a timber trade; in

the midst of which he found time to take part in the discussions of

the Royal Society, to which he largely contributed.  He left an

ample fortune to his sons, the eldest of whom was created Baron

Shelburne.  His will was a curious document, singularly

illustrative of his character; containing a detail of the principal

events of his life, and the gradual advancement of his fortune.

His sentiments on pauperism are characteristic:  "As for legacies

for the poor," said he, "I am at a stand; as for beggars by trade

and election, I give them nothing; as for impotents by the hand of

God, the public ought to maintain them; as for those who have been

bred to no calling nor estate, they should be put upon their

kindred;" . . .  "wherefore I am contented that I have assisted all

my poor relations, and put many into a way of getting their own

bread; have laboured in public works; and by inventions have sought

out real objects of charity; and I do hereby conjure all who

partake of my estate, from time to time, to do the same at their

peril.  Nevertheless to answer custom, and to take the surer side,

I give 20L. to the most wanting of the parish wherein I die."  He

was interred in the fine old Norman church of Romsey - the town

wherein he was born a poor man's son - and on the south side of the

choir is still to be seen a plain slab, with the inscription, cut

by an illiterate workman, "Here Layes Sir William Petty."



Another family, ennobled by invention and trade in our own day, is

that of Strutt of Belper.  Their patent of nobility was virtually

secured by Jedediah Strutt in 1758, when he invented his machine

for making ribbed stockings, and thereby laid the foundations of a

fortune which the subsequent bearers of the name have largely

increased and nobly employed.  The father of Jedediah was a farmer

and malster, who did but little for the education of his children;

yet they all prospered.  Jedediah was the second son, and when a

boy assisted his father in the work of the farm.  At an early age

he exhibited a taste for mechanics, and introduced several

improvements in the rude agricultural implements of the period.  On

the death of his uncle he succeeded to a farm at Blackwall, near

Normanton, long in the tenancy of the family, and shortly after he

married Miss Wollatt, the daughter of a Derby hosier.  Having

learned from his wife's brother that various unsuccessful attempts

had been made to manufacture ribbed-stockings, he proceeded to

study the subject with a view to effect what others had failed in

accomplishing.  He accordingly obtained a stocking-frame, and after

mastering its construction and mode of action, he proceeded to

introduce new combinations, by means of which he succeeded in

effecting a variation in the plain looped-work of the frame, and

was thereby enabled to turn out "ribbed" hosiery.  Having secured a

patent for the improved machine, he removed to Derby, and there

entered largely on the manufacture of ribbed-stockings, in which he

was very successful.  He afterwards joined Arkwright, of the merits

of whose invention he fully satisfied himself, and found the means

of securing his patent, as well as erecting a large cotton-mill at

Cranford, in Derbyshire.  After the expiry of the partnership with

Arkwright, the Strutts erected extensive cotton-mills at Milford,

near Belper, which worthily gives its title to the present head of

the family.  The sons of the founder were, like their father,

distinguished for their mechanical ability.  Thus William Strutt,

the eldest, is said to have invented a self-acting mule, the

success of which was only prevented by the mechanical skill of that

day being unequal to its manufacture.  Edward, the son of William,

was a man of eminent mechanical genius, having early discovered the

principle of suspension-wheels for carriages:  he had a wheelbarrow

and two carts made on the principle, which were used on his farm

near Belper.  It may be added that the Strutts have throughout been

distinguished for their noble employment of the wealth which their

industry and skill have brought them; that they have sought in all

ways to improve the moral and social condition of the work-people

in their employment; and that they have been liberal donors in

every good cause - of which the presentation, by Mr. Joseph Strutt,

of the beautiful park or Arboretum at Derby, as a gift to the

townspeople for ever, affords only one of many illustrations.  The

concluding words of the short address which he delivered on

presenting this valuable gift are worthy of being quoted and

remembered:- "As the sun has shone brightly on me through life, it

would be ungrateful in me not to employ a portion of the fortune I

possess in promoting the welfare of those amongst whom I live, and

by whose industry I have been aided in its organisation."



No less industry and energy have been displayed by the many brave

men, both in present and past times, who have earned the peerage by

their valour on land and at sea.  Not to mention the older feudal

lords, whose tenure depended upon military service, and who so

often led the van of the English armies in great national

encounters, we may point to Nelson, St. Vincent, and Lyons - to

Wellington, Hill, Hardinge, Clyde, and many more in recent times,

who have nobly earned their rank by their distinguished services.

But plodding industry has far oftener worked its way to the peerage

by the honourable pursuit of the legal profession, than by any

other.  No fewer than seventy British peerages, including two

dukedoms, have been founded by successful lawyers.  Mansfield and

Erskine were, it is true, of noble family; but the latter used to

thank God that out of his own family he did not know a lord. (23)

The others were, for the most part, the sons of attorneys, grocers,

clergymen, merchants, and hardworking members of the middle class.

Out of this profession have sprung the peerages of Howard and

Cavendish, the first peers of both families having been judges;

those of Aylesford, Ellenborough, Guildford, Shaftesbury,

Hardwicke, Cardigan, Clarendon, Camden, Ellesmere, Rosslyn; and

others nearer our own day, such as Tenterden, Eldon, Brougham,

Denman, Truro, Lyndhurst, St. Leonards, Cranworth, Campbell, and

Chelmsford.



Lord Lyndhurst's father was a portrait painter, and that of St.

Leonards a perfumer and hairdresser in Burlington Street.  Young

Edward Sugden was originally an errand-boy in the office of the

late Mr. Groom, of Henrietta Street, Cavendish Square, a

certificated conveyancer; and it was there that the future Lord

Chancellor of Ireland obtained his first notions of law.  The

origin of the late Lord Tenterden was perhaps the humblest of all,

nor was he ashamed of it; for he felt that the industry, study, and

application, by means of which he achieved his eminent position,

were entirely due to himself.  It is related of him, that on one

occasion he took his son Charles to a little shed, then standing

opposite the western front of Canterbury Cathedral, and pointing it

out to him, said, "Charles, you see this little shop; I have

brought you here on purpose to show it you.  In that shop your

grandfather used to shave for a penny:  that is the proudest

reflection of my life."  When a boy, Lord Tenterden was a singer in

the Cathedral, and it is a curious circumstance that his

destination in life was changed by a disappointment.  When he and

Mr. Justice Richards were going the Home Circuit together, they

went to service in the cathedral; and on Richards commending the

voice of a singing man in the choir, Lord Tenterden said, "Ah! that

is the only man I ever envied!  When at school in this town, we

were candidates for a chorister's place, and he obtained it."



Not less remarkable was the rise to the same distinguished office

of Lord Chief Justice, of the rugged Kenyon and the robust

Ellenborough; nor was he a less notable man who recently held the

same office - the astute Lord Campbell, late Lord Chancellor of

England, son of a parish minister in Fifeshire.  For many years he

worked hard as a reporter for the press, while diligently preparing

himself for the practice of his profession.  It is said of him,

that at the beginning of his career, he was accustomed to walk from

county town to county town when on circuit, being as yet too poor

to afford the luxury of posting.  But step by step he rose slowly

but surely to that eminence and distinction which ever follow a

career of industry honourably and energetically pursued, in the

legal, as in every other profession.



There have been other illustrious instances of Lords Chancellors

who have plodded up the steep of fame and honour with equal energy

and success.  The career of the late Lord Eldon is perhaps one of

the most remarkable examples.  He was the son of a Newcastle coal-

fitter; a mischievous rather than a studious boy; a great

scapegrace at school, and the subject of many terrible thrashings,

- for orchard-robbing was one of the favourite exploits of the

future Lord Chancellor.  His father first thought of putting him

apprentice to a grocer, and afterwards had almost made up his mind

to bring him up to his own trade of a coal-fitter.  But by this

time his eldest son William (afterwards Lord Stowell) who had

gained a scholarship at Oxford, wrote to his father, "Send Jack up

to me, I can do better for him."  John was sent up to Oxford

accordingly, where, by his brother's influence and his own

application, he succeeded in obtaining a fellowship.  But when at

home during the vacation, he was so unfortunate - or rather so

fortunate, as the issue proved - as to fall in love; and running

across the Border with his eloped bride, he married, and as his

friends thought, ruined himself for life.  He had neither house nor

home when he married, and had not yet earned a penny.  He lost his

fellowship, and at the same time shut himself out from preferment

in the Church, for which he had been destined.  He accordingly

turned his attention to the study of the law.  To a friend he

wrote, "I have married rashly; but it is my determination to work

hard to provide for the woman I love."



John Scott came up to London, and took a small house in Cursitor

Lane, where he settled down to the study of the law.  He worked

with great diligence and resolution; rising at four every morning

and studying till late at night, binding a wet towel round his head

to keep himself awake.  Too poor to study under a special pleader,

he copied out three folio volumes from a manuscript collection of

precedents.  Long after, when Lord Chancellor, passing down

Cursitor Lane one day, he said to his secretary, "Here was my first

perch:  many a time do I recollect coming down this street with

sixpence in my hand to buy sprats for supper."  When at length

called to the bar, he waited long for employment.  His first year's

earnings amounted to only nine shillings.  For four years he

assiduously attended the London Courts and the Northern Circuit,

with little better success.  Even in his native town, he seldom had

other than pauper cases to defend.  The results were indeed so

discouraging, that he had almost determined to relinquish his

chance of London business, and settle down in some provincial town

as a country barrister.  His brother William wrote home, "Business

is dull with poor Jack, very dull indeed!"  But as he had escaped

being a grocer, a coal-fitter, and a country parson so did he also

escape being a country lawyer.



An opportunity at length occurred which enabled John Scott to

exhibit the large legal knowledge which he had so laboriously

acquired.  In a case in which he was engaged, he urged a legal

point against the wishes both of the attorney and client who

employed him.  The Master of the Rolls decided against him, but on

an appeal to the House of Lords, Lord Thurlow reversed the decision

on the very point that Scott had urged.  On leaving the House that

day, a solicitor tapped him on the shoulder and said, "Young man,

your bread and butter's cut for life."  And the prophecy proved a

true one.  Lord Mansfield used to say that he knew no interval

between no business and 3000L. a-year, and Scott might have told

the same story; for so rapid was his progress, that in 1783, when

only thirty-two, he was appointed King's Counsel, was at the head

of the Northern Circuit, and sat in Parliament for the borough of

Weobley.  It was in the dull but unflinching drudgery of the early

part of his career that he laid the foundation of his future

success.  He won his spurs by perseverance, knowledge, and ability,

diligently cultivated.  He was successively appointed to the

offices of solicitor and attorney-general, and rose steadily

upwards to the highest office that the Crown had to bestow - that

of Lord Chancellor of England, which he held for a quarter of a

century.



Henry Bickersteth was the son of a surgeon at Kirkby Lonsdale, in

Westmoreland, and was himself educated to that profession.  As a

student at Edinburgh, he distinguished himself by the steadiness

with which he worked, and the application which he devoted to the

science of medicine.  Returned to Kirkby Lonsdale, he took an

active part in his father's practice; but he had no liking for the

profession, and grew discontented with the obscurity of a country

town.  He went on, nevertheless, diligently improving himself, and

engaged on speculations in the higher branches of physiology.  In

conformity with his own wish, his father consented to send him to

Cambridge, where it was his intention to take a medical degree with

the view of practising in the metropolis.  Close application to his

studies, however, threw him out of health, and with a view to re-

establishing his strength he accepted the appointment of travelling

physician to Lord Oxford.  While abroad he mastered Italian, and

acquired a great admiration for Italian literature, but no greater

liking for medicine than before.  On the contrary, he determined to

abandon it; but returning to Cambridge, he took his degree; and

that he worked hard may be inferred from the fact that he was

senior wrangler of his year.  Disappointed in his desire to enter

the army, he turned to the bar, and entered a student of the Inner

Temple.  He worked as hard at law as he had done at medicine.

Writing to his father, he said, "Everybody says to me, 'You are

certain of success in the end - only persevere;' and though I don't

well understand how this is to happen, I try to believe it as much

as I can, and I shall not fail to do everything in my power."  At

twenty-eight he was called to the bar, and had every step in life

yet to make.  His means were straitened, and he lived upon the

contributions of his friends.  For years he studied and waited.

Still no business came.  He stinted himself in recreation, in

clothes, and even in the necessaries of life; struggling on

indefatigably through all.  Writing home, he "confessed that he

hardly knew how he should be able to struggle on till he had fair

time and opportunity to establish himself."  After three years'

waiting, still without success, he wrote to his friends that rather

than be a burden upon them longer, he was willing to give the

matter up and return to Cambridge, "where he was sure of support

and some profit."  The friends at home sent him another small

remittance, and he persevered.  Business gradually came in.

Acquitting himself creditably in small matters, he was at length

entrusted with cases of greater importance.  He was a man who never

missed an opportunity, nor allowed a legitimate chance of

improvement to escape him.  His unflinching industry soon began to

tell upon his fortunes; a few more years and he was not only

enabled to do without assistance from home, but he was in a

position to pay back with interest the debts which he had incurred.

The clouds had dispersed, and the after career of Henry Bickersteth

was one of honour, of emolument, and of distinguished fame.  He

ended his career as Master of the Rolls, sitting in the House of

Peers as Baron Langdale.  His life affords only another

illustration of the power of patience, perseverance, and

conscientious working, in elevating the character of the

individual, and crowning his labours with the most complete

success.



Such are a few of the distinguished men who have honourably worked

their way to the highest position, and won the richest rewards of

their profession, by the diligent exercise of qualities in many

respects of an ordinary character, but made potent by the force of

application and industry.


