






Self Help


	by Samuel Smiles








CHAPTER I - SELF-HELP - NATIONAL AND INDIVIDUAL







"The worth of a State, in the long run, is the worth of the

individuals composing it." - J. S. Mill.



"We put too much faith in systems, and look too little to men." -

B. Disraeli.





"Heaven helps those who help themselves" is a well-tried maxim,

embodying in a small compass the results of vast human experience.

The spirit of self-help is the root of all genuine growth in the

individual; and, exhibited in the lives of many, it constitutes the

true source of national vigour and strength.  Help from without is

often enfeebling in its effects, but help from within invariably

invigorates.  Whatever is done FOR men or classes, to a certain

extent takes away the stimulus and necessity of doing for

themselves; and where men are subjected to over-guidance and over-

government, the inevitable tendency is to render them comparatively

helpless.



Even the best institutions can give a man no active help.  Perhaps

the most they can do is, to leave him free to develop himself and

improve his individual condition.  But in all times men have been

prone to believe that their happiness and well-being were to be

secured by means of institutions rather than by their own conduct.

Hence the value of legislation as an agent in human advancement has

usually been much over-estimated.  To constitute the millionth part

of a Legislature, by voting for one or two men once in three or

five years, however conscientiously this duty may be performed, can

exercise but little active influence upon any man's life and

character.  Moreover, it is every day becoming more clearly

understood, that the function of Government is negative and

restrictive, rather than positive and active; being resolvable

principally into protection - protection of life, liberty, and

property.  Laws, wisely administered, will secure men in the

enjoyment of the fruits of their labour, whether of mind or body,

at a comparatively small personal sacrifice; but no laws, however

stringent, can make the idle industrious, the thriftless provident,

or the drunken sober.  Such reforms can only be effected by means

of individual action, economy, and self-denial; by better habits,

rather than by greater rights.



The Government of a nation itself is usually found to be but the

reflex of the individuals composing it.  The Government that is

ahead of the people will inevitably be dragged down to their level,

as the Government that is behind them will in the long run be

dragged up.  In the order of nature, the collective character of a

nation will as surely find its befitting results in its law and

government, as water finds its own level.  The noble people will be

nobly ruled, and the ignorant and corrupt ignobly.  Indeed all

experience serves to prove that the worth and strength of a State

depend far less upon the form of its institutions than upon the

character of its men.  For the nation is only an aggregate of

individual conditions, and civilization itself is but a question of

the personal improvement of the men, women, and children of whom

society is composed.



National progress is the sum of individual industry, energy, and

uprightness, as national decay is of individual idleness,

selfishness, and vice.  What we are accustomed to decry as great

social evils, will, for the most part, be found to be but the

outgrowth of man's own perverted life; and though we may endeavour

to cut them down and extirpate them by means of Law, they will only

spring up again with fresh luxuriance in some other form, unless

the conditions of personal life and character are radically

improved.  If this view be correct, then it follows that the

highest patriotism and philanthropy consist, not so much in

altering laws and modifying institutions, as in helping and

stimulating men to elevate and improve themselves by their own free

and independent individual action.



It may be of comparatively little consequence how a man is governed

from without, whilst everything depends upon how he governs himself

from within.  The greatest slave is not he who is ruled by a

despot, great though that evil be, but he who is the thrall of his

own moral ignorance, selfishness, and vice.  Nations who are thus

enslaved at heart cannot be freed by any mere changes of masters or

of institutions; and so long as the fatal delusion prevails, that

liberty solely depends upon and consists in government, so long

will such changes, no matter at what cost they may be effected,

have as little practical and lasting result as the shifting of the

figures in a phantasmagoria.  The solid foundations of liberty must

rest upon individual character; which is also the only sure

guarantee for social security and national progress.  John Stuart

Mill truly observes that "even despotism does not produce its worst

effects so long as individuality exists under it; and whatever

crushes individuality IS despotism, by whatever name it be called."



Old fallacies as to human progress are constantly turning up.  Some

call for Caesars, others for Nationalities, and others for Acts of

Parliament.  We are to wait for Caesars, and when they are found,

"happy the people who recognise and follow them." (1) This doctrine

shortly means, everything FOR the people, nothing BY them, - a

doctrine which, if taken as a guide, must, by destroying the free

conscience of a community, speedily prepare the way for any form of

despotism.  Caesarism is human idolatry in its worst form - a

worship of mere power, as degrading in its effects as the worship

of mere wealth would be.  A far healthier doctrine to inculcate

among the nations would be that of Self-Help; and so soon as it is

thoroughly understood and carried into action, Caesarism will be no

more.  The two principles are directly antagonistic; and what

Victor Hugo said of the Pen and the Sword alike applies to them,

"Ceci tuera cela."  [This will kill that.]



The power of Nationalities and Acts of Parliament is also a

prevalent superstition.  What William Dargan, one of Ireland's

truest patriots, said at the closing of the first Dublin Industrial

Exhibition, may well be quoted now.  "To tell the truth," he said,

"I never heard the word independence mentioned that my own country

and my own fellow townsmen did not occur to my mind.  I have heard

a great deal about the independence that we were to get from this,

that, and the other place, and of the great expectations we were to

have from persons from other countries coming amongst us.  Whilst I

value as much as any man the great advantages that must result to

us from that intercourse, I have always been deeply impressed with

the feeling that our industrial independence is dependent upon

ourselves.  I believe that with simple industry and careful

exactness in the utilization of our energies, we never had a fairer

chance nor a brighter prospect than the present.  We have made a

step, but perseverance is the great agent of success; and if we but

go on zealously, I believe in my conscience that in a short period

we shall arrive at a position of equal comfort, of equal happiness,

and of equal independence, with that of any other people."



All nations have been made what they are by the thinking and the

working of many generations of men.  Patient and persevering

labourers in all ranks and conditions of life, cultivators of the

soil and explorers of the mine, inventors and discoverers,

manufacturers, mechanics and artisans, poets, philosophers, and

politicians, all have contributed towards the grand result, one

generation building upon another's labours, and carrying them

forward to still higher stages.  This constant succession of noble

workers - the artisans of civilisation - has served to create order

out of chaos in industry, science, and art; and the living race has

thus, in the course of nature, become the inheritor of the rich

estate provided by the skill and industry of our forefathers, which

is placed in our hands to cultivate, and to hand down, not only

unimpaired but improved, to our successors.



The spirit of self-help, as exhibited in the energetic action of

individuals, has in all times been a marked feature in the English

character, and furnishes the true measure of our power as a nation.

Rising above the heads of the mass, there were always to be found a

series of individuals distinguished beyond others, who commanded

the public homage.  But our progress has also been owing to

multitudes of smaller and less known men.  Though only the

generals' names may be remembered in the history of any great

campaign, it has been in a great measure through the individual

valour and heroism of the privates that victories have been won.

And life, too, is "a soldiers' battle," - men in the ranks having

in all times been amongst the greatest of workers.  Many are the

lives of men unwritten, which have nevertheless as powerfully

influenced civilisation and progress as the more fortunate Great

whose names are recorded in biography.  Even the humblest person,

who sets before his fellows an example of industry, sobriety, and

upright honesty of purpose in life, has a present as well as a

future influence upon the well-being of his country; for his life

and character pass unconsciously into the lives of others, and

propagate good example for all time to come.



Daily experience shows that it is energetic individualism which

produces the most powerful effects upon the life and action of

others, and really constitutes the best practical education.

Schools, academies, and colleges, give but the merest beginnings of

culture in comparison with it.  Far more influential is the life-

education daily given in our homes, in the streets, behind

counters, in workshops, at the loom and the plough, in counting-

houses and manufactories, and in the busy haunts of men.  This is

that finishing instruction as members of society, which Schiller

designated "the education of the human race," consisting in action,

conduct, self-culture, self-control, - all that tends to discipline

a man truly, and fit him for the proper performance of the duties

and business of life, - a kind of education not to be learnt from

books, or acquired by any amount of mere literary training.  With

his usual weight of words Bacon observes, that "Studies teach not

their own use; but that is a wisdom without them, and above them,

won by observation;" a remark that holds true of actual life, as

well as of the cultivation of the intellect itself.  For all

experience serves to illustrate and enforce the lesson, that a man

perfects himself by work more than by reading, - that it is life

rather than literature, action rather than study, and character

rather than biography, which tend perpetually to renovate mankind.



Biographies of great, but especially of good men, are nevertheless

most instructive and useful, as helps, guides, and incentives to

others.  Some of the best are almost equivalent to gospels -

teaching high living, high thinking, and energetic action for their

own and the world's good.  The valuable examples which they furnish

of the power of self-help, of patient purpose, resolute working,

and steadfast integrity, issuing in the formation of truly noble

and manly character, exhibit in language not to be misunderstood,

what it is in the power of each to accomplish for himself; and

eloquently illustrate the efficacy of self-respect and self-

reliance in enabling men of even the humblest rank to work out for

themselves an honourable competency and a solid reputation.



Great men of science, literature, and art - apostles of great

thoughts and lords of the great heart - have belonged to no

exclusive class nor rank in life.  They have come alike from

colleges, workshops, and farmhouses, - from the huts of poor men

and the mansions of the rich.  Some of God's greatest apostles have

come from "the ranks."  The poorest have sometimes taken the

highest places; nor have difficulties apparently the most

insuperable proved obstacles in their way.  Those very

difficulties, in many instances, would ever seem to have been their

best helpers, by evoking their powers of labour and endurance, and

stimulating into life faculties which might otherwise have lain

dormant.  The instances of obstacles thus surmounted, and of

triumphs thus achieved, are indeed so numerous, as almost to

justify the proverb that "with Will one can do anything."  Take,

for instance, the remarkable fact, that from the barber's shop came

Jeremy Taylor, the most poetical of divines; Sir Richard Arkwright,

the inventor of the spinning-jenny and founder of the cotton

manufacture; Lord Tenterden, one of the most distinguished of Lord

Chief Justices; and Turner, the greatest among landscape painters.



No one knows to a certainty what Shakespeare was; but it is

unquestionable that he sprang from a humble rank.  His father was a

butcher and grazier; and Shakespeare himself is supposed to have

been in early life a woolcomber; whilst others aver that he was an

usher in a school and afterwards a scrivener's clerk.  He truly

seems to have been "not one, but all mankind's epitome."  For such

is the accuracy of his sea phrases that a naval writer alleges that

he must have been a sailor; whilst a clergyman infers, from

internal evidence in his writings, that he was probably a parson's

clerk; and a distinguished judge of horse-flesh insists that he

must have been a horse-dealer.  Shakespeare was certainly an actor,

and in the course of his life "played many parts," gathering his

wonderful stores of knowledge from a wide field of experience and

observation.  In any event, he must have been a close student and a

hard worker; and to this day his writings continue to exercise a

powerful influence on the formation of English character.



The common class of day labourers has given us Brindley the

engineer, Cook the navigator, and Burns the poet.  Masons and

bricklayers can boast of Ben Jonson, who worked at the building of

Lincoln's Inn, with a trowel in his hand and a book in his pocket,

Edwards and Telford the engineers, Hugh Miller the geologist, and

Allan Cunningham the writer and sculptor; whilst among

distinguished carpenters we find the names of Inigo Jones the

architect, Harrison the chronometer-maker, John Hunter the

physiologist, Romney and Opie the painters, Professor Lee the

Orientalist, and John Gibson the sculptor.



From the weaver class have sprung Simson the mathematician, Bacon

the sculptor, the two Milners, Adam Walker, John Foster, Wilson the

ornithologist, Dr. Livingstone the missionary traveller, and

Tannahill the poet.  Shoemakers have given us Sir Cloudesley Shovel

the great Admiral, Sturgeon the electrician, Samuel Drew the

essayist, Gifford the editor of the 'Quarterly Review,' Bloomfield

the poet, and William Carey the missionary; whilst Morrison,

another laborious missionary, was a maker of shoe-lasts.  Within

the last few years, a profound naturalist has been discovered in

the person of a shoemaker at Banff, named Thomas Edwards, who,

while maintaining himself by his trade, has devoted his leisure to

the study of natural science in all its branches, his researches in

connexion with the smaller crustaceae having been rewarded by the

discovery of a new species, to which the name of "Praniza

Edwardsii" has been given by naturalists.



Nor have tailors been undistinguished.  John Stow, the historian,

worked at the trade during some part of his life.  Jackson, the

painter, made clothes until he reached manhood.  The brave Sir John

Hawkswood, who so greatly distinguished himself at Poictiers, and

was knighted by Edward III. for his valour, was in early life

apprenticed to a London tailor.  Admiral Hobson, who broke the boom

at Vigo in 1702, belonged to the same calling.  He was working as a

tailor's apprentice near Bonchurch, in the Isle of Wight, when the

news flew through the village that a squadron of men-of-war was

sailing off the island.  He sprang from the shopboard, and ran down

with his comrades to the beach, to gaze upon the glorious sight.

The boy was suddenly inflamed with the ambition to be a sailor; and

springing into a boat, he rowed off to the squadron, gained the

admiral's ship, and was accepted as a volunteer.  Years after, he

returned to his native village full of honours, and dined off bacon

and eggs in the cottage where he had worked as an apprentice.  But

the greatest tailor of all is unquestionably Andrew Johnson, the

present President of the United States - a man of extraordinary

force of character and vigour of intellect.  In his great speech at

Washington, when describing himself as having begun his political

career as an alderman, and run through all the branches of the

legislature, a voice in the crowd cried, "From a tailor up."  It

was characteristic of Johnson to take the intended sarcasm in good

part, and even to turn it to account.  "Some gentleman says I have

been a tailor.  That does not disconcert me in the least; for when

I was a tailor I had the reputation of being a good one, and making

close fits; I was always punctual with my customers, and always did

good work."



Cardinal Wolsey, De Foe, Akenside, and Kirke White were the sons of

butchers; Bunyan was a tinker, and Joseph Lancaster a basket-maker.

Among the great names identified with the invention of the steam-

engine are those of Newcomen, Watt, and Stephenson; the first a

blacksmith, the second a maker of mathematical instruments, and the

third an engine-fireman.  Huntingdon the preacher was originally a

coalheaver, and Bewick, the father of wood-engraving, a coalminer.

Dodsley was a footman, and Holcroft a groom.  Baffin the navigator

began his seafaring career as a man before the mast, and Sir

Cloudesley Shovel as a cabin-boy.  Herschel played the oboe in a

military band.  Chantrey was a journeyman carver, Etty a journeyman

printer, and Sir Thomas Lawrence the son of a tavern-keeper.

Michael Faraday, the son of a blacksmith, was in early life

apprenticed to a bookbinder, and worked at that trade until he

reached his twenty-second year:  he now occupies the very first

rank as a philosopher, excelling even his master, Sir Humphry Davy,

in the art of lucidly expounding the most difficult and abstruse

points in natural science.



Among those who have given the greatest impulse to the sublime

science of astronomy, we find Copernicus, the son of a Polish

baker; Kepler, the son of a German public-house keeper, and himself

the "garcon de cabaret;" d'Alembert, a foundling picked up one

winter's night on the steps of the church of St. Jean le Rond at

Paris, and brought up by the wife of a glazier; and Newton and

Laplace, the one the son of a small freeholder near Grantham, the

other the son of a poor peasant of Beaumont-en-Auge, near Honfleur.

Notwithstanding their comparatively adverse circumstances in early

life, these distinguished men achieved a solid and enduring

reputation by the exercise of their genius, which all the wealth in

the world could not have purchased.  The very possession of wealth

might indeed have proved an obstacle greater even than the humble

means to which they were born.  The father of Lagrange, the

astronomer and mathematician, held the office of Treasurer of War

at Turin; but having ruined himself by speculations, his family

were reduced to comparative poverty.  To this circumstance Lagrange

was in after life accustomed partly to attribute his own fame and

happiness.  "Had I been rich," said he, "I should probably not have

become a mathematician."



The sons of clergymen and ministers of religion generally, have

particularly distinguished themselves in our country's history.

Amongst them we find the names of Drake and Nelson, celebrated in

naval heroism; of Wollaston, Young, Playfair, and Bell, in science;

of Wren, Reynolds, Wilson, and Wilkie, in art; of Thurlow and

Campbell, in law; and of Addison, Thomson, Goldsmith, Coleridge,

and Tennyson, in literature.  Lord Hardinge, Colonel Edwardes, and

Major Hodson, so honourably known in Indian warfare, were also the

sons of clergymen.  Indeed, the empire of England in India was won

and held chiefly by men of the middle class - such as Clive, Warren

Hastings, and their successors - men for the most part bred in

factories and trained to habits of business.



Among the sons of attorneys we find Edmund Burke, Smeaton the

engineer, Scott and Wordsworth, and Lords Somers, Hardwick, and

Dunning.  Sir William Blackstone was the posthumous son of a silk-

mercer.  Lord Gifford's father was a grocer at Dover; Lord Denman's

a physician; judge Talfourd's a country brewer; and Lord Chief

Baron Pollock's a celebrated saddler at Charing Cross.  Layard, the

discoverer of the monuments of Nineveh, was an articled clerk in a

London solicitor's office; and Sir William Armstrong, the inventor

of hydraulic machinery and of the Armstrong ordnance, was also

trained to the law and practised for some time as an attorney.

Milton was the son of a London scrivener, and Pope and Southey were

the sons of linendrapers.  Professor Wilson was the son of a

Paisley manufacturer, and Lord Macaulay of an African merchant.

Keats was a druggist, and Sir Humphry Davy a country apothecary's

apprentice.  Speaking of himself, Davy once said, "What I am I have

made myself:  I say this without vanity, and in pure simplicity of

heart."  Richard Owen, the Newton of Natural History, began life as

a midshipman, and did not enter upon the line of scientific

research in which he has since become so distinguished, until

comparatively late in life.  He laid the foundations of his great

knowledge while occupied in cataloguing the magnificent museum

accumulated by the industry of John Hunter, a work which occupied

him at the College of Surgeons during a period of about ten years.



Foreign not less than English biography abounds in illustrations of

men who have glorified the lot of poverty by their labours and

their genius.  In Art we find Claude, the son of a pastrycook;

Geefs, of a baker; Leopold Robert, of a watchmaker; and Haydn, of a

wheelwright; whilst Daguerre was a scene-painter at the Opera.  The

father of Gregory VII. was a carpenter; of Sextus V., a shepherd;

and of Adrian VI., a poor bargeman.  When a boy, Adrian, unable to

pay for a light by which to study, was accustomed to prepare his

lessons by the light of the lamps in the streets and the church

porches, exhibiting a degree of patience and industry which were

the certain forerunners of his future distinction.  Of like humble

origin were Hauy, the mineralogist, who was the son of a weaver of

Saint-Just; Hautefeuille, the mechanician, of a baker at Orleans;

Joseph Fourier, the mathematician, of a tailor at Auxerre; Durand,

the architect, of a Paris shoemaker; and Gesner, the naturalist, of

a skinner or worker in hides, at Zurich.  This last began his

career under all the disadvantages attendant on poverty, sickness,

and domestic calamity; none of which, however, were sufficient to

damp his courage or hinder his progress.  His life was indeed an

eminent illustration of the truth of the saying, that those who

have most to do and are willing to work, will find the most time.

Pierre Ramus was another man of like character.  He was the son of

poor parents in Picardy, and when a boy was employed to tend sheep.

But not liking the occupation he ran away to Paris.  After

encountering much misery, he succeeded in entering the College of

Navarre as a servant.  The situation, however, opened for him the

road to learning, and he shortly became one of the most

distinguished men of his time.



The chemist Vauquelin was the son of a peasant of Saint-Andre-

d'Herbetot, in the Calvados.  When a boy at school, though poorly

clad, he was full of bright intelligence; and the master, who

taught him to read and write, when praising him for his diligence,

used to say, "Go on, my boy; work, study, Colin, and one day you

will go as well dressed as the parish churchwarden!"  A country

apothecary who visited the school, admired the robust boy's arms,

and offered to take him into his laboratory to pound his drugs, to

which Vauquelin assented, in the hope of being able to continue his

lessons.  But the apothecary would not permit him to spend any part

of his time in learning; and on ascertaining this, the youth

immediately determined to quit his service.  He therefore left

Saint-Andre and took the road for Paris with his havresac on his

back.  Arrived there, he searched for a place as apothecary's boy,

but could not find one.  Worn out by fatigue and destitution,

Vauquelin fell ill, and in that state was taken to the hospital,

where he thought he should die.  But better things were in store

for the poor boy.  He recovered, and again proceeded in his search

of employment, which he at length found with an apothecary.

Shortly after, he became known to Fourcroy the eminent chemist, who

was so pleased with the youth that he made him his private

secretary; and many years after, on the death of that great

philosopher, Vauquelin succeeded him as Professor of Chemistry.

Finally, in 1829, the electors of the district of Calvados

appointed him their representative in the Chamber of Deputies, and

he re-entered in triumph the village which he had left so many

years before, so poor and so obscure.



England has no parallel instances to show, of promotions from the

ranks of the army to the highest military offices; which have been

so common in France since the first Revolution.  "La carriere

ouverte aux talents" has there received many striking

illustrations, which would doubtless be matched among ourselves

were the road to promotion as open.  Hoche, Humbert, and Pichegru,

began their respective careers as private soldiers.  Hoche, while

in the King's army, was accustomed to embroider waistcoats to

enable him to earn money wherewith to purchase books on military

science.  Humbert was a scapegrace when a youth; at sixteen he ran

away from home, and was by turns servant to a tradesman at Nancy, a

workman at Lyons, and a hawker of rabbit skins.  In 1792, he

enlisted as a volunteer; and in a year he was general of brigade.

Kleber, Lefevre, Suchet, Victor, Lannes, Soult, Massena, St. Cyr,

D'Erlon, Murat, Augereau, Bessieres, and Ney, all rose from the

ranks.  In some cases promotion was rapid, in others it was slow.

Saint Cyr, the son of a tanner of Toul, began life as an actor,

after which he enlisted in the Chasseurs, and was promoted to a

captaincy within a year.  Victor, Duc de Belluno, enlisted in the

Artillery in 1781:  during the events preceding the Revolution he

was discharged; but immediately on the outbreak of war he re-

enlisted, and in the course of a few months his intrepidity and

ability secured his promotion as Adjutant-Major and chief of

battalion.  Murat, "le beau sabreur," was the son of a village

innkeeper in Perigord, where he looked after the horses.  He first

enlisted in a regiment of Chasseurs, from which he was dismissed

for insubordination:  but again enlisting, he shortly rose to the

rank of Colonel.  Ney enlisted at eighteen in a hussar regiment,

and gradually advanced step by step:  Kleber soon discovered his

merits, surnaming him "The Indefatigable," and promoted him to be

Adjutant-General when only twenty-five.  On the other hand, Soult

(2) was six years from the date of his enlistment before he reached

the rank of sergeant.  But Soult's advancement was rapid compared

with that of Massena, who served for fourteen years before he was

made sergeant; and though he afterwards rose successively, step by

step, to the grades of Colonel, General of Division, and Marshal,

he declared that the post of sergeant was the step which of all

others had cost him the most labour to win.  Similar promotions

from the ranks, in the French army, have continued down to our own

day.  Changarnier entered the King's bodyguard as a private in

1815.  Marshal Bugeaud served four years in the ranks, after which

he was made an officer.  Marshal Randon, the present French

Minister of War, began his military career as a drummer boy; and in

the portrait of him in the gallery at Versailles, his hand rests

upon a drum-head, the picture being thus painted at his own

request.  Instances such as these inspire French soldiers with

enthusiasm for their service, as each private feels that he may

possibly carry the baton of a marshal in his knapsack.



The instances of men, in this and other countries, who, by dint of

persevering application and energy, have raised themselves from the

humblest ranks of industry to eminent positions of usefulness and

influence in society, are indeed so numerous that they have long

ceased to be regarded as exceptional.  Looking at some of the more

remarkable, it might almost be said that early encounter with

difficulty and adverse circumstances was the necessary and

indispensable condition of success.  The British House of Commons

has always contained a considerable number of such self-raised men

- fitting representatives of the industrial character of the

people; and it is to the credit of our Legislature that they have

been welcomed and honoured there.  When the late Joseph Brotherton,

member for Salford, in the course of the discussion on the Ten

Hours Bill, detailed with true pathos the hardships and fatigues to

which he had been subjected when working as a factory boy in a

cotton mill, and described the resolution which he had then formed,

that if ever it was in his power he would endeavour to ameliorate

the condition of that class, Sir James Graham rose immediately

after him, and declared, amidst the cheers of the House, that he

did not before know that Mr. Brotherton's origin had been so

humble, but that it rendered him more proud than he had ever before

been of the House of Commons, to think that a person risen from

that condition should be able to sit side by side, on equal terms,

with the hereditary gentry of the land.



The late Mr. Fox, member for Oldham, was accustomed to introduce

his recollections of past times with the words, "when I was working

as a weaver boy at Norwich;" and there are other members of

parliament, still living, whose origin has been equally humble.

Mr. Lindsay, the well-known ship owner, until recently member for

Sunderland, once told the simple story of his life to the electors

of Weymouth, in answer to an attack made upon him by his political

opponents.  He had been left an orphan at fourteen, and when he

left Glasgow for Liverpool to push his way in the world, not being

able to pay the usual fare, the captain of the steamer agreed to

take his labour in exchange, and the boy worked his passage by

trimming the coals in the coal hole.  At Liverpool he remained for

seven weeks before he could obtain employment, during which time he

lived in sheds and fared hardly; until at last he found shelter on

board a West Indiaman.  He entered as a boy, and before he was

nineteen, by steady good conduct he had risen to the command of a

ship.  At twenty-three he retired from the sea, and settled on

shore, after which his progress was rapid "he had prospered," he

said, "by steady industry, by constant work, and by ever keeping in

view the great principle of doing to others as you would be done

by."



The career of Mr. William Jackson, of Birkenhead, the present

member for North Derbyshire, bears considerable resemblance to that

of Mr. Lindsay.  His father, a surgeon at Lancaster, died, leaving

a family of eleven children, of whom William Jackson was the

seventh son.  The elder boys had been well educated while the

father lived, but at his death the younger members had to shift for

themselves.  William, when under twelve years old, was taken from

school, and put to hard work at a ship's side from six in the

morning till nine at night.  His master falling ill, the boy was

taken into the counting-house, where he had more leisure.  This

gave him an opportunity of reading, and having obtained access to a

set of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica,' he read the volumes through

from A to Z, partly by day, but chiefly at night.  He afterwards

put himself to a trade, was diligent, and succeeded in it.  Now he

has ships sailing on almost every sea, and holds commercial

relations with nearly every country on the globe.



Among like men of the same class may be ranked the late Richard

Cobden, whose start in life was equally humble.  The son of a small

farmer at Midhurst in Sussex, he was sent at an early age to London

and employed as a boy in a warehouse in the City.  He was diligent,

well conducted, and eager for information.  His master, a man of

the old school, warned him against too much reading; but the boy

went on in his own course, storing his mind with the wealth found

in books.  He was promoted from one position of trust to another -

became a traveller for his house - secured a large connection, and

eventually started in business as a calico printer at Manchester.

Taking an interest in public questions, more especially in popular

education, his attention was gradually drawn to the subject of the

Corn Laws, to the repeal of which he may be said to have devoted

his fortune and his life.  It may be mentioned as a curious fact

that the first speech he delivered in public was a total failure.

But he had great perseverance, application, and energy; and with

persistency and practice, he became at length one of the most

persuasive and effective of public speakers, extorting the

disinterested eulogy of even Sir Robert Peel himself.  M. Drouyn de

Lhuys, the French Ambassador, has eloquently said of Mr. Cobden,

that he was "a living proof of what merit, perseverance, and labour

can accomplish; one of the most complete examples of those men who,

sprung from the humblest ranks of society, raise themselves to the

highest rank in public estimation by the effect of their own worth

and of their personal services; finally, one of the rarest examples

of the solid qualities inherent in the English character."



In all these cases, strenuous individual application was the price

paid for distinction; excellence of any sort being invariably

placed beyond the reach of indolence.  It is the diligent hand and

head alone that maketh rich - in self-culture, growth in wisdom,

and in business.  Even when men are born to wealth and high social

position, any solid reputation which they may individually achieve

can only be attained by energetic application; for though an

inheritance of acres may be bequeathed, an inheritance of knowledge

and wisdom cannot.  The wealthy man may pay others for doing his

work for him, but it is impossible to get his thinking done for him

by another, or to purchase any kind of self-culture.  Indeed, the

doctrine that excellence in any pursuit is only to be achieved by

laborious application, holds as true in the case of the man of

wealth as in that of Drew and Gifford, whose only school was a

cobbler's stall, or Hugh Miller, whose only college was a Cromarty

stone quarry.



Riches and ease, it is perfectly clear, are not necessary for man's

highest culture, else had not the world been so largely indebted in

all times to those who have sprung from the humbler ranks.  An easy

and luxurious existence does not train men to effort or encounter

with difficulty; nor does it awaken that consciousness of power

which is so necessary for energetic and effective action in life.

Indeed, so far from poverty being a misfortune, it may, by vigorous

self-help, be converted even into a blessing; rousing a man to that

struggle with the world in which, though some may purchase ease by

degradation, the right-minded and true-hearted find strength,

confidence, and triumph.  Bacon says, "Men seem neither to

understand their riches nor their strength:  of the former they

believe greater things than they should; of the latter much less.

Self-reliance and self-denial will teach a man to drink out of his

own cistern, and eat his own sweet bread, and to learn and labour

truly to get his living, and carefully to expend the good things

committed to his trust."



Riches are so great a temptation to ease and self-indulgence, to

which men are by nature prone, that the glory is all the greater of

those who, born to ample fortunes, nevertheless take an active part

in the work of their generation - who "scorn delights and live

laborious days."  It is to the honour of the wealthier ranks in

this country that they are not idlers; for they do their fair share

of the work of the state, and usually take more than their fair

share of its dangers.  It was a fine thing said of a subaltern

officer in the Peninsular campaigns, observed trudging alone

through mud and mire by the side of his regiment, "There goes

15,000L. a year!" and in our own day, the bleak slopes of

Sebastopol and the burning soil of India have borne witness to the

like noble self-denial and devotion on the part of our gentler

classes; many a gallant and noble fellow, of rank and estate,

having risked his life, or lost it, in one or other of those fields

of action, in the service of his country.



Nor have the wealthier classes been undistinguished in the more

peaceful pursuits of philosophy and science.  Take, for instance,

the great names of Bacon, the father of modern philosophy, and of

Worcester, Boyle, Cavendish, Talbot, and Rosse, in science.  The

last named may be regarded as the great mechanic of the peerage; a

man who, if he had not been born a peer, would probably have taken

the highest rank as an inventor.  So thorough is his knowledge of

smith-work that he is said to have been pressed on one occasion to

accept the foremanship of a large workshop, by a manufacturer to

whom his rank was unknown.  The great Rosse telescope, of his own

fabrication, is certainly the most extraordinary instrument of the

kind that has yet been constructed.



But it is principally in the departments of politics and literature

that we find the most energetic labourers amongst our higher

classes.  Success in these lines of action, as in all others, can

only be achieved through industry, practice, and study; and the

great Minister, or parliamentary leader, must necessarily be

amongst the very hardest of workers.  Such was Palmerston; and such

are Derby and Russell, Disraeli and Gladstone.  These men have had

the benefit of no Ten Hours Bill, but have often, during the busy

season of Parliament, worked "double shift," almost day and night.

One of the most illustrious of such workers in modern times was

unquestionably the late Sir Robert Peel.  He possessed in an

extraordinary degree the power of continuous intellectual labour,

nor did he spare himself.  His career, indeed, presented a

remarkable example of how much a man of comparatively moderate

powers can accomplish by means of assiduous application and

indefatigable industry.  During the forty years that he held a seat

in Parliament, his labours were prodigious.  He was a most

conscientious man, and whatever he undertook to do, he did

thoroughly.  All his speeches bear evidence of his careful study of

everything that had been spoken or written on the subject under

consideration.  He was elaborate almost to excess; and spared no

pains to adapt himself to the various capacities of his audience.

Withal, he possessed much practical sagacity, great strength of

purpose, and power to direct the issues of action with steady hand

and eye.  In one respect he surpassed most men:  his principles

broadened and enlarged with time; and age, instead of contracting,

only served to mellow and ripen his nature.  To the last he

continued open to the reception of new views, and, though many

thought him cautious to excess, he did not allow himself to fall

into that indiscriminating admiration of the past, which is the

palsy of many minds similarly educated, and renders the old age of

many nothing but a pity.



The indefatigable industry of Lord Brougham has become almost

proverbial.  His public labours have extended over a period of

upwards of sixty years, during which he has ranged over many fields

- of law, literature, politics, and science, - and achieved

distinction in them all.  How he contrived it, has been to many a

mystery.  Once, when Sir Samuel Romilly was requested to undertake

some new work, he excused himself by saying that he had no time;

"but," he added, "go with it to that fellow Brougham, he seems to

have time for everything."  The secret of it was, that he never

left a minute unemployed; withal he possessed a constitution of

iron.  When arrived at an age at which most men would have retired

from the world to enjoy their hard-earned leisure, perhaps to doze

away their time in an easy chair, Lord Brougham commenced and

prosecuted a series of elaborate investigations as to the laws of

Light, and he submitted the results to the most scientific

audiences that Paris and London could muster.  About the same time,

he was passing through the press his admirable sketches of the 'Men

of Science and Literature of the Reign of George III.,' and taking

his full share of the law business and the political discussions in

the House of Lords.  Sydney Smith once recommended him to confine

himself to only the transaction of so much business as three strong

men could get through.  But such was Brougham's love of work - long

become a habit - that no amount of application seems to have been

too great for him; and such was his love of excellence, that it has

been said of him that if his station in life had been only that of

a shoe-black, he would never have rested satisfied until he had

become the best shoe-black in England.



Another hard-working man of the same class is Sir E. Bulwer Lytton.

Few writers have done more, or achieved higher distinction in

various walks - as a novelist, poet, dramatist, historian,

essayist, orator, and politician.  He has worked his way step by

step, disdainful of ease, and animated throughout by the ardent

desire to excel.  On the score of mere industry, there are few

living English writers who have written so much, and none that have

produced so much of high quality.  The industry of Bulwer is

entitled to all the greater praise that it has been entirely self-

imposed.  To hunt, and shoot, and live at ease, - to frequent the

clubs and enjoy the opera, with the variety of London visiting and

sight-seeing during the "season," and then off to the country

mansion, with its well-stocked preserves, and its thousand

delightful out-door pleasures, - to travel abroad, to Paris,

Vienna, or Rome, - all this is excessively attractive to a lover of

pleasure and a man of fortune, and by no means calculated to make

him voluntarily undertake continuous labour of any kind.  Yet these

pleasures, all within his reach, Bulwer must, as compared with men

born to similar estate, have denied himself in assuming the

position and pursuing the career of a literary man.  Like Byron,

his first effort was poetical ('Weeds and Wild Flowers'), and a

failure.  His second was a novel ('Falkland'), and it proved a

failure too.  A man of weaker nerve would have dropped authorship;

but Bulwer had pluck and perseverance; and he worked on, determined

to succeed.  He was incessantly industrious, read extensively, and

from failure went courageously onwards to success.  'Pelham'

followed 'Falkland' within a year, and the remainder of Bulwer's

literary life, now extending over a period of thirty years, has

been a succession of triumphs.



Mr. Disraeli affords a similar instance of the power of industry

and application in working out an eminent public career.  His first

achievements were, like Bulwer's, in literature; and he reached

success only through a succession of failures.  His 'Wondrous Tale

of Alroy' and 'Revolutionary Epic' were laughed at, and regarded as

indications of literary lunacy.  But he worked on in other

directions, and his 'Coningsby,' 'Sybil,' and 'Tancred,' proved the

sterling stuff of which he was made.  As an orator too, his first

appearance in the House of Commons was a failure.  It was spoken of

as "more screaming than an Adelphi farce."  Though composed in a

grand and ambitious strain, every sentence was hailed with "loud

laughter."  'Hamlet' played as a comedy were nothing to it.  But he

concluded with a sentence which embodied a prophecy.  Writhing

under the laughter with which his studied eloquence had been

received, he exclaimed, "I have begun several times many things,

and have succeeded in them at last.  I shall sit down now, but the

time will come when you will hear me."  The time did come; and how

Disraeli succeeded in at length commanding the attention of the

first assembly of gentlemen in the world, affords a striking

illustration of what energy and determination will do; for Disraeli

earned his position by dint of patient industry.  He did not, as

many young men do, having once failed, retire dejected, to mope and

whine in a corner, but diligently set himself to work.  He

carefully unlearnt his faults, studied the character of his

audience, practised sedulously the art of speech, and industriously

filled his mind with the elements of parliamentary knowledge.  He

worked patiently for success; and it came, but slowly:  then the

House laughed with him, instead of at him.  The recollection of his

early failure was effaced, and by general consent he was at length

admitted to be one of the most finished and effective of

parliamentary speakers.



Although much may be accomplished by means of individual industry

and energy, as these and other instances set forth in the following

pages serve to illustrate, it must at the same time be acknowledged

that the help which we derive from others in the journey of life is

of very great importance.  The poet Wordsworth has well said that

"these two things, contradictory though they may seem, must go

together - manly dependence and manly independence, manly reliance

and manly self-reliance."  From infancy to old age, all are more or

less indebted to others for nurture and culture; and the best and

strongest are usually found the readiest to acknowledge such help.

Take, for example, the career of the late Alexis de Tocqueville, a

man doubly well-born, for his father was a distinguished peer of

France, and his mother a grand-daughter of Malesherbes.  Through

powerful family influence, he was appointed Judge Auditor at

Versailles when only twenty-one; but probably feeling that he had

not fairly won the position by merit, he determined to give it up

and owe his future advancement in life to himself alone.  "A

foolish resolution," some will say; but De Tocqueville bravely

acted it out.  He resigned his appointment, and made arrangements

to leave France for the purpose of travelling through the United

States, the results of which were published in his great book on

'Democracy in America.'  His friend and travelling companion,

Gustave de Beaumont, has described his indefatigable industry

during this journey.  "His nature," he says, "was wholly averse to

idleness, and whether he was travelling or resting, his mind was

always at work. . . . With Alexis, the most agreeable conversation

was that which was the most useful.  The worst day was the lost

day, or the day ill spent; the least loss of time annoyed him."

Tocqueville himself wrote to a friend - "There is no time of life

at which one can wholly cease from action, for effort without one's

self, and still more effort within, is equally necessary, if not

more so, when we grow old, as it is in youth.  I compare man in

this world to a traveller journeying without ceasing towards a

colder and colder region; the higher he goes, the faster he ought

to walk.  The great malady of the soul is cold.  And in resisting

this formidable evil, one needs not only to be sustained by the

action of a mind employed, but also by contact with one's fellows

in the business of life." (3)



Notwithstanding de Tocqueville's decided views as to the necessity

of exercising individual energy and self-dependence, no one could

be more ready than he was to recognise the value of that help and

support for which all men are indebted to others in a greater or

less degree.  Thus, he often acknowledged, with gratitude, his

obligations to his friends De Kergorlay and Stofells, - to the

former for intellectual assistance, and to the latter for moral

support and sympathy.  To De Kergorlay he wrote - "Thine is the

only soul in which I have confidence, and whose influence exercises

a genuine effect upon my own.  Many others have influence upon the

details of my actions, but no one has so much influence as thou on

the origination of fundamental ideas, and of those principles which

are the rule of conduct."  De Tocqueville was not less ready to

confess the great obligations which he owed to his wife, Marie, for

the preservation of that temper and frame of mind which enabled him

to prosecute his studies with success.  He believed that a noble-

minded woman insensibly elevated the character of her husband,

while one of a grovelling nature as certainly tended to degrade it.

(4)



In fine, human character is moulded by a thousand subtle

influences; by example and precept; by life and literature; by

friends and neighbours; by the world we live in as well as by the

spirits of our forefathers, whose legacy of good words and deeds we

inherit.  But great, unquestionably, though these influences are

acknowledged to be, it is nevertheless equally clear that men must

necessarily be the active agents of their own well-being and well-

doing; and that, however much the wise and the good may owe to

others, they themselves must in the very nature of things be their

own best helpers.


