






CHAPTER XI. - SELF-CULTURE - FACILITIES AND DIFFICULTIES







"Every person has two educations, one which he receives from

others, and one, more important, which he gives to himself." -

Gibbon.



"Is there one whom difficulties dishearten - who bends to the

storm?  He will do little.  Is there one who will conquer?  That

kind of man never fails." - John Hunter.



"The wise and active conquer difficulties,

By daring to attempt them:  sloth and folly

Shiver and shrink at sight of toil and danger,

And MAKE the impossibility they fear." - Rowe.





"The best part of every man's education," said Sir Walter Scott,

"is that which he gives to himself."  The late Sir Benjamin Brodie

delighted to remember this saying, and he used to congratulate

himself on the fact that professionally he was self-taught.  But

this is necessarily the case with all men who have acquired

distinction in letters, science, or art.  The education received at

school or college is but a beginning, and is valuable mainly

inasmuch as it trains the mind and habituates it to continuous

application and study.  That which is put into us by others is

always far less ours than that which we acquire by our own diligent

and persevering effort.  Knowledge conquered by labour becomes a

possession - a property entirely our own.  A greater vividness and

permanency of impression is secured; and facts thus acquired become

registered in the mind in a way that mere imparted information can

never effect.  This kind of self-culture also calls forth power and

cultivates strength.  The solution of one problem helps the mastery

of another; and thus knowledge is carried into faculty.  Our own

active effort is the essential thing; and no facilities, no books,

no teachers, no amount of lessons learnt by rote will enable us to

dispense with it.



The best teachers have been the readiest to recognize the

importance of self-culture, and of stimulating the student to

acquire knowledge by the active exercise of his own faculties.

They have relied more upon TRAINING than upon telling, and sought

to make their pupils themselves active parties to the work in which

they were engaged; thus making teaching something far higher than

the mere passive reception of the scraps and details of knowledge.

This was the spirit in which the great Dr. Arnold worked; he strove

to teach his pupils to rely upon themselves, and develop their

powers by their own active efforts, himself merely guiding,

directing, stimulating, and encouraging them.  "I would far

rather," he said, "send a boy to Van Diemen's Land, where he must

work for his bread, than send him to Oxford to live in luxury,

without any desire in his mind to avail himself of his advantages."

"If there be one thing on earth," he observed on another occasion,

"which is truly admirable, it is to see God's wisdom blessing an

inferiority of natural powers, when they have been honestly, truly,

and zealously cultivated."  Speaking of a pupil of this character,

he said, "I would stand to that man hat in hand."  Once at Laleham,

when teaching a rather dull boy, Arnold spoke somewhat sharply to

him, on which the pupil looked up in his face and said, "Why do you

speak angrily, sir? INDEED, I am doing the best I can."  Years

afterwards, Arnold used to tell the story to his children, and

added, "I never felt so much in my life - that look and that speech

I have never forgotten."



From the numerous instances already cited of men of humble station

who have risen to distinction in science and literature, it will be

obvious that labour is by no means incompatible with the highest

intellectual culture.  Work in moderation is healthy, as well as

agreeable to the human constitution.  Work educates the body, as

study educates the mind; and that is the best state of society in

which there is some work for every man's leisure, and some leisure

for every man's work.  Even the leisure classes are in a measure

compelled to work, sometimes as a relief from ENNUI, but in most

cases to gratify an instinct which they cannot resist.  Some go

foxhunting in the English counties, others grouse-shooting on the

Scotch hills, while many wander away every summer to climb

mountains in Switzerland.  Hence the boating, running, cricketing,

and athletic sports of the public schools, in which our young men

at the same time so healthfully cultivate their strength both of

mind and body.  It is said that the Duke of Wellington, when once

looking on at the boys engaged in their sports in the play-ground

at Eton, where he had spent many of his own younger days, made the

remark, "It was there that the battle of Waterloo was won!"



Daniel Malthus urged his son when at college to be most diligent in

the cultivation of knowledge, but he also enjoined him to pursue

manly sports as the best means of keeping up the full working power

of his mind, as well as of enjoying the pleasures of intellect.

"Every kind of knowledge," said he, "every acquaintance with nature

and art, will amuse and strengthen your mind, and I am perfectly

pleased that cricket should do the same by your arms and legs; I

love to see you excel in exercises of the body, and I think myself

that the better half, and much the most agreeable part, of the

pleasures of the mind is best enjoyed while one is upon one's

legs."  But a still more important use of active employment is that

referred to by the great divine, Jeremy Taylor.  "Avoid idleness,"

he says, "and fill up all the spaces of thy time with severe and

useful employment; for lust easily creeps in at those emptinesses

where the soul is unemployed and the body is at ease; for no easy,

healthful, idle person was ever chaste if he could be tempted; but

of all employments bodily labour is the most useful, and of the

greatest benefit for driving away the devil."



Practical success in life depends more upon physical health than is

generally imagined.  Hodson, of Hodson's Horse, writing home to a

friend in England, said, "I believe, if I get on well in India, it

will be owing, physically speaking, to a sound digestion."  The

capacity for continuous working in any calling must necessarily

depend in a great measure upon this; and hence the necessity for

attending to health, even as a means of intellectual labour.  It is

perhaps to the neglect of physical exercise that we find amongst

students so frequent a tendency towards discontent, unhappiness,

inaction, and reverie, - displaying itself in contempt for real

life and disgust at the beaten tracks of men, - a tendency which in

England has been called Byronism, and in Germany Wertherism.  Dr.

Channing noted the same growth in America, which led him to make

the remark, that "too many of our young men grow up in a school of

despair."  The only remedy for this green-sickness in youth is

physical exercise - action, work, and bodily occupation.



The use of early labour in self-imposed mechanical employments may

be illustrated by the boyhood of Sir Isaac Newton.  Though a

comparatively dull scholar, he was very assiduous in the use of his

saw, hammer, and hatchet - "knocking and hammering in his lodging

room" - making models of windmills, carriages, and machines of all

sorts; and as he grew older, he took delight in making little

tables and cupboards for his friends.  Smeaton, Watt, and

Stephenson, were equally handy with tools when mere boys; and but

for such kind of self-culture in their youth, it is doubtful

whether they would have accomplished so much in their manhood.

Such was also the early training of the great inventors and

mechanics described in the preceding pages, whose contrivance and

intelligence were practically trained by the constant use of their

hands in early life.  Even where men belonging to the manual labour

class have risen above it, and become more purely intellectual

labourers, they have found the advantages of their early training

in their later pursuits.  Elihu Burritt says he found hard labour

NECESSARY to enable him to study with effect; and more than once he

gave up school-teaching and study, and, taking to his leather-apron

again, went back to his blacksmith's forge and anvil for his health

of body and mind's sake.



The training of young men in the use of tools would, at the same

time that it educated them in "common things," teach them the use

of their hands and arms, familiarize them with healthy work,

exercise their faculties upon things tangible and actual, give them

some practical acquaintance with mechanics, impart to them the

ability of being useful, and implant in them the habit of

persevering physical effort.  This is an advantage which the

working classes, strictly so called, certainly possess over the

leisure classes, - that they are in early life under the necessity

of applying themselves laboriously to some mechanical pursuit or

other, - thus acquiring manual dexterity and the use of their

physical powers.  The chief disadvantage attached to the calling of

the laborious classes is, not that they are employed in physical

work, but that they are too exclusively so employed, often to the

neglect of their moral and intellectual faculties.  While the

youths of the leisure classes, having been taught to associate

labour with servility, have shunned it, and been allowed to grow up

practically ignorant, the poorer classes, confining themselves

within the circle of their laborious callings, have been allowed to

grow up in a large proportion of cases absolutely illiterate.  It

seems possible, however, to avoid both these evils by combining

physical training or physical work with intellectual culture:  and

there are various signs abroad which seem to mark the gradual

adoption of this healthier system of education.



The success of even professional men depends in no slight degree on

their physical health; and a public writer has gone so far as to

say that "the greatness of our great men is quite as much a bodily

affair as a mental one." (28)  A healthy breathing apparatus is as

indispensable to the successful lawyer or politician as a well-

cultured intellect.  The thorough aeration of the blood by free

exposure to a large breathing surface in the lungs, is necessary to

maintain that full vital power on which the vigorous working of the

brain in so large a measure depends.  The lawyer has to climb the

heights of his profession through close and heated courts, and the

political leader has to bear the fatigue and excitement of long and

anxious debates in a crowded House.  Hence the lawyer in full

practice and the parliamentary leader in full work are called upon

to display powers of physical endurance and activity even more

extraordinary than those of the intellect, - such powers as have

been exhibited in so remarkable a degree by Brougham, Lyndhurst,

and Campbell; by Peel, Graham, and Palmerston - all full-chested

men.



Though Sir Walter Scott, when at Edinburgh College, went by the

name of "The Greek Blockhead," he was, notwithstanding his

lameness, a remarkably healthy youth:  he could spear a salmon with

the best fisher on the Tweed, and ride a wild horse with any hunter

in Yarrow.  When devoting himself in after life to literary

pursuits, Sir Walter never lost his taste for field sports; but

while writing 'Waverley' in the morning, he would in the afternoon

course hares.  Professor Wilson was a very athlete, as great at

throwing the hammer as in his flights of eloquence and poetry; and

Burns, when a youth, was remarkable chiefly for his leaping,

putting, and wrestling.  Some of our greatest divines were

distinguished in their youth for their physical energies.  Isaac

Barrow, when at the Charterhouse School, was notorious for his

pugilistic encounters, in which he got many a bloody nose; Andrew

Fuller, when working as a farmer's lad at Soham, was chiefly famous

for his skill in boxing; and Adam Clarke, when a boy, was only

remarkable for the strength displayed by him in "rolling large

stones about," - the secret, possibly, of some of the power which

he subsequently displayed in rolling forth large thoughts in his

manhood.



While it is necessary, then, in the first place to secure this

solid foundation of physical health, it must also be observed that

the cultivation of the habit of mental application is quite

indispensable for the education of the student.  The maxim that

"Labour conquers all things" holds especially true in the case of

the conquest of knowledge.  The road into learning is alike free to

all who will give the labour and the study requisite to gather it;

nor are there any difficulties so great that the student of

resolute purpose may not surmount and overcome them.  It was one of

the characteristic expressions of Chatterton, that God had sent his

creatures into the world with arms long enough to reach anything if

they chose to be at the trouble.  In study, as in business, energy

is the great thing.  There must be the "fervet opus":  we must not

only strike the iron while it is hot, but strike it till it is made

hot.  It is astonishing how much may be accomplished in self-

culture by the energetic and the persevering, who are careful to

avail themselves of opportunities, and use up the fragments of

spare time which the idle permit to run to waste.  Thus Ferguson

learnt astronomy from the heavens, while wrapt in a sheep-skin on

the highland hills.  Thus Stone learnt mathematics while working as

a journeyman gardener; thus Drew studied the highest philosophy in

the intervals of cobbling shoes; and thus Miller taught himself

geology while working as a day labourer in a quarry.



Sir Joshua Reynolds, as we have already observed, was so earnest a

believer in the force of industry that he held that all men might

achieve excellence if they would but exercise the power of

assiduous and patient working.  He held that drudgery lay on the

road to genius, and that there was no limit to the proficiency of

an artist except the limit of his own painstaking.  He would not

believe in what is called inspiration, but only in study and

labour.  "Excellence," he said, "is never granted to man but as the

reward of labour."  "If you have great talents, industry will

improve them; if you have but moderate abilities, industry will

supply their deficiency.  Nothing is denied to well-directed

labour; nothing is to be obtained without it."  Sir Fowell Buxton

was an equal believer in the power of study; and he entertained the

modest idea that he could do as well as other men if he devoted to

the pursuit double the time and labour that they did.  He placed

his great confidence in ordinary means and extraordinary

application.



"I have known several men in my life," says Dr. Ross, "who may be

recognized in days to come as men of genius, and they were all

plodders, hard-working, INTENT men.  Genius is known by its works;

genius without works is a blind faith, a dumb oracle.  But

meritorious works are the result of time and labour, and cannot be

accomplished by intention or by a wish. . . . Every great work is

the result of vast preparatory training.  Facility comes by labour.

Nothing seems easy, not even walking, that was not difficult at

first.  The orator whose eye flashes instantaneous fire, and whose

lips pour out a flood of noble thoughts, startling by their

unexpectedness, and elevating by their wisdom and truth, has

learned his secret by patient repetition, and after many bitter

disappointments." (29)



Thoroughness and accuracy are two principal points to be aimed at

in study.  Francis Horner, in laying down rules for the cultivation

of his mind, placed great stress upon the habit of continuous

application to one subject for the sake of mastering it thoroughly;

he confined himself, with this object, to only a few books, and

resisted with the greatest firmness "every approach to a habit of

desultory reading."  The value of knowledge to any man consists not

in its quantity, but mainly in the good uses to which he can apply

it.  Hence a little knowledge, of an exact and perfect character,

is always found more valuable for practical purposes than any

extent of superficial learning.



One of Ignatius Loyola's maxims was, "He who does well one work at

a time, does more than all."  By spreading our efforts over too

large a surface we inevitably weaken our force, hinder our

progress, and acquire a habit of fitfulness and ineffective

working.  Lord St. Leonards once communicated to Sir Fowell Buxton

the mode in which he had conducted his studies, and thus explained

the secret of his success.  "I resolved," said he, "when beginning

to read law, to make everything I acquired perfectly my own, and

never to go to a second thing till I had entirely accomplished the

first.  Many of my competitors read as much in a day as I read in a

week; but, at the end of twelve months, my knowledge was as fresh

as the day it was acquired, while theirs had glided away from

recollection."



It is not the quantity of study that one gets through, or the

amount of reading, that makes a wise man; but the appositeness of

the study to the purpose for which it is pursued; the concentration

of the mind for the time being on the subject under consideration;

and the habitual discipline by which the whole system of mental

application is regulated.  Abernethy was even of opinion that there

was a point of saturation in his own mind, and that if he took into

it something more than it could hold, it only had the effect of

pushing something else out.  Speaking of the study of medicine, he

said, "If a man has a clear idea of what he desires to do, he will

seldom fail in selecting the proper means of accomplishing it."



The most profitable study is that which is conducted with a

definite aim and object.  By thoroughly mastering any given branch

of knowledge we render it more available for use at any moment.

Hence it is not enough merely to have books, or to know where to

read for information as we want it.  Practical wisdom, for the

purposes of life, must be carried about with us, and be ready for

use at call.  It is not sufficient that we have a fund laid up at

home, but not a farthing in the pocket:  we must carry about with

us a store of the current coin of knowledge ready for exchange on

all occasions, else we are comparatively helpless when the

opportunity for using it occurs.



Decision and promptitude are as requisite in self-culture as in

business.  The growth of these qualities may be encouraged by

accustoming young people to rely upon their own resources, leaving

them to enjoy as much freedom of action in early life as is

practicable.  Too much guidance and restraint hinder the formation

of habits of self-help.  They are like bladders tied under the arms

of one who has not taught himself to swim.  Want of confidence is

perhaps a greater obstacle to improvement than is generally

imagined.  It has been said that half the failures in life arise

from pulling in one's horse while he is leaping.  Dr. Johnson was

accustomed to attribute his success to confidence in his own

powers.  True modesty is quite compatible with a due estimate of

one's own merits, and does not demand the abnegation of all merit.

Though there are those who deceive themselves by putting a false

figure before their ciphers, the want of confidence, the want of

faith in one's self, and consequently the want of promptitude in

action, is a defect of character which is found to stand very much

in the way of individual progress; and the reason why so little is

done, is generally because so little is attempted.



There is usually no want of desire on the part of most persons to

arrive at the results of self-culture, but there is a great

aversion to pay the inevitable price for it, of hard work.  Dr.

Johnson held that "impatience of study was the mental disease of

the present generation;" and the remark is still applicable.  We

may not believe that there is a royal road to learning, but we seem

to believe very firmly in a "popular" one.  In education, we invent

labour-saving processes, seek short cuts to science, learn French

and Latin "in twelve lessons," or "without a master."  We resemble

the lady of fashion, who engaged a master to teach her on condition

that he did not plague her with verbs and participles.  We get our

smattering of science in the same way; we learn chemistry by

listening to a short course of lectures enlivened by experiments,

and when we have inhaled laughing gas, seen green water turned to

red, and phosphorus burnt in oxygen, we have got our smattering, of

which the most that can be said is, that though it may be better

than nothing, it is yet good for nothing.  Thus we often imagine we

are being educated while we are only being amused.



The facility with which young people are thus induced to acquire

knowledge, without study and labour, is not education.  It occupies

but does not enrich the mind.  It imparts a stimulus for the time,

and produces a sort of intellectual keenness and cleverness; but,

without an implanted purpose and a higher object than mere

pleasure, it will bring with it no solid advantage.  In such cases

knowledge produces but a passing impression; a sensation, but no

more; it is, in fact, the merest epicurism of intelligence -

sensuous, but certainly not intellectual.  Thus the best qualities

of many minds, those which are evoked by vigorous effort and

independent action, sleep a deep sleep, and are often never called

to life, except by the rough awakening of sudden calamity or

suffering, which, in such cases, comes as a blessing, if it serves

to rouse up a courageous spirit that, but for it, would have slept

on.



Accustomed to acquire information under the guise of amusement,

young people will soon reject that which is presented to them under

the aspect of study and labour.  Learning their knowledge and

science in sport, they will be too apt to make sport of both; while

the habit of intellectual dissipation, thus engendered, cannot

fail, in course of time, to produce a thoroughly emasculating

effect both upon their mind and character.  "Multifarious reading,"

said Robertson of Brighton, "weakens the mind like smoking, and is

an excuse for its lying dormant.  It is the idlest of all

idlenesses, and leaves more of impotency than any other."



The evil is a growing one, and operates in various ways.  Its least

mischief is shallowness; its greatest, the aversion to steady

labour which it induces, and the low and feeble tone of mind which

it encourages.  If we would be really wise, we must diligently

apply ourselves, and confront the same continuous application which

our forefathers did; for labour is still, and ever will be, the

inevitable price set upon everything which is valuable.  We must be

satisfied to work with a purpose, and wait the results with

patience.  All progress, of the best kind, is slow; but to him who

works faithfully and zealously the reward will, doubtless, be

vouchsafed in good time.  The spirit of industry, embodied in a

man's daily life, will gradually lead him to exercise his powers on

objects outside himself, of greater dignity and more extended

usefulness.  And still we must labour on; for the work of self-

culture is never finished.  "To be employed," said the poet Gray,

"is to be happy."  "It is better to wear out than rust out," said

Bishop Cumberland.  "Have we not all eternity to rest in?"

exclaimed Arnauld.  "Repos ailleurs" was the motto of Marnix de St.

Aldegonde, the energetic and ever-working friend of William the

Silent.



It is the use we make of the powers entrusted to us, which

constitutes our only just claim to respect.  He who employs his one

talent aright is as much to be honoured as he to whom ten talents

have been given.  There is really no more personal merit attaching

to the possession of superior intellectual powers than there is in

the succession to a large estate.  How are those powers used - how

is that estate employed?  The mind may accumulate large stores of

knowledge without any useful purpose; but the knowledge must be

allied to goodness and wisdom, and embodied in upright character,

else it is naught.  Pestalozzi even held intellectual training by

itself to be pernicious; insisting that the roots of all knowledge

must strike and feed in the soil of the rightly-governed will.  The

acquisition of knowledge may, it is true, protect a man against the

meaner felonies of life; but not in any degree against its selfish

vices, unless fortified by sound principles and habits.  Hence do

we find in daily life so many instances of men who are well-

informed in intellect, but utterly deformed in character; filled

with the learning of the schools, yet possessing little practical

wisdom, and offering examples for warning rather than imitation.

An often quoted expression at this day is that "Knowledge is

power;" but so also are fanaticism, despotism, and ambition.

Knowledge of itself, unless wisely directed, might merely make bad

men more dangerous, and the society in which it was regarded as the

highest good, little better than a pandemonium.



It is possible that at this day we may even exaggerate the

importance of literary culture.  We are apt to imagine that because

we possess many libraries, institutes, and museums, we are making

great progress.  But such facilities may as often be a hindrance as

a help to individual self-culture of the highest kind.  The

possession of a library, or the free use of it, no more constitutes

learning, than the possession of wealth constitutes generosity.

Though we undoubtedly possess great facilities it is nevertheless

true, as of old, that wisdom and understanding can only become the

possession of individual men by travelling the old road of

observation, attention, perseverance, and industry.  The possession

of the mere materials of knowledge is something very different from

wisdom and understanding, which are reached through a higher kind

of discipline than that of reading, - which is often but a mere

passive reception of other men's thoughts; there being little or no

active effort of mind in the transaction.  Then how much of our

reading is but the indulgence of a sort of intellectual dram-

drinking, imparting a grateful excitement for the moment, without

the slightest effect in improving and enriching the mind or

building up the character.  Thus many indulge themselves in the

conceit that they are cultivating their minds, when they are only

employed in the humbler occupation of killing time, of which

perhaps the best that can be said is that it keeps them from doing

worse things.



It is also to be borne in mind that the experience gathered from

books, though often valuable, is but of the nature of LEARNING;

whereas the experience gained from actual life is of the nature of

WISDOM; and a small store of the latter is worth vastly more than

any stock of the former.  Lord Bolingbroke truly said that

"Whatever study tends neither directly nor indirectly to make us

better men and citizens, is at best but a specious and ingenious

sort of idleness, and the knowledge we acquire by it, only a

creditable kind of ignorance - nothing more."



Useful and instructive though good reading may be, it is yet only

one mode of cultivating the mind; and is much less influential than

practical experience and good example in the formation of

character.  There were wise, valiant, and true-hearted men bred in

England, long before the existence of a reading public.  Magna

Charta was secured by men who signed the deed with their marks.

Though altogether unskilled in the art of deciphering the literary

signs by which principles were denominated upon paper, they yet

understood and appreciated, and boldly contended for, the things

themselves.  Thus the foundations of English liberty were laid by

men, who, though illiterate, were nevertheless of the very highest

stamp of character.  And it must be admitted that the chief object

of culture is, not merely to fill the mind with other men's

thoughts, and to be the passive recipient of their impressions of

things, but to enlarge our individual intelligence, and render us

more useful and efficient workers in the sphere of life to which we

may be called.  Many of our most energetic and useful workers have

been but sparing readers.  Brindley and Stephenson did not learn to

read and write until they reached manhood, and yet they did great

works and lived manly lives; John Hunter could barely read or write

when he was twenty years old, though he could make tables and

chairs with any carpenter in the trade.  "I never read," said the

great physiologist when lecturing before his class; "this" -

pointing to some part of the subject before him - "this is the work

that you must study if you wish to become eminent in your

profession."  When told that one of his contemporaries had charged

him with being ignorant of the dead languages, he said, "I would

undertake to teach him that on the dead body which he never knew in

any language, dead or living."



It is not then how much a man may know, that is of importance, but

the end and purpose for which he knows it.  The object of knowledge

should be to mature wisdom and improve character, to render us

better, happier, and more useful; more benevolent, more energetic,

and more efficient in the pursuit of every high purpose in life.

"When people once fall into the habit of admiring and encouraging

ability as such, without reference to moral character - and

religious and political opinions are the concrete form of moral

character - they are on the highway to all sorts of degradation."

(30)  We must ourselves BE and DO, and not rest satisfied merely

with reading and meditating over what other men have been and done.

Our best light must be made life, and our best thought action.  At

least we ought to be able to say, as Richter did, "I have made as

much out of myself as could be made of the stuff, and no man should

require more;" for it is every man's duty to discipline and guide

himself, with God's help, according to his responsibilities and the

faculties with which he has been endowed.



Self-discipline and self-control are the beginnings of practical

wisdom; and these must have their root in self-respect.  Hope

springs from it - hope, which is the companion of power, and the

mother of success; for whoso hopes strongly has within him the gift

of miracles.  The humblest may say, "To respect myself, to develop

myself - this is my true duty in life.  An integral and responsible

part of the great system of society, I owe it to society and to its

Author not to degrade or destroy either my body, mind, or

instincts.  On the contrary, I am bound to the best of my power to

give to those parts of my constitution the highest degree of

perfection possible.  I am not only to suppress the evil, but to

evoke the good elements in my nature.  And as I respect myself, so

am I equally bound to respect others, as they on their part are

bound to respect me."  Hence mutual respect, justice, and order, of

which law becomes the written record and guarantee.



Self-respect is the noblest garment with which a man may clothe

himself - the most elevating feeling with which the mind can be

inspired.  One of Pythagoras's wisest maxims, in his 'Golden

Verses,' is that with which he enjoins the pupil to "reverence

himself."  Borne up by this high idea, he will not defile his body

by sensuality, nor his mind by servile thoughts.  This sentiment,

carried into daily life, will be found at the root of all the

virtues - cleanliness, sobriety, chastity, morality, and religion.

"The pious and just honouring of ourselves," said Milton, may be

thought the radical moisture and fountain-head from whence every

laudable and worthy enterprise issues forth."  To think meanly of

one's self, is to sink in one's own estimation as well as in the

estimation of others.  And as the thoughts are, so will the acts

be.  Man cannot aspire if he look down; if he will rise, he must

look up.  The very humblest may be sustained by the proper

indulgence of this feeling.  Poverty itself may be lifted and

lighted up by self-respect; and it is truly a noble sight to see a

poor man hold himself upright amidst his temptations, and refuse to

demean himself by low actions.



One way in which self-culture may be degraded is by regarding it

too exclusively as a means of "getting on."  Viewed in this light,

it is unquestionable that education is one of the best investments

of time and labour.  In any line of life, intelligence will enable

a man to adapt himself more readily to circumstances, suggest

improved methods of working, and render him more apt, skilled and

effective in all respects.  He who works with his head as well as

his hands, will come to look at his business with a clearer eye;

and he will become conscious of increasing power - perhaps the most

cheering consciousness the human mind can cherish.  The power of

self-help will gradually grow; and in proportion to a man's self-

respect, will he be armed against the temptation of low

indulgences.  Society and its action will be regarded with quite a

new interest, his sympathies will widen and enlarge, and he will

thus be attracted to work for others as well as for himself.



Self-culture may not, however, end in eminence, as in the numerous

instances above cited.  The great majority of men, in all times,

however enlightened, must necessarily be engaged in the ordinary

avocations of industry; and no degree of culture which can be

conferred upon the community at large will ever enable them - even

were it desirable, which it is not - to get rid of the daily work

of society, which must be done.  But this, we think, may also be

accomplished.  We can elevate the condition of labour by allying it

to noble thoughts, which confer a grace upon the lowliest as well

as the highest rank.  For no matter how poor or humble a man may

be, the great thinker of this and other days may come in and sit

down with him, and be his companion for the time, though his

dwelling be the meanest hut.  It is thus that the habit of well-

directed reading may become a source of the greatest pleasure and

self-improvement, and exercise a gentle coercion, with the most

beneficial results, over the whole tenour of a man's character and

conduct.  And even though self-culture may not bring wealth, it

will at all events give one the companionship of elevated thoughts.

A nobleman once contemptuously asked of a sage, "What have you got

by all your philosophy?"  "At least I have got society in myself,"

was the wise man's reply.



But many are apt to feel despondent, and become discouraged in the

work of self-culture, because they do not "get on" in the world so

fast as they think they deserve to do.  Having planted their acorn,

they expect to see it grow into an oak at once.  They have perhaps

looked upon knowledge in the light of a marketable commodity, and

are consequently mortified because it does not sell as they

expected it would do.  Mr. Tremenheere, in one of his 'Education

Reports' (for 1840-1), states that a schoolmaster in Norfolk,

finding his school rapidly falling off, made inquiry into the

cause, and ascertained that the reason given by the majority of the

parents for withdrawing their children was, that they had expected

"education was to make them better off than they were before," but

that having found it had "done them no good," they had taken their

children from school, and would give themselves no further trouble

about education!



The same low idea of self-culture is but too prevalent in other

classes, and is encouraged by the false views of life which are

always more or less current in society.  But to regard self-culture

either as a means of getting past others in the world, or of

intellectual dissipation and amusement, rather than as a power to

elevate the character and expand the spiritual nature, is to place

it on a very low level.  To use the words of Bacon, "Knowledge is

not a shop for profit or sale, but a rich storehouse for the glory

of the Creator and the relief of man's estate."  It is doubtless

most honourable for a man to labour to elevate himself, and to

better his condition in society, but this is not to be done at the

sacrifice of himself.  To make the mind the mere drudge of the

body, is putting it to a very servile use; and to go about whining

and bemoaning our pitiful lot because we fail in achieving that

success in life which, after all, depends rather upon habits of

industry and attention to business details than upon knowledge, is

the mark of a small, and often of a sour mind.  Such a temper

cannot better be reproved than in the words of Robert Southey, who

thus wrote to a friend who sought his counsel:  "I would give you

advice if it could be of use; but there is no curing those who

choose to be diseased.  A good man and a wise man may at times be

angry with the world, at times grieved for it; but be sure no man

was ever discontented with the world if he did his duty in it.  If

a man of education, who has health, eyes, hands, and leisure, wants

an object, it is only because God Almighty has bestowed all those

blessings upon a man who does not deserve them."



Another way in which education may be prostituted is by employing

it as a mere means of intellectual dissipation and amusement.  Many

are the ministers to this taste in our time.  There is almost a

mania for frivolity and excitement, which exhibits itself in many

forms in our popular literature.  To meet the public taste, our

books and periodicals must now be highly spiced, amusing, and

comic, not disdaining slang, and illustrative of breaches of all

laws, human and divine.  Douglas Jerrold once observed of this

tendency, "I am convinced the world will get tired (at least I hope

so) of this eternal guffaw about all things.  After all, life has

something serious in it.  It cannot be all a comic history of

humanity.  Some men would, I believe, write a Comic Sermon on the

Mount.  Think of a Comic History of England, the drollery of

Alfred, the fun of Sir Thomas More, the farce of his daughter

begging the dead head and clasping it in her coffin on her bosom.

Surely the world will be sick of this blasphemy."  John Sterling,

in a like spirit, said:- "Periodicals and novels are to all in this

generation, but more especially to those whose minds are still

unformed and in the process of formation, a new and more effectual

substitute for the plagues of Egypt, vermin that corrupt the

wholesome waters and infest our chambers."



As a rest from toil and a relaxation from graver pursuits, the

perusal of a well-written story, by a writer of genius, is a high

intellectual pleasure; and it is a description of literature to

which all classes of readers, old and young, are attracted as by a

powerful instinct; nor would we have any of them debarred from its

enjoyment in a reasonable degree.  But to make it the exclusive

literary diet, as some do, - to devour the garbage with which the

shelves of circulating libraries are filled, - and to occupy the

greater portion of the leisure hours in studying the preposterous

pictures of human life which so many of them present, is worse than

waste of time:  it is positively pernicious.  The habitual novel-

reader indulges in fictitious feelings so much, that there is great

risk of sound and healthy feeling becoming perverted or benumbed.

"I never go to hear a tragedy," said a gay man once to the

Archbishop of York, "it wears my heart out."  The literary pity

evoked by fiction leads to no corresponding action; the

susceptibilities which it excites involve neither inconvenience nor

self-sacrifice; so that the heart that is touched too often by the

fiction may at length become insensible to the reality.  The steel

is gradually rubbed out of the character, and it insensibly loses

its vital spring.  "Drawing fine pictures of virtue in one's mind,"

said Bishop Butler, "is so far from necessarily or certainly

conducive to form a HABIT of it in him who thus employs himself,

that it may even harden the mind in a contrary course, and render

it gradually more insensible."



Amusement in moderation is wholesome, and to be commended; but

amusement in excess vitiates the whole nature, and is a thing to be

carefully guarded against.  The maxim is often quoted of "All work

and no play makes Jack a dull boy;" but all play and no work makes

him something greatly worse.  Nothing can be more hurtful to a

youth than to have his soul sodden with pleasure.  The best

qualities of his mind are impaired; common enjoyments become

tasteless; his appetite for the higher kind of pleasures is

vitiated; and when he comes to face the work and the duties of

life, the result is usually aversion and disgust.  "Fast" men waste

and exhaust the powers of life, and dry up the sources of true

happiness.  Having forestalled their spring, they can produce no

healthy growth of either character or intellect.  A child without

simplicity, a maiden without innocence, a boy without truthfulness,

are not more piteous sights than the man who has wasted and thrown

away his youth in self-indulgence.  Mirabeau said of himself, "My

early years have already in a great measure disinherited the

succeeding ones, and dissipated a great part of my vital powers."

As the wrong done to another to-day returns upon ourselves to-

morrow, so the sins of our youth rise up in our age to scourge us.

When Lord Bacon says that "strength of nature in youth passeth over

many excesses which are owing a man until he is old," he exposes a

physical as well as a moral fact which cannot be too well weighed

in the conduct of life.  "I assure you," wrote Giusti the Italian

to a friend, "I pay a heavy price for existence.  It is true that

our lives are not at our own disposal.  Nature pretends to give

them gratis at the beginning, and then sends in her account."  The

worst of youthful indiscretions is, not that they destroy health,

so much as that they sully manhood.  The dissipated youth becomes a

tainted man; and often he cannot be pure, even if he would.  If

cure there be, it is only to be found in inoculating the mind with

a fervent spirit of duty, and in energetic application to useful

work.



One of the most gifted of Frenchmen, in point of great intellectual

endowments, was Benjamin Constant; but, BLASE at twenty, his life

was only a prolonged wail, instead of a harvest of the great deeds

which he was capable of accomplishing with ordinary diligence and

self-control.  He resolved upon doing so many things, which he

never did, that people came to speak of him as Constant the

Inconstant.  He was a fluent and brilliant writer, and cherished

the ambition of writing works, "which the world would not willingly

let die."  But whilst Constant affected the highest thinking,

unhappily he practised the lowest living; nor did the

transcendentalism of his books atone for the meanness of his life.

He frequented the gaming-tables while engaged in preparing his work

upon religion, and carried on a disreputable intrigue while writing

his 'Adolphe.'  With all his powers of intellect, he was powerless,

because he had no faith in virtue.  "Bah!" said he, "what are

honour and dignity?  The longer I live, the more clearly I see

there is nothing in them."  It was the howl of a miserable man.  He

described himself as but "ashes and dust."  "I pass," said he,

"like a shadow over the earth, accompanied by misery and ENNUI."

He wished for Voltaire's energy, which he would rather have

possessed than his genius.  But he had no strength of purpose -

nothing but wishes:  his life, prematurely exhausted, had become

but a heap of broken links.  He spoke of himself as a person with

one foot in the air.  He admitted that he had no principles, and no

moral consistency.  Hence, with his splendid talents, he contrived

to do nothing; and, after living many years miserable, he died worn

out and wretched.



The career of Augustin Thierry, the author of the 'History of the

Norman Conquest,' affords an admirable contrast to that of

Constant.  His entire life presented a striking example of

perseverance, diligence, self culture, and untiring devotion to

knowledge.  In the pursuit he lost his eyesight, lost his health,

but never lost his love of truth.  When so feeble that he was

carried from room to room, like a helpless infant, in the arms of a

nurse, his brave spirit never failed him; and blind and helpless

though he was, he concluded his literary career in the following

noble words:- "If, as I think, the interest of science is counted

in the number of great national interests, I have given my country

all that the soldier, mutilated on the field of battle, gives her.

Whatever may be the fate of my labours, this example, I hope, will

not be lost.  I would wish it to serve to combat the species of

moral weakness which is THE DISEASE of our present generation; to

bring back into the straight road of life some of those enervated

souls that complain of wanting faith, that know not what to do, and

seek everywhere, without finding it, an object of worship and

admiration.  Why say, with so much bitterness, that in the world,

constituted as it is, there is no air for all lungs - no employment

for all minds?  Is not calm and serious study there? and is not

that a refuge, a hope, a field within the reach of all of us?  With

it, evil days are passed over without their weight being felt.

Every one can make his own destiny - every one employ his life

nobly.  This is what I have done, and would do again if I had to

recommence my career; I would choose that which has brought me

where I am.  Blind, and suffering without hope, and almost without

intermission, I may give this testimony, which from me will not

appear suspicious.  There is something in the world better than

sensual enjoyments, better than fortune, better than health itself

- it is devotion to knowledge."



Coleridge, in many respects, resembled Constant.  He possessed

equally brilliant powers, but was similarly infirm of purpose.

With all his great intellectual gifts, he wanted the gift of

industry, and was averse to continuous labour.  He wanted also the

sense of independence, and thought it no degradation to leave his

wife and children to be maintained by the brain-work of the noble

Southey, while he himself retired to Highgate Grove to discourse

transcendentalism to his disciples, looking down contemptuously

upon the honest work going forward beneath him amidst the din and

smoke of London.  With remunerative employment at his command he

stooped to accept the charity of friends; and, notwithstanding his

lofty ideas of philosophy, he condescended to humiliations from

which many a day-labourer would have shrunk.  How different in

spirit was Southey! labouring not merely at work of his own choice,

and at taskwork often tedious and distasteful, but also

unremittingly and with the utmost eagerness seeking and storing

knowledge purely for the love of it.  Every day, every hour had its

allotted employment:  engagements to publishers requiring punctual

fulfilment; the current expenses of a large household duty to

provide:  for Southey had no crop growing while his pen was idle.

"My ways," he used to say, "are as broad as the king's high-road,

and my means lie in an inkstand."



Robert Nicoll wrote to a friend, after reading the 'Recollections

of Coleridge,' "What a mighty intellect was lost in that man for

want of a little energy - a little determination!"  Nicoll himself

was a true and brave spirit, who died young, but not before he had

encountered and overcome great difficulties in life.  At his

outset, while carrying on a small business as a bookseller, he

found himself weighed down with a debt of only twenty pounds, which

he said he felt "weighing like a millstone round his neck," and

that, "if he had it paid he never would borrow again from mortal

man."  Writing to his mother at the time he said, "Fear not for me,

dear mother, for I feel myself daily growing firmer and more

hopeful in spirit.  The more I think and reflect - and thinking,

not reading, is now my occupation - I feel that, whether I be

growing richer or not, I am growing a wiser man, which is far

better.  Pain, poverty, and all the other wild beasts of life which

so affrighten others, I am so bold as to think I could look in the

face without shrinking, without losing respect for myself, faith in

man's high destinies, or trust in God.  There is a point which it

costs much mental toil and struggling to gain, but which, when once

gained, a man can look down from, as a traveller from a lofty

mountain, on storms raging below, while he is walking in sunshine.

That I have yet gained this point in life I will not say, but I

feel myself daily nearer to it."



It is not ease, but effort - not facility, but difficulty, that

makes men.  There is, perhaps, no station in life, in which

difficulties have not to be encountered and overcome before any

decided measure of success can be achieved.  Those difficulties

are, however, our best instructors, as our mistakes often form our

best experience.  Charles James Fox was accustomed to say that he

hoped more from a man who failed, and yet went on in spite of his

failure, than from the buoyant career of the successful.  "It is

all very well," said he, "to tell me that a young man has

distinguished himself by a brilliant first speech.  He may go on,

or he may be satisfied with his first triumph; but show me a young

man who has NOT succeeded at first, and nevertheless has gone on,

and I will back that young man to do better than most of those who

have succeeded at the first trial."



We learn wisdom from failure much more than from success.  We often

discover what WILL do, by finding out what will not do; and

probably he who never made a mistake never made a discovery.  It

was the failure in the attempt to make a sucking-pump act, when the

working bucket was more than thirty-three feet above the surface of

the water to be raised, that led observant men to study the law of

atmospheric pressure, and opened a new field of research to the

genius of Galileo, Torrecelli, and Boyle.  John Hunter used to

remark that the art of surgery would not advance until professional

men had the courage to publish their failures as well as their

successes.  Watt the engineer said, of all things most wanted in

mechanical engineering was a history of failures:  "We want," he

said, "a book of blots."  When Sir Humphry Davy was once shown a

dexterously manipulated experiment, he said - "I thank God I was

not made a dexterous manipulator, for the most important of my

discoveries have been suggested to me by failures."  Another

distinguished investigator in physical science has left it on

record that, whenever in the course of his researches he

encountered an apparently insuperable obstacle, he generally found

himself on the brink of some discovery.  The very greatest things -

great thoughts, discoveries, inventions - have usually been

nurtured in hardship, often pondered over in sorrow, and at length

established with difficulty.



Beethoven said of Rossini, that he had in him the stuff to have

made a good musician if he had only, when a boy, been well flogged;

but that he had been spoilt by the facility with which he produced.

Men who feel their strength within them need not fear to encounter

adverse opinions; they have far greater reason to fear undue praise

and too friendly criticism.  When Mendelssohn was about to enter

the orchestra at Birmingham, on the first performance of his

'Elijah,' he said laughingly to one of his friends and critics,

"Stick your claws into me!  Don't tell me what you like, but what

you don't like!"



It has been said, and truly, that it is the defeat that tries the

general more than the victory.  Washington lost more battles than

he gained; but he succeeded in the end.  The Romans, in their most

victorious campaigns, almost invariably began with defeats.  Moreau

used to be compared by his companions to a drum, which nobody hears

of except it be beaten.  Wellington's military genius was perfected

by encounter with difficulties of apparently the most overwhelming

character, but which only served to nerve his resolution, and bring

out more prominently his great qualities as a man and a general.

So the skilful mariner obtains his best experience amidst storms

and tempests, which train him to self-reliance, courage, and the

highest discipline; and we probably own to rough seas and wintry

nights the best training of our race of British seamen, who are,

certainly, not surpassed by any in the world.



Necessity may be a hard schoolmistress, but she is generally found

the best.  Though the ordeal of adversity is one from which we

naturally shrink, yet, when it comes, we must bravely and manfully

encounter it.  Burns says truly,





"Though losses and crosses

Be lessons right severe,

There's wit there, you'll get there,

You'll find no other where."





"Sweet indeed are the uses of adversity."  They reveal to us our

powers, and call forth our energies.  If there be real worth in the

character, like sweet herbs, it will give forth its finest

fragrance when pressed.  "Crosses," says the old proverb, "are the

ladders that lead to heaven."  "What is even poverty itself," asks

Richter, "that a man should murmur under it?  It is but as the pain

of piercing a maiden's ear, and you hang precious jewels in the

wound."  In the experience of life it is found that the wholesome

discipline of adversity in strong natures usually carries with it a

self-preserving influence.  Many are found capable of bravely

bearing up under privations, and cheerfully encountering

obstructions, who are afterwards found unable to withstand the more

dangerous influences of prosperity.  It is only a weak man whom the

wind deprives of his cloak:  a man of average strength is more in

danger of losing it when assailed by the beams of a too genial sun.

Thus it often needs a higher discipline and a stronger character to

bear up under good fortune than under adverse.  Some generous

natures kindle and warm with prosperity, but there are many on whom

wealth has no such influence.  Base hearts it only hardens, making

those who were mean and servile, mean and proud.  But while

prosperity is apt to harden the heart to pride, adversity in a man

of resolution will serve to ripen it into fortitude.  To use the

words of Burke, "Difficulty is a severe instructor, set over us by

the supreme ordinance of a parental guardian and instructor, who

knows us better than we know ourselves, as He loves us better too.

He that wrestles with us strengthens our nerves, and sharpens our

skill:  our antagonist is thus our helper."  Without the necessity

of encountering difficulty, life might be easier, but men would be

worth less.  For trials, wisely improved, train the character, and

teach self-help; thus hardship itself may often prove the

wholesomest discipline for us, though we recognise it not.  When

the gallant young Hodson, unjustly removed from his Indian command,

felt himself sore pressed down by unmerited calumny and reproach,

he yet preserved the courage to say to a friend, "I strive to look

the worst boldly in the face, as I would an enemy in the field, and

to do my appointed work resolutely and to the best of my ability,

satisfied that there is a reason for all; and that even irksome

duties well done bring their own reward, and that, if not, still

they ARE duties."



The battle of life is, in most cases, fought up-hill; and to win it

without a struggle were perhaps to win it without honour.  If there

were no difficulties there would be no success; if there were

nothing to struggle for, there would be nothing to be achieved.

Difficulties may intimidate the weak, but they act only as a

wholesome stimulus to men of resolution and valour.  All experience

of life indeed serves to prove that the impediments thrown in the

way of human advancement may for the most part be overcome by

steady good conduct, honest zeal, activity, perseverance, and above

all by a determined resolution to surmount difficulties, and stand

up manfully against misfortune.



The school of Difficulty is the best school of moral discipline,

for nations as for individuals.  Indeed, the history of difficulty

would be but a history of all the great and good things that have

yet been accomplished by men.  It is hard to say how much northern

nations owe to their encounter with a comparatively rude and

changeable climate and an originally sterile soil, which is one of

the necessities of their condition, - involving a perennial

struggle with difficulties such as the natives of sunnier climes

know nothing of.  And thus it may be, that though our finest

products are exotic, the skill and industry which have been

necessary to rear them, have issued in the production of a native

growth of men not surpassed on the globe.



Wherever there is difficulty, the individual man must come out for

better for worse.  Encounter with it will train his strength, and

discipline his skill; heartening him for future effort, as the

racer, by being trained to run against the hill, at length courses

with facility.  The road to success may be steep to climb, and it

puts to the proof the energies of him who would reach the summit.

But by experience a man soon learns that obstacles are to be

overcome by grappling with them, - that the nettle feels as soft as

silk when it is boldly grasped, - and that the most effective help

towards realizing the object proposed is the moral conviction that

we can and will accomplish it.  Thus difficulties often fall away

of themselves before the determination to overcome them.



Much will be done if we do but try.  Nobody knows what he can do

till he has tried; and few try their best till they have been

forced to do it.  "IF I could do such and such a thing," sighs the

desponding youth.  But nothing will be done if he only wishes.  The

desire must ripen into purpose and effort; and one energetic

attempt is worth a thousand aspirations.  It is these thorny "ifs"

- the mutterings of impotence and despair - which so often hedge

round the field of possibility, and prevent anything being done or

even attempted.  "A difficulty," said Lord Lyndhurst, "is a thing

to be overcome;" grapple with it at once; facility will come with

practice, and strength and fortitude with repeated effort.  Thus

the mind and character may be trained to an almost perfect

discipline, and enabled to act with a grace, spirit, and liberty,

almost incomprehensible to those who have not passed through a

similar experience.



Everything that we learn is the mastery of a difficulty; and the

mastery of one helps to the mastery of others.  Things which may at

first sight appear comparatively valueless in education - such as

the study of the dead languages, and the relations of lines and

surfaces which we call mathematics - are really of the greatest

practical value, not so much because of the information which they

yield, as because of the development which they compel.  The

mastery of these studies evokes effort, and cultivates powers of

application, which otherwise might have lain dormant, Thus one

thing leads to another, and so the work goes on through life -

encounter with difficulty ending only when life and culture end.

But indulging in the feeling of discouragement never helped any one

over a difficulty, and never will.  D'Alembert's advice to the

student who complained to him about his want of success in

mastering the first elements of mathematics was the right one - "Go

on, sir, and faith and strength will come to you."



The danseuse who turns a pirouette, the violinist who plays a

sonata, have acquired their dexterity by patient repetition and

after many failures.  Carissimi, when praised for the ease and

grace of his melodies, exclaimed, "Ah! you little know with what

difficulty this ease has been acquired."  Sir Joshua Reynolds, when

once asked how long it had taken him to paint a certain picture,

replied, "All my life."  Henry Clay, the American orator, when

giving advice to young men, thus described to them the secret of

his success in the cultivation of his art:  "I owe my success in

life," said he, "chiefly to one circumstance - that at the age of

twenty-seven I commenced, and continued for years, the process of

daily reading and speaking upon the contents of some historical or

scientific book.  These off-hand efforts were made, sometimes in a

cornfield, at others in the forest, and not unfrequently in some

distant barn, with the horse and the ox for my auditors.  It is to

this early practice of the art of all arts that I am indebted for

the primary and leading impulses that stimulated me onward and have

shaped and moulded my whole subsequent destiny."



Curran, the Irish orator, when a youth, had a strong defect in his

articulation, and at school he was known as "stuttering Jack

Curran."  While he was engaged in the study of the law, and still

struggling to overcome his defect, he was stung into eloquence by

the sarcasms of a member of a debating club, who characterised him

as "Orator Mum;" for, like Cowper, when he stood up to speak on a

previous occasion, Curran had not been able to utter a word.  The

taunt stung him and he replied in a triumphant speech.  This

accidental discovery in himself of the gift of eloquence encouraged

him to proceed in his studies with renewed energy.  He corrected

his enunciation by reading aloud, emphatically and distinctly, the

best passages in literature, for several hours every day, studying

his features before a mirror, and adopting a method of

gesticulation suited to his rather awkward and ungraceful figure.

He also proposed cases to himself, which he argued with as much

care as if he had been addressing a jury.  Curran began business

with the qualification which Lord Eldon stated to be the first

requisite for distinction, that is, "to be not worth a shilling."

While working his way laboriously at the bar, still oppressed by

the diffidence which had overcome him in his debating club, he was

on one occasion provoked by the Judge (Robinson) into making a very

severe retort.  In the case under discussion, Curran observed "that

he had never met the law as laid down by his lordship in any book

in his library."  "That may be, sir," said the judge, in a

contemptuous tone, "but I suspect that YOUR library is very small."

His lordship was notoriously a furious political partisan, the

author of several anonymous pamphlets characterised by unusual

violence and dogmatism.  Curran, roused by the allusion to his

straitened circumstances, replied thus; "It is very true, my lord,

that I am poor, and the circumstance has certainly curtailed my

library; my books are not numerous, but they are select, and I hope

they have been perused with proper dispositions.  I have prepared

myself for this high profession by the study of a few good works,

rather than by the composition of a great many bad ones.  I am not

ashamed of my poverty; but I should be ashamed of my wealth, could

I have stooped to acquire it by servility and corruption.  If I

rise not to rank, I shall at least be honest; and should I ever

cease to be so, many an example shows me that an ill-gained

elevation, by making me the more conspicuous, would only make me

the more universally and the more notoriously contemptible."



The extremest poverty has been no obstacle in the way of men

devoted to the duty of self-culture.  Professor Alexander Murray,

the linguist, learnt to write by scribbling his letters on an old

wool-card with the end of a burnt heather stem.  The only book

which his father, who was a poor shepherd, possessed, was a penny

Shorter Catechism; but that, being thought too valuable for common

use, was carefully preserved in a cupboard for the Sunday

catechisings.  Professor Moor, when a young man, being too poor to

purchase Newton's 'Principia,' borrowed the book, and copied the

whole of it with his own hand.  Many poor students, while labouring

daily for their living, have only been able to snatch an atom of

knowledge here and there at intervals, as birds do their food in

winter time when the fields are covered with snow.  They have

struggled on, and faith and hope have come to them.  A well-known

author and publisher, William Chambers, of Edinburgh, speaking

before an assemblage of young men in that city, thus briefly

described to them his humble beginnings, for their encouragement:

"I stand before you," he said, "a self-educated man.  My education

was that which is supplied at the humble parish schools of

Scotland; and it was only when I went to Edinburgh, a poor boy,

that I devoted my evenings, after the labours of the day, to the

cultivation of that intellect which the Almighty has given me.

From seven or eight in the morning till nine or ten at night was I

at my business as a bookseller's apprentice, and it was only during

hours after these, stolen from sleep, that I could devote myself to

study.  I did not read novels:  my attention was devoted to

physical science, and other useful matters.  I also taught myself

French.  I look back to those times with great pleasure, and am

almost sorry I have not to go through the same experience again;

for I reaped more pleasure when I had not a sixpence in my pocket,

studying in a garret in Edinburgh, then I now find when sitting

amidst all the elegancies and comforts of a parlour."



William Cobbett's account of how he learnt English Grammar is full

of interest and instruction for all students labouring under

difficulties.  "I learned grammar," said he, "when I was a private

soldier on the pay of sixpence a day.  The edge of my berth, or

that of my guard-bed, was my seat to study in; my knapsack was my

book-case; a bit of board lying on my lap was my writing-table; and

the task did not demand anything like a year of my life.  I had no

money to purchase candle or oil; in winter time it was rarely that

I could get any evening light but that of the fire, and only my

turn even of that.  And if I, under such circumstances, and without

parent or friend to advise or encourage me, accomplished this

undertaking, what excuse can there be for any youth, however poor,

however pressed with business, or however circumstanced as to room

or other conveniences?  To buy a pen or a sheet of paper I was

compelled to forego some portion of food, though in a state of

half-starvation:  I had no moment of time that I could call my own;

and I had to read and to write amidst the talking, laughing,

singing, whistling, and brawling of at least half a score of the

most thoughtless of men, and that, too, in the hours of their

freedom from all control.  Think not lightly of the farthing that I

had to give, now and then, for ink, pen, or paper!  That farthing

was, alas! a great sum to me!  I was as tall as I am now; I had

great health and great exercise.  The whole of the money, not

expended for us at market, was two-pence a week for each man.  I

remember, and well I may! that on one occasion I, after all

necessary expenses, had, on a Friday, made shifts to have a

halfpenny in reserve, which I had destined for the purchase of a

redherring in the morning; but, when I pulled off my clothes at

night, so hungry then as to be hardly able to endure life, I found

that I had lost my halfpenny!  I buried my head under the miserable

sheet and rug, and cried like a child!  And again I say, if, I,

under circumstances like these, could encounter and overcome this

task, is there, can there be, in the whole world, a youth to find

an excuse for the non-performance?"



We have been informed of an equally striking instance of

perseverance and application in learning on the part of a French

political exile in London.  His original occupation was that of a

stonemason, at which he found employment for some time; but work

becoming slack, he lost his place, and poverty stared him in the

face.  In his dilemma he called upon a fellow exile profitably

engaged in teaching French, and consulted him what he ought to do

to earn a living.  The answer was, "Become a professor!"  "A

professor?" answered the mason - "I, who am only a workman,

speaking but a patois!  Surely you are jesting?"  "On the contrary,

I am quite serious," said the other, "and again I advise you -

become a professor; place yourself under me, and I will undertake

to teach you how to teach others."  "No, no!" replied the mason,

"it is impossible; I am too old to learn; I am too little of a

scholar; I cannot be a professor."  He went away, and again he

tried to obtain employment at his trade.  From London he went into

the provinces, and travelled several hundred miles in vain; he

could not find a master.  Returning to London, he went direct to

his former adviser, and said, "I have tried everywhere for work,

and failed; I will now try to be a professor!"  He immediately

placed himself under instruction; and being a man of close

application, of quick apprehension, and vigorous intelligence, he

speedily mastered the elements of grammar, the rules of

construction and composition, and (what he had still in a great

measure to learn) the correct pronunciation of classical French.

When his friend and instructor thought him sufficiently competent

to undertake the teaching of others, an appointment, advertised as

vacant, was applied for and obtained; and behold our artisan at

length become professor!  It so happened, that the seminary to

which he was appointed was situated in a suburb of London where he

had formerly worked as a stonemason; and every morning the first

thing which met his eyes on looking out of his dressing-room window

was a stack of cottage chimneys which he had himself built!  He

feared for a time lest he should be recognised in the village as

the quondam workman, and thus bring discredit on his seminary,

which was of high standing.  But he need have been under no such

apprehension, as he proved a most efficient teacher, and his pupils

were on more than one occasion publicly complimented for their

knowledge of French.  Meanwhile, he secured the respect and

friendship of all who knew him - fellow-professors as well as

pupils; and when the story of his struggles, his difficulties, and

his past history, became known to them, they admired him more than

ever.



Sir Samuel Romilly was not less indefatigable as a self-cultivator.

The son of a jeweller, descended from a French refugee, he received

little education in his early years, but overcame all his

disadvantages by unwearied application, and by efforts constantly

directed towards the same end.  "I determined," he says, in his

autobiography, "when I was between fifteen and sixteen years of

age, to apply myself seriously to learning Latin, of which I, at

that time, knew little more than some of the most familiar rules of

grammar.  In the course of three or four years, during which I thus

applied myself, I had read almost every prose writer of the age of

pure Latinity, except those who have treated merely of technical

subjects, such as Varro, Columella, and Celsus.  I had gone three

times through the whole of Livy, Sallust, and Tacitus.  I had

studied the most celebrated orations of Cicero, and translated a

great deal of Homer.  Terence, Virgil, Horace, Ovid, and Juvenal, I

had read over and over again."  He also studied geography, natural

history, and natural philosophy, and obtained a considerable

acquaintance with general knowledge.  At sixteen he was articled to

a clerk in Chancery; worked hard; was admitted to the bar; and his

industry and perseverance ensured success.  He became Solicitor-

General under the Fox administration in 1806, and steadily worked

his way to the highest celebrity in his profession.  Yet he was

always haunted by a painful and almost oppressive sense of his own

disqualifications, and never ceased labouring to remedy them.  His

autobiography is a lesson of instructive facts, worth volumes of

sentiment, and well deserves a careful perusal.



Sir Walter Scott was accustomed to cite the case of his young

friend John Leyden as one of the most remarkable illustrations of

the power of perseverance which he had ever known.  The son of a

shepherd in one of the wildest valleys of Roxburghshire, he was

almost entirely self educated.  Like many Scotch shepherds' sons -

like Hogg, who taught himself to write by copying the letters of a

printed book as he lay watching his flock on the hill-side - like

Cairns, who from tending sheep on the Lammermoors, raised himself

by dint of application and industry to the professor's chair which

he now so worthily holds - like Murray, Ferguson, and many more,

Leyden was early inspired by a thirst for knowledge.  When a poor

barefooted boy, he walked six or eight miles across the moors daily

to learn reading at the little village schoolhouse of Kirkton; and

this was all the education he received; the rest he acquired for

himself.  He found his way to Edinburgh to attend the college

there, setting the extremest penury at defiance.  He was first

discovered as a frequenter of a small bookseller's shop kept by

Archibald Constable, afterwards so well known as a publisher.  He

would pass hour after hour perched on a ladder in mid-air, with

some great folio in his hand, forgetful of the scanty meal of bread

and water which awaited him at his miserable lodging.  Access to

books and lectures comprised all within the bounds of his wishes.

Thus he toiled and battled at the gates of science until his

unconquerable perseverance carried everything before it.  Before he

had attained his nineteenth year he had astonished all the

professors in Edinburgh by his profound knowledge of Greek and

Latin, and the general mass of information he had acquired.  Having

turned his views to India, he sought employment in the civil

service, but failed.  He was however informed that a surgeon's

assistant's commission was open to him.  But he was no surgeon, and

knew no more of the profession than a child.  He could however

learn.  Then he was told that he must be ready to pass in six

months!  Nothing daunted, he set to work, to acquire in six months

what usually required three years.  At the end of six months he

took his degree with honour.  Scott and a few friends helped to fit

him out; and he sailed for India, after publishing his beautiful

poem 'The Scenes of Infancy.'  In India he promised to become one

of the greatest of oriental scholars, but was unhappily cut off by

fever caught by exposure, and died at an early age.



The life of the late Dr. Lee, Professor of Hebrew at Cambridge,

furnishes one of the most remarkable instances in modern times of

the power of patient perseverance and resolute purpose in working

out an honourable career in literature.  He received his education

at a charity school at Lognor, near Shrewsbury, but so little

distinguished himself there, that his master pronounced him one of

the dullest boys that ever passed through his hands.  He was put

apprentice to a carpenter, and worked at that trade until he

arrived at manhood.  To occupy his leisure hours he took to

reading; and, some of the books containing Latin quotations, he

became desirous of ascertaining what they meant.  He bought a Latin

grammar, and proceeded to learn Latin.  As Stone, the Duke of

Argyle's gardener, said, long before, "Does one need to know

anything more than the twenty-four letters in order to learn

everything else that one wishes?"  Lee rose early and sat up late,

and he succeeded in mastering the Latin before his apprenticeship

was out.  Whilst working one day in some place of worship, a copy

of a Greek Testament fell in his way, and he was immediately filled

with the desire to learn that language.  He accordingly sold some

of his Latin books, and purchased a Greek Grammar and Lexicon.

Taking pleasure in learning, he soon mastered the language.  Then

he sold his Greek books, and bought Hebrew ones, and learnt that

language, unassisted by any instructor, without any hope of fame or

reward, but simply following the bent of his genius.  He next

proceeded to learn the Chaldee, Syriac, and Samaritan dialects.

But his studies began to tell upon his health, and brought on

disease in his eyes through his long night watchings with his

books.  Having laid them aside for a time and recovered his health,

he went on with his daily work.  His character as a tradesman being

excellent, his business improved, and his means enabled him to

marry, which he did when twenty-eight years old.  He determined now

to devote himself to the maintenance of his family, and to renounce

the luxury of literature; accordingly he sold all his books.  He

might have continued a working carpenter all his life, had not the

chest of tools upon which he depended for subsistence been

destroyed by fire, and destitution stared him in the face.  He was

too poor to buy new tools, so he bethought him of teaching children

their letters, - a profession requiring the least possible capital.

But though he had mastered many languages, he was so defective in

the common branches of knowledge, that at first he could not teach

them.  Resolute of purpose, however, he assiduously set to work,

and taught himself arithmetic and writing to such a degree as to be

able to impart the knowledge of these branches to little children.

His unaffected, simple, and beautiful character gradually attracted

friends, and the acquirements of the "learned carpenter" became

bruited abroad.  Dr. Scott, a neighbouring clergyman, obtained for

him the appointment of master of a charity school in Shrewsbury,

and introduced him to a distinguished Oriental scholar.  These

friends supplied him with books, and Lee successively mastered

Arabic, Persic, and Hindostanee.  He continued to pursue his

studies while on duty as a private in the local militia of the

county; gradually acquiring greater proficiency in languages.  At

length his kind patron, Dr. Scott, enabled Lee to enter Queen's

College, Cambridge; and after a course of study, in which he

distinguished himself by his mathematical acquirements, a vacancy

occurring in the professorship of Arabic and Hebrew, he was

worthily elected to fill the honourable office.  Besides ably

performing his duties as a professor, he voluntarily gave much of

his time to the instruction of missionaries going forth to preach

the Gospel to eastern tribes in their own tongue.  He also made

translations of the Bible into several Asiatic dialects; and having

mastered the New Zealand language, he arranged a grammar and

vocabulary for two New Zealand chiefs who were then in England,

which books are now in daily use in the New Zealand schools.  Such,

in brief, is the remarkable history of Dr. Samuel Lee; and it is

but the counterpart of numerous similarly instructive examples of

the power of perseverance in self-culture, as displayed in the

lives of many of the most distinguished of our literary and

scientific men.



There are many other illustrious names which might be cited to

prove the truth of the common saying that "it is never too late to

learn."  Even at advanced years men can do much, if they will

determine on making a beginning.  Sir Henry Spelman did not begin

the study of science until he was between fifty and sixty years of

age.  Franklin was fifty before he fully entered upon the study of

Natural Philosophy.  Dryden and Scott were not known as authors

until each was in his fortieth year.  Boccaccio was thirty-five

when he commenced his literary career, and Alfieri was forty-six

when he began the study of Greek.  Dr. Arnold learnt German at an

advanced age, for the purpose of reading Niebuhr in the original;

and in like manner James Watt, when about forty, while working at

his trade of an instrument maker in Glasgow, learnt French, German,

and Italian, to enable himself to peruse the valuable works on

mechanical philosophy which existed in those languages.  Thomas

Scott was fifty-six before he began to learn Hebrew.  Robert Hall

was once found lying upon the floor, racked by pain, learning

Italian in his old age, to enable him to judge of the parallel

drawn by Macaulay between Milton and Dante.  Handel was forty-eight

before he published any of his great works.  Indeed hundreds of

instances might be given of men who struck out an entirely new

path, and successfully entered on new studies, at a comparatively

advanced time of life.  None but the frivolous or the indolent will

say, "I am too old to learn." (31)



And here we would repeat what we have said before, that it is not

men of genius who move the world and take the lead in it, so much

as men of steadfastness, purpose, and indefatigable industry.

Notwithstanding the many undeniable instances of the precocity of

men of genius, it is nevertheless true that early cleverness gives

no indication of the height to which the grown man will reach.

Precocity is sometimes a symptom of disease rather than of

intellectual vigour.  What becomes of all the "remarkably clever

children?"  Where are the duxes and prize boys?  Trace them through

life, and it will frequently be found that the dull boys, who were

beaten at school, have shot ahead of them.  The clever boys are

rewarded, but the prizes which they gain by their greater quickness

and facility do not always prove of use to them.  What ought rather

to be rewarded is the endeavour, the struggle, and the obedience;

for it is the youth who does his best, though endowed with an

inferiority of natural powers, that ought above all others to be

encouraged.



An interesting chapter might be written on the subject of

illustrious dunces - dull boys, but brilliant men.  We have room,

however, for only a few instances.  Pietro di Cortona, the painter,

was thought so stupid that he was nicknamed "Ass's Head" when a

boy; and Tomaso Guidi was generally known as "Heavy Tom" (Massaccio

Tomasaccio), though by diligence he afterwards raised himself to

the highest eminence.  Newton, when at school, stood at the bottom

of the lowest form but one.  The boy above Newton having kicked

him, the dunce showed his pluck by challenging him to a fight, and

beat him.  Then he set to work with a will, and determined also to

vanquish his antagonist as a scholar, which he did, rising to the

top of his class.  Many of our greatest divines have been anything

but precocious.  Isaac Barrow, when a boy at the Charterhouse

School, was notorious chiefly for his strong temper, pugnacious

habits, and proverbial idleness as a scholar; and he caused such

grief to his parents that his father used to say that, if it

pleased God to take from him any of his children, he hoped it might

be Isaac, the least promising of them all.  Adam Clarke, when a

boy, was proclaimed by his father to be "a grievous dunce;" though

he could roll large stones about.  Dean Swift was "plucked" at

Dublin University, and only obtained his recommendation to Oxford

"speciali gratia."  The well-known Dr. Chalmers and Dr. Cook (32)

were boys together at the parish school of St. Andrew's; and they

were found so stupid and mischievous, that the master, irritated

beyond measure, dismissed them both as incorrigible dunces.



The brilliant Sheridan showed so little capacity as a boy, that he

was presented to a tutor by his mother with the complimentary

accompaniment that he was an incorrigible dunce.  Walter Scott was

all but a dunce when a boy, always much readier for a "bicker,"

than apt at his lessons.  At the Edinburgh University, Professor

Dalzell pronounced upon him the sentence that "Dunce he was, and

dunce he would remain."  Chatterton was returned on his mother's

hands as "a fool, of whom nothing could be made."  Burns was a dull

boy, good only at athletic exercises.  Goldsmith spoke of himself,

as a plant that flowered late.  Alfieri left college no wiser than

he entered it, and did not begin the studies by which he

distinguished himself, until he had run half over Europe.  Robert

Clive was a dunce, if not a reprobate, when a youth; but always

full of energy, even in badness.  His family, glad to get rid of

him, shipped him off to Madras; and he lived to lay the foundations

of the British power in India.  Napoleon and Wellington were both

dull boys, not distinguishing themselves in any way at school. (33)

Of the former the Duchess d'Abrantes says, "he had good health, but

was in other respects like other boys."



Ulysses Grant, the Commander-in-Chief of the United States, was

called "Useless Grant" by his mother - he was so dull and unhandy

when a boy; and Stonewall Jackson, Lee's greatest lieutenant, was,

in his youth, chiefly noted for his slowness.  While a pupil at

West Point Military Academy he was, however, equally remarkable for

his indefatigable application and perseverance.  When a task was

set him, he never left it until he had mastered it; nor did he ever

feign to possess knowledge which he had not entirely acquired.

"Again and again," wrote one who knew him, "when called upon to

answer questions in the recitation of the day, he would reply, 'I

have not yet looked at it; I have been engaged in mastering the

recitation of yesterday or the day before.'  The result was that he

graduated seventeenth in a class of seventy.  There was probably in

the whole class not a boy to whom Jackson at the outset was not

inferior in knowledge and attainments; but at the end of the race

he had only sixteen before him, and had outstripped no fewer than

fifty-three.  It used to be said of him by his contemporaries, that

if the course had been for ten years instead of four, Jackson would

have graduated at the head of his class." (34)



John Howard, the philanthropist, was another illustrious dunce,

learning next to nothing during the seven years that he was at

school.  Stephenson, as a youth, was distinguished chiefly for his

skill at putting and wrestling, and attention to his work.  The

brilliant Sir Humphry Davy was no cleverer than other boys:  his

teacher, Dr. Cardew, once said of him, "While he was with me I

could not discern the faculties by which he was so much

distinguished."  Indeed, Davy himself in after life considered it

fortunate that he had been left to "enjoy so much idleness" at

school.  Watt was a dull scholar, notwithstanding the stories told

about his precocity; but he was, what was better, patient and

perseverant, and it was by such qualities, and by his carefully

cultivated inventiveness, that he was enabled to perfect his steam-

engine.



What Dr. Arnold said of boys is equally true of men - that the

difference between one boy and another consists not so much in

talent as in energy.  Given perseverance and energy soon becomes

habitual.  Provided the dunce has persistency and application he

will inevitably head the cleverer fellow without those qualities.

Slow but sure wins the race.  It is perseverance that explains how

the position of boys at school is so often reversed in real life;

and it is curious to note how some who were then so clever have

since become so commonplace; whilst others, dull boys, of whom

nothing was expected, slow in their faculties but sure in their

pace, have assumed the position of leaders of men.  The author of

this book, when a boy, stood in the same class with one of the

greatest of dunces.  One teacher after another had tried his skill

upon him and failed.  Corporal punishment, the fool's cap, coaxing,

and earnest entreaty, proved alike fruitless.  Sometimes the

experiment was tried of putting him at the top of his class, and it

was curious to note the rapidity with which he gravitated to the

inevitable bottom.  The youth was given up by his teachers as an

incorrigible dunce - one of them pronouncing him to be a

"stupendous booby."  Yet, slow though he was, this dunce had a sort

of dull energy of purpose in him, which grew with his muscles and

his manhood; and, strange to say, when he at length came to take

part in the practical business of life, he was found heading most

of his school companions, and eventually left the greater number of

them far behind.  The last time the author heard of him, he was

chief magistrate of his native town.



The tortoise in the right road will beat a racer in the wrong.  It

matters not though a youth be slow, if he be but diligent.

Quickness of parts may even prove a defect, inasmuch as the boy who

learns readily will often forget as readily; and also because he

finds no need of cultivating that quality of application and

perseverance which the slower youth is compelled to exercise, and

which proves so valuable an element in the formation of every

character.  Davy said "What I am I have made myself;" and the same

holds true universally.



To conclude:  the best culture is not obtained from teachers when

at school or college, so much as by our own diligent self-education

when we have become men.  Hence parents need not be in too great

haste to see their children's talents forced into bloom.  Let them

watch and wait patiently, letting good example and quiet training

do their work, and leave the rest to Providence.  Let them see to

it that the youth is provided, by free exercise of his bodily

powers, with a full stock of physical health; set him fairly on the

road of self-culture; carefully train his habits of application and

perseverance; and as he grows older, if the right stuff be in him,

he will be enabled vigorously and effectively to cultivate himself.

