






CHAPTER V. - HELPS AND OPPORTUNITIES - SCIENTIFIC PURSUITS







"Neither the naked hand, nor the understanding, left to itself, can

do much; the work is accomplished by instruments and helps, of

which the need is not less for the understanding than the hand." -

Bacon.



"Opportunity has hair in front, behind she is bald; if you seize

her by the forelock you may hold her, but, if suffered to escape,

not Jupiter himself can catch her again." - From the Latin.





Accident does very little towards the production of any great

result in life.  Though sometimes what is called "a happy hit" may

be made by a bold venture, the common highway of steady industry

and application is the only safe road to travel.  It is said of the

landscape painter Wilson, that when he had nearly finished a

picture in a tame, correct manner, he would step back from it, his

pencil fixed at the end of a long stick, and after gazing earnestly

on the work, he would suddenly walk up and by a few bold touches

give a brilliant finish to the painting.  But it will not do for

every one who would produce an effect, to throw his brush at the

canvas in the hope of producing a picture.  The capability of

putting in these last vital touches is acquired only by the labour

of a life; and the probability is, that the artist who has not

carefully trained himself beforehand, in attempting to produce a

brilliant effect at a dash, will only produce a blotch.



Sedulous attention and painstaking industry always mark the true

worker.  The greatest men are not those who "despise the day of

small things," but those who improve them the most carefully.

Michael Angelo was one day explaining to a visitor at his studio,

what he had been doing at a statue since his previous visit.  "I

have retouched this part - polished that - softened this feature -

brought out that muscle - given some expression to this lip, and

more energy to that limb."  "But these are trifles," remarked the

visitor.  "It may be so," replied the sculptor, "but recollect that

trifles make perfection, and perfection is no trifle."  So it was

said of Nicholas Poussin, the painter, that the rule of his conduct

was, that "whatever was worth doing at all was worth doing well;"

and when asked, late in life, by his friend Vigneul de Marville, by

what means he had gained so high a reputation among the painters of

Italy, Poussin emphatically answered, "Because I have neglected

nothing."



Although there are discoveries which are said to have been made by

accident, if carefully inquired into, it will be found that there

has really been very little that was accidental about them.  For

the most part, these so-called accidents have only been

opportunities, carefully improved by genius.  The fall of the apple

at Newton's feet has often been quoted in proof of the accidental

character of some discoveries.  But Newton's whole mind had already

been devoted for years to the laborious and patient investigation

of the subject of gravitation; and the circumstance of the apple

falling before his eyes was suddenly apprehended only as genius

could apprehend it, and served to flash upon him the brilliant

discovery then opening to his sight.  In like manner, the

brilliantly-coloured soap-bubbles blown from a common tobacco pipe

- though "trifles light as air" in most eyes - suggested to Dr.

Young his beautiful theory of "interferences," and led to his

discovery relating to the diffraction of light.  Although great men

are popularly supposed only to deal with great things, men such as

Newton and Young were ready to detect the significance of the most

familiar and simple facts; their greatness consisting mainly in

their wise interpretation of them.



The difference between men consists, in a great measure, in the

intelligence of their observation.  The Russian proverb says of the

non-observant man, "He goes through the forest and sees no

firewood."  "The wise man's eyes are in his head," says Solomon,

"but the fool walketh in darkness."  "Sir," said Johnson, on one

occasion, to a fine gentleman just returned from Italy, "some men

will learn more in the Hampstead stage than others in the tour of

Europe."  It is the mind that sees as well as the eye.  Where

unthinking gazers observe nothing, men of intelligent vision

penetrate into the very fibre of the phenomena presented to them,

attentively noting differences, making comparisons, and recognizing

their underlying idea.  Many before Galileo had seen a suspended

weight swing before their eyes with a measured beat; but he was the

first to detect the value of the fact.  One of the vergers in the

cathedral at Pisa, after replenishing with oil a lamp which hung

from the roof, left it swinging to and fro; and Galileo, then a

youth of only eighteen, noting it attentively, conceived the idea

of applying it to the measurement of time.  Fifty years of study

and labour, however, elapsed, before he completed the invention of

his Pendulum, - the importance of which, in the measurement of time

and in astronomical calculations, can scarcely be overrated.  In

like manner, Galileo, having casually heard that one Lippershey, a

Dutch spectacle-maker, had presented to Count Maurice of Nassau an

instrument by means of which distant objects appeared nearer to the

beholder, addressed himself to the cause of such a phenomenon,

which led to the invention of the telescope, and proved the

beginning of the modern science of astronomy.  Discoveries such as

these could never have been made by a negligent observer, or by a

mere passive listener.



While Captain (afterwards Sir Samuel) Brown was occupied in

studying the construction of bridges, with the view of contriving

one of a cheap description to be thrown across the Tweed, near

which he lived, he was walking in his garden one dewy autumn

morning, when he saw a tiny spider's net suspended across his path.

The idea immediately occurred to him, that a bridge of iron ropes

or chains might be constructed in like manner, and the result was

the invention of his Suspension Bridge.  So James Watt, when

consulted about the mode of carrying water by pipes under the

Clyde, along the unequal bed of the river, turned his attention one

day to the shell of a lobster presented at table; and from that

model he invented an iron tube, which, when laid down, was found

effectually to answer the purpose.  Sir Isambert Brunel took his

first lessons in forming the Thames Tunnel from the tiny shipworm:

he saw how the little creature perforated the wood with its well-

armed head, first in one direction and then in another, till the

archway was complete, and then daubed over the roof and sides with

a kind of varnish; and by copying this work exactly on a large

scale, Brunel was at length enabled to construct his shield and

accomplish his great engineering work.



It is the intelligent eye of the careful observer which gives these

apparently trivial phenomena their value.  So trifling a matter as

the sight of seaweed floating past his ship, enabled Columbus to

quell the mutiny which arose amongst his sailors at not discovering

land, and to assure them that the eagerly sought New World was not

far off.  There is nothing so small that it should remain

forgotten; and no fact, however trivial, but may prove useful in

some way or other if carefully interpreted.  Who could have

imagined that the famous "chalk cliffs of Albion" had been built up

by tiny insects - detected only by the help of the microscope - of

the same order of creatures that have gemmed the sea with islands

of coral!  And who that contemplates such extraordinary results,

arising from infinitely minute operations, will venture to question

the power of little things?



It is the close observation of little things which is the secret of

success in business, in art, in science, and in every pursuit in

life.  Human knowledge is but an accumulation of small facts, made

by successive generations of men, the little bits of knowledge and

experience carefully treasured up by them growing at length into a

mighty pyramid.  Though many of these facts and observations seemed

in the first instance to have but slight significance, they are all

found to have their eventual uses, and to fit into their proper

places.  Even many speculations seemingly remote, turn out to be

the basis of results the most obviously practical.  In the case of

the conic sections discovered by Apollonius Pergaeus, twenty

centuries elapsed before they were made the basis of astronomy - a

science which enables the modern navigator to steer his way through

unknown seas and traces for him in the heavens an unerring path to

his appointed haven.  And had not mathematicians toiled for so

long, and, to uninstructed observers, apparently so fruitlessly,

over the abstract relations of lines and surfaces, it is probable

that but few of our mechanical inventions would have seen the

light.



When Franklin made his discovery of the identity of lightning and

electricity, it was sneered at, and people asked, "Of what use is

it?"  To which his reply was, "What is the use of a child?  It may

become a man!"  When Galvani discovered that a frog's leg twitched

when placed in contact with different metals, it could scarcely

have been imagined that so apparently insignificant a fact could

have led to important results.  Yet therein lay the germ of the

Electric Telegraph, which binds the intelligence of continents

together, and, probably before many years have elapsed, will "put a

girdle round the globe."  So too, little bits of stone and fossil,

dug out of the earth, intelligently interpreted, have issued in the

science of geology and the practical operations of mining, in which

large capitals are invested and vast numbers of persons profitably

employed.



The gigantic machinery employed in pumping our mines, working our

mills and manufactures, and driving our steam-ships and

locomotives, in like manner depends for its supply of power upon so

slight an agency as little drops of water expanded by heat, - that

familiar agency called steam, which we see issuing from that common

tea-kettle spout, but which, when put up within an ingeniously

contrived mechanism, displays a force equal to that of millions of

horses, and contains a power to rebuke the waves and set even the

hurricane at defiance.  The same power at work within the bowels of

the earth has been the cause of those volcanoes and earthquakes

which have played so mighty a part in the history of the globe.



It is said that the Marquis of Worcester's attention was first

accidentally directed to the subject of steam power, by the tight

cover of a vessel containing hot water having been blown off before

his eyes, when confined a prisoner in the Tower.  He published the

result of his observations in his 'Century of Inventions,' which

formed a sort of text-book for inquirers into the powers of steam

for a time, until Savary, Newcomen, and others, applying it to

practical purposes, brought the steam-engine to the state in which

Watt found it when called upon to repair a model of Newcomen's

engine, which belonged to the University of Glasgow.  This

accidental circumstance was an opportunity for Watt, which he was

not slow to improve; and it was the labour of his life to bring the

steam-engine to perfection.



This art of seizing opportunities and turning even accidents to

account, bending them to some purpose is a great secret of success.

Dr. Johnson has defined genius to be "a mind of large general

powers accidentally determined in some particular direction."  Men

who are resolved to find a way for themselves, will always find

opportunities enough; and if they do not lie ready to their hand,

they will make them.  It is not those who have enjoyed the

advantages of colleges, museums, and public galleries, that have

accomplished the most for science and art; nor have the greatest

mechanics and inventors been trained in mechanics' institutes.

Necessity, oftener than facility, has been the mother of invention;

and the most prolific school of all has been the school of

difficulty.  Some of the very best workmen have had the most

indifferent tools to work with.  But it is not tools that make the

workman, but the trained skill and perseverance of the man himself.

Indeed it is proverbial that the bad workman never yet had a good

tool.  Some one asked Opie by what wonderful process he mixed his

colours.  "I mix them with my brains, sir," was his reply.  It is

the same with every workman who would excel.  Ferguson made

marvellous things - such as his wooden clock, that accurately

measured the hours - by means of a common penknife, a tool in

everybody's hand; but then everybody is not a Ferguson.  A pan of

water and two thermometers were the tools by which Dr. Black

discovered latent heat; and a prism, a lens, and a sheet of

pasteboard enabled Newton to unfold the composition of light and

the origin of colours.  An eminent foreign SAVANT once called upon

Dr. Wollaston, and requested to be shown over his laboratories in

which science had been enriched by so many important discoveries,

when the doctor took him into a little study, and, pointing to an

old tea-tray on the table, containing a few watch-glasses, test

papers, a small balance, and a blowpipe, said, "There is all the

laboratory that I have!"



Stothard learnt the art of combining colours by closely studying

butterflies' wings:  he would often say that no one knew what he

owed to these tiny insects.  A burnt stick and a barn door served

Wilkie in lieu of pencil and canvas.  Bewick first practised

drawing on the cottage walls of his native village, which he

covered with his sketches in chalk; and Benjamin West made his

first brushes out of the cat's tail.  Ferguson laid himself down in

the fields at night in a blanket, and made a map of the heavenly

bodies by means of a thread with small beads on it stretched

between his eye and the stars.  Franklin first robbed the

thundercloud of its lightning by means of a kite made with two

cross sticks and a silk handkerchief.  Watt made his first model of

the condensing steam-engine out of an old anatomist's syringe, used

to inject the arteries previous to dissection.  Gifford worked his

first problems in mathematics, when a cobbler's apprentice, upon

small scraps of leather, which he beat smooth for the purpose;

whilst Rittenhouse, the astronomer, first calculated eclipses on

his plough handle.



The most ordinary occasions will furnish a man with opportunities

or suggestions for improvement, if he be but prompt to take

advantage of them.  Professor Lee was attracted to the study of

Hebrew by finding a Bible in that tongue in a synagogue, while

working as a common carpenter at the repairs of the benches.  He

became possessed with a desire to read the book in the original,

and, buying a cheap second-hand copy of a Hebrew grammar, he set to

work and learnt the language for himself.  As Edmund Stone said to

the Duke of Argyle, in answer to his grace's inquiry how he, a poor

gardener's boy, had contrived to be able to read Newton's Principia

in Latin, "One needs only to know the twenty-four letters of the

alphabet in order to learn everything else that one wishes."

Application and perseverance, and the diligent improvement of

opportunities, will do the rest.



Sir Walter Scott found opportunities for self-improvement in every

pursuit, and turned even accidents to account.  Thus it was in the

discharge of his functions as a writer's apprentice that he first

visited the Highlands, and formed those friendships among the

surviving heroes of 1745 which served to lay the foundation of a

large class of his works.  Later in life, when employed as

quartermaster of the Edinburgh Light Cavalry, he was accidentally

disabled by the kick of a horse, and confined for some time to his

house; but Scott was a sworn enemy to idleness, and he forthwith

set his mind to work.  In three days he had composed the first

canto of 'The Lay of the Last Minstrel,' which he shortly after

finished, - his first great original work.



The attention of Dr. Priestley, the discoverer of so many gases,

was accidentally drawn to the subject of chemistry through his

living in the neighbourhood of a brewery.  When visiting the place

one day, he noted the peculiar appearances attending the extinction

of lighted chips in the gas floating over the fermented liquor.  He


was forty years old at the time, and knew nothing of chemistry.  He

consulted books to ascertain the cause, but they told him little,

for as yet nothing was known on the subject.  Then he began to

experiment, with some rude apparatus of his own contrivance.  The

curious results of his first experiments led to others, which in

his hands shortly became the science of pneumatic chemistry.  About

the same time, Scheele was obscurely working in the same direction

in a remote Swedish village; and he discovered several new gases,

with no more effective apparatus at his command than a few

apothecaries' phials and pigs' bladders.



Sir Humphry Davy, when an apothecary's apprentice, performed his

first experiments with instruments of the rudest description.  He

extemporised the greater part of them himself, out of the motley

materials which chance threw in his way, - the pots and pans of the

kitchen, and the phials and vessels of his master's surgery.  It

happened that a French ship was wrecked off the Land's End, and the

surgeon escaped, bearing with him his case of instruments, amongst

which was an old-fashioned glyster apparatus; this article he

presented to Davy, with whom he had become acquainted.  The

apothecary's apprentice received it with great exultation, and

forthwith employed it as a part of a pneumatic apparatus which he

contrived, afterwards using it to perform the duties of an air-pump

in one of his experiments on the nature and sources of heat.



In like manner Professor Faraday, Sir Humphry Davy's scientific

successor, made his first experiments in electricity by means of an

old bottle, white he was still a working bookbinder.  And it is a

curious fact that Faraday was first attracted to the study of

chemistry by hearing one of Sir Humphry Davy's lectures on the

subject at the Royal Institution.  A gentleman, who was a member,

calling one day at the shop where Faraday was employed in binding

books, found him poring over the article "Electricity" in an

Encyclopaedia placed in his hands to bind.  The gentleman, having

made inquiries, found that the young bookbinder was curious about

such subjects, and gave him an order of admission to the Royal

Institution, where he attended a course of four lectures delivered

by Sir Humphry.  He took notes of them, which he showed to the

lecturer, who acknowledged their scientific accuracy, and was

surprised when informed of the humble position of the reporter.

Faraday then expressed his desire to devote himself to the

prosecution of chemical studies, from which Sir Humphry at first

endeavoured to dissuade him:  but the young man persisting, he was

at length taken into the Royal Institution as an assistant; and

eventually the mantle of the brilliant apothecary's boy fell upon

the worthy shoulders of the equally brilliant bookbinder's

apprentice.



The words which Davy entered in his note-book, when about twenty

years of age, working in Dr. Beddoes' laboratory at Bristol, were

eminently characteristic of him:  "I have neither riches, nor

power, nor birth to recommend me; yet if I live, I trust I shall

not be of less service to mankind and my friends, than if I had

been born with all these advantages."  Davy possessed the

capability, as Faraday does, of devoting the whole power of his

mind to the practical and experimental investigation of a subject

in all its bearings; and such a mind will rarely fail, by dint of

mere industry and patient thinking, in producing results of the

highest order.  Coleridge said of Davy, "There is an energy and

elasticity in his mind, which enables him to seize on and analyze

all questions, pushing them to their legitimate consequences.

Every subject in Davy's mind has the principle of vitality.  Living

thoughts spring up like turf under his feet."  Davy, on his part,

said of Coleridge, whose abilities he greatly admired, "With the

most exalted genius, enlarged views, sensitive heart, and

enlightened mind, he will be the victim of a want of order,

precision, and regularity."



The great Cuvier was a singularly accurate, careful, and

industrious observer.  When a boy, he was attracted to the subject

of natural history by the sight of a volume of Buffon which

accidentally fell in his way.  He at once proceeded to copy the

drawings, and to colour them after the descriptions given in the

text.  While still at school, one of his teachers made him a

present of 'Linnaeus's System of Nature;' and for more than ten

years this constituted his library of natural history.  At eighteen

he was offered the situation of tutor in a family residing near

Fecamp, in Normandy.  Living close to the sea-shore, he was brought

face to face with the wonders of marine life.  Strolling along the

sands one day, he observed a stranded cuttlefish.  He was attracted

by the curious object, took it home to dissect, and thus began the

study of the molluscae, in the pursuit of which he achieved so

distinguished a reputation.  He had no books to refer to, excepting

only the great book of Nature which lay open before him.  The study

of the novel and interesting objects which it daily presented to

his eyes made a much deeper impression on his mind than any written

or engraved descriptions could possibly have done.  Three years

thus passed, during which he compared the living species of marine

animals with the fossil remains found in the neighbourhood,

dissected the specimens of marine life that came under his notice,

and, by careful observation, prepared the way for a complete reform

in the classification of the animal kingdom.  About this time

Cuvier became known to the learned Abbe Teissier, who wrote to

Jussieu and other friends in Paris on the subject of the young

naturalist's inquiries, in terms of such high commendation, that

Cuvier was requested to send some of his papers to the Society of

Natural History; and he was shortly after appointed assistant-

superintendent at the Jardin des Plantes.  In the letter written by

Teissier to Jussieu, introducing the young naturalist to his

notice, he said, "You remember that it was I who gave Delambre to

the Academy in another branch of science:  this also will be a

Delambre."  We need scarcely add that the prediction of Teissier

was more than fulfilled.



It is not accident, then, that helps a man in the world so much as

purpose and persistent industry.  To the feeble, the sluggish and

purposeless, the happiest accidents avail nothing, - they pass them

by, seeing no meaning in them.  But it is astonishing how much can

be accomplished if we are prompt to seize and improve the

opportunities for action and effort which are constantly presenting

themselves.  Watt taught himself chemistry and mechanics while

working at his trade of a mathematical-instrument maker, at the

same time that he was learning German from a Swiss dyer.

Stephenson taught himself arithmetic and mensuration while working

as an engineman during the night shifts; and when he could snatch a

few moments in the intervals allowed for meals during the day, he

worked his sums with a bit of chalk upon the sides of the colliery

waggons.  Dalton's industry was the habit of his life.  He began

from his boyhood, for he taught a little village-school when he was

only about twelve years old, - keeping the school in winter, and

working upon his father's farm in summer.  He would sometimes urge

himself and companions to study by the stimulus of a bet, though

bred a Quaker; and on one occasion, by his satisfactory solution of

a problem, he won as much as enabled him to buy a winter's store of

candles.  He continued his meteorological observations until a day

or two before he died, - having made and recorded upwards of

200,000 in the course of his life.



With perseverance, the very odds and ends of time may be worked up

into results of the greatest value.  An hour in every day withdrawn

from frivolous pursuits would, if profitably employed, enable a

person of ordinary capacity to go far towards mastering a science.

It would make an ignorant man a well-informed one in less than ten

years.  Time should not be allowed to pass without yielding fruits,

in the form of something learnt worthy of being known, some good

principle cultivated, or some good habit strengthened.  Dr. Mason

Good translated Lucretius while riding in his carriage in the

streets of London, going the round of his patients.  Dr. Darwin

composed nearly all his works in the same way while driving about

in his "sulky" from house to house in the country, - writing down

his thoughts on little scraps of paper, which he carried about with

him for the purpose.  Hale wrote his 'Contemplations' while

travelling on circuit.  Dr. Burney learnt French and Italian while

travelling on horseback from one musical pupil to another in the

course of his profession.  Kirke White learnt Greek while walking

to and from a lawyer's office; and we personally know a man of

eminent position who learnt Latin and French while going messages

as an errand-boy in the streets of Manchester.



Daguesseau, one of the great Chancellors of France, by carefully

working up his odd bits of time, wrote a bulky and able volume in

the successive intervals of waiting for dinner, and Madame de

Genlis composed several of her charming volumes while waiting for

the princess to whom she gave her daily lessons.  Elihu Burritt

attributed his first success in self-improvement, not to genius,

which he disclaimed, but simply to the careful employment of those

invaluable fragments of time, called "odd moments."  While working

and earning his living as a blacksmith, he mastered some eighteen

ancient and modern languages, and twenty-two European dialects.



What a solemn and striking admonition to youth is that inscribed on

the dial at All Souls, Oxford - "Pereunt et imputantur" - the hours

perish, and are laid to our charge.  Time is the only little

fragment of Eternity that belongs to man; and, like life, it can

never be recalled.  "In the dissipation of worldly treasure," says

Jackson of Exeter, "the frugality of the future may balance the

extravagance of the past; but who can say, 'I will take from

minutes to-morrow to compensate for those I have lost to-day'?"

Melancthon noted down the time lost by him, that he might thereby

reanimate his industry, and not lose an hour.  An Italian scholar

put over his door an inscription intimating that whosoever remained

there should join in his labours.  "We are afraid," said some

visitors to Baxter, "that we break in upon your time."  "To be sure

you do," replied the disturbed and blunt divine.  Time was the

estate out of which these great workers, and all other workers,

formed that rich treasury of thoughts and deeds which they have

left to their successors.



The mere drudgery undergone by some men in carrying on their

undertakings has been something extraordinary, but the drudgery

they regarded as the price of success.  Addison amassed as much as

three folios of manuscript materials before he began his

'Spectator.'  Newton wrote his 'Chronology' fifteen times over

before he was satisfied with it; and Gibbon wrote out his 'Memoir'

nine times.  Hale studied for many years at the rate of sixteen

hours a day, and when wearied with the study of the law, he would

recreate himself with philosophy and the study of the mathematics.

Hume wrote thirteen hours a day while preparing his 'History of

England.'  Montesquieu, speaking of one part of his writings, said

to a friend, "You will read it in a few hours; but I assure you it

has cost me so much labour that it has whitened my hair."



The practice of writing down thoughts and facts for the purpose of

holding them fast and preventing their escape into the dim region

of forgetfulness, has been much resorted to by thoughtful and

studious men.  Lord Bacon left behind him many manuscripts entitled

"Sudden thoughts set down for use."  Erskine made great extracts

from Burke; and Eldon copied Coke upon Littleton twice over with

his own hand, so that the book became, as it were, part of his own

mind.  The late Dr. Pye Smith, when apprenticed to his father as a

bookbinder, was accustomed to make copious memoranda of all the

books he read, with extracts and criticisms.  This indomitable

industry in collecting materials distinguished him through life,

his biographer describing him as "always at work, always in

advance, always accumulating."  These note-books afterwards proved,

like Richter's "quarries," the great storehouse from which he drew

his illustrations.



The same practice characterized the eminent John Hunter, who

adopted it for the purpose of supplying the defects of memory; and

he was accustomed thus to illustrate the advantages which one

derives from putting one's thoughts in writing:  "It resembles," he

said, "a tradesman taking stock, without which he never knows

either what he possesses or in what he is deficient."  John Hunter

- whose observation was so keen that Abernethy was accustomed to

speak of him as "the Argus-eyed" - furnished an illustrious example

of the power of patient industry.  He received little or no

education till he was about twenty years of age, and it was with

difficulty that he acquired the arts of reading and writing.  He

worked for some years as a common carpenter at Glasgow, after which

he joined his brother William, who had settled in London as a

lecturer and anatomical demonstrator.  John entered his dissecting-

room as an assistant, but soon shot ahead of his brother, partly by

virtue of his great natural ability, but mainly by reason of his

patient application and indefatigable industry.  He was one of the

first in this country to devote himself assiduously to the study of

comparative anatomy, and the objects he dissected and collected

took the eminent Professor Owen no less than ten years to arrange.

The collection contains some twenty thousand specimens, and is the

most precious treasure of the kind that has ever been accumulated

by the industry of one man.  Hunter used to spend every morning

from sunrise until eight o'clock in his museum; and throughout the

day he carried on his extensive private practice, performed his

laborious duties as surgeon to St. George's Hospital and deputy

surgeon-general to the army; delivered lectures to students, and

superintended a school of practical anatomy at his own house;

finding leisure, amidst all, for elaborate experiments on the

animal economy, and the composition of various works of great

scientific importance.  To find time for this gigantic amount of

work, he allowed himself only four hours of sleep at night, and an

hour after dinner.  When once asked what method he had adopted to

insure success in his undertakings, he replied, "My rule is,

deliberately to consider, before I commence, whether the thing be

practicable.  If it be not practicable, I do not attempt it.  If it

be practicable, I can accomplish it if I give sufficient pains to

it; and having begun, I never stop till the thing is done.  To this

rule I owe all my success."



Hunter occupied a great deal of his time in collecting definite

facts respecting matters which, before his day, were regarded as

exceedingly trivial.  Thus it was supposed by many of his

contemporaries that he was only wasting his time and thought in

studying so carefully as he did the growth of a deer's horn.  But

Hunter was impressed with the conviction that no accurate knowledge

of scientific facts is without its value.  By the study referred

to, he learnt how arteries accommodate themselves to circumstances,

and enlarge as occasion requires; and the knowledge thus acquired

emboldened him, in a case of aneurism in a branch artery, to tie

the main trunk where no surgeon before him had dared to tie it, and

the life of his patient was saved.  Like many original men, he

worked for a long time as it were underground, digging and laying

foundations.  He was a solitary and self-reliant genius, holding on

his course without the solace of sympathy or approbation, - for but

few of his contemporaries perceived the ultimate object of his

pursuits.  But like all true workers, he did not fail in securing

his best reward - that which depends less upon others than upon

one's self - the approval of conscience, which in a right-minded

man invariably follows the honest and energetic performance of

duty.



Ambrose Pare, the great French surgeon, was another illustrious

instance of close observation, patient application, and

indefatigable perseverance.  He was the son of a barber at Laval,

in Maine, where he was born in 1509.  His parents were too poor to

send him to school, but they placed him as foot-boy with the cure

of the village, hoping that under that learned man he might pick up

an education for himself.  But the cure kept him so busily employed

in grooming his mule and in other menial offices that the boy found

no time for learning.  While in his service, it happened that the

celebrated lithotomist, Cotot, came to Laval to operate on one of

the cure's ecclesiastical brethren.  Pare was present at the

operation, and was so much interested by it that he is said to have

from that time formed the determination of devoting himself to the

art of surgery.



Leaving the cure's household service, Pare apprenticed himself to a

barber-surgeon named Vialot, under whom he learnt to let blood,

draw teeth, and perform the minor operations.  After four years'

experience of this kind, he went to Paris to study at the school of

anatomy and surgery, meanwhile maintaining himself by his trade of

a barber.  He afterwards succeeded in obtaining an appointment as

assistant at the Hotel Dieu, where his conduct was so exemplary,

and his progress so marked, that the chief surgeon, Goupil,

entrusted him with the charge of the patients whom he could not

himself attend to.  After the usual course of instruction, Pare was

admitted a master barber-surgeon, and shortly after was appointed

to a charge with the French army under Montmorenci in Piedmont.

Pare was not a man to follow in the ordinary ruts of his

profession, but brought the resources of an ardent and original

mind to bear upon his daily work, diligently thinking out for

himself the RATIONALE of diseases and their befitting remedies.

Before his time the wounded suffered much more at the hands of

their surgeons than they did at those of their enemies.  To stop

bleeding from gunshot wounds, the barbarous expedient was resorted

to of dressing them with boiling oil.  Haemorrhage was also stopped

by searing the wounds with a red-hot iron; and when amputation was

necessary, it was performed with a red-hot knife.  At first Pare

treated wounds according to the approved methods; but, fortunately,

on one occasion, running short of boiling oil, he substituted a

mild and emollient application.  He was in great fear all night

lest he should have done wrong in adopting this treatment; but was

greatly relieved next morning on finding his patients comparatively

comfortable, while those whose wounds had been treated in the usual

way were writhing in torment.  Such was the casual origin of one of

Pare's greatest improvements in the treatment of gun-shot wounds;

and he proceeded to adopt the emollient treatment in all future

cases.  Another still more important improvement was his employment

of the ligature in tying arteries to stop haemorrhage, instead of

the actual cautery.  Pare, however, met with the usual fate of

innovators and reformers.  His practice was denounced by his

surgical brethren as dangerous, unprofessional, and empirical; and

the older surgeons banded themselves together to resist its

adoption.  They reproached him for his want of education, more

especially for his ignorance of Latin and Greek; and they assailed

him with quotations from ancient writers, which he was unable

either to verify or refute.  But the best answer to his assailants

was the success of his practice.  The wounded soldiers called out

everywhere for Pare, and he was always at their service:  he tended

them carefully and affectionately; and he usually took leave of

them with the words, "I have dressed you; may God cure you."



After three years' active service as army-surgeon, Pare returned to

Paris with such a reputation that he was at once appointed surgeon

in ordinary to the King.  When Metz was besieged by the Spanish

army, under Charles V., the garrison suffered heavy loss, and the

number of wounded was very great.  The surgeons were few and

incompetent, and probably slew more by their bad treatment than the

Spaniards did by the sword.  The Duke of Guise, who commanded the

garrison, wrote to the King imploring him to send Pare to his help.

The courageous surgeon at once set out, and, after braving many

dangers (to use his own words, "d'estre pendu, estrangle ou mis en

pieces"), he succeeded in passing the enemy's lines, and entered

Metz in safety.  The Duke, the generals, and the captains gave him

an affectionate welcome; while the soldiers, when they heard of his

arrival, cried, "We no longer fear dying of our wounds; our friend

is among us."  In the following year Pare was in like manner with

the besieged in the town of Hesdin, which shortly fell before the

Duke of Savoy, and he was taken prisoner.  But having succeeded in

curing one of the enemy's chief officers of a serious wound, he was

discharged without ransom, and returned in safety to Paris.



The rest of his life was occupied in study, in self-improvement, in

piety, and in good deeds.  Urged by some of the most learned among

his contemporaries, he placed on record the results of his surgical

experience, in twenty-eight books, which were published by him at

different times.  His writings are valuable and remarkable chiefly

on account of the great number of facts and cases contained in

them, and the care with which he avoids giving any directions

resting merely upon theory unsupported by observation.  Pare

continued, though a Protestant, to hold the office of surgeon in

ordinary to the King; and during the Massacre of St. Bartholomew he

owed his life to the personal friendship of Charles IX., whom he

had on one occasion saved from the dangerous effects of a wound

inflicted by a clumsy surgeon in performing the operation of

venesection.  Brantome, in his 'Memoires,' thus speaks of the

King's rescue of Pare on the night of Saint Bartholomew - "He sent

to fetch him, and to remain during the night in his chamber and

wardrobe-room, commanding him not to stir, and saying that it was

not reasonable that a man who had preserved the lives of so many

people should himself be massacred."  Thus Pare escaped the horrors

of that fearful night, which he survived for many years, and was

permitted to die in peace, full of age and honours.



Harvey was as indefatigable a labourer as any we have named.  He

spent not less than eight long years of investigation and research

before he published his views of the circulation of the blood.  He

repeated and verified his experiments again and again, probably

anticipating the opposition he would have to encounter from the

profession on making known his discovery.  The tract in which he at

length announced his views, was a most modest one, - but simple,

perspicuous, and conclusive.  It was nevertheless received with

ridicule, as the utterance of a crack-brained impostor.  For some

time, he did not make a single convert, and gained nothing but

contumely and abuse.  He had called in question the revered

authority of the ancients; and it was even averred that his views

were calculated to subvert the authority of the Scriptures and

undermine the very foundations of morality and religion.  His

little practice fell away, and he was left almost without a friend.

This lasted for some years, until the great truth, held fast by

Harvey amidst all his adversity, and which had dropped into many

thoughtful minds, gradually ripened by further observation, and

after a period of about twenty-five years, it became generally

recognised as an established scientific truth.



The difficulties encountered by Dr. Jenner in promulgating and

establishing his discovery of vaccination as a preventive of small-

pox, were even greater than those of Harvey.  Many, before him, had

witnessed the cow-pox, and had heard of the report current among

the milkmaids in Gloucestershire, that whoever had taken that

disease was secure against small-pox.  It was a trifling, vulgar

rumour, supposed to have no significance whatever; and no one had

thought it worthy of investigation, until it was accidentally

brought under the notice of Jenner.  He was a youth, pursuing his

studies at Sodbury, when his attention was arrested by the casual

observation made by a country girl who came to his master's shop

for advice.  The small-pox was mentioned, when the girl said, "I

can't take that disease, for I have had cow-pox."  The observation

immediately riveted Jenner's attention, and he forthwith set about

inquiring and making observations on the subject.  His professional

friends, to whom he mentioned his views as to the prophylactic

virtues of cow-pox, laughed at him, and even threatened to expel

him from their society, if he persisted in harassing them with the

subject.  In London he was so fortunate as to study under John

Hunter, to whom he communicated his views.  The advice of the great

anatomist was thoroughly characteristic:  "Don't think, but TRY; be

patient, be accurate."  Jenner's courage was supported by the

advice, which conveyed to him the true art of philosophical

investigation.  He went back to the country to practise his

profession and make observations and experiments, which he

continued to pursue for a period of twenty years.  His faith in his

discovery was so implicit that he vaccinated his own son on three

several occasions.  At length he published his views in a quarto of

about seventy pages, in which he gave the details of twenty-three

cases of successful vaccination of individuals, to whom it was

found afterwards impossible to communicate the small-pox either by

contagion or inoculation.  It was in 1798 that this treatise was

published; though he had been working out his ideas since the year

1775, when they had begun to assume a definite form.



How was the discovery received?  First with indifference, then with

active hostility.  Jenner proceeded to London to exhibit to the

profession the process of vaccination and its results; but not a

single medical man could be induced to make trial of it, and after

fruitlessly waiting for nearly three months, he returned to his

native village.  He was even caricatured and abused for his attempt

to "bestialize" his species by the introduction into their systems

of diseased matter from the cow's udder.  Vaccination was denounced

from the pulpit as "diabolical."  It was averred that vaccinated

children became "ox-faced," that abscesses broke out to "indicate

sprouting horns," and that the countenance was gradually

"transmuted into the visage of a cow, the voice into the bellowing

of bulls."  Vaccination, however, was a truth, and notwithstanding

the violence of the opposition, belief in it spread slowly.  In one

village, where a gentleman tried to introduce the practice, the

first persons who permitted themselves to be vaccinated were

absolutely pelted and driven into their houses if they appeared out

of doors.  Two ladies of title - Lady Ducie and the Countess of

Berkeley - to their honour be it remembered - had the courage to

vaccinate their children; and the prejudices of the day were at

once broken through.  The medical profession gradually came round,

and there were several who even sought to rob Dr. Jenner of the

merit of the discovery, when its importance came to be recognised.

Jenner's cause at last triumphed, and he was publicly honoured and

rewarded.  In his prosperity he was as modest as he had been in his

obscurity.  He was invited to settle in London, and told that he

might command a practice of 10,000L. a year.  But his answer was,

"No!  In the morning of my days I have sought the sequestered and

lowly paths of life - the valley, and not the mountain, - and now,

in the evening of my days, it is not meet for me to hold myself up

as an object for fortune and for fame."  During Jenner's own life-

time the practice of vaccination became adopted all over the

civilized world; and when he died, his title as a Benefactor of his

kind was recognised far and wide.  Cuvier has said, "If vaccine

were the only discovery of the epoch, it would serve to render it

illustrious for ever; yet it knocked twenty times in vain at the

doors of the Academies."



Not less patient, resolute, and persevering was Sir Charles Bell in

the prosecution of his discoveries relating to the nervous system.

Previous to his time, the most confused notions prevailed as to the

functions of the nerves, and this branch of study was little more

advanced than it had been in the times of Democritus and Anaxagoras

three thousand years before.  Sir Charles Bell, in the valuable

series of papers the publication of which was commenced in 1821,

took an entirely original view of the subject, based upon a long

series of careful, accurate, and oft-repeated experiments.

Elaborately tracing the development of the nervous system up from

the lowest order of animated being, to man - the lord of the animal

kingdom, - he displayed it, to use his own words, "as plainly as if

it were written in our mother-tongue."  His discovery consisted in

the fact, that the spinal nerves are double in their function, and

arise by double roots from the spinal marrow, - volition being

conveyed by that part of the nerves springing from the one root,

and sensation by the other.  The subject occupied the mind of Sir

Charles Bell for a period of forty years, when, in 1840, he laid

his last paper before the Royal Society.  As in the cases of Harvey

and Jenner, when he had lived down the ridicule and opposition with

which his views were first received, and their truth came to be

recognised, numerous claims for priority in making the discovery

were set up at home and abroad.  Like them, too, he lost practice

by the publication of his papers; and he left it on record that,

after every step in his discovery, he was obliged to work harder

than ever to preserve his reputation as a practitioner.  The great

merits of Sir Charles Bell were, however, at length fully

recognised; and Cuvier himself, when on his death-bed, finding his

face distorted and drawn to one side, pointed out the symptom to

his attendants as a proof of the correctness of Sir Charles Bell's

theory.



An equally devoted pursuer of the same branch of science was the

late Dr. Marshall Hall, whose name posterity will rank with those

of Harvey, Hunter, Jenner, and Bell.  During the whole course of

his long and useful life he was a most careful and minute observer;

and no fact, however apparently insignificant, escaped his

attention.  His important discovery of the diastaltic nervous

system, by which his name will long be known amongst scientific

men, originated in an exceedingly simple circumstance.  When

investigating the pneumonic circulation in the Triton, the

decapitated object lay upon the table; and on separating the tail

and accidentally pricking the external integument, he observed that

it moved with energy, and became contorted into various forms.  He

had not touched a muscle or a muscular nerve; what then was the

nature of these movements?  The same phenomena had probably been

often observed before, but Dr. Hall was the first to apply himself

perseveringly to the investigation of their causes; and he

exclaimed on the occasion, "I will never rest satisfied until I

have found all this out, and made it clear."  His attention to the

subject was almost incessant; and it is estimated that in the

course of his life he devoted not less than 25,000 hours to its

experimental and chemical investigation.  He was at the same time

carrying on an extensive private practice, and officiating as

lecturer at St. Thomas's Hospital and other Medical Schools.  It

will scarcely be credited that the paper in which he embodied his

discovery was rejected by the Royal Society, and was only accepted

after the lapse of seventeen years, when the truth of his views had

become acknowledged by scientific men both at home and abroad.



The life of Sir William Herschel affords another remarkable

illustration of the force of perseverance in another branch of

science.  His father was a poor German musician, who brought up his

four sons to the same calling.  William came over to England to

seek his fortune, and he joined the band of the Durham Militia, in

which he played the oboe.  The regiment was lying at Doncaster,

where Dr. Miller first became acquainted with Herschel, having

heard him perform a solo on the violin in a surprising manner.  The

Doctor entered into conversation with the youth, and was so pleased

with him, that he urged him to leave the militia and take up his

residence at his house for a time.  Herschel did so, and while at

Doncaster was principally occupied in violin-playing at concerts,

availing himself of the advantages of Dr. Miller's library to study

at his leisure hours.  A new organ having been built for the parish

church of Halifax, an organist was advertised for, on which

Herschel applied for the office, and was selected.  Leading the

wandering life of an artist, he was next attracted to Bath, where

he played in the Pump-room band, and also officiated as organist in

the Octagon chapel.  Some recent discoveries in astronomy having

arrested his mind, and awakened in him a powerful spirit of

curiosity, he sought and obtained from a friend the loan of a two-

foot Gregorian telescope.  So fascinated was the poor musician by

the science, that he even thought of purchasing a telescope, but

the price asked by the London optician was so alarming, that he

determined to make one.  Those who know what a reflecting telescope

is, and the skill which is required to prepare the concave metallic

speculum which forms the most important part of the apparatus, will

be able to form some idea of the difficulty of this undertaking.

Nevertheless, Herschel succeeded, after long and painful labour, in

completing a five-foot reflector, with which he had the

gratification of observing the ring and satellites of Saturn.  Not

satisfied with his triumph, he proceeded to make other instruments

in succession, of seven, ten, and even twenty feet.  In

constructing the seven-foot reflector, he finished no fewer than

two hundred specula before he produced one that would bear any

power that was applied to it, - a striking instance of the

persevering laboriousness of the man.  While gauging the heavens

with his instruments, he continued patiently to earn his bread by

piping to the fashionable frequenters of the Pump-room.  So eager

was he in his astronomical observations, that he would steal away

from the room during an interval of the performance, give a little

turn at his telescope, and contentedly return to his oboe.  Thus

working away, Herschel discovered the Georgium Sidus, the orbit and

rate of motion of which he carefully calculated, and sent the

result to the Royal Society; when the humble oboe player found

himself at once elevated from obscurity to fame.  He was shortly

after appointed Astronomer Royal, and by the kindness of George

III. was placed in a position of honourable competency for life.

He bore his honours with the same meekness and humility which had

distinguished him in the days of his obscurity.  So gentle and

patient, and withal so distinguished and successful a follower of

science under difficulties, perhaps cannot be found in the entire

history of biography.




The career of William Smith, the father of English geology, though

perhaps less known, is not less interesting and instructive as an

example of patient and laborious effort, and the diligent

cultivation of opportunities.  He was born in 1769, the son of a

yeoman farmer at Churchill, in Oxfordshire.  His father dying when

he was but a child, he received a very sparing education at the

village school, and even that was to a considerable extent

interfered with by his wandering and somewhat idle habits as a boy.

His mother having married a second time, he was taken in charge by

an uncle, also a farmer, by whom he was brought up.  Though the

uncle was by no means pleased with the boy's love of wandering

about, collecting "poundstones," "pundips," and other stony

curiosities which lay scattered about the adjoining land, he yet

enabled him to purchase a few of the necessary books wherewith to

instruct himself in the rudiments of geometry and surveying; for

the boy was already destined for the business of a land-surveyor.

One of his marked characteristics, even as a youth, was the

accuracy and keenness of his observation; and what he once clearly

saw he never forgot.  He began to draw, attempted to colour, and

practised the arts of mensuration and surveying, all without

regular instruction; and by his efforts in self-culture, he shortly

became so proficient, that he was taken on as assistant to a local

surveyor of ability in the neighbourhood.  In carrying on his

business he was constantly under the necessity of traversing

Oxfordshire and the adjoining counties.  One of the first things he

seriously pondered over, was the position of the various soils and

strata that came under his notice on the lands which he surveyed or

travelled over; more especially the position of the red earth in

regard to the lias and superincumbent rocks.  The surveys of

numerous collieries which he was called upon to make, gave him

further experience; and already, when only twenty-three years of

age, he contemplated making a model of the strata of the earth.



While engaged in levelling for a proposed canal in Gloucestershire,

the idea of a general law occurred to him relating to the strata of

that district.  He conceived that the strata lying above the coal

were not laid horizontally, but inclined, and in one direction,

towards the east; resembling, on a large scale, "the ordinary

appearance of superposed slices of bread and butter."  The

correctness of this theory he shortly after confirmed by

observations of the strata in two parallel valleys, the "red

ground," "lias," and "freestone" or "oolite," being found to come

down in an eastern direction, and to sink below the level, yielding

place to the next in succession.  He was shortly enabled to verify

the truth of his views on a larger scale, having been appointed to

examine personally into the management of canals in England and

Wales.  During his journeys, which extended from Bath to Newcastle-

on-Tyne, returning by Shropshire and Wales, his keen eyes were

never idle for a moment.  He rapidly noted the aspect and structure

of the country through which he passed with his companions,

treasuring up his observations for future use.  His geologic vision

was so acute, that though the road along which he passed from York

to Newcastle in the post chaise was from five to fifteen miles

distant from the hills of chalk and oolite on the east, he was

satisfied as to their nature, by their contours and relative

position, and their ranges on the surface in relation to the lias

and "red ground" occasionally seen on the road.



The general results of his observation seem to have been these.  He

noted that the rocky masses of country in the western parts of

England generally inclined to the east and south-east; that the red

sandstones and marls above the coal measures passed beneath the

lias, clay, and limestone, that these again passed beneath the

sands, yellow limestones and clays, forming the table-land of the

Cotswold Hills, while these in turn passed beneath the great chalk

deposits occupying the eastern parts of England.  He further

observed, that each layer of clay, sand, and limestone held its own

peculiar classes of fossils; and pondering much on these things, he

at length came to the then unheard-of conclusion, that each

distinct deposit of marine animals, in these several strata,

indicated a distinct sea-bottom, and that each layer of clay, sand,

chalk, and stone, marked a distinct epoch of time in the history of

the earth.



This idea took firm possession of his mind, and he could talk and

think of nothing else.  At canal boards, at sheep-shearings, at

county meetings, and at agricultural associations, 'Strata Smith,'

as he came to be called, was always running over with the subject

that possessed him.  He had indeed made a great discovery, though

he was as yet a man utterly unknown in the scientific world.  He

proceeded to project a map of the stratification of England; but

was for some time deterred from proceeding with it, being fully

occupied in carrying out the works of the Somersetshire coal canal,

which engaged him for a period of about six years.  He continued,

nevertheless, to be unremitting in his observation of facts; and he

became so expert in apprehending the internal structure of a

district and detecting the lie of the strata from its external

configuration, that he was often consulted respecting the drainage

of extensive tracts of land, in which, guided by his geological

knowledge, he proved remarkably successful, and acquired an

extensive reputation.



One day, when looking over the cabinet collection of fossils

belonging to the Rev. Samuel Richardson, at Bath, Smith astonished

his friend by suddenly disarranging his classification, and re-

arranging the fossils in their stratigraphical order, saying -

"These came from the blue lias, these from the over-lying sand and

freestone, these from the fuller's earth, and these from the Bath

building stone."  A new light flashed upon Mr. Richardson's mind,

and he shortly became a convert to and believer in William Smith's

doctrine.  The geologists of the day were not, however, so easily

convinced; and it was scarcely to be tolerated that an unknown

land-surveyor should pretend to teach them the science of geology.

But William Smith had an eye and mind to penetrate deep beneath the

skin of the earth; he saw its very fibre and skeleton, and, as it

were, divined its organization.  His knowledge of the strata in the

neighbourhood of Bath was so accurate, that one evening, when

dining at the house of the Rev. Joseph Townsend, he dictated to Mr.

Richardson the different strata according to their order of

succession in descending order, twenty-three in number, commencing

with the chalk and descending in continuous series down to the

coal, below which the strata were not then sufficiently determined.

To this was added a list of the more remarkable fossils which had

been gathered in the several layers of rock.  This was printed and

extensively circulated in 1801.



He next determined to trace out the strata through districts as

remote from Bath as his means would enable him to reach.  For years

he journeyed to and fro, sometimes on foot, sometimes on horseback,

riding on the tops of stage coaches, often making up by night-

travelling the time he had lost by day, so as not to fail in his

ordinary business engagements.  When he was professionally called

away to any distance from home - as, for instance, when travelling

from Bath to Holkham, in Norfolk, to direct the irrigation and

drainage of Mr. Coke's land in that county - he rode on horseback,

making frequent detours from the road to note the geological

features of the country which he traversed.



For several years he was thus engaged in his journeys to distant

quarters in England and Ireland, to the extent of upwards of ten

thousand miles yearly; and it was amidst this incessant and

laborious travelling, that he contrived to commit to paper his

fast-growing generalizations on what he rightly regarded as a new

science.  No observation, howsoever trivial it might appear, was

neglected, and no opportunity of collecting fresh facts was

overlooked.  Whenever he could, he possessed himself of records of

borings, natural and artificial sections, drew them to a constant

scale of eight yards to the inch, and coloured them up.  Of his

keenness of observation take the following illustration.  When

making one of his geological excursions about the country near

Woburn, as he was drawing near to the foot of the Dunstable chalk

hills, he observed to his companion, "If there be any broken ground

about the foot of these hills, we may find SHARK'S TEETH;" and they

had not proceeded far, before they picked up six from the white

bank of a new fence-ditch.  As he afterwards said of himself, "The

habit of observation crept on me, gained a settlement in my mind,

became a constant associate of my life, and started up in activity

at the first thought of a journey; so that I generally went off

well prepared with maps, and sometimes with contemplations on its

objects, or on those on the road, reduced to writing before it

commenced.  My mind was, therefore, like the canvas of a painter,

well prepared for the first and best impressions."



Notwithstanding his courageous and indefatigable industry, many

circumstances contributed to prevent the promised publication of

William Smith's 'Map of the Strata of England and Wales,' and it

was not until 1814 that he was enabled, by the assistance of some

friends, to give to the world the fruits of his twenty years'

incessant labour.  To prosecute his inquiries, and collect the

extensive series of facts and observations requisite for his

purpose, he had to expend the whole of the profits of his

professional labours during that period; and he even sold off his

small property to provide the means of visiting remoter parts of

the island.  Meanwhile he had entered on a quarrying speculation

near Bath, which proved unsuccessful, and he was under the

necessity of selling his geological collection (which was purchased

by the British Museum), his furniture and library, reserving only

his papers, maps, and sections, which were useless save to himself.

He bore his losses and misfortunes with exemplary fortitude; and

amidst all, he went on working with cheerful courage and untiring

patience.  He died at Northampton, in August, 1839, while on his

way to attend the meeting of the British Association at Birmingham.



It is difficult to speak in terms of too high praise of the first

geological map of England, which we owe to the industry of this

courageous man of science.  An accomplished writer says of it, "It

was a work so masterly in conception and so correct in general

outline, that in principle it served as a basis not only for the

production of later maps of the British Islands, but for geological

maps of all other parts of the world, wherever they have been

undertaken.  In the apartments of the Geological Society Smith's

map may yet be seen - a great historical document, old and worn,

calling for renewal of its faded tints.  Let any one conversant

with the subject compare it with later works on a similar scale,

and he will find that in all essential features it will not suffer

by the comparison - the intricate anatomy of the Silurian rocks of

Wales and the north of England by Murchison and Sedgwick being the

chief additions made to his great generalizations." (20)  The

genius of the Oxfordshire surveyor did not fail to be duly

recognised and honoured by men of science during his lifetime.  In

1831 the Geological Society of London awarded to him the Wollaston

medal, "in consideration of his being a great original discoverer

in English geology, and especially for his being the first in this

country to discover and to teach the identification of strata, and

to determine their succession by means of their imbedded fossils."

William Smith, in his simple, earnest way, gained for himself a

name as lasting as the science he loved so well.  To use the words

of the writer above quoted, "Till the manner as well as the fact of

the first appearance of successive forms of life shall be solved,

it is not easy to surmise how any discovery can be made in geology

equal in value to that which we owe to the genius of William

Smith."



Hugh Miller was a man of like observant faculties, who studied

literature as well as science with zeal and success.  The book in

which he has told the story of his life, ('My Schools and

Schoolmasters'), is extremely interesting, and calculated to be

eminently useful.  It is the history of the formation of a truly

noble character in the humblest condition of life; and inculcates

most powerfully the lessons of self-help, self-respect, and self-

dependence.  While Hugh was but a child, his father, who was a

sailor, was drowned at sea, and he was brought up by his widowed

mother.  He had a school training after a sort, but his best

teachers were the boys with whom he played, the men amongst whom he

worked, the friends and relatives with whom he lived.  He read much

and miscellaneously, and picked up odd sorts of knowledge from many

quarters, - from workmen, carpenters, fishermen and sailors, and

above all, from the old boulders strewed along the shores of the

Cromarty Frith.  With a big hammer which had belonged to his great-

grandfather, an old buccaneer, the boy went about chipping the

stones, and accumulating specimens of mica, porphyry, garnet, and

such like.  Sometimes he had a day in the woods, and there, too,

the boy's attention was excited by the peculiar geological

curiosities which came in his way.  While searching among the rocks

on the beach, he was sometimes asked, in irony, by the farm

servants who came to load their carts with sea-weed, whether he

"was gettin' siller in the stanes," but was so unlucky as never to

be able to answer in the affirmative.  When of a suitable age he

was apprenticed to the trade of his choice - that of a working

stonemason; and he began his labouring career in a quarry looking

out upon the Cromarty Frith.  This quarry proved one of his best

schools.  The remarkable geological formations which it displayed

awakened his curiosity.  The bar of deep-red stone beneath, and the

bar of pale-red clay above, were noted by the young quarryman, who

even in such unpromising subjects found matter for observation and

reflection.  Where other men saw nothing, he detected analogies,

differences, and peculiarities, which set him a-thinking.  He

simply kept his eyes and his mind open; was sober, diligent, and

persevering; and this was the secret of his intellectual growth.



His curiosity was excited and kept alive by the curious organic

remains, principally of old and extinct species of fishes, ferns,

and ammonites, which were revealed along the coast by the washings

of the waves, or were exposed by the stroke of his mason's hammer.

He never lost sight of the subject; but went on accumulating

observations and comparing formations, until at length, many years

afterwards, when no longer a working mason, he gave to the world

his highly interesting work on the Old Red Sandstone, which at once

established his reputation as a scientific geologist.  But this

work was the fruit of long years of patient observation and

research.  As he modestly states in his autobiography, "the only

merit to which I lay claim in the case is that of patient research

- a merit in which whoever wills may rival or surpass me; and this

humble faculty of patience, when rightly developed, may lead to

more extraordinary developments of idea than even genius itself."



The late John Brown, the eminent English geologist, was, like

Miller, a stonemason in his early life, serving an apprenticeship

to the trade at Colchester, and afterwards working as a journeyman

mason at Norwich.  He began business as a builder on his own

account at Colchester, where by frugality and industry he secured a

competency.  It was while working at his trade that his attention

was first drawn to the study of fossils and shells; and he

proceeded to make a collection of them, which afterwards grew into

one of the finest in England.  His researches along the coasts of

Essex, Kent, and Sussex brought to light some magnificent remains

of the elephant and rhinoceros, the most valuable of which were

presented by him to the British Museum.  During the last few years

of his life he devoted considerable attention to the study of the

Foraminifera in chalk, respecting which he made several interesting

discoveries.  His life was useful, happy, and honoured; and he died

at Stanway, in Essex, in November 1859, at the ripe age of eighty

years.



Not long ago, Sir Roderick Murchison discovered at Thurso, in the

far north of Scotland, a profound geologist, in the person of a

baker there, named Robert Dick.  When Sir Roderick called upon him

at the bakehouse in which he baked and earned his bread, Robert

Dick delineated to him, by means of flour upon the board, the

geographical features and geological phenomena of his native

county, pointing out the imperfections in the existing maps, which

he had ascertained by travelling over the country in his leisure

hours.  On further inquiry, Sir Roderick ascertained that the

humble individual before him was not only a capital baker and

geologist, but a first-rate botanist.  "I found," said the

President of the Geographical Society, "to my great humiliation

that the baker knew infinitely more of botanical science, ay, ten

times more, than I did; and that there were only some twenty or

thirty specimens of flowers which he had not collected.  Some he

had obtained as presents, some he had purchased, but the greater

portion had been accumulated by his industry, in his native county

of Caithness; and the specimens were all arranged in the most

beautiful order, with their scientific names affixed."



Sir Roderick Murchison himself is an illustrious follower of these

and kindred branches of science.  A writer in the 'Quarterly

Review' cites him as a "singular instance of a man who, having

passed the early part of his life as a soldier, never having had

the advantage, or disadvantage as the case might have been, of a

scientific training, instead of remaining a fox-hunting country

gentleman, has succeeded by his own native vigour and sagacity,

untiring industry and zeal, in making for himself a scientific

reputation that is as wide as it is likely to be lasting.  He took

first of all an unexplored and difficult district at home, and, by

the labour of many years, examined its rock-formations, classed

them in natural groups, assigned to each its characteristic

assemblage of fossils, and was the first to decipher two great

chapters in the world's geological history, which must always

henceforth carry his name on their title-page.  Not only so, but he

applied the knowledge thus acquired to the dissection of large

districts, both at home and abroad, so as to become the geological

discoverer of great countries which had formerly been 'terrae

incognitae.'"  But Sir Roderick Murchison is not merely a

geologist.  His indefatigable labours in many branches of knowledge

have contributed to render him among the most accomplished and

complete of scientific men.

