






CHAPTER IV. - APPLICATION AND PERSEVERANCE







"Rich are the diligent, who can command

Time, nature's stock! and could his hour-glass fall,

Would, as for seed of stars, stoop for the sand,

And, by incessant labour, gather all." - D'Avenant.

"Allez en avant, et la foi vous viendra!" - D'Alembert.





The greatest results in life are usually attained by simple means,

and the exercise of ordinary qualities.  The common life of every

day, with its cares, necessities, and duties, affords ample

opportunity for acquiring experience of the best kind; and its most

beaten paths provide the true worker with abundant scope for effort

and room for self-improvement.  The road of human welfare lies

along the old highway of steadfast well-doing; and they who are the

most persistent, and work in the truest spirit, will usually be the

most successful.



Fortune has often been blamed for her blindness; but fortune is not

so blind as men are.  Those who look into practical life will find

that fortune is usually on the side of the industrious, as the

winds and waves are on the side of the best navigators.  In the

pursuit of even the highest branches of human inquiry, the commoner

qualities are found the most useful - such as common sense,

attention, application, and perseverance.  Genius may not be

necessary, though even genius of the highest sort does not disdain

the use of these ordinary qualities.  The very greatest men have

been among the least believers in the power of genius, and as

worldly wise and persevering as successful men of the commoner

sort.  Some have even defined genius to be only common sense

intensified.  A distinguished teacher and president of a college

spoke of it as the power of making efforts.  John Foster held it to

be the power of lighting one's own fire.  Buffon said of genius "it

is patience."



Newton's was unquestionably a mind of the very highest order, and

yet, when asked by what means he had worked out his extraordinary

discoveries, he modestly answered, "By always thinking unto them."

At another time he thus expressed his method of study:  "I keep the

subject continually before me, and wait till the first dawnings

open slowly by little and little into a full and clear light."  It

was in Newton's case, as in every other, only by diligent

application and perseverance that his great reputation was

achieved.  Even his recreation consisted in change of study, laying

down one subject to take up another.  To Dr. Bentley he said:  "If

I have done the public any service, it is due to nothing but

industry and patient thought."  So Kepler, another great

philosopher, speaking of his studies and his progress, said:  "As

in Virgil, 'Fama mobilitate viget, vires acquirit eundo,' so it was

with me, that the diligent thought on these things was the occasion

of still further thinking; until at last I brooded with the whole

energy of my mind upon the subject."



The extraordinary results effected by dint of sheer industry and

perseverance, have led many distinguished men to doubt whether the

gift of genius be so exceptional an endowment as it is usually

supposed to be.  Thus Voltaire held that it is only a very slight

line of separation that divides the man of genius from the man of

ordinary mould.  Beccaria was even of opinion that all men might be

poets and orators, and Reynolds that they might be painters and

sculptors.  If this were really so, that stolid Englishman might

not have been so very far wrong after all, who, on Canova's death,

inquired of his brother whether it was "his intention to carry on

the business!"  Locke, Helvetius, and Diderot believed that all men

have an equal aptitude for genius, and that what some are able to

effect, under the laws which regulate the operations of the

intellect, must also be within the reach of others who, under like

circumstances, apply themselves to like pursuits.  But while

admitting to the fullest extent the wonderful achievements of

labour, and recognising the fact that men of the most distinguished

genius have invariably been found the most indefatigable workers,

it must nevertheless be sufficiently obvious that, without the

original endowment of heart and brain, no amount of labour, however

well applied, could have produced a Shakespeare, a Newton, a

Beethoven, or a Michael Angelo.



Dalton, the chemist, repudiated the notion of his being "a genius,"

attributing everything which he had accomplished to simple industry

and accumulation.  John Hunter said of himself, "My mind is like a

beehive; but full as it is of buzz and apparent confusion, it is

yet full of order and regularity, and food collected with incessant

industry from the choicest stores of nature."  We have, indeed, but

to glance at the biographies of great men to find that the most

distinguished inventors, artists, thinkers, and workers of all

kinds, owe their success, in a great measure, to their

indefatigable industry and application.  They were men who turned

all things to gold - even time itself.  Disraeli the elder held

that the secret of success consisted in being master of your

subject, such mastery being attainable only through continuous

application and study.  Hence it happens that the men who have most

moved the world, have not been so much men of genius, strictly so

called, as men of intense mediocre abilities, and untiring

perseverance; not so often the gifted, of naturally bright and

shining qualities, as those who have applied themselves diligently

to their work, in whatsoever line that might lie.  "Alas!" said a

widow, speaking of her brilliant but careless son, "he has not the

gift of continuance."  Wanting in perseverance, such volatile

natures are outstripped in the race of life by the diligent and

even the dull.  "Che va piano, va longano, e va lontano," says the

Italian proverb:  Who goes slowly, goes long, and goes far.



Hence, a great point to be aimed at is to get the working quality

well trained.  When that is done, the race will be found

comparatively easy.  We must repeat and again repeat; facility will

come with labour.  Not even the simplest art can be accomplished

without it; and what difficulties it is found capable of achieving!

It was by early discipline and repetition that the late Sir Robert

Peel cultivated those remarkable, though still mediocre powers,

which rendered him so illustrious an ornament of the British

Senate.  When a boy at Drayton Manor, his father was accustomed to

set him up at table to practise speaking extempore; and he early

accustomed him to repeat as much of the Sunday's sermon as he could

remember.  Little progress was made at first, but by steady

perseverance the habit of attention became powerful, and the sermon

was at length repeated almost verbatim.  When afterwards replying

in succession to the arguments of his parliamentary opponents - an

art in which he was perhaps unrivalled - it was little surmised

that the extraordinary power of accurate remembrance which he

displayed on such occasions had been originally trained under the

discipline of his father in the parish church of Drayton.



It is indeed marvellous what continuous application will effect in

the commonest of things.  It may seem a simple affair to play upon

a violin; yet what a long and laborious practice it requires!

Giardini said to a youth who asked him how long it would take to

learn it, "Twelve hours a day for twenty years together."

Industry, it is said, FAIT L'OURS DANSER.  The poor figurante must

devote years of incessant toil to her profitless task before she

can shine in it.  When Taglioni was preparing herself for her

evening exhibition, she would, after a severe two hours' lesson

from her father, fall down exhausted, and had to be undressed,

sponged, and resuscitated totally unconscious.  The agility and

bounds of the evening were insured only at a price like this.



Progress, however, of the best kind, is comparatively slow.  Great

results cannot be achieved at once; and we must be satisfied to

advance in life as we walk, step by step.  De Maistre says that "to

know HOW TO WAIT is the great secret of success."  We must sow

before we can reap, and often have to wait long, content meanwhile

to look patiently forward in hope; the fruit best worth waiting for

often ripening the slowest.  But "time and patience," says the

Eastern proverb, "change the mulberry leaf to satin."



To wait patiently, however, men must work cheerfully.  Cheerfulness

is an excellent working quality, imparting great elasticity to the

character.  As a bishop has said, "Temper is nine-tenths of

Christianity;" so are cheerfulness and diligence nine-tenths of

practical wisdom.  They are the life and soul of success, as well

as of happiness; perhaps the very highest pleasure in life

consisting in clear, brisk, conscious working; energy, confidence,

and every other good quality mainly depending upon it.  Sydney

Smith, when labouring as a parish priest at Foston-le-Clay, in

Yorkshire, - though he did not feel himself to be in his proper

element, - went cheerfully to work in the firm determination to do

his best.  "I am resolved," he said, "to like it, and reconcile

myself to it, which is more manly than to feign myself above it,

and to send up complaints by the post of being thrown away, and

being desolate, and such like trash."  So Dr. Hook, when leaving

Leeds for a new sphere of labour said, "Wherever I may be, I shall,

by God's blessing, do with my might what my hand findeth to do; and

if I do not find work, I shall make it."



Labourers for the public good especially, have to work long and

patiently, often uncheered by the prospect of immediate recompense

or result.  The seeds they sow sometimes lie hidden under the

winter's snow, and before the spring comes the husbandman may have

gone to his rest.  It is not every public worker who, like Rowland

Hill, sees his great idea bring forth fruit in his life-time.  Adam

Smith sowed the seeds of a great social amelioration in that dingy

old University of Glasgow where he so long laboured, and laid the

foundations of his 'Wealth of Nations;' but seventy years passed

before his work bore substantial fruits, nor indeed are they all

gathered in yet.



Nothing can compensate for the loss of hope in a man:  it entirely

changes the character.  "How can I work - how can I be happy," said

a great but miserable thinker, "when I have lost all hope?"  One of

the most cheerful and courageous, because one of the most hopeful

of workers, was Carey, the missionary.  When in India, it was no

uncommon thing for him to weary out three pundits, who officiated

as his clerks, in one day, he himself taking rest only in change of

employment.  Carey, the son of a shoe-maker, was supported in his

labours by Ward, the son of a carpenter, and Marsham, the son of a

weaver.  By their labours, a magnificent college was erected at

Serampore; sixteen flourishing stations were established; the Bible

was translated into sixteen languages, and the seeds were sown of a

beneficent moral revolution in British India.  Carey was never

ashamed of the humbleness of his origin.  On one occasion, when at

the Governor-General's table he over-heard an officer opposite him

asking another, loud enough to be heard, whether Carey had not once

been a shoemaker:  "No, sir," exclaimed Carey immediately; "only a

cobbler."  An eminently characteristic anecdote has been told of

his perseverance as a boy.  When climbing a tree one day, his foot

slipped, and he fell to the ground, breaking his leg by the fall.

He was confined to his bed for weeks, but when he recovered and was

able to walk without support, the very first thing he did was to go

and climb that tree.  Carey had need of this sort of dauntless

courage for the great missionary work of his life, and nobly and

resolutely he did it.



It was a maxim of Dr. Young, the philosopher, that "Any man can do

what any other man has done;" and it is unquestionable that he

himself never recoiled from any trials to which he determined to

subject himself.  It is related of him, that the first time he

mounted a horse, he was in company with the grandson of Mr. Barclay

of Ury, the well-known sportsman; when the horseman who preceded

them leapt a high fence.  Young wished to imitate him, but fell off

his horse in the attempt.  Without saying a word, he remounted,

made a second effort, and was again unsuccessful, but this time he

was not thrown further than on to the horse's neck, to which he

clung.  At the third trial, he succeeded, and cleared the fence.



The story of Timour the Tartar learning a lesson of perseverance

under adversity from the spider is well known.  Not less

interesting is the anecdote of Audubon, the American ornithologist,

as related by himself:  "An accident," he says, "which happened to

two hundred of my original drawings, nearly put a stop to my

researches in ornithology.  I shall relate it, merely to show how

far enthusiasm - for by no other name can I call my perseverance -

may enable the preserver of nature to surmount the most

disheartening difficulties.  I left the village of Henderson, in

Kentucky, situated on the banks of the Ohio, where I resided for

several years, to proceed to Philadelphia on business.  I looked to

my drawings before my departure, placed them carefully in a wooden

box, and gave them in charge of a relative, with injunctions to see

that no injury should happen to them.  My absence was of several

months; and when I returned, after having enjoyed the pleasures of

home for a few days, I inquired after my box, and what I was

pleased to call my treasure.  The box was produced and opened; but

reader, feel for me - a pair of Norway rats had taken possession of

the whole, and reared a young family among the gnawed bits of

paper, which, but a month previous, represented nearly a thousand

inhabitants of air!  The burning beat which instantly rushed

through my brain was too great to be endured without affecting my

whole nervous system.  I slept for several nights, and the days

passed like days of oblivion - until the animal powers being

recalled into action through the strength of my constitution, I

took up my gun, my notebook, and my pencils, and went forth to the

woods as gaily as if nothing had happened.  I felt pleased that I

might now make better drawings than before; and, ere a period not

exceeding three years had elapsed, my portfolio was again filled."



The accidental destruction of Sir Isaac Newton's papers, by his

little dog 'Diamond' upsetting a lighted taper upon his desk, by

which the elaborate calculations of many years were in a moment

destroyed, is a well-known anecdote, and need not be repeated:  it

is said that the loss caused the philosopher such profound grief

that it seriously injured his health, and impaired his

understanding.  An accident of a somewhat similar kind happened to

the MS. of Mr. Carlyle's first volume of his 'French Revolution.'

He had lent the MS. to a literary neighbour to peruse.  By some

mischance, it had been left lying on the parlour floor, and become

forgotten.  Weeks ran on, and the historian sent for his work, the

printers being loud for "copy."  Inquiries were made, and it was

found that the maid-of-all-work, finding what she conceived to be a

bundle of waste paper on the floor, had used it to light the

kitchen and parlour fires with!  Such was the answer returned to

Mr. Carlyle; and his feelings may be imagined.  There was, however,

no help for him but to set resolutely to work to re-write the book;

and he turned to and did it.  He had no draft, and was compelled to

rake up from his memory facts, ideas, and expressions, which had

been long since dismissed.  The composition of the book in the

first instance had been a work of pleasure; the re-writing of it a

second time was one of pain and anguish almost beyond belief.  That

he persevered and finished the volume under such circumstances,

affords an instance of determination of purpose which has seldom

been surpassed.



The lives of eminent inventors are eminently illustrative of the

same quality of perseverance.  George Stephenson, when addressing

young men, was accustomed to sum up his best advice to them, in the

words, "Do as I have done - persevere."  He had worked at the

improvement of his locomotive for some fifteen years before

achieving his decisive victory at Rainhill; and Watt was engaged

for some thirty years upon the condensing-engine before he brought

it to perfection.  But there are equally striking illustrations of

perseverance to be found in every other branch of science, art, and

industry.  Perhaps one of the most interesting is that connected

with the disentombment of the Nineveh marbles, and the discovery of

the long-lost cuneiform or arrow-headed character in which the

inscriptions on them are written - a kind of writing which had been

lost to the world since the period of the Macedonian conquest of

Persia.



An intelligent cadet of the East India Company, stationed at

Kermanshah, in Persia, had observed the curious cuneiform

inscriptions on the old monuments in the neighbourhood - so old

that all historical traces of them had been lost, - and amongst the

inscriptions which he copied was that on the celebrated rock of

Behistun - a perpendicular rock rising abruptly some 1700 feet from

the plain, the lower part bearing inscriptions for the space of

about 300 feet in three languages - Persian, Scythian, and

Assyrian.  Comparison of the known with the unknown, of the

language which survived with the language that had been lost,

enabled this cadet to acquire some knowledge of the cuneiform

character, and even to form an alphabet.  Mr. (afterwards Sir

Henry) Rawlinson sent his tracings home for examination.  No

professors in colleges as yet knew anything of the cuneiform

character; but there was a ci-devant clerk of the East India House

- a modest unknown man of the name of Norris - who had made this

little-understood subject his study, to whom the tracings were

submitted; and so accurate was his knowledge, that, though he had

never seen the Behistun rock, he pronounced that the cadet had not

copied the puzzling inscription with proper exactness.  Rawlinson,

who was still in the neighbourhood of the rock, compared his copy

with the original, and found that Norris was right; and by further

comparison and careful study the knowledge of the cuneiform writing

was thus greatly advanced.



But to make the learning of these two self-taught men of avail, a

third labourer was necessary in order to supply them with material

for the exercise of their skill.  Such a labourer presented himself

in the person of Austen Layard, originally an articled clerk in the

office of a London solicitor.  One would scarcely have expected to

find in these three men, a cadet, an India-House clerk, and a

lawyer's clerk, the discoverers of a forgotten language, and of the


buried history of Babylon; yet it was so.  Layard was a youth of

only twenty-two, travelling in the East, when he was possessed with

a desire to penetrate the regions beyond the Euphrates.

Accompanied by a single companion, trusting to his arms for

protection, and, what was better, to his cheerfulness, politeness,

and chivalrous bearing, he passed safely amidst tribes at deadly

war with each other; and, after the lapse of many years, with

comparatively slender means at his command, but aided by

application and perseverance, resolute will and purpose, and almost

sublime patience, - borne up throughout by his passionate

enthusiasm for discovery and research, - he succeeded in laying

bare and digging up an amount of historical treasures, the like of

which has probably never before been collected by the industry of

any one man.  Not less than two miles of bas-reliefs were thus

brought to light by Mr. Layard.  The selection of these valuable

antiquities, now placed in the British Museum, was found so

curiously corroborative of the scriptural records of events which

occurred some three thousand years ago, that they burst upon the

world almost like a new revelation.  And the story of the

disentombment of these remarkable works, as told by Mr. Layard

himself in his 'Monuments of Nineveh,' will always be regarded as

one of the most charming and unaffected records which we possess of

individual enterprise, industry, and energy.



The career of the Comte de Buffon presents another remarkable

illustration of the power of patient industry as well as of his own

saying, that "Genius is patience."  Notwithstanding the great

results achieved by him in natural history, Buffon, when a youth,

was regarded as of mediocre talents.  His mind was slow in forming

itself, and slow in reproducing what it had acquired.  He was also

constitutionally indolent; and being born to good estate, it might

be supposed that he would indulge his liking for ease and luxury.

Instead of which, he early formed the resolution of denying himself

pleasure, and devoting himself to study and self-culture.

Regarding time as a treasure that was limited, and finding that he

was losing many hours by lying a-bed in the mornings, he determined

to break himself of the habit.  He struggled hard against it for

some time, but failed in being able to rise at the hour he had

fixed.  He then called his servant, Joseph, to his help, and

promised him the reward of a crown every time that he succeeded in

getting him up before six.  At first, when called, Buffon declined

to rise - pleaded that he was ill, or pretended anger at being

disturbed; and on the Count at length getting up, Joseph found that

he had earned nothing but reproaches for having permitted his

master to lie a-bed contrary to his express orders.  At length the

valet determined to earn his crown; and again and again he forced

Buffon to rise, notwithstanding his entreaties, expostulations, and

threats of immediate discharge from his service.  One morning

Buffon was unusually obstinate, and Joseph found it necessary to

resort to the extreme measure of dashing a basin of ice-cold water

under the bed-clothes, the effect of which was instantaneous.  By

the persistent use of such means, Buffon at length conquered his

habit; and he was accustomed to say that he owed to Joseph three or

four volumes of his Natural History.



For forty years of his life, Buffon worked every morning at his

desk from nine till two, and again in the evening from five till

nine.  His diligence was so continuous and so regular that it

became habitual.  His biographer has said of him, "Work was his

necessity; his studies were the charm of his life; and towards the

last term of his glorious career he frequently said that he still

hoped to be able to consecrate to them a few more years."  He was a

most conscientious worker, always studying to give the reader his

best thoughts, expressed in the very best manner.  He was never

wearied with touching and retouching his compositions, so that his

style may be pronounced almost perfect.  He wrote the 'Epoques de

la Nature' not fewer than eleven times before he was satisfied with

it; although he had thought over the work about fifty years.  He

was a thorough man of business, most orderly in everything; and he

was accustomed to say that genius without order lost three-fourths

of its power.  His great success as a writer was the result mainly

of his painstaking labour and diligent application.  "Buffon,"

observed Madame Necker, "strongly persuaded that genius is the

result of a profound attention directed to a particular subject,

said that he was thoroughly wearied out when composing his first

writings, but compelled himself to return to them and go over them

carefully again, even when he thought he had already brought them

to a certain degree of perfection; and that at length he found

pleasure instead of weariness in this long and elaborate

correction."  It ought also to be added that Buffon wrote and

published all his great works while afflicted by one of the most

painful diseases to which the human frame is subject.



Literary life affords abundant illustrations of the same power of

perseverance; and perhaps no career is more instructive, viewed in

this light, than that of Sir Walter Scott.  His admirable working

qualities were trained in a lawyer's office, where he pursued for

many years a sort of drudgery scarcely above that of a copying

clerk.  His daily dull routine made his evenings, which were his

own, all the more sweet; and he generally devoted them to reading

and study.  He himself attributed to his prosaic office discipline

that habit of steady, sober diligence, in which mere literary men

are so often found wanting.  As a copying clerk he was allowed 3D.

for every page containing a certain number of words; and he

sometimes, by extra work, was able to copy as many as 120 pages in

twenty-four hours, thus earning some 30S.; out of which he would

occasionally purchase an odd volume, otherwise beyond his means.



During his after-life Scott was wont to pride himself upon being a

man of business, and he averred, in contradiction to what he called

the cant of sonneteers, that there was no necessary connection

between genius and an aversion or contempt for the common duties of

life.  On the contrary, he was of opinion that to spend some fair

portion of every day in any matter-of-fact occupation was good for

the higher faculties themselves in the upshot.  While afterwards

acting as clerk to the Court of Session in Edinburgh, he performed

his literary work chiefly before breakfast, attending the court

during the day, where he authenticated registered deeds and

writings of various kinds.  On the whole, says Lockhart, "it forms

one of the most remarkable features in his history, that throughout

the most active period of his literary career, he must have devoted

a large proportion of his hours, during half at least of every

year, to the conscientious discharge of professional duties."  It

was a principle of action which he laid down for himself, that he

must earn his living by business, and not by literature.  On one

occasion he said, "I determined that literature should be my staff,

not my crutch, and that the profits of my literary labour, however

convenient otherwise, should not, if I could help it, become

necessary to my ordinary expenses."



His punctuality was one of the most carefully cultivated of his

habits, otherwise it had not been possible for him to get through

so enormous an amount of literary labour.  He made it a rule to

answer every letter received by him on the same day, except where

inquiry and deliberation were requisite.  Nothing else could have

enabled him to keep abreast with the flood of communications that

poured in upon him and sometimes put his good nature to the

severest test.  It was his practice to rise by five o'clock, and

light his own fire.  He shaved and dressed with deliberation, and

was seated at his desk by six o'clock, with his papers arranged

before him in the most accurate order, his works of reference

marshalled round him on the floor, while at least one favourite dog

lay watching his eye, outside the line of books.  Thus by the time

the family assembled for breakfast, between nine and ten, he had

done enough - to use his own words - to break the neck of the day's

work.  But with all his diligent and indefatigable industry, and

his immense knowledge, the result of many years' patient labour,

Scott always spoke with the greatest diffidence of his own powers.

On one occasion he said, "Throughout every part of my career I have

felt pinched and hampered by my own ignorance."



Such is true wisdom and humility; for the more a man really knows,

the less conceited he will be.  The student at Trinity College who

went up to his professor to take leave of him because he had

"finished his education," was wisely rebuked by the professor's

reply, "Indeed!  I am only beginning mine."  The superficial person

who has obtained a smattering of many things, but knows nothing

well, may pride himself upon his gifts; but the sage humbly

confesses that "all he knows is, that he knows nothing," or like

Newton, that he has been only engaged in picking shells by the sea

shore, while the great ocean of truth lies all unexplored before

him.



The lives of second-rate literary men furnish equally remarkable

illustrations of the power of perseverance.  The late John Britton,

author of 'The Beauties of England and Wales,' and of many valuable

architectural works, was born in a miserable cot in Kingston,

Wiltshire.  His father had been a baker and maltster, but was

ruined in trade and became insane while Britton was yet a child.

The boy received very little schooling, but a great deal of bad

example, which happily did not corrupt him.  He was early in life

set to labour with an uncle, a tavern-keeper in Clerkenwell, under

whom he bottled, corked, and binned wine for more than five years.

His health failing him, his uncle turned him adrift in the world,

with only two guineas, the fruits of his five years' service, in

his pocket.  During the next seven years of his life he endured

many vicissitudes and hardships.  Yet he says, in his

autobiography, "in my poor and obscure lodgings, at eighteenpence a

week, I indulged in study, and often read in bed during the winter

evenings, because I could not afford a fire."  Travelling on foot

to Bath, he there obtained an engagement as a cellarman, but

shortly after we find him back in the metropolis again almost

penniless, shoeless, and shirtless.  He succeeded, however, in

obtaining employment as a cellarman at the London Tavern, where it

was his duty to be in the cellar from seven in the morning until

eleven at night.  His health broke down under this confinement in

the dark, added to the heavy work; and he then engaged himself, at

fifteen shillings a week, to an attorney, - for he had been

diligently cultivating the art of writing during the few spare

minutes that he could call his own.  While in this employment, he

devoted his leisure principally to perambulating the bookstalls,

where he read books by snatches which he could not buy, and thus

picked up a good deal of odd knowledge.  Then he shifted to another

office, at the advanced wages of twenty shillings a week, still

reading and studying.  At twenty-eight he was able to write a book,

which he published under the title of 'The Enterprising Adventures

of Pizarro;' and from that time until his death, during a period of

about fifty-five years, Britton was occupied in laborious literary

occupation.  The number of his published works is not fewer than

eighty-seven; the most important being 'The Cathedral Antiquities

of England,' in fourteen volumes, a truly magnificent work; itself

the best monument of John Britton's indefatigable industry.



London, the landscape gardener, was a man of somewhat similar

character, possessed of an extraordinary working power.  The son of

a farmer near Edinburgh, he was early inured to work.  His skill in

drawing plans and making sketches of scenery induced his father to

train him for a landscape gardener.  During his apprenticeship he

sat up two whole nights every week to study; yet he worked harder

during the day than any labourer.  In the course of his night

studies he learnt French, and before he was eighteen he translated

a life of Abelard for an Encyclopaedia.  He was so eager to make

progress in life, that when only twenty, while working as a

gardener in England, he wrote down in his note-book, "I am now

twenty years of age, and perhaps a third part of my life has passed

away, and yet what have I done to benefit my fellow men?" an

unusual reflection for a youth of only twenty.  From French he

proceeded to learn German, and rapidly mastered that language.

Having taken a large farm, for the purpose of introducing Scotch

improvements in the art of agriculture, he shortly succeeded in

realising a considerable income.  The continent being thrown open

at the end of the war, he travelled abroad for the purpose of

inquiring into the system of gardening and agriculture in other

countries.  He twice repeated his journeys, and the results were

published in his Encyclopaedias, which are among the most

remarkable works of their kind, - distinguished for the immense

mass of useful matter which they contain, collected by an amount of

industry and labour which has rarely been equalled.



The career of Samuel Drew is not less remarkable than any of those

which we have cited.  His father was a hard-working labourer of the

parish of St. Austell, in Cornwall.  Though poor, he contrived to

send his two sons to a penny-a-week school in the neighbourhood.

Jabez, the elder, took delight in learning, and made great progress

in his lessons; but Samuel, the younger, was a dunce, notoriously

given to mischief and playing truant.  When about eight years old

he was put to manual labour, earning three-halfpence a day as a

buddle-boy at a tin mine.  At ten he was apprenticed to a

shoemaker, and while in this employment he endured much hardship, -

living, as he used to say, "like a toad under a harrow."  He often

thought of running away and becoming a pirate, or something of the

sort, and he seems to have grown in recklessness as he grew in

years.  In robbing orchards he was usually a leader; and, as he

grew older, he delighted to take part in any poaching or smuggling

adventure.  When about seventeen, before his apprenticeship was

out, he ran away, intending to enter on board a man-of-war; but,

sleeping in a hay-field at night cooled him a little, and he

returned to his trade.



Drew next removed to the neighbourhood of Plymouth to work at his

shoemaking business, and while at Cawsand he won a prize for

cudgel-playing, in which he seems to have been an adept.  While

living there, he had nearly lost his life in a smuggling exploit

which he had joined, partly induced by the love of adventure, and

partly by the love of gain, for his regular wages were not more

than eight shillings a-week.  One night, notice was given

throughout Crafthole, that a smuggler was off the coast, ready to

land her cargo; on which the male population of the place - nearly

all smugglers - made for the shore.  One party remained on the

rocks to make signals and dispose of the goods as they were landed;

and another manned the boats, Drew being of the latter party.  The

night was intensely dark, and very little of the cargo had been

landed, when the wind rose, with a heavy sea.  The men in the

boats, however, determined to persevere, and several trips were

made between the smuggler, now standing farther out to sea, and the

shore.  One of the men in the boat in which Drew was, had his hat

blown off by the wind, and in attempting to recover it, the boat

was upset.  Three of the men were immediately drowned; the others

clung to the boat for a time, but finding it drifting out to sea,

they took to swimming.  They were two miles from land, and the

night was intensely dark.  After being about three hours in the

water, Drew reached a rock near the shore, with one or two others,

where he remained benumbed with cold till morning, when he and his

companions were discovered and taken off, more dead than alive.  A

keg of brandy from the cargo just landed was brought, the head

knocked in with a hatchet, and a bowlfull of the liquid presented

to the survivors; and, shortly after, Drew was able to walk two

miles through deep snow, to his lodgings.



This was a very unpromising beginning of a life; and yet this same

Drew, scapegrace, orchard-robber, shoemaker, cudgel-player, and

smuggler, outlived the recklessness of his youth and became

distinguished as a minister of the Gospel and a writer of good

books.  Happily, before it was too late, the energy which

characterised him was turned into a more healthy direction, and

rendered him as eminent in usefulness as he had before been in

wickedness.  His father again took him back to St. Austell, and

found employment for him as a journeyman shoemaker.  Perhaps his

recent escape from death had tended to make the young man serious,

as we shortly find him attracted by the forcible preaching of Dr.

Adam Clarke, a minister of the Wesleyan Methodists.  His brother

having died about the same time, the impression of seriousness was

deepened; and thenceforward he was an altered man.  He began anew

the work of education, for he had almost forgotten how to read and

write; and even after several years' practice, a friend compared

his writing to the traces of a spider dipped in ink set to crawl

upon paper.  Speaking of himself, about that time, Drew afterwards

said, "The more I read, the more I felt my own ignorance; and the

more I felt my ignorance, the more invincible became my energy to

surmount it.  Every leisure moment was now employed in reading one

thing or another.  Having to support myself by manual labour, my

time for reading was but little, and to overcome this disadvantage,

my usual method was to place a book before me while at meat, and at

every repast I read five or six pages."  The perusal of Locke's

'Essay on the Understanding' gave the first metaphysical turn to

his mind.  "It awakened me from my stupor," said he, "and induced

me to form a resolution to abandon the grovelling views which I had

been accustomed to entertain."



Drew began business on his own account, with a capital of a few

shillings; but his character for steadiness was such that a

neighbouring miller offered him a loan, which was accepted, and,

success attending his industry, the debt was repaid at the end of a

year.  He started with a determination to "owe no man anything,"

and he held to it in the midst of many privations.  Often he went

to bed supperless, to avoid rising in debt.  His ambition was to

achieve independence by industry and economy, and in this he

gradually succeeded.  In the midst of incessant labour, he

sedulously strove to improve his mind, studying astronomy, history,

and metaphysics.  He was induced to pursue the latter study chiefly

because it required fewer books to consult than either of the

others.  "It appeared to be a thorny path," he said, "but I

determined, nevertheless, to enter, and accordingly began to tread

it."



Added to his labours in shoemaking and metaphysics, Drew became a

local preacher and a class leader.  He took an eager interest in

politics, and his shop became a favourite resort with the village

politicians.  And when they did not come to him, he went to them to

talk over public affairs.  This so encroached upon his time that he

found it necessary sometimes to work until midnight to make up for

the hours lost during the day.  His political fervour become the

talk of the village.  While busy one night hammering away at a

shoe-sole, a little boy, seeing a light in the shop, put his mouth

to the keyhole of the door, and called out in a shrill pipe,

"Shoemaker! shoe-maker! work by night and run about by day!"  A

friend, to whom Drew afterwards told the story, asked, "And did not

you run after the boy, and strap him?"  "No, no," was the reply;

"had a pistol been fired off at my ear, I could not have been more

dismayed or confounded.  I dropped my work, and said to myself,

'True, true! but you shall never have that to say of me again.'  To

me that cry was as the voice of God, and it has been a word in

season throughout my life.  I learnt from it not to leave till to-

morrow the work of to-day, or to idle when I ought to be working."



From that moment Drew dropped politics, and stuck to his work,

reading and studying in his spare hours:  but he never allowed the

latter pursuit to interfere with his business, though it frequently

broke in upon his rest.  He married, and thought of emigrating to

America; but he remained working on.  His literary taste first took

the direction of poetical composition; and from some of the

fragments which have been preserved, it appears that his

speculations as to the immateriality and immortality of the soul

had their origin in these poetical musings.  His study was the

kitchen, where his wife's bellows served him for a desk; and he

wrote amidst the cries and cradlings of his children.  Paine's 'Age

of Reason' having appeared about this time and excited much

interest, he composed a pamphlet in refutation of its arguments,

which was published.  He used afterwards to say that it was the

'Age of Reason' that made him an author.  Various pamphlets from

his pen shortly appeared in rapid succession, and a few years

later, while still working at shoemaking, he wrote and published

his admirable 'Essay on the Immateriality and Immortality of the

Human Soul,' which he sold for twenty pounds, a great sum in his

estimation at the time.  The book went through many editions, and

is still prized.



Drew was in no wise puffed up by his success, as many young authors

are, but, long after he had become celebrated as a writer, used to

be seen sweeping the street before his door, or helping his

apprentices to carry in the winter's coals.  Nor could he, for some

time, bring himself to regard literature as a profession to live

by.  His first care was, to secure an honest livelihood by his

business, and to put into the "lottery of literary success," as he

termed it, only the surplus of his time.  At length, however, he

devoted himself wholly to literature, more particularly in

connection with the Wesleyan body; editing one of their magazines,

and superintending the publication of several of their

denominational works.  He also wrote in the 'Eclectic Review,' and

compiled and published a valuable history of his native county,

Cornwall, with numerous other works.  Towards the close of his

career, he said of himself, - "Raised from one of the lowest

stations in society, I have endeavoured through life to bring my

family into a state of respectability, by honest industry,

frugality, and a high regard for my moral character.  Divine

providence has smiled on my exertions, and crowned my wishes with

success."



The late Joseph Hume pursued a very different career, but worked in

an equally persevering spirit.  He was a man of moderate parts, but

of great industry and unimpeachable honesty of purpose.  The motto

of his life was "Perseverance," and well, he acted up to it.  His

father dying while he was a mere child, his mother opened a small

shop in Montrose, and toiled hard to maintain her family and bring

them up respectably.  Joseph she put apprentice to a surgeon, and

educated for the medical profession.  Having got his diploma, he

made several voyages to India as ship's surgeon, (19) and

afterwards obtained a cadetship in the Company's service.  None

worked harder, or lived more temperately, than he did, and,

securing the confidence of his superiors, who found him a capable

man in the performance of his duty, they gradually promoted him to

higher offices.  In 1803 he was with the division of the army under

General Powell, in the Mahratta war; and the interpreter having

died, Hume, who had meanwhile studied and mastered the native

languages, was appointed in his stead.  He was next made chief of

the medical staff.  But as if this were not enough to occupy his

full working power, he undertook in addition the offices of

paymaster and post-master, and filled them satisfactorily.  He also

contracted to supply the commissariat, which he did with advantage

to the army and profit to himself.  After about ten years'

unremitting labour, he returned to England with a competency; and

one of his first acts was to make provision for the poorer members

of his family.



But Joseph Hume was not a man to enjoy the fruits of his industry

in idleness.  Work and occupation had become necessary for his

comfort and happiness.  To make himself fully acquainted with the

actual state of his own country, and the condition of the people,

he visited every town in the kingdom which then enjoyed any degree

of manufacturing celebrity.  He afterwards travelled abroad for the

purpose of obtaining a knowledge of foreign states. Returned to

England, he entered Parliament in 1812, and continued a member of

that assembly, with a short interruption, for a period of about

thirty-four years.  His first recorded speech was on the subject of

public education, and throughout his long and honourable career he

took an active and earnest interest in that and all other questions

calculated to elevate and improve the condition of the people -

criminal reform, savings-banks, free trade, economy and

retrenchment, extended representation, and such like measures, all

of which he indefatigably promoted.  Whatever subject he undertook,

he worked at with all his might.  He was not a good speaker, but

what he said was believed to proceed from the lips of an honest,

single-minded, accurate man.  If ridicule, as Shaftesbury says, be

the test of truth, Joseph Hume stood the test well.  No man was

more laughed at, but there he stood perpetually, and literally, "at

his post."  He was usually beaten on a division, but the influence

which he exercised was nevertheless felt, and many important

financial improvements were effected by him even with the vote

directly against him.  The amount of hard work which he contrived

to get through was something extraordinary.  He rose at six, wrote

letters and arranged his papers for parliament; then, after

breakfast, he received persons on business, sometimes as many as

twenty in a morning.  The House rarely assembled without him, and

though the debate might be prolonged to two or three o'clock in the

morning, his name was seldom found absent from the division.  In

short, to perform the work which he did, extending over so long a

period, in the face of so many Administrations, week after week,

year after year, - to be outvoted, beaten, laughed at, standing on

many occasions almost alone, - to persevere in the face of every

discouragement, preserving his temper unruffled, never relaxing in

his energy or his hope, and living to see the greater number of his

measures adopted with acclamation, must be regarded as one of the

most remarkable illustrations of the power of human perseverance

that biography can exhibit.

