





CHAPTER XII. - EXAMPLE - MODELS







"Ever their phantoms rise before us,

Our loftier brothers, but one in blood;

By bed and table they lord it o'er us,

With looks of beauty and words of good." - John Sterling.



"Children may be strangled, but Deeds never; they have an

indestructible life, both in and out of our consciousness." -

George Eliot.



"There is no action of man in this life, which is not the beginning

of so long a chain of consequences, as that no human providence is

high enough to give us a prospect to the end." - Thomas of

Malmesbury.





Example is one of the most potent of instructors, though it teaches

without a tongue.  It is the practical school of mankind, working

by action, which is always more forcible than words.  Precept may

point to us the way, but it is silent continuous example, conveyed

to us by habits, and living with us in fact, that carries us along.

Good advice has its weight:  but without the accompaniment of a

good example it is of comparatively small influence; and it will be

found that the common saying of "Do as I say, not as I do," is

usually reversed in the actual experience of life.



All persons are more or less apt to learn through the eye rather

than the ear; and, whatever is seen in fact, makes a far deeper

impression than anything that is merely read or heard.  This is

especially the case in early youth, when the eye is the chief inlet

of knowledge.  Whatever children see they unconsciously imitate.

They insensibly come to resemble those who are about them - as

insects take the colour of the leaves they feed on.  Hence the vast

importance of domestic training.  For whatever may be the

efficiency of schools, the examples set in our Homes must always be

of vastly greater influence in forming the characters of our future

men and women.  The Home is the crystal of society - the nucleus of

national character; and from that source, be it pure or tainted,

issue the habits, principles and maxims, which govern public as

well as private life.  The nation comes from the nursery.  Public

opinion itself is for the most part the outgrowth of the home; and

the best philanthropy comes from the fireside.  "To love the little

platoon we belong to in society," says Burke, "is the germ of all

public affections."  From this little central spot, the human

sympathies may extend in an ever widening circle, until the world

is embraced; for, though true philanthropy, like charity, begins at

home, assuredly it does not end there.



Example in conduct, therefore, even in apparently trivial matters,

is of no light moment, inasmuch as it is constantly becoming

inwoven with the lives of others, and contributing to form their

natures for better or for worse.  The characters of parents are

thus constantly repeated in their children; and the acts of

affection, discipline, industry, and self-control, which they daily

exemplify, live and act when all else which may have been learned

through the ear has long been forgotten.  Hence a wise man was

accustomed to speak of his children as his "future state."  Even

the mute action and unconscious look of a parent may give a stamp

to the character which is never effaced; and who can tell how much

evil act has been stayed by the thought of some good parent, whose

memory their children may not sully by the commission of an

unworthy deed, or the indulgence of an impure thought?  The veriest

trifles thus become of importance in influencing the characters of

men.  "A kiss from my mother," said West, "made me a painter."  It

is on the direction of such seeming trifles when children that the

future happiness and success of men mainly depend.  Fowell Buxton,

when occupying an eminent and influential station in life, wrote to

his mother, "I constantly feel, especially in action and exertion

for others, the effects of principles early implanted by you in my

mind."  Buxton was also accustomed to remember with gratitude the

obligations which he owed to an illiterate man, a gamekeeper, named

Abraham Plastow, with whom he played, and rode, and sported - a man

who could neither read nor write, but was full of natural good

sense and mother-wit.  "What made him particularly valuable," says

Buxton, "were his principles of integrity and honour.  He never

said or did a thing in the absence of my mother of which she would

have disapproved.  He always held up the highest standard of

integrity, and filled our youthful minds with sentiments as pure

and as generous as could be found in the writings of Seneca or

Cicero.  Such was my first instructor, and, I must add, my best."



Lord Langdale, looking back upon the admirable example set him by

his mother, declared, "If the whole world were put into one scale,

and my mother into the other, the world would kick the beam."  Mrs.

Schimmel Penninck, in her old age, was accustomed to call to mind

the personal influence exercised by her mother upon the society

amidst which she moved.  When she entered a room it had the effect

of immediately raising the tone of the conversation, and as if

purifying the moral atmosphere - all seeming to breathe more

freely, and stand more erectly.  "In her presence," says the

daughter, "I became for the time transformed into another person."

So much does she moral health depend upon the moral atmosphere that

is breathed, and so great is the influence daily exercised by

parents over their children by living a life before their eyes,

that perhaps the best system of parental instruction might be

summed up in these two words:  "Improve thyself."



There is something solemn and awful in the thought that there is

not an act done or a word uttered by a human being but carries with

it a train of consequences, the end of which we may never trace.

Not one but, to a certain extent, gives a colour to our life, and

insensibly influences the lives of those about us.  The good deed

or word will live, even though we may not see it fructify, but so

will the bad; and no person is so insignificant as to be sure that

his example will not do good on the one hand, or evil on the other.

The spirits of men do not die:  they still live and walk abroad

among us.  It was a fine and a true thought uttered by Mr. Disraeli

in the House of Commons on the death of Richard Cobden, that "he

was one of those men who, though not present, were still members of

that House, who were independent of dissolutions, of the caprices

of constituencies, and even of the course of time."



There is, indeed, an essence of immortality in the life of man,

even in this world.  No individual in the universe stands alone; he

is a component part of a system of mutual dependencies; and by his

several acts he either increases or diminishes the sum of human

good now and for ever.  As the present is rooted in the past, and

the lives and examples of our forefathers still to a great extent

influence us, so are we by our daily acts contributing to form the

condition and character of the future.  Man is a fruit formed and

ripened by the culture of all the foregoing centuries; and the

living generation continues the magnetic current of action and

example destined to bind the remotest past with the most distant

future.  No man's acts die utterly; and though his body may resolve

into dust and air, his good or his bad deeds will still be bringing

forth fruit after their kind, and influencing future generations

for all time to come.  It is in this momentous and solemn fact that

the great peril and responsibility of human existence lies.



Mr. Babbage has so powerfully expressed this idea in a noble

passage in one of his writings that we here venture to quote his

words:  "Every atom," he says, "impressed with good or ill, retains

at once the motions which philosophers and sages have imparted to

it, mixed and combined in ten thousand ways with all that is

worthless and base; the air itself is one vast library, on whose

pages are written FOR EVER all that man has ever said or whispered.

There, in their immutable but unerring characters, mixed with the

earliest as well as the latest sighs of mortality, stand for ever

recorded vows unredeemed, promises unfulfilled; perpetuating, in

the united movements of each particle, the testimony of man's

changeful will.  But, if the air we breathe is the never-failing

historian of the sentiments we have uttered, earth, air, and ocean,

are, in like manner, the eternal witnesses of the acts we have

done; the same principle of the equality of action and reaction

applies to them.  No motion impressed by natural causes, or by

human agency, is ever obliterated. . . . If the Almighty stamped on

the brow of the first murderer the indelible and visible mark of

his guilt, He has also established laws by which every succeeding

criminal is not less irrevocably chained to the testimony of his

crime; for every atom of his mortal frame, through whatever changes

its severed particles may migrate, will still retain adhering to

it, through every combination, some movement derived from that very

muscular effort by which the crime itself was perpetrated."



Thus, every act we do or word we utter, as well as every act we

witness or word we hear, carries with it an influence which extends

over, and gives a colour, not only to the whole of our future life,

but makes itself felt upon the whole frame of society.  We may not,

and indeed cannot, possibly, trace the influence working itself

into action in its various ramifications amongst our children, our

friends, or associates; yet there it is assuredly, working on for

ever.  And herein lies the great significance of setting forth a

good example, - a silent teaching which even the poorest and least

significant person can practise in his daily life.  There is no one

so humble, but that he owes to others this simple but priceless

instruction.  Even the meanest condition may thus be made useful;

for the light set in a low place shines as faithfully as that set

upon a hill.  Everywhere, and under almost all circumstances,

however externally adverse - in moorland shielings, in cottage

hamlets, in the close alleys of great towns - the true man may

grow.  He who tills a space of earth scarce bigger than is needed

for his grave, may work as faithfully, and to as good purpose, as

the heir to thousands.  The commonest workshop may thus be a school

of industry, science, and good morals, on the one hand; or of

idleness, folly, and depravity, on the other.  It all depends on

the individual men, and the use they make of the opportunities for

good which offer themselves.



A life well spent, a character uprightly sustained, is no slight

legacy to leave to one's children, and to the world; for it is the

most eloquent lesson of virtue and the severest reproof of vice,

while it continues an enduring source of the best kind of riches.

Well for those who can say, as Pope did, in rejoinder to the

sarcasm of Lord Hervey, "I think it enough that my parents, such as

they were, never cost me a blush, and that their son, such as he

is, never cost them a tear."



It is not enough to tell others what they are to do, but to exhibit

the actual example of doing.  What Mrs. Chisholm described to Mrs.

Stowe as the secret of her success, applies to all life.  "I

found," she said, "that if we want anything DONE, we must go to

work and DO,  it is of no use merely to talk - none whatever."  It

is poor eloquence that only shows how a person can talk.  Had Mrs.

Chisholm rested satisfied with lecturing, her project, she was

persuaded, would never have got beyond the region of talk; but when

people saw what she was doing and had actually accomplished, they

fell in with her views and came forward to help her.  Hence the

most beneficent worker is not he who says the most eloquent things,

or even who thinks the most loftily, but he who does the most

eloquent acts.



True-hearted persons, even in the humblest station in life, who are

energetic doers, may thus give an impulse to good works out of all

proportion, apparently, to their actual station in society.  Thomas

Wright might have talked about the reclamation of criminals, and

John Pounds about the necessity for Ragged Schools, and yet done

nothing; instead of which they simply set to work without any other

idea in their minds than that of doing, not talking.  And how the

example of even the poorest man may tell upon society, hear what

Dr. Guthrie, the apostle of the Ragged School movement, says of the

influence which the example of John Pounds, the humble Portsmouth

cobbler, exercised upon his own working career:-



"The interest I have been led to take in this cause is an example

of how, in Providence, a man's destiny - his course of life, like

that of a river - may be determined and affected by very trivial

circumstances.  It is rather curious - at least it is interesting

to me to remember - that it was by a picture I was first led to

take an interest in ragged schools - by a picture in an old,

obscure, decaying burgh that stands on the shores of the Frith of

Forth, the birthplace of Thomas Chalmers.  I went to see this place

many years ago; and, going into an inn for refreshment, I found the

room covered with pictures of shepherdesses with their crooks, and

sailors in holiday attire, not particularly interesting.  But above

the chimney-piece there was a large print, more respectable than

its neighbours, which represented a cobbler's room.  The cobbler

was there himself, spectacles on nose, an old shoe between his

knees - the massive forehead and firm mouth indicating great

determination of character, and, beneath his bushy eyebrows,

benevolence gleamed out on a number of poor ragged boys and girls

who stood at their lessons round the busy cobbler.  My curiosity

was awakened; and in the inscription I read how this man, John

Pounds, a cobbler in Portsmouth, taking pity on the multitude of

poor ragged children left by ministers and magistrates, and ladies

and gentlemen, to go to ruin on the streets - how, like a good

shepherd, he gathered in these wretched outcasts - how he had

trained them to God and to the world - and how, while earning his

daily bread by the sweat of his brow, he had rescued from misery

and saved to society not less than five hundred of these children.

I felt ashamed of myself.  I felt reproved for the little I had

done.  My feelings were touched.  I was astonished at this man's

achievements; and I well remember, in the enthusiasm of the moment,

saying to my companion (and I have seen in my cooler and calmer

moments no reason for unsaying the saying) - 'That man is an honour

to humanity, and deserves the tallest monument ever raised within

the shores of Britain.'  I took up that man's history, and I found

it animated by the spirit of Him who 'had compassion on the

multitude.'  John Pounds was a clever man besides; and, like Paul,

if he could not win a poor boy any other way, he won him by art.

He would be seen chasing a ragged boy along the quays, and

compelling him to come to school, not by the power of a policeman,

but by the power of a hot potato.  He knew the love an Irishman had

for a potato; and John Pounds might be seen running holding under

the boy's nose a potato, like an Irishman, very hot, and with a

coat as ragged as himself.  When the day comes when honour will be

done to whom honour is due, I can fancy the crowd of those whose

fame poets have sung, and to whose memory monuments have been

raised, dividing like the wave, and, passing the great, and the

noble, and the mighty of the land, this poor, obscure old man

stepping forward and receiving the especial notice of Him who said

'Inasmuch as ye did it to one of the least of these, ye did it also

to Me.'"



The education of character is very much a question of models; we

mould ourselves so unconsciously after the characters, manners,

habits, and opinions of those who are about us.  Good rules may do

much, but good models far more; for in the latter we have

instruction in action - wisdom at work.  Good admonition and bad

example only build with one hand to pull down with the other.

Hence the vast importance of exercising great care in the selection

of companions, especially in youth.  There is a magnetic affinity

in young persons which insensibly tends to assimilate them to each

other's likeness.  Mr. Edgeworth was so strongly convinced that

from sympathy they involuntarily imitated or caught the tone of the

company they frequented, that he held it to be of the most

essential importance that they should be taught to select the very

best models.  "No company, or good company," was his motto.  Lord

Collingwood, writing to a young friend, said, "Hold it as a maxim

that you had better be alone than in mean company.  Let your

companions be such as yourself, or superior; for the worth of a man

will always be ruled by that of his company."  It was a remark of

the famous Dr. Sydenham that everybody some time or other would be

the better or the worse for having but spoken to a good or a bad

man.  As Sir Peter Lely made it a rule never to look at a bad

picture if he could help it, believing that whenever he did so his

pencil caught a taint from it, so, whoever chooses to gaze often

upon a debased specimen of humanity and to frequent his society,

cannot help gradually assimilating himself to that sort of model.



It is therefore advisable for young men to seek the fellowship of

the good, and always to aim at a higher standard than themselves.

Francis Horner, speaking of the advantages to himself of direct

personal intercourse with high-minded, intelligent men, said, "I

cannot hesitate to decide that I have derived more intellectual

improvement from them than from all the books I have turned over."

Lord Shelburne (afterwards Marquis of Lansdowne), when a young man,

paid a visit to the venerable Malesherbes, and was so much

impressed by it, that he said, - "I have travelled much, but I have

never been so influenced by personal contact with any man; and if I

ever accomplish any good in the course of my life, I am certain

that the recollection of M. de Malesherbes will animate my soul."

So Fowell Buxton was always ready to acknowledge the powerful

influence exercised upon the formation of his character in early

life by the example of the Gurney family:  "It has given a colour

to my life," he used to say.  Speaking of his success at the Dublin

University, he confessed, "I can ascribe it to nothing but my

Earlham visits."  It was from the Gurneys he "caught the infection"

of self-improvement.



Contact with the good never fails to impart good, and we carry away

with us some of the blessing, as travellers' garments retain the

odour of the flowers and shrubs through which they have passed.

Those who knew the late John Sterling intimately, have spoken of

the beneficial influence which he exercised on all with whom he

came into personal contact.  Many owed to him their first awakening

to a higher being; from him they learnt what they were, and what

they ought to be.  Mr. Trench says of him:- "It was impossible to

come in contact with his noble nature without feeling one's self in

some measure ENNOBLED and LIFTED UP, as I ever felt when I left

him, into a higher region of objects and aims than that in which

one is tempted habitually to dwell."  It is thus that the noble

character always acts; we become insensibly elevated by him, and

cannot help feeling as he does and acquiring the habit of looking

at things in the same light.  Such is the magical action and

reaction of minds upon each other.



Artists, also, feel themselves elevated by contact with artists

greater than themselves.  Thus Haydn's genius was first fired by

Handel.  Hearing him play, Haydn's ardour for musical composition

was at once excited, and but for this circumstance, he himself

believed that he would never have written the 'Creation.'  Speaking

of Handel, he said, "When he chooses, he strikes like the

thunderbolt;" and at another time, "There is not a note of him but

draws blood."  Scarlatti was another of Handel's ardent admirers,

following him all over Italy; afterwards, when speaking of the

great master, he would cross himself in token of admiration.  True

artists never fail generously to recognise each other's greatness.

Thus Beethoven's admiration for Cherubini was regal:  and he

ardently hailed the genius of Schubert:  "Truly," said he, "in

Schubert dwells a divine fire."  When Northcote was a mere youth he

had such an admiration for Reynolds that, when the great painter

was once attending a public meeting down in Devonshire, the boy

pushed through the crowd, and got so near Reynolds as to touch the

skirt of his coat, "which I did," says Northcote, "with great

satisfaction to my mind," - a true touch of youthful enthusiasm in

its admiration of genius.



The example of the brave is an inspiration to the timid, their

presence thrilling through every fibre.  Hence the miracles of

valour so often performed by ordinary men under the leadership of

the heroic.  The very recollection of the deeds of the valiant

stirs men's blood like the sound of a trumpet.  Ziska bequeathed

his skin to be used as a drum to inspire the valour of the

Bohemians.  When Scanderbeg, prince of Epirus, was dead, the Turks

wished to possess his bones, that each might wear a piece next his

heart, hoping thus to secure some portion of the courage he had

displayed while living, and which they had so often experienced in

battle.  When the gallant Douglas, bearing the heart of Bruce to

the Holy Land, saw one of his knights surrounded and sorely pressed

by the Saracens, he took from his neck the silver case containing

the hero's bequest, and throwing it amidst the thickest press of

his foes, cried, "Pass first in fight, as thou wert wont to do, and

Douglas will follow thee, or die;" and so saying, he rushed forward

to the place where it fell, and was there slain.



The chief use of biography consists in the noble models of

character in which it abounds.  Our great forefathers still live

among us in the records of their lives, as well as in the acts they

have done, which live also; still sit by us at table, and hold us

by the hand; furnishing examples for our benefit, which we may

still study, admire and imitate.  Indeed, whoever has left behind

him the record of a noble life, has bequeathed to posterity an

enduring source of good, for it serves as a model for others to

form themselves by in all time to come; still breathing fresh life

into men, helping them to reproduce his life anew, and to

illustrate his character in other forms.  Hence a book containing

the life of a true man is full of precious seed.  It is a still

living voice; it is an intellect.  To use Milton's words, "it is

the precious life-blood of a master spirit, embalmed and treasured

up on purpose to a life beyond life."  Such a book never ceases to

exercise an elevating and ennobling influence.  But, above all,

there is the Book containing the very highest Example set before us

to shape our lives by in this world - the most suitable for all the

necessities of our mind and heart - an example which we can only

follow afar off and feel after,





"Like plants or vines which never saw the sun,

But dream of him and guess where he may be,

And do their best to climb and get to him."





Again, no young man can rise from the perusal of such lives as

those of Buxton and Arnold, without feeling his mind and heart made

better, and his best resolves invigorated.  Such biographies

increase a man's self-reliance by demonstrating what men can be,

and what they can do; fortifying his hopes and elevating his aims

in life.  Sometimes a young man discovers himself in a biography,

as Correggio felt within him the risings of genius on contemplating

the works of Michael Angelo:  "And I too, am a painter," he

exclaimed.  Sir Samuel Romilly, in his autobiography, confessed

himself to have been powerfully influenced by the life of the great

and noble-minded French Chancellor Daguesseau:- "The works of

Thomas," says he, "had fallen into my hands, and I had read with

admiration his 'Eloge of Daguesseau;' and the career of honour

which he represented that illustrious magistrate to have run,

excited to a great degree my ardour and ambition, and opened to my

imagination new paths of glory."



Franklin was accustomed to attribute his usefulness and eminence to

his having early read Cotton Mather's 'Essays to do Good' - a book

which grew out of Mather's own life.  And see how good example

draws other men after it, and propagates itself through future

generations in all lands.  For Samuel Drew avers that he framed his

own life, and especially his business habits, after the model left

on record by Benjamin Franklin.  Thus it is impossible to say where

a good example may not reach, or where it will end, if indeed it

have an end.  Hence the advantage, in literature as in life, of

keeping the best society, reading the best books, and wisely

admiring and imitating the best things we find in them.  "In

literature," said Lord Dudley, "I am fond of confining myself to

the best company, which consists chiefly of my old acquaintance,

with whom I am desirous of becoming more intimate; and I suspect

that nine times out of ten it is more profitable, if not more

agreeable, to read an old book over again, than to read a new one

for the first time."



Sometimes a book containing a noble exemplar of life, taken up at

random, merely with the object of reading it as a pastime, has been

known to call forth energies whose existence had not before been

suspected.  Alfieri was first drawn with passion to literature by

reading 'Plutarch's Lives.'  Loyola, when a soldier serving at the

siege of Pampeluna, and laid up by a dangerous wound in his leg,

asked for a book to divert his thoughts:  the 'Lives of the Saints'

was brought to him, and its perusal so inflamed his mind, that he

determined thenceforth to devote himself to the founding of a

religious order.  Luther, in like manner, was inspired to undertake

the great labours of his life by a perusal of the 'Life and

Writings of John Huss.'  Dr. Wolff was stimulated to enter upon his

missionary career by reading the 'Life of Francis Xavier;' and the

book fired his youthful bosom with a passion the most sincere and

ardent to devote himself to the enterprise of his life.  William

Carey, also, got the first idea of entering upon his sublime

labours as a missionary from a perusal of the Voyages of Captain

Cook.



Francis Horner was accustomed to note in his diary and letters the

books by which he was most improved and influenced.  Amongst these

were Condorcet's 'Eloge of Haller,' Sir Joshua Reynolds'

'Discourses,' the writings of Bacon, and 'Burnet's Account of Sir

Matthew Hale.'  The perusal of the last-mentioned book - the

portrait of a prodigy of labour - Horner says, filled him with

enthusiasm.  Of Condorcet's 'Eloge of Haller,' he said:  "I never

rise from the account of such men without a sort of thrilling

palpitation about me, which I know not whether I should call

admiration, ambition, or despair."  And speaking of the

'Discourses' of Sir Joshua Reynolds, he said:  "Next to the

writings of Bacon, there is no book which has more powerfully

impelled me to self-culture.  He is one of the first men of genius

who has condescended to inform the world of the steps by which

greatness is attained.  The confidence with which he asserts the

omnipotence of human labour has the effect of familiarising his

reader with the idea that genius is an acquisition rather than a

gift; whilst with all there is blended so naturally and eloquently

the most elevated and passionate admiration of excellence, that

upon the whole there is no book of a more INFLAMMATORY effect."  It

is remarkable that Reynolds himself attributed his first passionate

impulse towards the study of art, to reading Richardson's account

of a great painter; and Haydon was in like manner afterwards

inflamed to follow the same pursuit by reading of the career of

Reynolds.  Thus the brave and aspiring life of one man lights a

flame in the minds of others of like faculties and impulse; and

where there is equally vigorous efforts like distinction and

success will almost surely follow.  Thus the chain of example is

carried down through time in an endless succession of links, -

admiration exciting imitation, and perpetuating the true

aristocracy of genius.



One of the most valuable, and one of the most infectious examples

which can be set before the young, is that of cheerful working.

Cheerfulness gives elasticity to the spirit.  Spectres fly before

it; difficulties cause no despair, for they are encountered with

hope, and the mind acquires that happy disposition to improve

opportunities which rarely fails of success.  The fervent spirit is

always a healthy and happy spirit; working cheerfully itself, and

stimulating others to work.  It confers a dignity on even the most

ordinary occupations.  The most effective work, also, is usually

the full-hearted work - that which passes through the hands or the

head of him whose heart is glad.  Hume was accustomed to say that

he would rather possess a cheerful disposition - inclined always to

look at the bright side of things - than with a gloomy mind to be

the master of an estate of ten thousand a year.  Granville Sharp,

amidst his indefatigable labours on behalf of the slave, solaced

himself in the evenings by taking part in glees and instrumental

concerts at his brother's house, singing, or playing on the flute,

the clarionet or the oboe; and, at the Sunday evening oratorios,

when Handel was played, he beat the kettle-drums.  He also

indulged, though sparingly, in caricature drawing.  Fowell Buxton

also was an eminently cheerful man; taking special pleasure in

field sports, in riding about the country with his children, and in

mixing in all their domestic amusements.



In another sphere of action, Dr. Arnold was a noble and a cheerful

worker, throwing himself into the great business of his life, the

training and teaching of young men, with his whole heart and soul.

It is stated in his admirable biography, that "the most remarkable

thing in the Laleham circle was the wonderful healthiness of tone

which prevailed there.  It was a place where a new comer at once

felt that a great and earnest work was going forward.  Every pupil

was made to feel that there was a work for him to do; that his

happiness, as well as his duty, lay in doing that work well.  Hence

an indescribable zest was communicated to a young man's feeling

about life; a strange joy came over him on discerning that he had

the means of being useful, and thus of being happy; and a deep

respect and ardent attachment sprang up towards him who had taught

him thus to value life and his own self, and his work and mission

in the world.  All this was founded on the breadth and

comprehensiveness of Arnold's character, as well as its striking

truth and reality; on the unfeigned regard he had for work of all

kinds, and the sense he had of its value, both for the complex

aggregate of society and the growth and protection of the

individual.  In all this there was no excitement; no predilection

for one class of work above another; no enthusiasm for any one-

sided object:  but a humble, profound, and most religious

consciousness that work is the appointed calling of man on earth;

the end for which his various faculties were given; the element in

which his nature is ordained to develop itself, and in which his

progressive advance towards heaven is to lie."  Among the many

valuable men trained for public life and usefulness by Arnold, was

the gallant Hodson, of Hodson's Horse, who, writing home from

India, many years after, thus spoke of his revered master:  "The

influence he produced has been most lasting and striking in its

effects.  It is felt even in India; I cannot say more than THAT."



The useful influence which a right-hearted man of energy and

industry may exercise amongst his neighbours and dependants, and

accomplish for his country, cannot, perhaps, be better illustrated

than by the career of Sir John Sinclair; characterized by the Abbe

Gregoire as "the most indefatigable man in Europe."  He was

originally a country laird, born to a considerable estate situated

near John o' Groat's House, almost beyond the beat of civilization,

in a bare wild country fronting the stormy North Sea.  His father

dying while he was a youth of sixteen, the management of the family

property thus early devolved upon him; and at eighteen he began a

course of vigorous improvement in the county of Caithness, which

eventually spread all over Scotland.  Agriculture then was in a

most backward state; the fields were unenclosed, the lands

undrained; the small farmers of Caithness were so poor that they

could scarcely afford to keep a horse or shelty; the hard work was

chiefly done, and the burdens borne, by the women; and if a cottier

lost a horse it was not unusual for him to marry a wife as the

cheapest substitute.  The country was without roads or bridges; and

drovers driving their cattle south had to swim the rivers along

with their beasts.  The chief track leading into Caithness lay

along a high shelf on a mountain side, the road being some hundred

feet of clear perpendicular height above the sea which dashed

below.  Sir John, though a mere youth, determined to make a new

road over the hill of Ben Cheilt, the old let-alone proprietors,

however, regarding his scheme with incredulity and derision.  But

he himself laid out the road, assembled some twelve hundred workmen

early one summer's morning, set them simultaneously to work,

superintending their labours, and stimulating them by his presence

and example; and before night, what had been a dangerous sheep

track, six miles in length, hardly passable for led horses, was

made practicable for wheel-carriages as if by the power of magic.

It was an admirable example of energy and well-directed labour,

which could not fail to have a most salutary influence upon the

surrounding population.  He then proceeded to make more roads, to

erect mills, to build bridges, and to enclose and cultivate the

waste lands.  He introduced improved methods of culture, and

regular rotation of crops, distributing small premiums to encourage

industry; and he thus soon quickened the whole frame of society

within reach of his influence, and infused an entirely new spirit

into the cultivators of the soil.  From being one of the most

inaccessible districts of the north - the very ULTIMA THULE of

civilization - Caithness became a pattern county for its roads, its

agriculture, and its fisheries.  In Sinclair's youth, the post was

carried by a runner only once a week, and the young baronet then

declared that he would never rest till a coach drove daily to

Thurso.  The people of the neighbourhood could not believe in any

such thing, and it became a proverb in the county to say of an

utterly impossible scheme, "Ou, ay, that will come to pass when Sir

John sees the daily mail at Thurso!"  But Sir John lived to see his

dream realized, and the daily mail established to Thurso.



The circle of his benevolent operation gradually widened.

Observing the serious deterioration which had taken place in the

quality of British wool, - one of the staple commodities of the

country, - he forthwith, though but a private and little-known

country gentleman, devoted himself to its improvement.  By his

personal exertions he established the British Wool Society for the

purpose, and himself led the way to practical improvement by

importing 800 sheep from all countries, at his own expense.  The

result was, the introduction into Scotland of the celebrated

Cheviot breed.  Sheep farmers scouted the idea of south country

flocks being able to thrive in the far north.  But Sir John

persevered; and in a few years there were not fewer than 300,000

Cheviots diffused over the four northern counties alone.  The value

of all grazing land was thus enormously increased; and Scotch

estates, which before were comparatively worthless, began to yield

large rentals.



Returned by Caithness to Parliament, in which he remained for

thirty years, rarely missing a division, his position gave him

farther opportunities of usefulness, which he did not neglect to

employ.  Mr. Pitt, observing his persevering energy in all useful

public projects, sent for him to Downing Street, and voluntarily

proposed his assistance in any object he might have in view.

Another man might have thought of himself and his own promotion;

but Sir John characteristically replied, that he desired no favour

for himself, but intimated that the reward most gratifying to his

feelings would be Mr. Pitt's assistance in the establishment of a

National Board of Agriculture.  Arthur Young laid a bet with the

baronet that his scheme would never be established, adding, "Your

Board of Agriculture will be in the moon!"  But vigorously setting

to work, he roused public attention to the subject, enlisted a

majority of Parliament on his side, and eventually established the

Board, of which he was appointed President.  The result of its

action need not be described, but the stimulus which it gave to

agriculture and stock-raising was shortly felt throughout the whole

United Kingdom, and tens of thousands of acres were redeemed from

barrenness by its operation.  He was equally indefatigable in

encouraging the establishment of fisheries; and the successful

founding of these great branches of British industry at Thurso and

Wick was mainly due to his exertions.  He urged for long years, and

at length succeeded in obtaining the enclosure of a harbour for the

latter place, which is perhaps the greatest and most prosperous

fishing town in the world.



Sir John threw his personal energy into every work in which he

engaged, rousing the inert, stimulating the idle, encouraging the

hopeful, and working with all.  When a French invasion was

threatened, he offered to Mr. Pitt to raise a regiment on his own

estate, and he was as good as his word.  He went down to the north,

and raised a battalion of 600 men, afterwards increased to 1000;

and it was admitted to be one of the finest volunteer regiments

ever raised, inspired throughout by his own noble and patriotic

spirit.  While commanding officer of the camp at Aberdeen he held

the offices of a Director of the Bank of Scotland, Chairman of the

British Wool Society, Provost of Wick, Director of the British

Fishery Society, Commissioner for issuing Exchequer Bills, Member

of Parliament for Caithness, and President of the Board of

Agriculture.  Amidst all this multifarious and self-imposed work,

he even found time to write books, enough of themselves to

establish a reputation.  When Mr. Rush, the American Ambassador,

arrived in England, he relates that he inquired of Mr. Coke of

Holkham, what was the best work on Agriculture, and was referred to

Sir John Sinclair's; and when he further asked of Mr. Vansittart,

Chancellor of the Exchequer, what was the best work on British

Finance, he was again referred to a work by Sir John Sinclair, his

'History of the Public Revenue.'  But the great monument of his

indefatigable industry, a work that would have appalled other men,

but only served to rouse and sustain his energy, was his

'Statistical Account of Scotland,' in twenty-one volumes, one of

the most valuable practical works ever published in any age or

country.  Amid a host of other pursuits it occupied him nearly

eight years of hard labour, during which he received, and attended

to, upwards of 20,000 letters on the subject.  It was a thoroughly

patriotic undertaking, from which he derived no personal advantage

whatever, beyond the honour of having completed it.  The whole of

the profits were assigned by him to the Society for the Sons of the

Clergy in Scotland.  The publication of the book led to great

public improvements; it was followed by the immediate abolition of

several oppressive feudal rights, to which it called attention; the

salaries of schoolmasters and clergymen in many parishes were

increased; and an increased stimulus was given to agriculture

throughout Scotland.  Sir John then publicly offered to undertake

the much greater labour of collecting and publishing a similar

Statistical Account of England; but unhappily the then Archbishop

of Canterbury refused to sanction it, lest it should interfere with

the tithes of the clergy, and the idea was abandoned.



A remarkable illustration of his energetic promptitude was the

manner in which he once provided, on a great emergency, for the

relief of the manufacturing districts.  In 1793 the stagnation

produced by the war led to an unusual number of bankruptcies, and

many of the first houses in Manchester and Glasgow were tottering,

not so much from want of property, but because the usual sources of

trade and credit were for the time closed up.  A period of intense

distress amongst the labouring classes seemed imminent, when Sir

John urged, in Parliament, that Exchequer notes to the amount of

five millions should be issued immediately as a loan to such

merchants as could give security.  This suggestion was adopted, and

his offer to carry out his plan, in conjunction with certain

members named by him, was also accepted.  The vote was passed late

at night, and early next morning Sir John, anticipating the delays

of officialism and red tape, proceeded to bankers in the city, and

borrowed of them, on his own personal security, the sum of

70,000L., which he despatched the same evening to those merchants

who were in the most urgent need of assistance.  Pitt meeting Sir

John in the House, expressed his great regret that the pressing

wants of Manchester and Glasgow could not be supplied so soon as

was desirable, adding, "The money cannot be raised for some days."

"It is already gone! it left London by to-night's mail!" was Sir

John's triumphant reply; and in afterwards relating the anecdote he

added, with a smile of pleasure, "Pitt was as much startled as if I

had stabbed him."  To the last this great, good man worked on

usefully and cheerfully, setting a great example for his family and

for his country.  In so laboriously seeking others' good, it might

be said that he found his own - not wealth, for his generosity

seriously impaired his private fortune, but happiness, and self-

satisfaction, and the peace that passes knowledge.  A great

patriot, with magnificent powers of work, he nobly did his duty to

his country; yet he was not neglectful of his own household and

home.  His sons and daughters grew up to honour and usefulness; and

it was one of the proudest things Sir John could say, when verging

on his eightieth year, that he had lived to see seven sons grown

up, not one of whom had incurred a debt he could not pay, or caused

him a sorrow that could have been avoided.

