






Footnotes:





(1)  Napoleon III., 'Life of Caesar.'



(2)  Soult received but little education in his youth, and learnt

next to no geography until he became foreign minister of France,

when the study of this branch of knowledge is said to have given

him the greatest pleasure. - 'OEuvres, &c., d'Alexis de

Tocqueville.  Par G. de Beaumont.'  Paris, 1861. I. 52



(3)  'OEuvres et Correspondance inedite d'Alexis de Tocqueville.

Par Gustave de Beaumont.'  I. 398.



(4)  "I have seen," said he, "a hundred times in the course of my

life, a weak man exhibit genuine public virtue, because supported

by a wife who sustained hint in his course, not so much by advising

him to such and such acts, as by exercising a strengthening

influence over the manner in which duty or even ambition was to be

regarded.  Much oftener, however, it must be confessed, have I seen

private and domestic life gradually transform a man to whom nature

had given generosity, disinterestedness, and even some capacity for

greatness, into an ambitious, mean-spirited, vulgar, and selfish

creature who, in matters relating to his country, ended by

considering them only in so far as they rendered his own particular

condition more comfortable and easy." - 'OEuvres de Tocqueville.'

II. 349.



(5)  Since the original publication of this book, the author has in

another work, 'The Lives of Boulton and Watt,' endeavoured to

portray in greater detail the character and achievements of these

two remarkable men.



(6)  The following entry, which occurs in the account of monies

disbursed by the burgesses of Sheffield in 1573 [?] is supposed by

some to refer to the inventor of the stocking frame:- "Item gyven

to Willm-Lee, a poore scholler in Sheafield, towards the settyng

him to the Universitie of Chambrydge, and buying him bookes and

other furnyture [which money was afterwards returned] xiii iiii

[13s. 4d.]." - Hunter, 'History of Hallamshire,' 141.



(7)  'History of the Framework Knitters.'



(8)  There are, however, other and different accounts.  One is to

the effect that Lee set about studying the contrivance of the

stocking-loom for the purpose of lessening the labour of a young

country-girl to whom he was attached, whose occupation was

knitting; another, that being married and poor, his wife was under

the necessity of contributing to their joint support by knitting;

and that Lee, while watching the motion of his wife's fingers,

conceived the idea of imitating their movements by a machine.  The

latter story seems to have been invented by Aaron Hill, Esq., in

his 'Account of the Rise and Progress of the Beech Oil

manufacture,' London, 1715; but his statement is altogether

unreliable.  Thus he makes Lee to have been a Fellow of a college

at Oxford, from which he was expelled for marrying an innkeeper's

daughter; whilst Lee neither studied at Oxford, nor married there,

nor was a Fellow of any college; and he concludes by alleging that

the result of his invention was to "make Lee and his family happy;"

whereas the invention brought him only a heritage of misery, and he

died abroad destitute.



(9)  Blackner, 'History of Nottingham.'  The author adds, "We have

information, handed down in direct succession from father to son,

that it was not till late in the seventeenth century that one man

could manage the working of a frame.  The man who was considered

the workman employed a labourer, who stood behind the frame to work

the slur and pressing motions; but the application of traddles and

of the feet eventually rendered the labour unnecessary."



(10)  Palissy's own words are:- "Le bois m'ayant failli, je fus

contraint brusler les estapes (etaies) qui soustenoyent les tailles

de mon jardin, lesquelles estant bruslees, je fus constraint

brusler les tables et plancher de la maison, afin de faire fondre

la seconde composition.  J'estois en une telle angoisse que je ne

scaurois dire:  car j'estois tout tari et deseche e cause du labeur

et de la chaleur du fourneau; il y avoit plus d'un mois que ma

chemise n'avoit seiche sur moy, encores pour me consoler on se

moquoit de moy, et mesme ceux qui me devoient secourir alloient

crier par la ville que je faisois brusler le plancher:  et par tel

moyen l'on me faisoit perdre mon credit et m'estimoit-on estre fol.

Les autres disoient que je cherchois e faire la fausse monnoye, qui

estoit un mal qui me faisoit seicher sur les pieds; et m'en allois

par les rues tout baisse comme un homme honteux:  . . . personne ne

me secouroit:  Mais au contraire ils se mocquoyent de moy, en

disant:  Il luy appartient bien de mourir de faim, par ce qu'il

delaisse son mestier.  Toutes ces nouvelles venoyent a mes

aureilles quand je passois par la rue."  'OEuvres Completes de

Palissy.  Paris, 1844;' De l'Art de Terre, p. 315.



(11)  "Toutes ces fautes m'ont cause un tel lasseur et tristesse

d'esprit, qu'auparavant que j'aye rendu mes emaux fusible e un

mesme degre de feu, j'ay cuide entrer jusques e la porte du

sepulchre:  aussi en me travaillant e tels affaires je me suis

trouve l'espace de plus se dix ans si fort escoule en ma personne,

qu'il n'y avoit aucune forme ny apparence de bosse aux bras ny aux

jambes:  ains estoyent mes dites jambes toutes d'une venue:  de

sorte que les liens de quoy j'attachois mes bas de chausses

estoyent, soudain que je cheminois, sur les talons avec le residu

de mes chausses." - 'OEuvres, 319-20.



(12)  At the sale of Mr. Bernal's articles of vertu in London a few

years since, one of Palissy's small dishes, 12 inches in diameter,

with a lizard in the centre, sold for 162L.



(13)  Within the last few months, Mr. Charles Read, a gentleman

curious in matters of Protestant antiquarianism in France, has

discovered one of the ovens in which Palissy baked his chefs-

d'oeuvre.  Several moulds of faces, plants, animals, &c., were dug

up in a good state of preservation, bearing his well-known stamp.

It is situated under the gallery of the Louvre, in the Place du

Carrousel.



(14)  D'Aubigne, 'Histoire Universelle.'  The historian adds,

"Voyez l'impudence de ce bilistre! vous diriez qu'il auroit lu ce

vers de Seneque:  'On ne peut contraindre celui qui sait mourir:

QUI MORI SCIT, cogi nescit.'"



(15)  The subject of Palissy's life and labours has been ably and

elaborately treated by Professor Morley in his well-known work.  In

the above brief narrative we have for the most part followed

Palissy's own account of his experiments as given in his 'Art de

Terre.'



(16)  "Almighty God, the great Creator,

Has changed a goldmaker to a potter."



(17)  The whole of the Chinese and Japanese porcelain was formerly

known as Indian porcelain - probably because it was first brought

by the Portuguese from India to Europe, after the discovery of the

Cape of Good Hope by Vasco da Gama.



(18)  'Wedgwood:  an Address delivered at Burslem, Oct. 26th,

1863.'  By the Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone, M.P.



(19)  It was characteristic of Mr. Hume, that, during his

professional voyages between England and India, he should

diligently apply his spare time to the study of navigation and

seamanship; and many years after, it proved of use to him in a

remarkable manner.  In 1825, when on his passage from London to

Leith by a sailing smack, the vessel had scarcely cleared the mouth

of the Thames when a sudden storm came on, she was driven out of

her course, and, in the darkness of the night, she struck on the

Goodwin Sands.  The captain, losing his presence of mind, seemed

incapable of giving coherent orders, and it is probable that the

vessel would have become a total wreck, had not one of the

passengers suddenly taken the command and directed the working of

the ship, himself taking the helm while the danger lasted.  The

vessel was saved, and the stranger was Mr. Hume.



(20)  'Saturday Review,' July 3rd, 1858.



(21)  Mrs. Grote's 'Memoir of the Life of Ary Scheffer,' p. 67.



(22)  While the sheets of this revised edition are passing through

the press, the announcement appears in the local papers of the

death of Mr. Jackson at the age of fifty.  His last work, completed

shortly before his death, was a cantata, entitled 'The Praise of

Music.'  The above particulars of his early life were communicated

by himself to the author several years since, while he was still

carrying on his business of a tallow-chandler at Masham.



(23)  Mansfield owed nothing to his noble relations, who were poor

and uninfluential.  His success was the legitimate and logical

result of the means which he sedulously employed to secure it.

When a boy he rode up from Scotland to London on a pony - taking

two months to make the journey.  After a course of school and

college, he entered upon the profession of the law, and he closed a

career of patient and ceaseless labour as Lord Chief Justice of

England - the functions of which he is universally admitted to have

performed with unsurpassed ability, justice, and honour.



(24)  On 'Thought and Action.'



(25)  'Correspondance de Napoleon Ier.,' publiee par ordre de

l'Empereur Napoleon III, Paris, 1864.



(26)  The recently published correspondence of Napoleon with his

brother Joseph, and the Memoirs of the Duke of Ragusa, abundantly

confirm this view.  The Duke overthrew Napoleon's generals by the

superiority of his routine.  He used to say that, if he knew

anything at all, he knew how to feed an army.



(27)  His old gardener.  Collingwood's favourite amusement was

gardening.  Shortly after the battle of Trafalgar a brother admiral

called upon him, and, after searching for his lordship all over the

garden, he at last discovered him, with old Scott, in the bottom of

a deep trench which they were busily employed in digging.



(28)  Article in the 'Times.'



(29)  'Self-Development:  an Address to Students,' by George Ross,

M.D., pp. 1-20, reprinted from the 'Medical Circular.'  This

address, to which we acknowledge our obligations, contains many

admirable thoughts on self-culture, is thoroughly healthy in its

tone, and well deserves republication in an enlarged form.



(30)  'Saturday Review.'



(31)  See the admirable and well-known book, 'The Pursuit of

Knowledge under Difficulties.'



(32)  Late Professor of Moral Philosophy at St. Andrew's.



(33)  A writer in the 'Edinburgh Review' (July, 1859) observes that

"the Duke's talents seem never to have developed themselves until

some active and practical field for their display was placed

immediately before him.  He was long described by his Spartan

mother, who thought him a dunce, as only 'food for powder.'  He

gained no sort of distinction, either at Eton or at the French

Military College of Angers."  It is not improbable that a

competitive examination, at this day, might have excluded him from

the army.



(34)  Correspondent of 'The Times,' 11th June, 1863.



(35)  Robertson's 'Life and Letters,' i. 258.



(36)  On the 11th January, 1866.



(37)  Brown's 'Horae Subsecivae.'











End 