





CHAPTER VIII - ENGLAND UNDER WILLIAM THE FIRST, THE NORMAN 

CONQUEROR







UPON the ground where the brave Harold fell, William the Norman 

afterwards founded an abbey, which, under the name of Battle Abbey, 

was a rich and splendid place through many a troubled year, though 

now it is a grey ruin overgrown with ivy.  But the first work he 

had to do, was to conquer the English thoroughly; and that, as you 

know by this time, was hard work for any man.



He ravaged several counties; he burned and plundered many towns; he 

laid waste scores upon scores of miles of pleasant country; he 

destroyed innumerable lives.  At length STIGAND, Archbishop of 

Canterbury, with other representatives of the clergy and the 

people, went to his camp, and submitted to him.  EDGAR, the 

insignificant son of Edmund Ironside, was proclaimed King by 

others, but nothing came of it.  He fled to Scotland afterwards, 

where his sister, who was young and beautiful, married the Scottish 

King.  Edgar himself was not important enough for anybody to care 

much about him.



On Christmas Day, William was crowned in Westminster Abbey, under 

the title of WILLIAM THE FIRST; but he is best known as WILLIAM THE 

CONQUEROR.  It was a strange coronation.  One of the bishops who 

performed the ceremony asked the Normans, in French, if they would 

have Duke William for their king?  They answered Yes.  Another of 

the bishops put the same question to the Saxons, in English.  They 

too answered Yes, with a loud shout.  The noise being heard by a 

guard of Norman horse-soldiers outside, was mistaken for resistance 

on the part of the English.  The guard instantly set fire to the 

neighbouring houses, and a tumult ensued; in the midst of which the 

King, being left alone in the Abbey, with a few priests (and they 

all being in a terrible fright together), was hurriedly crowned.  

When the crown was placed upon his head, he swore to govern the 

English as well as the best of their own monarchs.  I dare say you 

think, as I do, that if we except the Great Alfred, he might pretty 

easily have done that.



Numbers of the English nobles had been killed in the last 

disastrous battle.  Their estates, and the estates of all the 

nobles who had fought against him there, King William seized upon, 

and gave to his own Norman knights and nobles.  Many great English 

families of the present time acquired their English lands in this 

way, and are very proud of it.



But what is got by force must be maintained by force.  These nobles 

were obliged to build castles all over England, to defend their new 

property; and, do what he would, the King could neither soothe nor 

quell the nation as he wished.  He gradually introduced the Norman 

language and the Norman customs; yet, for a long time the great 

body of the English remained sullen and revengeful.  On his going 

over to Normandy, to visit his subjects there, the oppressions of 

his half-brother ODO, whom he left in charge of his English 

kingdom, drove the people mad.  The men of Kent even invited over, 

to take possession of Dover, their old enemy Count Eustace of 

Boulogne, who had led the fray when the Dover man was slain at his 

own fireside.  The men of Hereford, aided by the Welsh, and 

commanded by a chief named EDRIC THE WILD, drove the Normans out of 

their country.  Some of those who had been dispossessed of their 

lands, banded together in the North of England; some, in Scotland; 

some, in the thick woods and marshes; and whensoever they could 

fall upon the Normans, or upon the English who had submitted to the 

Normans, they fought, despoiled, and murdered, like the desperate 

outlaws that they were.  Conspiracies were set on foot for a 

general massacre of the Normans, like the old massacre of the 

Danes.  In short, the English were in a murderous mood all through 

the kingdom.



King William, fearing he might lose his conquest, came back, and 

tried to pacify the London people by soft words.  He then set forth 

to repress the country people by stern deeds.  Among the towns 

which he besieged, and where he killed and maimed the inhabitants 

without any distinction, sparing none, young or old, armed or 

unarmed, were Oxford, Warwick, Leicester, Nottingham, Derby, 

Lincoln, York.  In all these places, and in many others, fire and 

sword worked their utmost horrors, and made the land dreadful to 

behold.  The streams and rivers were discoloured with blood; the 

sky was blackened with smoke; the fields were wastes of ashes; the 

waysides were heaped up with dead.  Such are the fatal results of 

conquest and ambition!  Although William was a harsh and angry man, 

I do not suppose that he deliberately meant to work this shocking 

ruin, when he invaded England.  But what he had got by the strong 

hand, he could only keep by the strong hand, and in so doing he 

made England a great grave.



Two sons of Harold, by name EDMUND and GODWIN, came over from 

Ireland, with some ships, against the Normans, but were defeated.  

This was scarcely done, when the outlaws in the woods so harassed 

York, that the Governor sent to the King for help.  The King 

despatched a general and a large force to occupy the town of 

Durham.  The Bishop of that place met the general outside the town, 

and warned him not to enter, as he would be in danger there.  The 

general cared nothing for the warning, and went in with all his 

men.  That night, on every hill within sight of Durham, signal 

fires were seen to blaze.  When the morning dawned, the English, 

who had assembled in great strength, forced the gates, rushed into 

the town, and slew the Normans every one.  The English afterwards 

besought the Danes to come and help them.  The Danes came, with two 

hundred and forty ships.  The outlawed nobles joined them; they 

captured York, and drove the Normans out of that city.  Then, 

William bribed the Danes to go away; and took such vengeance on the 

English, that all the former fire and sword, smoke and ashes, death 

and ruin, were nothing compared with it.  In melancholy songs, and 

doleful stories, it was still sung and told by cottage fires on 

winter evenings, a hundred years afterwards, how, in those dreadful 

days of the Normans, there was not, from the River Humber to the 

River Tyne, one inhabited village left, nor one cultivated field - 

how there was nothing but a dismal ruin, where the human creatures 

and the beasts lay dead together.



The outlaws had, at this time, what they called a Camp of Refuge, 

in the midst of the fens of Cambridgeshire.  Protected by those 

marshy grounds which were difficult of approach, they lay among the 

reeds and rushes, and were hidden by the mists that rose up from 

the watery earth.  Now, there also was, at that time, over the sea 

in Flanders, an Englishman named HEREWARD, whose father had died in 

his absence, and whose property had been given to a Norman.  When 

he heard of this wrong that had been done him (from such of the 

exiled English as chanced to wander into that country), he longed 

for revenge; and joining the outlaws in their camp of refuge, 

became their commander.  He was so good a soldier, that the Normans 

supposed him to be aided by enchantment.  William, even after he 

had made a road three miles in length across the Cambridgeshire 

marshes, on purpose to attack this supposed enchanter, thought it 

necessary to engage an old lady, who pretended to be a sorceress, 

to come and do a little enchantment in the royal cause.  For this 

purpose she was pushed on before the troops in a wooden tower; but 

Hereward very soon disposed of this unfortunate sorceress, by 

burning her, tower and all.  The monks of the convent of Ely near 

at hand, however, who were fond of good living, and who found it 

very uncomfortable to have the country blockaded and their supplies 

of meat and drink cut off, showed the King a secret way of 

surprising the camp.  So Hereward was soon defeated.  Whether he 

afterwards died quietly, or whether he was killed after killing 

sixteen of the men who attacked him (as some old rhymes relate that 

he did), I cannot say.  His defeat put an end to the Camp of 

Refuge; and, very soon afterwards, the King, victorious both in 

Scotland and in England, quelled the last rebellious English noble.  

He then surrounded himself with Norman lords, enriched by the 

property of English nobles; had a great survey made of all the land 

in England, which was entered as the property of its new owners, on 

a roll called Doomsday Book; obliged the people to put out their 

fires and candles at a certain hour every night, on the ringing of 

a bell which was called The Curfew; introduced the Norman dresses 

and manners; made the Normans masters everywhere, and the English, 

servants; turned out the English bishops, and put Normans in their 

places; and showed himself to be the Conqueror indeed.



But, even with his own Normans, he had a restless life.  They were 

always hungering and thirsting for the riches of the English; and 

the more he gave, the more they wanted.  His priests were as greedy 

as his soldiers.  We know of only one Norman who plainly told his 

master, the King, that he had come with him to England to do his 

duty as a faithful servant, and that property taken by force from 

other men had no charms for him.  His name was GUILBERT.  We should 

not forget his name, for it is good to remember and to honour 

honest men.



Besides all these troubles, William the Conqueror was troubled by 

quarrels among his sons.  He had three living.  ROBERT, called 

CURTHOSE, because of his short legs; WILLIAM, called RUFUS or the 

Red, from the colour of his hair; and HENRY, fond of learning, and 

called, in the Norman language, BEAUCLERC, or Fine-Scholar.  When 

Robert grew up, he asked of his father the government of Normandy, 

which he had nominally possessed, as a child, under his mother, 

MATILDA.  The King refusing to grant it, Robert became jealous and 

discontented; and happening one day, while in this temper, to be 

ridiculed by his brothers, who threw water on him from a balcony as 

he was walking before the door, he drew his sword, rushed up-

stairs, and was only prevented by the King himself from putting 

them to death.  That same night, he hotly departed with some 

followers from his father's court, and endeavoured to take the 

Castle of Rouen by surprise.  Failing in this, he shut himself up 

in another Castle in Normandy, which the King besieged, and where 

Robert one day unhorsed and nearly killed him without knowing who 

he was.  His submission when he discovered his father, and the 

intercession of the queen and others, reconciled them; but not 

soundly; for Robert soon strayed abroad, and went from court to 

court with his complaints.  He was a gay, careless, thoughtless 

fellow, spending all he got on musicians and dancers; but his 

mother loved him, and often, against the King's command, supplied 

him with money through a messenger named SAMSON.  At length the 

incensed King swore he would tear out Samson's eyes; and Samson, 

thinking that his only hope of safety was in becoming a monk, 

became one, went on such errands no more, and kept his eyes in his 

head.



All this time, from the turbulent day of his strange coronation, 

the Conqueror had been struggling, you see, at any cost of cruelty 

and bloodshed, to maintain what he had seized.  All his reign, he 

struggled still, with the same object ever before him.  He was a 

stern, bold man, and he succeeded in it.



He loved money, and was particular in his eating, but he had only 

leisure to indulge one other passion, and that was his love of 

hunting.  He carried it to such a height that he ordered whole 

villages and towns to be swept away to make forests for the deer.  

Not satisfied with sixty-eight Royal Forests, he laid waste an 

immense district, to form another in Hampshire, called the New 

Forest.  The many thousands of miserable peasants who saw their 

little houses pulled down, and themselves and children turned into 

the open country without a shelter, detested him for his merciless 

addition to their many sufferings; and when, in the twenty-first 

year of his reign (which proved to be the last), he went over to 

Rouen, England was as full of hatred against him, as if every leaf 

on every tree in all his Royal Forests had been a curse upon his 

head.  In the New Forest, his son Richard (for he had four sons) 

had been gored to death by a Stag; and the people said that this so 

cruelly-made Forest would yet be fatal to others of the Conqueror's 

race.



He was engaged in a dispute with the King of France about some 

territory.  While he stayed at Rouen, negotiating with that King, 

he kept his bed and took medicines:  being advised by his 

physicians to do so, on account of having grown to an unwieldy 

size.  Word being brought to him that the King of France made light 

of this, and joked about it, he swore in a great rage that he 

should rue his jests.  He assembled his army, marched into the 

disputed territory, burnt - his old way! - the vines, the crops, 

and fruit, and set the town of Mantes on fire.  But, in an evil 

hour; for, as he rode over the hot ruins, his horse, setting his 

hoofs upon some burning embers, started, threw him forward against 

the pommel of the saddle, and gave him a mortal hurt.  For six 

weeks he lay dying in a monastery near Rouen, and then made his 

will, giving England to William, Normandy to Robert, and five 

thousand pounds to Henry.  And now, his violent deeds lay heavy on 

his mind.  He ordered money to be given to many English churches 

and monasteries, and - which was much better repentance - released 

his prisoners of state, some of whom had been confined in his 

dungeons twenty years.



It was a September morning, and the sun was rising, when the King 

was awakened from slumber by the sound of a church bell.  'What 

bell is that?' he faintly asked.  They told him it was the bell of 

the chapel of Saint Mary.  'I commend my soul,' said he, 'to Mary!' 

and died.



Think of his name, The Conqueror, and then consider how he lay in 

death!  The moment he was dead, his physicians, priests, and 

nobles, not knowing what contest for the throne might now take 

place, or what might happen in it, hastened away, each man for 

himself and his own property; the mercenary servants of the court 

began to rob and plunder; the body of the King, in the indecent 

strife, was rolled from the bed, and lay alone, for hours, upon the 

ground.  O Conqueror, of whom so many great names are proud now, of 

whom so many great names thought nothing then, it were better to 

have conquered one true heart, than England!



By-and-by, the priests came creeping in with prayers and candles; 

and a good knight, named HERLUIN, undertook (which no one else 

would do) to convey the body to Caen, in Normandy, in order that it 

might be buried in St. Stephen's church there, which the Conqueror 

had founded.  But fire, of which he had made such bad use in his 

life, seemed to follow him of itself in death.  A great 

conflagration broke out in the town when the body was placed in the 

church; and those present running out to extinguish the flames, it 

was once again left alone.



It was not even buried in peace.  It was about to be let down, in 

its Royal robes, into a tomb near the high altar, in presence of a 

great concourse of people, when a loud voice in the crowd cried 

out, 'This ground is mine!  Upon it, stood my father's house.  This 

King despoiled me of both ground and house to build this church.  

In the great name of GOD, I here forbid his body to be covered with 

the earth that is my right!'  The priests and bishops present, 

knowing the speaker's right, and knowing that the King had often 

denied him justice, paid him down sixty shillings for the grave.  

Even then, the corpse was not at rest.  The tomb was too small, and 

they tried to force it in.  It broke, a dreadful smell arose, the 

people hurried out into the air, and, for the third time, it was 

left alone.



Where were the Conqueror's three sons, that they were not at their 

father's burial?  Robert was lounging among minstrels, dancers, and 

gamesters, in France or Germany.  Henry was carrying his five 

thousand pounds safely away in a convenient chest he had got made.  

William the Red was hurrying to England, to lay hands upon the 

Royal treasure and the crown.

