





CHAPTER III - ENGLAND UNDER THE GOOD SAXON, ALFRED







ALFRED THE GREAT was a young man, three-and-twenty years of age, 

when he became king.  Twice in his childhood, he had been taken to 

Rome, where the Saxon nobles were in the habit of going on journeys 

which they supposed to be religious; and, once, he had stayed for 

some time in Paris.  Learning, however, was so little cared for, 

then, that at twelve years old he had not been taught to read; 

although, of the sons of KING ETHELWULF, he, the youngest, was the 

favourite.  But he had - as most men who grow up to be great and 

good are generally found to have had - an excellent mother; and, 

one day, this lady, whose name was OSBURGA, happened, as she was 

sitting among her sons, to read a book of Saxon poetry.  The art of 

printing was not known until long and long after that period, and 

the book, which was written, was what is called 'illuminated,' with 

beautiful bright letters, richly painted.  The brothers admiring it 

very much, their mother said, 'I will give it to that one of you 

four princes who first learns to read.'  ALFRED sought out a tutor 

that very day, applied himself to learn with great diligence, and 

soon won the book.  He was proud of it, all his life.



This great king, in the first year of his reign, fought nine 

battles with the Danes.  He made some treaties with them too, by 

which the false Danes swore they would quit the country.  They 

pretended to consider that they had taken a very solemn oath, in 

swearing this upon the holy bracelets that they wore, and which 

were always buried with them when they died; but they cared little 

for it, for they thought nothing of breaking oaths and treaties 

too, as soon as it suited their purpose, and coming back again to 

fight, plunder, and burn, as usual.  One fatal winter, in the 

fourth year of KING ALFRED'S reign, they spread themselves in great 

numbers over the whole of England; and so dispersed and routed the 

King's soldiers that the King was left alone, and was obliged to 

disguise himself as a common peasant, and to take refuge in the 

cottage of one of his cowherds who did not know his face.



Here, KING ALFRED, while the Danes sought him far and near, was 

left alone one day, by the cowherd's wife, to watch some cakes 

which she put to bake upon the hearth.  But, being at work upon his 

bow and arrows, with which he hoped to punish the false Danes when 

a brighter time should come, and thinking deeply of his poor 

unhappy subjects whom the Danes chased through the land, his noble 

mind forgot the cakes, and they were burnt.  'What!' said the 

cowherd's wife, who scolded him well when she came back, and little 

thought she was scolding the King, 'you will be ready enough to eat 

them by-and-by, and yet you cannot watch them, idle dog?'



At length, the Devonshire men made head against a new host of Danes 

who landed on their coast; killed their chief, and captured their 

flag; on which was represented the likeness of a Raven - a very fit 

bird for a thievish army like that, I think.  The loss of their 

standard troubled the Danes greatly, for they believed it to be 

enchanted - woven by the three daughters of one father in a single 

afternoon - and they had a story among themselves that when they 

were victorious in battle, the Raven stretched his wings and seemed 

to fly; and that when they were defeated, he would droop.  He had 

good reason to droop, now, if he could have done anything half so 

sensible; for, KING ALFRED joined the Devonshire men; made a camp 

with them on a piece of firm ground in the midst of a bog in 

Somersetshire; and prepared for a great attempt for vengeance on 

the Danes, and the deliverance of his oppressed people.



But, first, as it was important to know how numerous those 

pestilent Danes were, and how they were fortified, KING ALFRED, 

being a good musician, disguised himself as a glee-man or minstrel, 

and went, with his harp, to the Danish camp.  He played and sang in 

the very tent of GUTHRUM the Danish leader, and entertained the 

Danes as they caroused.  While he seemed to think of nothing but 

his music, he was watchful of their tents, their arms, their 

discipline, everything that he desired to know.  And right soon did 

this great king entertain them to a different tune; for, summoning 

all his true followers to meet him at an appointed place, where 

they received him with joyful shouts and tears, as the monarch whom 

many of them had given up for lost or dead, he put himself at their 

head, marched on the Danish camp, defeated the Danes with great 

slaughter, and besieged them for fourteen days to prevent their 

escape.  But, being as merciful as he was good and brave, he then, 

instead of killing them, proposed peace:  on condition that they 

should altogether depart from that Western part of England, and 

settle in the East; and that GUTHRUM should become a Christian, in 

remembrance of the Divine religion which now taught his conqueror, 

the noble ALFRED, to forgive the enemy who had so often injured 

him.  This, GUTHRUM did.  At his baptism, KING ALFRED was his 

godfather.  And GUTHRUM was an honourable chief who well deserved 

that clemency; for, ever afterwards he was loyal and faithful to 

the king.  The Danes under him were faithful too.  They plundered 

and burned no more, but worked like honest men.  They ploughed, and 

sowed, and reaped, and led good honest English lives.  And I hope 

the children of those Danes played, many a time, with Saxon 

children in the sunny fields; and that Danish young men fell in 

love with Saxon girls, and married them; and that English 

travellers, benighted at the doors of Danish cottages, often went 

in for shelter until morning; and that Danes and Saxons sat by the 

red fire, friends, talking of KING ALFRED THE GREAT.



All the Danes were not like these under GUTHRUM; for, after some 

years, more of them came over, in the old plundering and burning 

way - among them a fierce pirate of the name of HASTINGS, who had 

the boldness to sail up the Thames to Gravesend, with eighty ships.  

For three years, there was a war with these Danes; and there was a 

famine in the country, too, and a plague, both upon human creatures 

and beasts.  But KING ALFRED, whose mighty heart never failed him, 

built large ships nevertheless, with which to pursue the pirates on 

the sea; and he encouraged his soldiers, by his brave example, to 

fight valiantly against them on the shore.  At last, he drove them 

all away; and then there was repose in England.



As great and good in peace, as he was great and good in war, KING 

ALFRED never rested from his labours to improve his people.  He 

loved to talk with clever men, and with travellers from foreign 

countries, and to write down what they told him, for his people to 

read.  He had studied Latin after learning to read English, and now 

another of his labours was, to translate Latin books into the 

English-Saxon tongue, that his people might be interested, and 

improved by their contents.  He made just laws, that they might 

live more happily and freely; he turned away all partial judges, 

that no wrong might be done them; he was so careful of their 

property, and punished robbers so severely, that it was a common 

thing to say that under the great KING ALFRED, garlands of golden 

chains and jewels might have hung across the streets, and no man 

would have touched one.  He founded schools; he patiently heard 

causes himself in his Court of Justice; the great desires of his 

heart were, to do right to all his subjects, and to leave England 

better, wiser, happier in all ways, than he found it.  His industry 

in these efforts was quite astonishing.  Every day he divided into 

certain portions, and in each portion devoted himself to a certain 

pursuit.  That he might divide his time exactly, he had wax torches 

or candles made, which were all of the same size, were notched 

across at regular distances, and were always kept burning.  Thus, 

as the candles burnt down, he divided the day into notches, almost 

as accurately as we now divide it into hours upon the clock.  But 

when the candles were first invented, it was found that the wind 

and draughts of air, blowing into the palace through the doors and 

windows, and through the chinks in the walls, caused them to gutter 

and burn unequally.  To prevent this, the King had them put into 

cases formed of wood and white horn.  And these were the first 

lanthorns ever made in England.



All this time, he was afflicted with a terrible unknown disease, 

which caused him violent and frequent pain that nothing could 

relieve.  He bore it, as he had borne all the troubles of his life, 

like a brave good man, until he was fifty-three years old; and 

then, having reigned thirty years, he died.  He died in the year 

nine hundred and one; but, long ago as that is, his fame, and the 

love and gratitude with which his subjects regarded him, are 

freshly remembered to the present hour.



In the next reign, which was the reign of EDWARD, surnamed THE 

ELDER, who was chosen in council to succeed, a nephew of KING 

ALFRED troubled the country by trying to obtain the throne.  The 

Danes in the East of England took part with this usurper (perhaps 

because they had honoured his uncle so much, and honoured him for 

his uncle's sake), and there was hard fighting; but, the King, with 

the assistance of his sister, gained the day, and reigned in peace 

for four and twenty years.  He gradually extended his power over 

the whole of England, and so the Seven Kingdoms were united into 

one.



When England thus became one kingdom, ruled over by one Saxon king, 

the Saxons had been settled in the country more than four hundred 

and fifty years.  Great changes had taken place in its customs 

during that time.  The Saxons were still greedy eaters and great 

drinkers, and their feasts were often of a noisy and drunken kind; 

but many new comforts and even elegances had become known, and were 

fast increasing.  Hangings for the walls of rooms, where, in these 

modern days, we paste up paper, are known to have been sometimes 

made of silk, ornamented with birds and flowers in needlework.  

Tables and chairs were curiously carved in different woods; were 

sometimes decorated with gold or silver; sometimes even made of 

those precious metals.  Knives and spoons were used at table; 

golden ornaments were worn - with silk and cloth, and golden 

tissues and embroideries; dishes were made of gold and silver, 

brass and bone.  There were varieties of drinking-horns, bedsteads, 

musical instruments.  A harp was passed round, at a feast, like the 

drinking-bowl, from guest to guest; and each one usually sang or 

played when his turn came.  The weapons of the Saxons were stoutly 

made, and among them was a terrible iron hammer that gave deadly 

blows, and was long remembered.  The Saxons themselves were a 

handsome people.  The men were proud of their long fair hair, 

parted on the forehead; their ample beards, their fresh 

complexions, and clear eyes.  The beauty of the Saxon women filled 

all England with a new delight and grace.



I have more to tell of the Saxons yet, but I stop to say this now, 

because under the GREAT ALFRED, all the best points of the English-

Saxon character were first encouraged, and in him first shown.  It 

has been the greatest character among the nations of the earth.  

Wherever the descendants of the Saxon race have gone, have sailed, 

or otherwise made their way, even to the remotest regions of the 

world, they have been patient, persevering, never to be broken in 

spirit, never to be turned aside from enterprises on which they 

have resolved.  In Europe, Asia, Africa, America, the whole world 

over; in the desert, in the forest, on the sea; scorched by a 

burning sun, or frozen by ice that never melts; the Saxon blood 

remains unchanged.  Wheresoever that race goes, there, law, and 

industry, and safety for life and property, and all the great 

results of steady perseverance, are certain to arise.



I pause to think with admiration, of the noble king who, in his 

single person, possessed all the Saxon virtues.  Whom misfortune 

could not subdue, whom prosperity could not spoil, whose 

perseverance nothing could shake.  Who was hopeful in defeat, and 

generous in success.  Who loved justice, freedom, truth, and 

knowledge.  Who, in his care to instruct his people, probably did 

more to preserve the beautiful old Saxon language, than I can 

imagine.  Without whom, the English tongue in which I tell this 

story might have wanted half its meaning.  As it is said that his 

spirit still inspires some of our best English laws, so, let you 

and I pray that it may animate our English hearts, at least to this 

- to resolve, when we see any of our fellow-creatures left in 

ignorance, that we will do our best, while life is in us, to have 

them taught; and to tell those rulers whose duty it is to teach 

them, and who neglect their duty, that they have profited very 

little by all the years that have rolled away since the year nine 

hundred and one, and that they are far behind the bright example of 

KING ALFRED THE GREAT.

