





CHAPTER XXV - ENGLAND UNDER RICHARD THE THIRD







KING RICHARD THE THIRD was up betimes in the morning, and went to 

Westminster Hall.  In the Hall was a marble seat, upon which he sat 

himself down between two great noblemen, and told the people that 

he began the new reign in that place, because the first duty of a 

sovereign was to administer the laws equally to all, and to 

maintain justice.  He then mounted his horse and rode back to the 

City, where he was received by the clergy and the crowd as if he 

really had a right to the throne, and really were a just man.  The 

clergy and the crowd must have been rather ashamed of themselves in 

secret, I think, for being such poor-spirited knaves.



The new King and his Queen were soon crowned with a great deal of 

show and noise, which the people liked very much; and then the King 

set forth on a royal progress through his dominions.  He was 

crowned a second time at York, in order that the people might have 

show and noise enough; and wherever he went was received with 

shouts of rejoicing - from a good many people of strong lungs, who 

were paid to strain their throats in crying, 'God save King 

Richard!'  The plan was so successful that I am told it has been 

imitated since, by other usurpers, in other progresses through 

other dominions.



While he was on this journey, King Richard stayed a week at 

Warwick.  And from Warwick he sent instructions home for one of the 

wickedest murders that ever was done - the murder of the two young 

princes, his nephews, who were shut up in the Tower of London.



Sir Robert Brackenbury was at that time Governor of the Tower.  To 

him, by the hands of a messenger named JOHN GREEN, did King Richard 

send a letter, ordering him by some means to put the two young 

princes to death.  But Sir Robert - I hope because he had children 

of his own, and loved them - sent John Green back again, riding and 

spurring along the dusty roads, with the answer that he could not 

do so horrible a piece of work.  The King, having frowningly 

considered a little, called to him SIR JAMES TYRREL, his master of 

the horse, and to him gave authority to take command of the Tower, 

whenever he would, for twenty-four hours, and to keep all the keys 

of the Tower during that space of time.  Tyrrel, well knowing what 

was wanted, looked about him for two hardened ruffians, and chose 

JOHN DIGHTON, one of his own grooms, and MILES FOREST, who was a 

murderer by trade.  Having secured these two assistants, he went, 

upon a day in August, to the Tower, showed his authority from the 

King, took the command for four-and-twenty hours, and obtained 

possession of the keys.  And when the black night came he went 

creeping, creeping, like a guilty villain as he was, up the dark, 

stone winding stairs, and along the dark stone passages, until he 

came to the door of the room where the two young princes, having 

said their prayers, lay fast asleep, clasped in each other's arms.  

And while he watched and listened at the door, he sent in those 

evil demons, John Dighton and Miles Forest, who smothered the two 

princes with the bed and pillows, and carried their bodies down the 

stairs, and buried them under a great heap of stones at the 

staircase foot.  And when the day came, he gave up the command of 

the Tower, and restored the keys, and hurried away without once 

looking behind him; and Sir Robert Brackenbury went with fear and 

sadness to the princes' room, and found the princes gone for ever.



You know, through all this history, how true it is that traitors 

are never true, and you will not be surprised to learn that the 

Duke of Buckingham soon turned against King Richard, and joined a 

great conspiracy that was formed to dethrone him, and to place the 

crown upon its rightful owner's head.  Richard had meant to keep 

the murder secret; but when he heard through his spies that this 

conspiracy existed, and that many lords and gentlemen drank in 

secret to the healths of the two young princes in the Tower, he 

made it known that they were dead.  The conspirators, though 

thwarted for a moment, soon resolved to set up for the crown 

against the murderous Richard, HENRY Earl of Richmond, grandson of 

Catherine:  that widow of Henry the Fifth who married Owen Tudor.  

And as Henry was of the house of Lancaster, they proposed that he 

should marry the Princess Elizabeth, the eldest daughter of the 

late King, now the heiress of the house of York, and thus by 

uniting the rival families put an end to the fatal wars of the Red 

and White Roses.  All being settled, a time was appointed for Henry 

to come over from Brittany, and for a great rising against Richard 

to take place in several parts of England at the same hour.  On a 

certain day, therefore, in October, the revolt took place; but 

unsuccessfully.  Richard was prepared, Henry was driven back at sea 

by a storm, his followers in England were dispersed, and the Duke 

of Buckingham was taken, and at once beheaded in the market-place 

at Salisbury.



The time of his success was a good time, Richard thought, for 

summoning a Parliament and getting some money.  So, a Parliament 

was called, and it flattered and fawned upon him as much as he 

could possibly desire, and declared him to be the rightful King of 

England, and his only son Edward, then eleven years of age, the 

next heir to the throne.



Richard knew full well that, let the Parliament say what it would, 

the Princess Elizabeth was remembered by people as the heiress of 

the house of York; and having accurate information besides, of its 

being designed by the conspirators to marry her to Henry of 

Richmond, he felt that it would much strengthen him and weaken 

them, to be beforehand with them, and marry her to his son.  With 

this view he went to the Sanctuary at Westminster, where the late 

King's widow and her daughter still were, and besought them to come 

to Court:  where (he swore by anything and everything) they should 

be safely and honourably entertained.  They came, accordingly, but 

had scarcely been at Court a month when his son died suddenly - or 

was poisoned - and his plan was crushed to pieces.



In this extremity, King Richard, always active, thought, 'I must 

make another plan.'  And he made the plan of marrying the Princess 

Elizabeth himself, although she was his niece.  There was one 

difficulty in the way:  his wife, the Queen Anne, was alive.  But, 

he knew (remembering his nephews) how to remove that obstacle, and 

he made love to the Princess Elizabeth, telling her he felt 

perfectly confident that the Queen would die in February.  The 

Princess was not a very scrupulous young lady, for, instead of 

rejecting the murderer of her brothers with scorn and hatred, she 

openly declared she loved him dearly; and, when February came and 

the Queen did not die, she expressed her impatient opinion that she 

was too long about it.  However, King Richard was not so far out in 

his prediction, but, that she died in March - he took good care of 

that - and then this precious pair hoped to be married.  But they 

were disappointed, for the idea of such a marriage was so unpopular 

in the country, that the King's chief counsellors, RATCLIFFE and 

CATESBY, would by no means undertake to propose it, and the King 

was even obliged to declare in public that he had never thought of 

such a thing.



He was, by this time, dreaded and hated by all classes of his 

subjects.  His nobles deserted every day to Henry's side; he dared 

not call another Parliament, lest his crimes should be denounced 

there; and for want of money, he was obliged to get Benevolences 

from the citizens, which exasperated them all against him.  It was 

said too, that, being stricken by his conscience, he dreamed 

frightful dreams, and started up in the night-time, wild with 

terror and remorse.  Active to the last, through all this, he 

issued vigorous proclamations against Henry of Richmond and all his 

followers, when he heard that they were coming against him with a 

Fleet from France; and took the field as fierce and savage as a 

wild boar - the animal represented on his shield.



Henry of Richmond landed with six thousand men at Milford Haven, 

and came on against King Richard, then encamped at Leicester with 

an army twice as great, through North Wales.  On Bosworth Field the 

two armies met; and Richard, looking along Henry's ranks, and 

seeing them crowded with the English nobles who had abandoned him, 

turned pale when he beheld the powerful Lord Stanley and his son 

(whom he had tried hard to retain) among them.  But, he was as 

brave as he was wicked, and plunged into the thickest of the fight.  

He was riding hither and thither, laying about him in all 

directions, when he observed the Earl of Northumberland - one of 

his few great allies - to stand inactive, and the main body of his 

troops to hesitate.  At the same moment, his desperate glance 

caught Henry of Richmond among a little group of his knights.  

Riding hard at him, and crying 'Treason!' he killed his standard-

bearer, fiercely unhorsed another gentleman, and aimed a powerful 

stroke at Henry himself, to cut him down.  But, Sir William Stanley 

parried it as it fell, and before Richard could raise his arm 

again, he was borne down in a press of numbers, unhorsed, and 

killed.  Lord Stanley picked up the crown, all bruised and 

trampled, and stained with blood, and put it upon Richmond's head, 

amid loud and rejoicing cries of 'Long live King Henry!'



That night, a horse was led up to the church of the Grey Friars at 

Leicester; across whose back was tied, like some worthless sack, a 

naked body brought there for burial.  It was the body of the last 

of the Plantagenet line, King Richard the Third, usurper and 

murderer, slain at the battle of Bosworth Field in the thirty-

second year of his age, after a reign of two years.


