





CHAPTER XXIII - ENGLAND UNDER EDWARD THE FOURTH







KING EDWARD THE FOURTH was not quite twenty-one years of age when 

he took that unquiet seat upon the throne of England.  The 

Lancaster party, the Red Roses, were then assembling in great 

numbers near York, and it was necessary to give them battle 

instantly.  But, the stout Earl of Warwick leading for the young 

King, and the young King himself closely following him, and the 

English people crowding round the Royal standard, the White and the 

Red Roses met, on a wild March day when the snow was falling 

heavily, at Towton; and there such a furious battle raged between 

them, that the total loss amounted to forty thousand men - all 

Englishmen, fighting, upon English ground, against one another.  

The young King gained the day, took down the heads of his father 

and brother from the walls of York, and put up the heads of some of 

the most famous noblemen engaged in the battle on the other side.  

Then, he went to London and was crowned with great splendour.



A new Parliament met.  No fewer than one hundred and fifty of the 

principal noblemen and gentlemen on the Lancaster side were 

declared traitors, and the King - who had very little humanity, 

though he was handsome in person and agreeable in manners - 

resolved to do all he could, to pluck up the Red Rose root and 

branch.



Queen Margaret, however, was still active for her young son.  She 

obtained help from Scotland and from Normandy, and took several 

important English castles.  But, Warwick soon retook them; the 

Queen lost all her treasure on board ship in a great storm; and 

both she and her son suffered great misfortunes.  Once, in the 

winter weather, as they were riding through a forest, they were 

attacked and plundered by a party of robbers; and, when they had 

escaped from these men and were passing alone and on foot through a 

thick dark part of the wood, they came, all at once, upon another 

robber.  So the Queen, with a stout heart, took the little Prince 

by the hand, and going straight up to that robber, said to him, 'My 

friend, this is the young son of your lawful King!  I confide him 

to your care.'  The robber was surprised, but took the boy in his 

arms, and faithfully restored him and his mother to their friends.  

In the end, the Queen's soldiers being beaten and dispersed, she 

went abroad again, and kept quiet for the present.



Now, all this time, the deposed King Henry was concealed by a Welsh 

knight, who kept him close in his castle.  But, next year, the 

Lancaster party recovering their spirits, raised a large body of 

men, and called him out of his retirement, to put him at their 

head.  They were joined by some powerful noblemen who had sworn 

fidelity to the new King, but who were ready, as usual, to break 

their oaths, whenever they thought there was anything to be got by 

it.  One of the worst things in the history of the war of the Red 

and White Roses, is the ease with which these noblemen, who should 

have set an example of honour to the people, left either side as 

they took slight offence, or were disappointed in their greedy 

expectations, and joined the other.  Well! Warwick's brother soon 

beat the Lancastrians, and the false noblemen, being taken, were 

beheaded without a moment's loss of time.  The deposed King had a 

narrow escape; three of his servants were taken, and one of them 

bore his cap of estate, which was set with pearls and embroidered 

with two golden crowns.  However, the head to which the cap 

belonged, got safely into Lancashire, and lay pretty quietly there 

(the people in the secret being very true) for more than a year.  

At length, an old monk gave such intelligence as led to Henry's 

being taken while he was sitting at dinner in a place called 

Waddington Hall.  He was immediately sent to London, and met at 

Islington by the Earl of Warwick, by whose directions he was put 

upon a horse, with his legs tied under it, and paraded three times 

round the pillory.  Then, he was carried off to the Tower, where 

they treated him well enough.



The White Rose being so triumphant, the young King abandoned 

himself entirely to pleasure, and led a jovial life.  But, thorns 

were springing up under his bed of roses, as he soon found out.  

For, having been privately married to ELIZABETH WOODVILLE, a young 

widow lady, very beautiful and very captivating; and at last 

resolving to make his secret known, and to declare her his Queen; 

he gave some offence to the Earl of Warwick, who was usually called 

the King-Maker, because of his power and influence, and because of 

his having lent such great help to placing Edward on the throne.  

This offence was not lessened by the jealousy with which the Nevil 

family (the Earl of Warwick's) regarded the promotion of the 

Woodville family.  For, the young Queen was so bent on providing 

for her relations, that she made her father an earl and a great 

officer of state; married her five sisters to young noblemen of the 

highest rank; and provided for her younger brother, a young man of 

twenty, by marrying him to an immensely rich old duchess of eighty.  

The Earl of Warwick took all this pretty graciously for a man of 

his proud temper, until the question arose to whom the King's 

sister, MARGARET, should be married.  The Earl of Warwick said, 'To 

one of the French King's sons,' and was allowed to go over to the 

French King to make friendly proposals for that purpose, and to 

hold all manner of friendly interviews with him.  But, while he was 

so engaged, the Woodville party married the young lady to the Duke 

of Burgundy!  Upon this he came back in great rage and scorn, and 

shut himself up discontented, in his Castle of Middleham.



A reconciliation, though not a very sincere one, was patched up 

between the Earl of Warwick and the King, and lasted until the Earl 

married his daughter, against the King's wishes, to the Duke of 

Clarence.  While the marriage was being celebrated at Calais, the 

people in the north of England, where the influence of the Nevil 

family was strongest, broke out into rebellion; their complaint 

was, that England was oppressed and plundered by the Woodville 

family, whom they demanded to have removed from power.  As they 

were joined by great numbers of people, and as they openly declared 

that they were supported by the Earl of Warwick, the King did not 

know what to do.  At last, as he wrote to the earl beseeching his 

aid, he and his new son-in-law came over to England, and began to 

arrange the business by shutting the King up in Middleham Castle in 

the safe keeping of the Archbishop of York; so England was not only 

in the strange position of having two kings at once, but they were 

both prisoners at the same time.



Even as yet, however, the King-Maker was so far true to the King, 

that he dispersed a new rising of the Lancastrians, took their 

leader prisoner, and brought him to the King, who ordered him to be 

immediately executed.  He presently allowed the King to return to 

London, and there innumerable pledges of forgiveness and friendship 

were exchanged between them, and between the Nevils and the 

Woodvilles; the King's eldest daughter was promised in marriage to 

the heir of the Nevil family; and more friendly oaths were sworn, 

and more friendly promises made, than this book would hold.



They lasted about three months.  At the end of that time, the 

Archbishop of York made a feast for the King, the Earl of Warwick, 

and the Duke of Clarence, at his house, the Moor, in Hertfordshire.  

The King was washing his hands before supper, when some one 

whispered him that a body of a hundred men were lying in ambush 

outside the house.  Whether this were true or untrue, the King took 

fright, mounted his horse, and rode through the dark night to 

Windsor Castle.  Another reconciliation was patched up between him 

and the King-Maker, but it was a short one, and it was the last.  A 

new rising took place in Lincolnshire, and the King marched to 

repress it.  Having done so, he proclaimed that both the Earl of 

Warwick and the Duke of Clarence were traitors, who had secretly 

assisted it, and who had been prepared publicly to join it on the 

following day.  In these dangerous circumstances they both took 

ship and sailed away to the French court.



And here a meeting took place between the Earl of Warwick and his 

old enemy, the Dowager Queen Margaret, through whom his father had 

had his head struck off, and to whom he had been a bitter foe.  

But, now, when he said that he had done with the ungrateful and 

perfidious Edward of York, and that henceforth he devoted himself 

to the restoration of the House of Lancaster, either in the person 

of her husband or of her little son, she embraced him as if he had 

ever been her dearest friend.  She did more than that; she married 

her son to his second daughter, the Lady Anne.  However agreeable 

this marriage was to the new friends, it was very disagreeable to 

the Duke of Clarence, who perceived that his father-in-law, the 

King-Maker, would never make HIM King, now.  So, being but a weak-

minded young traitor, possessed of very little worth or sense, he 

readily listened to an artful court lady sent over for the purpose, 

and promised to turn traitor once more, and go over to his brother, 

King Edward, when a fitting opportunity should come.



The Earl of Warwick, knowing nothing of this, soon redeemed his 

promise to the Dowager Queen Margaret, by invading England and 

landing at Plymouth, where he instantly proclaimed King Henry, and 

summoned all Englishmen between the ages of sixteen and sixty, to 

join his banner.  Then, with his army increasing as he marched 

along, he went northward, and came so near King Edward, who was in 

that part of the country, that Edward had to ride hard for it to 

the coast of Norfolk, and thence to get away in such ships as he 

could find, to Holland.  Thereupon, the triumphant King-Maker and 

his false son-in-law, the Duke of Clarence, went to London, took 

the old King out of the Tower, and walked him in a great procession 

to Saint Paul's Cathedral with the crown upon his head.  This did 

not improve the temper of the Duke of Clarence, who saw himself 

farther off from being King than ever; but he kept his secret, and 

said nothing.  The Nevil family were restored to all their honours 

and glories, and the Woodvilles and the rest were disgraced.  The 

King-Maker, less sanguinary than the King, shed no blood except 

that of the Earl of Worcester, who had been so cruel to the people 

as to have gained the title of the Butcher.  Him they caught hidden 

in a tree, and him they tried and executed.  No other death stained 

the King-Maker's triumph.



To dispute this triumph, back came King Edward again, next year, 

landing at Ravenspur, coming on to York, causing all his men to cry 

'Long live King Henry!' and swearing on the altar, without a blush, 

that he came to lay no claim to the crown.  Now was the time for 

the Duke of Clarence, who ordered his men to assume the White Rose, 

and declare for his brother.  The Marquis of Montague, though the 

Earl of Warwick's brother, also declining to fight against King 

Edward, he went on successfully to London, where the Archbishop of 

York let him into the City, and where the people made great 

demonstrations in his favour.  For this they had four reasons.  

Firstly, there were great numbers of the King's adherents hiding in 

the City and ready to break out; secondly, the King owed them a 

great deal of money, which they could never hope to get if he were 

unsuccessful; thirdly, there was a young prince to inherit the 

crown; and fourthly, the King was gay and handsome, and more 

popular than a better man might have been with the City ladies.  

After a stay of only two days with these worthy supporters, the 

King marched out to Barnet Common, to give the Earl of Warwick 

battle.  And now it was to be seen, for the last time, whether the 

King or the King-Maker was to carry the day.



While the battle was yet pending, the fainthearted Duke of Clarence 

began to repent, and sent over secret messages to his father-in-

law, offering his services in mediation with the King.  But, the 

Earl of Warwick disdainfully rejected them, and replied that 

Clarence was false and perjured, and that he would settle the 

quarrel by the sword.  The battle began at four o'clock in the 

morning and lasted until ten, and during the greater part of the 

time it was fought in a thick mist - absurdly supposed to be raised 

by a magician.  The loss of life was very great, for the hatred was 

strong on both sides.  The King-Maker was defeated, and the King 

triumphed.  Both the Earl of Warwick and his brother were slain, 

and their bodies lay in St. Paul's, for some days, as a spectacle 

to the people.



Margaret's spirit was not broken even by this great blow.  Within 

five days she was in arms again, and raised her standard in Bath, 

whence she set off with her army, to try and join Lord Pembroke, 

who had a force in Wales.  But, the King, coming up with her 

outside the town of Tewkesbury, and ordering his brother, the DUKE 

OF GLOUCESTER, who was a brave soldier, to attack her men, she 

sustained an entire defeat, and was taken prisoner, together with 

her son, now only eighteen years of age.  The conduct of the King 

to this poor youth was worthy of his cruel character.  He ordered 

him to be led into his tent.  'And what,' said he, 'brought YOU to 

England?'  'I came to England,' replied the prisoner, with a spirit 

which a man of spirit might have admired in a captive, 'to recover 

my father's kingdom, which descended to him as his right, and from 

him descends to me, as mine.'  The King, drawing off his iron 

gauntlet, struck him with it in the face; and the Duke of Clarence 

and some other lords, who were there, drew their noble swords, and 

killed him.



His mother survived him, a prisoner, for five years; after her 

ransom by the King of France, she survived for six years more.  

Within three weeks of this murder, Henry died one of those 

convenient sudden deaths which were so common in the Tower; in 

plainer words, he was murdered by the King's order.



Having no particular excitement on his hands after this great 

defeat of the Lancaster party, and being perhaps desirous to get 

rid of some of his fat (for he was now getting too corpulent to be 

handsome), the King thought of making war on France.  As he wanted 

more money for this purpose than the Parliament could give him, 

though they were usually ready enough for war, he invented a new 

way of raising it, by sending for the principal citizens of London, 

and telling them, with a grave face, that he was very much in want 

of cash, and would take it very kind in them if they would lend him 

some.  It being impossible for them safely to refuse, they 

complied, and the moneys thus forced from them were called - no 

doubt to the great amusement of the King and the Court - as if they 

were free gifts, 'Benevolences.'  What with grants from Parliament, 

and what with Benevolences, the King raised an army and passed over 

to Calais.  As nobody wanted war, however, the French King made 

proposals of peace, which were accepted, and a truce was concluded 

for seven long years.  The proceedings between the Kings of France 

and England on this occasion, were very friendly, very splendid, 

and very distrustful.  They finished with a meeting between the two 

Kings, on a temporary bridge over the river Somme, where they 

embraced through two holes in a strong wooden grating like a lion's 

cage, and made several bows and fine speeches to one another.



It was time, now, that the Duke of Clarence should be punished for 

his treacheries; and Fate had his punishment in store.  He was, 

probably, not trusted by the King - for who could trust him who 

knew him! - and he had certainly a powerful opponent in his brother 

Richard, Duke of Gloucester, who, being avaricious and ambitious, 

wanted to marry that widowed daughter of the Earl of Warwick's who 

had been espoused to the deceased young Prince, at Calais.  

Clarence, who wanted all the family wealth for himself, secreted 

this lady, whom Richard found disguised as a servant in the City of 

London, and whom he married; arbitrators appointed by the King, 

then divided the property between the brothers.  This led to ill-

will and mistrust between them.  Clarence's wife dying, and he 

wishing to make another marriage, which was obnoxious to the King, 

his ruin was hurried by that means, too.  At first, the Court 

struck at his retainers and dependents, and accused some of them of 

magic and witchcraft, and similar nonsense.  Successful against 

this small game, it then mounted to the Duke himself, who was 

impeached by his brother the King, in person, on a variety of such 

charges.  He was found guilty, and sentenced to be publicly 

executed.  He never was publicly executed, but he met his death 

somehow, in the Tower, and, no doubt, through some agency of the 

King or his brother Gloucester, or both.  It was supposed at the 

time that he was told to choose the manner of his death, and that 

he chose to be drowned in a butt of Malmsey wine.  I hope the story 

may be true, for it would have been a becoming death for such a 

miserable creature.



The King survived him some five years.  He died in the forty-second 

year of his life, and the twenty-third of his reign.  He had a very 

good capacity and some good points, but he was selfish, careless, 

sensual, and cruel.  He was a favourite with the people for his 

showy manners; and the people were a good example to him in the 

constancy of their attachment.  He was penitent on his death-bed 

for his 'benevolences,' and other extortions, and ordered 

restitution to be made to the people who had suffered from them.  

He also called about his bed the enriched members of the Woodville 

family, and the proud lords whose honours were of older date, and 

endeavoured to reconcile them, for the sake of the peaceful 

succession of his son and the tranquillity of England.

