





CHAPTER XXIX - ENGLAND UNDER EDWARD THE SIXTH







HENRY THE EIGHTH had made a will, appointing a council of sixteen 

to govern the kingdom for his son while he was under age (he was 

now only ten years old), and another council of twelve to help 

them.  The most powerful of the first council was the EARL OF 

HERTFORD, the young King's uncle, who lost no time in bringing his 

nephew with great state up to Enfield, and thence to the Tower.  It 

was considered at the time a striking proof of virtue in the young 

King that he was sorry for his father's death; but, as common 

subjects have that virtue too, sometimes, we will say no more about 

it.



There was a curious part of the late King's will, requiring his 

executors to fulfil whatever promises he had made.  Some of the 

court wondering what these might be, the Earl of Hertford and the 

other noblemen interested, said that they were promises to advance 

and enrich THEM.  So, the Earl of Hertford made himself DUKE OF 

SOMERSET, and made his brother EDWARD SEYMOUR a baron; and there 

were various similar promotions, all very agreeable to the parties 

concerned, and very dutiful, no doubt, to the late King's memory.  

To be more dutiful still, they made themselves rich out of the 

Church lands, and were very comfortable.  The new Duke of Somerset 

caused himself to be declared PROTECTOR of the kingdom, and was, 

indeed, the King.



As young Edward the Sixth had been brought up in the principles of 

the Protestant religion, everybody knew that they would be 

maintained.  But Cranmer, to whom they were chiefly entrusted, 

advanced them steadily and temperately.  Many superstitious and 

ridiculous practices were stopped; but practices which were 

harmless were not interfered with.



The Duke of Somerset, the Protector, was anxious to have the young 

King engaged in marriage to the young Queen of Scotland, in order 

to prevent that princess from making an alliance with any foreign 

power; but, as a large party in Scotland were unfavourable to this 

plan, he invaded that country.  His excuse for doing so was, that 

the Border men - that is, the Scotch who lived in that part of the 

country where England and Scotland joined - troubled the English 

very much.  But there were two sides to this question; for the 

English Border men troubled the Scotch too; and, through many long 

years, there were perpetual border quarrels which gave rise to 

numbers of old tales and songs.  However, the Protector invaded 

Scotland; and ARRAN, the Scottish Regent, with an army twice as 

large as his, advanced to meet him.  They encountered on the banks 

of the river Esk, within a few miles of Edinburgh; and there, after 

a little skirmish, the Protector made such moderate proposals, in 

offering to retire if the Scotch would only engage not to marry 

their princess to any foreign prince, that the Regent thought the 

English were afraid.  But in this he made a horrible mistake; for 

the English soldiers on land, and the English sailors on the water, 

so set upon the Scotch, that they broke and fled, and more than ten 

thousand of them were killed.  It was a dreadful battle, for the 

fugitives were slain without mercy.  The ground for four miles, all 

the way to Edinburgh, was strewn with dead men, and with arms, and 

legs, and heads.  Some hid themselves in streams and were drowned; 

some threw away their armour and were killed running, almost naked; 

but in this battle of Pinkey the English lost only two or three 

hundred men.  They were much better clothed than the Scotch; at the 

poverty of whose appearance and country they were exceedingly 

astonished.



A Parliament was called when Somerset came back, and it repealed 

the whip with six strings, and did one or two other good things; 

though it unhappily retained the punishment of burning for those 

people who did not make believe to believe, in all religious 

matters, what the Government had declared that they must and should 

believe.  It also made a foolish law (meant to put down beggars), 

that any man who lived idly and loitered about for three days 

together, should be burned with a hot iron, made a slave, and wear 

an iron fetter.  But this savage absurdity soon came to an end, and 

went the way of a great many other foolish laws.



The Protector was now so proud that he sat in Parliament before all 

the nobles, on the right hand of the throne.  Many other noblemen, 

who only wanted to be as proud if they could get a chance, became 

his enemies of course; and it is supposed that he came back 

suddenly from Scotland because he had received news that his 

brother, LORD SEYMOUR, was becoming dangerous to him.  This lord 

was now High Admiral of England; a very handsome man, and a great 

favourite with the Court ladies - even with the young Princess 

Elizabeth, who romped with him a little more than young princesses 

in these times do with any one.  He had married Catherine Parr, the 

late King's widow, who was now dead; and, to strengthen his power, 

he secretly supplied the young King with money.  He may even have 

engaged with some of his brother's enemies in a plot to carry the 

boy off.  On these and other accusations, at any rate, he was 

confined in the Tower, impeached, and found guilty; his own 

brother's name being - unnatural and sad to tell - the first signed 

to the warrant of his execution.  He was executed on Tower Hill, 

and died denying his treason.  One of his last proceedings in this 

world was to write two letters, one to the Princess Elizabeth, and 

one to the Princess Mary, which a servant of his took charge of, 

and concealed in his shoe.  These letters are supposed to have 

urged them against his brother, and to revenge his death.  What 

they truly contained is not known; but there is no doubt that he 

had, at one time, obtained great influence over the Princess 

Elizabeth.



All this while, the Protestant religion was making progress.  The 

images which the people had gradually come to worship, were removed 

from the churches; the people were informed that they need not 

confess themselves to priests unless they chose; a common prayer-

book was drawn up in the English language, which all could 

understand, and many other improvements were made; still 

moderately.  For Cranmer was a very moderate man, and even 

restrained the Protestant clergy from violently abusing the 

unreformed religion - as they very often did, and which was not a 

good example.  But the people were at this time in great distress.  

The rapacious nobility who had come into possession of the Church 

lands, were very bad landlords.  They enclosed great quantities of 

ground for the feeding of sheep, which was then more profitable 

than the growing of crops; and this increased the general distress.  

So the people, who still understood little of what was going on 

about them, and still readily believed what the homeless monks told 

them - many of whom had been their good friends in their better 

days - took it into their heads that all this was owing to the 

reformed religion, and therefore rose, in many parts of the 

country.



The most powerful risings were in Devonshire and Norfolk.  In 

Devonshire, the rebellion was so strong that ten thousand men 

united within a few days, and even laid siege to Exeter.  But LORD 

RUSSELL, coming to the assistance of the citizens who defended that 

town, defeated the rebels; and, not only hanged the Mayor of one 

place, but hanged the vicar of another from his own church steeple.  

What with hanging and killing by the sword, four thousand of the 

rebels are supposed to have fallen in that one county.  In Norfolk 

(where the rising was more against the enclosure of open lands than 

against the reformed religion), the popular leader was a man named 

ROBERT KET, a tanner of Wymondham.  The mob were, in the first 

instance, excited against the tanner by one JOHN FLOWERDEW, a 

gentleman who owed him a grudge:  but the tanner was more than a 

match for the gentleman, since he soon got the people on his side, 

and established himself near Norwich with quite an army.  There was 

a large oak-tree in that place, on a spot called Moushold Hill, 

which Ket named the Tree of Reformation; and under its green 

boughs, he and his men sat, in the midsummer weather, holding 

courts of justice, and debating affairs of state.  They were even 

impartial enough to allow some rather tiresome public speakers to 

get up into this Tree of Reformation, and point out their errors to 

them, in long discourses, while they lay listening (not always 

without some grumbling and growling) in the shade below.  At last, 

one sunny July day, a herald appeared below the tree, and 

proclaimed Ket and all his men traitors, unless from that moment 

they dispersed and went home:  in which case they were to receive a 

pardon.  But, Ket and his men made light of the herald and became 

stronger than ever, until the Earl of Warwick went after them with 

a sufficient force, and cut them all to pieces.  A few were hanged, 

drawn, and quartered, as traitors, and their limbs were sent into 

various country places to be a terror to the people.  Nine of them 

were hanged upon nine green branches of the Oak of Reformation; and 

so, for the time, that tree may be said to have withered away.



The Protector, though a haughty man, had compassion for the real 

distresses of the common people, and a sincere desire to help them.  

But he was too proud and too high in degree to hold even their 

favour steadily; and many of the nobles always envied and hated 

him, because they were as proud and not as high as he.  He was at 

this time building a great Palace in the Strand:  to get the stone 

for which he blew up church steeples with gunpowder, and pulled 

down bishops' houses:  thus making himself still more disliked.  At 

length, his principal enemy, the Earl of Warwick - Dudley by name, 

and the son of that Dudley who had made himself so odious with 

Empson, in the reign of Henry the Seventh - joined with seven other 

members of the Council against him, formed a separate Council; and, 

becoming stronger in a few days, sent him to the Tower under 

twenty-nine articles of accusation.  After being sentenced by the 

Council to the forfeiture of all his offices and lands, he was 

liberated and pardoned, on making a very humble submission.  He was 

even taken back into the Council again, after having suffered this 

fall, and married his daughter, LADY ANNE SEYMOUR, to Warwick's 

eldest son.  But such a reconciliation was little likely to last, 

and did not outlive a year.  Warwick, having got himself made Duke 

of Northumberland, and having advanced the more important of his 

friends, then finished the history by causing the Duke of Somerset 

and his friend LORD GREY, and others, to be arrested for treason, 

in having conspired to seize and dethrone the King.  They were also 

accused of having intended to seize the new Duke of Northumberland, 

with his friends LORD NORTHAMPTON and LORD PEMBROKE; to murder them 

if they found need; and to raise the City to revolt.  All this the 

fallen Protector positively denied; except that he confessed to 

having spoken of the murder of those three noblemen, but having 

never designed it.  He was acquitted of the charge of treason, and 

found guilty of the other charges; so when the people - who 

remembered his having been their friend, now that he was disgraced 

and in danger, saw him come out from his trial with the axe turned 

from him - they thought he was altogether acquitted, and sent up a 

loud shout of joy.



But the Duke of Somerset was ordered to be beheaded on Tower Hill, 

at eight o'clock in the morning, and proclamations were issued 

bidding the citizens keep at home until after ten.  They filled the 

streets, however, and crowded the place of execution as soon as it 

was light; and, with sad faces and sad hearts, saw the once 

powerful Protector ascend the scaffold to lay his head upon the 

dreadful block.  While he was yet saying his last words to them 

with manly courage, and telling them, in particular, how it 

comforted him, at that pass, to have assisted in reforming the 

national religion, a member of the Council was seen riding up on 

horseback.  They again thought that the Duke was saved by his 

bringing a reprieve, and again shouted for joy.  But the Duke 

himself told them they were mistaken, and laid down his head and 

had it struck off at a blow.



Many of the bystanders rushed forward and steeped their 

handkerchiefs in his blood, as a mark of their affection.  He had, 

indeed, been capable of many good acts, and one of them was 

discovered after he was no more.  The Bishop of Durham, a very good 

man, had been informed against to the Council, when the Duke was in 

power, as having answered a treacherous letter proposing a 

rebellion against the reformed religion.  As the answer could not 

be found, he could not be declared guilty; but it was now 

discovered, hidden by the Duke himself among some private papers, 

in his regard for that good man.  The Bishop lost his office, and 

was deprived of his possessions.



It is not very pleasant to know that while his uncle lay in prison 

under sentence of death, the young King was being vastly 

entertained by plays, and dances, and sham fights:  but there is no 

doubt of it, for he kept a journal himself.  It is pleasanter to 

know that not a single Roman Catholic was burnt in this reign for 

holding that religion; though two wretched victims suffered for 

heresy.  One, a woman named JOAN BOCHER, for professing some 

opinions that even she could only explain in unintelligible jargon.  

The other, a Dutchman, named VON PARIS, who practised as a surgeon 

in London.  Edward was, to his credit, exceedingly unwilling to 

sign the warrant for the woman's execution:  shedding tears before 

he did so, and telling Cranmer, who urged him to do it (though 

Cranmer really would have spared the woman at first, but for her 

own determined obstinacy), that the guilt was not his, but that of 

the man who so strongly urged the dreadful act.  We shall see, too 

soon, whether the time ever came when Cranmer is likely to have 

remembered this with sorrow and remorse.



Cranmer and RIDLEY (at first Bishop of Rochester, and afterwards 

Bishop of London) were the most powerful of the clergy of this 

reign.  Others were imprisoned and deprived of their property for 

still adhering to the unreformed religion; the most important among 

whom were GARDINER Bishop of Winchester, HEATH Bishop of Worcester, 

DAY Bishop of Chichester, and BONNER that Bishop of London who was 

superseded by Ridley.  The Princess Mary, who inherited her 

mother's gloomy temper, and hated the reformed religion as 

connected with her mother's wrongs and sorrows - she knew nothing 

else about it, always refusing to read a single book in which it 

was truly described - held by the unreformed religion too, and was 

the only person in the kingdom for whom the old Mass was allowed to 

be performed; nor would the young King have made that exception 

even in her favour, but for the strong persuasions of Cranmer and 

Ridley.  He always viewed it with horror; and when he fell into a 

sickly condition, after having been very ill, first of the measles 

and then of the small-pox, he was greatly troubled in mind to think 

that if he died, and she, the next heir to the throne, succeeded, 

the Roman Catholic religion would be set up again.



This uneasiness, the Duke of Northumberland was not slow to 

encourage:  for, if the Princess Mary came to the throne, he, who 

had taken part with the Protestants, was sure to be disgraced.  

Now, the Duchess of Suffolk was descended from King Henry the 

Seventh; and, if she resigned what little or no right she had, in 

favour of her daughter LADY JANE GREY, that would be the succession 

to promote the Duke's greatness; because LORD GUILFORD DUDLEY, one 

of his sons, was, at this very time, newly married to her.  So, he 

worked upon the King's fears, and persuaded him to set aside both 

the Princess Mary and the Princess Elizabeth, and assert his right 

to appoint his successor.  Accordingly the young King handed to the 

Crown lawyers a writing signed half a dozen times over by himself, 

appointing Lady Jane Grey to succeed to the Crown, and requiring 

them to have his will made out according to law.  They were much 

against it at first, and told the King so; but the Duke of 

Northumberland - being so violent about it that the lawyers even 

expected him to beat them, and hotly declaring that, stripped to 

his shirt, he would fight any man in such a quarrel - they yielded.  

Cranmer, also, at first hesitated; pleading that he had sworn to 

maintain the succession of the Crown to the Princess Mary; but, he 

was a weak man in his resolutions, and afterwards signed the 

document with the rest of the council.



It was completed none too soon; for Edward was now sinking in a 

rapid decline; and, by way of making him better, they handed him 

over to a woman-doctor who pretended to be able to cure it.  He 

speedily got worse.  On the sixth of July, in the year one thousand 

five hundred and fifty-three, he died, very peaceably and piously, 

praying God, with his last breath, to protect the reformed 

religion.



This King died in the sixteenth year of his age, and in the seventh 

of his reign.  It is difficult to judge what the character of one 

so young might afterwards have become among so many bad, ambitious, 

quarrelling nobles.  But, he was an amiable boy, of very good 

abilities, and had nothing coarse or cruel or brutal in his 

disposition - which in the son of such a father is rather 

surprising.

