





CHAPTER XXIV - ENGLAND UNDER EDWARD THE FIFTH







THE late King's eldest son, the Prince of Wales, called EDWARD 

after him, was only thirteen years of age at his father's death.  

He was at Ludlow Castle with his uncle, the Earl of Rivers.  The 

prince's brother, the Duke of York, only eleven years of age, was 

in London with his mother.  The boldest, most crafty, and most 

dreaded nobleman in England at that time was their uncle RICHARD, 

Duke of Gloucester, and everybody wondered how the two poor boys 

would fare with such an uncle for a friend or a foe.



The Queen, their mother, being exceedingly uneasy about this, was 

anxious that instructions should be sent to Lord Rivers to raise an 

army to escort the young King safely to London.  But, Lord 

Hastings, who was of the Court party opposed to the Woodvilles, and 

who disliked the thought of giving them that power, argued against 

the proposal, and obliged the Queen to be satisfied with an escort 

of two thousand horse.  The Duke of Gloucester did nothing, at 

first, to justify suspicion.  He came from Scotland (where he was 

commanding an army) to York, and was there the first to swear 

allegiance to his nephew.  He then wrote a condoling letter to the 

Queen-Mother, and set off to be present at the coronation in 

London.



Now, the young King, journeying towards London too, with Lord 

Rivers and Lord Gray, came to Stony Stratford, as his uncle came to 

Northampton, about ten miles distant; and when those two lords 

heard that the Duke of Gloucester was so near, they proposed to the 

young King that they should go back and greet him in his name.  The 

boy being very willing that they should do so, they rode off and 

were received with great friendliness, and asked by the Duke of 

Gloucester to stay and dine with him.  In the evening, while they 

were merry together, up came the Duke of Buckingham with three 

hundred horsemen; and next morning the two lords and the two dukes, 

and the three hundred horsemen, rode away together to rejoin the 

King.  Just as they were entering Stony Stratford, the Duke of 

Gloucester, checking his horse, turned suddenly on the two lords, 

charged them with alienating from him the affections of his sweet 

nephew, and caused them to be arrested by the three hundred 

horsemen and taken back.  Then, he and the Duke of Buckingham went 

straight to the King (whom they had now in their power), to whom 

they made a show of kneeling down, and offering great love and 

submission; and then they ordered his attendants to disperse, and 

took him, alone with them, to Northampton.



A few days afterwards they conducted him to London, and lodged him 

in the Bishop's Palace.  But, he did not remain there long; for, 

the Duke of Buckingham with a tender face made a speech expressing 

how anxious he was for the Royal boy's safety, and how much safer 

he would be in the Tower until his coronation, than he could be 

anywhere else.  So, to the Tower he was taken, very carefully, and 

the Duke of Gloucester was named Protector of the State.



Although Gloucester had proceeded thus far with a very smooth 

countenance - and although he was a clever man, fair of speech, and 

not ill-looking, in spite of one of his shoulders being something 

higher than the other - and although he had come into the City 

riding bare-headed at the King's side, and looking very fond of him 

- he had made the King's mother more uneasy yet; and when the Royal 

boy was taken to the Tower, she became so alarmed that she took 

sanctuary in Westminster with her five daughters.



Nor did she do this without reason, for, the Duke of Gloucester, 

finding that the lords who were opposed to the Woodville family 

were faithful to the young King nevertheless, quickly resolved to 

strike a blow for himself.  Accordingly, while those lords met in 

council at the Tower, he and those who were in his interest met in 

separate council at his own residence, Crosby Palace, in 

Bishopsgate Street.  Being at last quite prepared, he one day 

appeared unexpectedly at the council in the Tower, and appeared to 

be very jocular and merry.  He was particularly gay with the Bishop 

of Ely:  praising the strawberries that grew in his garden on 

Holborn Hill, and asking him to have some gathered that he might 

eat them at dinner.  The Bishop, quite proud of the honour, sent 

one of his men to fetch some; and the Duke, still very jocular and 

gay, went out; and the council all said what a very agreeable duke 

he was!  In a little time, however, he came back quite altered - 

not at all jocular - frowning and fierce - and suddenly said, -



'What do those persons deserve who have compassed my destruction; I 

being the King's lawful, as well as natural, protector?'



To this strange question, Lord Hastings replied, that they deserved 

death, whosoever they were.



'Then,' said the Duke, 'I tell you that they are that sorceress my 

brother's wife;' meaning the Queen:  'and that other sorceress, 

Jane Shore.  Who, by witchcraft, have withered my body, and caused 

my arm to shrink as I now show you.'



He then pulled up his sleeve and showed them his arm, which was 

shrunken, it is true, but which had been so, as they all very well 

knew, from the hour of his birth.



Jane Shore, being then the lover of Lord Hastings, as she had 

formerly been of the late King, that lord knew that he himself was 

attacked.  So, he said, in some confusion, 'Certainly, my Lord, if 

they have done this, they be worthy of punishment.'



'If?' said the Duke of Gloucester; 'do you talk to me of ifs?  I 

tell you that they HAVE so done, and I will make it good upon thy 

body, thou traitor!'



With that, he struck the table a great blow with his fist.  This 

was a signal to some of his people outside to cry 'Treason!'  They 

immediately did so, and there was a rush into the chamber of so 

many armed men that it was filled in a moment.



'First,' said the Duke of Gloucester to Lord Hastings, 'I arrest 

thee, traitor!  And let him,' he added to the armed men who took 

him, 'have a priest at once, for by St. Paul I will not dine until 

I have seen his head of!'



Lord Hastings was hurried to the green by the Tower chapel, and 

there beheaded on a log of wood that happened to be lying on the 

ground.  Then, the Duke dined with a good appetite, and after 

dinner summoning the principal citizens to attend him, told them 

that Lord Hastings and the rest had designed to murder both himself 

and the Duke if Buckingham, who stood by his side, if he had not 

providentially discovered their design.  He requested them to be so 

obliging as to inform their fellow-citizens of the truth of what he 

said, and issued a proclamation (prepared and neatly copied out 

beforehand) to the same effect.



On the same day that the Duke did these things in the Tower, Sir 

Richard Ratcliffe, the boldest and most undaunted of his men, went 

down to Pontefract; arrested Lord Rivers, Lord Gray, and two other 

gentlemen; and publicly executed them on the scaffold, without any 

trial, for having intended the Duke's death.  Three days afterwards 

the Duke, not to lose time, went down the river to Westminster in 

his barge, attended by divers bishops, lords, and soldiers, and 

demanded that the Queen should deliver her second son, the Duke of 

York, into his safe keeping.  The Queen, being obliged to comply, 

resigned the child after she had wept over him; and Richard of 

Gloucester placed him with his brother in the Tower.  Then, he 

seized Jane Shore, and, because she had been the lover of the late 

King, confiscated her property, and got her sentenced to do public 

penance in the streets by walking in a scanty dress, with bare 

feet, and carrying a lighted candle, to St. Paul's Cathedral, 

through the most crowded part of the City.



Having now all things ready for his own advancement, he caused a 

friar to preach a sermon at the cross which stood in front of St. 

Paul's Cathedral, in which he dwelt upon the profligate manners of 

the late King, and upon the late shame of Jane Shore, and hinted 

that the princes were not his children.  'Whereas, good people,' 

said the friar, whose name was SHAW, 'my Lord the Protector, the 

noble Duke of Gloucester, that sweet prince, the pattern of all the 

noblest virtues, is the perfect image and express likeness of his 

father.'  There had been a little plot between the Duke and the 

friar, that the Duke should appear in the crowd at this moment, 

when it was expected that the people would cry 'Long live King 

Richard!'  But, either through the friar saying the words too soon, 

or through the Duke's coming too late, the Duke and the words did 

not come together, and the people only laughed, and the friar 

sneaked off ashamed.



The Duke of Buckingham was a better hand at such business than the 

friar, so he went to the Guildhall the next day, and addressed the 

citizens in the Lord Protector's behalf.  A few dirty men, who had 

been hired and stationed there for the purpose, crying when he had 

done, 'God save King Richard!' he made them a great bow, and 

thanked them with all his heart.  Next day, to make an end of it, 

he went with the mayor and some lords and citizens to Bayard 

Castle, by the river, where Richard then was, and read an address, 

humbly entreating him to accept the Crown of England.  Richard, who 

looked down upon them out of a window and pretended to be in great 

uneasiness and alarm, assured them there was nothing he desired 

less, and that his deep affection for his nephews forbade him to 

think of it.  To this the Duke of Buckingham replied, with 

pretended warmth, that the free people of England would never 

submit to his nephew's rule, and that if Richard, who was the 

lawful heir, refused the Crown, why then they must find some one 

else to wear it.  The Duke of Gloucester returned, that since he 

used that strong language, it became his painful duty to think no 

more of himself, and to accept the Crown.



Upon that, the people cheered and dispersed; and the Duke of 

Gloucester and the Duke of Buckingham passed a pleasant evening, 

talking over the play they had just acted with so much success, and 

every word of which they had prepared together.

