





CHAPTER XII - ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE SECOND - PART THE FIRST







HENRY PLANTAGENET, when he was but twenty-one years old, quietly 

succeeded to the throne of England, according to his agreement made 

with the late King at Winchester.  Six weeks after Stephen's death, 

he and his Queen, Eleanor, were crowned in that city; into which 

they rode on horseback in great state, side by side, amidst much 

shouting and rejoicing, and clashing of music, and strewing of 

flowers.



The reign of King Henry the Second began well.  The King had great 

possessions, and (what with his own rights, and what with those of 

his wife) was lord of one-third part of France.  He was a young man 

of vigour, ability, and resolution, and immediately applied himself 

to remove some of the evils which had arisen in the last unhappy 

reign.  He revoked all the grants of land that had been hastily 

made, on either side, during the late struggles; he obliged numbers 

of disorderly soldiers to depart from England; he reclaimed all the 

castles belonging to the Crown; and he forced the wicked nobles to 

pull down their own castles, to the number of eleven hundred, in 

which such dismal cruelties had been inflicted on the people.  The 

King's brother, GEOFFREY, rose against him in France, while he was 

so well employed, and rendered it necessary for him to repair to 

that country; where, after he had subdued and made a friendly 

arrangement with his brother (who did not live long), his ambition 

to increase his possessions involved him in a war with the French 

King, Louis, with whom he had been on such friendly terms just 

before, that to the French King's infant daughter, then a baby in 

the cradle, he had promised one of his little sons in marriage, who 

was a child of five years old.  However, the war came to nothing at 

last, and the Pope made the two Kings friends again.



Now, the clergy, in the troubles of the last reign, had gone on 

very ill indeed.  There were all kinds of criminals among them - 

murderers, thieves, and vagabonds; and the worst of the matter was, 

that the good priests would not give up the bad priests to justice, 

when they committed crimes, but persisted in sheltering and 

defending them.  The King, well knowing that there could be no 

peace or rest in England while such things lasted, resolved to 

reduce the power of the clergy; and, when he had reigned seven 

years, found (as he considered) a good opportunity for doing so, in 

the death of the Archbishop of Canterbury.  'I will have for the 

new Archbishop,' thought the King, 'a friend in whom I can trust, 

who will help me to humble these rebellious priests, and to have 

them dealt with, when they do wrong, as other men who do wrong are 

dealt with.'  So, he resolved to make his favourite, the new 

Archbishop; and this favourite was so extraordinary a man, and his 

story is so curious, that I must tell you all about him.



Once upon a time, a worthy merchant of London, named GILBERT A 

BECKET, made a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, and was taken prisoner 

by a Saracen lord.  This lord, who treated him kindly and not like 

a slave, had one fair daughter, who fell in love with the merchant; 

and who told him that she wanted to become a Christian, and was 

willing to marry him if they could fly to a Christian country.  The 

merchant returned her love, until he found an opportunity to 

escape, when he did not trouble himself about the Saracen lady, but 

escaped with his servant Richard, who had been taken prisoner along 

with him, and arrived in England and forgot her.  The Saracen lady, 

who was more loving than the merchant, left her father's house in 

disguise to follow him, and made her way, under many hardships, to 

the sea-shore.  The merchant had taught her only two English words 

(for I suppose he must have learnt the Saracen tongue himself, and 

made love in that language), of which LONDON was one, and his own 

name, GILBERT, the other.  She went among the ships, saying, 

'London! London!' over and over again, until the sailors understood 

that she wanted to find an English vessel that would carry her 

there; so they showed her such a ship, and she paid for her passage 

with some of her jewels, and sailed away.  Well!  The merchant was 

sitting in his counting-house in London one day, when he heard a 

great noise in the street; and presently Richard came running in 

from the warehouse, with his eyes wide open and his breath almost 

gone, saying, 'Master, master, here is the Saracen lady!'  The 

merchant thought Richard was mad; but Richard said, 'No, master!  

As I live, the Saracen lady is going up and down the city, calling 

Gilbert!  Gilbert!'  Then, he took the merchant by the sleeve, and 

pointed out of window; and there they saw her among the gables and 

water-spouts of the dark, dirty street, in her foreign dress, so 

forlorn, surrounded by a wondering crowd, and passing slowly along, 

calling Gilbert, Gilbert!  When the merchant saw her, and thought 

of the tenderness she had shown him in his captivity, and of her 

constancy, his heart was moved, and he ran down into the street; 

and she saw him coming, and with a great cry fainted in his arms.  

They were married without loss of time, and Richard (who was an 

excellent man) danced with joy the whole day of the wedding; and 

they all lived happy ever afterwards.



This merchant and this Saracen lady had one son, THOMAS A BECKET.  

He it was who became the Favourite of King Henry the Second.



He had become Chancellor, when the King thought of making him 

Archbishop.  He was clever, gay, well educated, brave; had fought 

in several battles in France; had defeated a French knight in 

single combat, and brought his horse away as a token of the 

victory.  He lived in a noble palace, he was the tutor of the young 

Prince Henry, he was served by one hundred and forty knights, his 

riches were immense.  The King once sent him as his ambassador to 

France; and the French people, beholding in what state he 

travelled, cried out in the streets, 'How splendid must the King of 

England be, when this is only the Chancellor!'  They had good 

reason to wonder at the magnificence of Thomas a Becket, for, when 

he entered a French town, his procession was headed by two hundred 

and fifty singing boys; then, came his hounds in couples; then, 

eight waggons, each drawn by five horses driven by five drivers:  

two of the waggons filled with strong ale to be given away to the 

people; four, with his gold and silver plate and stately clothes; 

two, with the dresses of his numerous servants.  Then, came twelve 

horses, each with a monkey on his back; then, a train of people 

bearing shields and leading fine war-horses splendidly equipped; 

then, falconers with hawks upon their wrists; then, a host of 

knights, and gentlemen and priests; then, the Chancellor with his 

brilliant garments flashing in the sun, and all the people capering 

and shouting with delight.



The King was well pleased with all this, thinking that it only made 

himself the more magnificent to have so magnificent a favourite; 

but he sometimes jested with the Chancellor upon his splendour too.  

Once, when they were riding together through the streets of London 

in hard winter weather, they saw a shivering old man in rags.  

'Look at the poor object!' said the King.  'Would it not be a 

charitable act to give that aged man a comfortable warm cloak?'  

'Undoubtedly it would,' said Thomas a Becket, 'and you do well, 

Sir, to think of such Christian duties.'  'Come!' cried the King, 

'then give him your cloak!'  It was made of rich crimson trimmed 

with ermine.  The King tried to pull it off, the Chancellor tried 

to keep it on, both were near rolling from their saddles in the 

mud, when the Chancellor submitted, and the King gave the cloak to 

the old beggar:  much to the beggar's astonishment, and much to the 

merriment of all the courtiers in attendance.  For, courtiers are 

not only eager to laugh when the King laughs, but they really do 

enjoy a laugh against a Favourite.



'I will make,' thought King Henry the second, 'this Chancellor of 

mine, Thomas a Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury.  He will then be 

the head of the Church, and, being devoted to me, will help me to 

correct the Church.  He has always upheld my power against the 

power of the clergy, and once publicly told some bishops (I 

remember), that men of the Church were equally bound to me, with 

men of the sword.  Thomas a Becket is the man, of all other men in 

England, to help me in my great design.'  So the King, regardless 

of all objection, either that he was a fighting man, or a lavish 

man, or a courtly man, or a man of pleasure, or anything but a 

likely man for the office, made him Archbishop accordingly.



Now, Thomas a Becket was proud and loved to be famous.  He was 

already famous for the pomp of his life, for his riches, his gold 

and silver plate, his waggons, horses, and attendants.  He could do 

no more in that way than he had done; and being tired of that kind 

of fame (which is a very poor one), he longed to have his name 

celebrated for something else.  Nothing, he knew, would render him 

so famous in the world, as the setting of his utmost power and 

ability against the utmost power and ability of the King.  He 

resolved with the whole strength of his mind to do it.



He may have had some secret grudge against the King besides.  The 

King may have offended his proud humour at some time or other, for 

anything I know.  I think it likely, because it is a common thing 

for Kings, Princes, and other great people, to try the tempers of 

their favourites rather severely.  Even the little affair of the 

crimson cloak must have been anything but a pleasant one to a 

haughty man.  Thomas a Becket knew better than any one in England 

what the King expected of him.  In all his sumptuous life, he had 

never yet been in a position to disappoint the King.  He could take 

up that proud stand now, as head of the Church; and he determined 

that it should be written in history, either that he subdued the 

King, or that the King subdued him.



So, of a sudden, he completely altered the whole manner of his 

life.  He turned off all his brilliant followers, ate coarse food, 

drank bitter water, wore next his skin sackcloth covered with dirt 

and vermin (for it was then thought very religious to be very 

dirty), flogged his back to punish himself, lived chiefly in a 

little cell, washed the feet of thirteen poor people every day, and 

looked as miserable as he possibly could.  If he had put twelve 

hundred monkeys on horseback instead of twelve, and had gone in 

procession with eight thousand waggons instead of eight, he could 

not have half astonished the people so much as by this great 

change.  It soon caused him to be more talked about as an 

Archbishop than he had been as a Chancellor.



The King was very angry; and was made still more so, when the new 

Archbishop, claiming various estates from the nobles as being 

rightfully Church property, required the King himself, for the same 

reason, to give up Rochester Castle, and Rochester City too.  Not 

satisfied with this, he declared that no power but himself should 

appoint a priest to any Church in the part of England over which he 

was Archbishop; and when a certain gentleman of Kent made such an 

appointment, as he claimed to have the right to do, Thomas a Becket 

excommunicated him.



Excommunication was, next to the Interdict I told you of at the 

close of the last chapter, the great weapon of the clergy.  It 

consisted in declaring the person who was excommunicated, an 

outcast from the Church and from all religious offices; and in 

cursing him all over, from the top of his head to the sole of his 

foot, whether he was standing up, lying down, sitting, kneeling, 

walking, running, hopping, jumping, gaping, coughing, sneezing, or 

whatever else he was doing.  This unchristian nonsense would of 

course have made no sort of difference to the person cursed - who 

could say his prayers at home if he were shut out of church, and 

whom none but GOD could judge - but for the fears and superstitions 

of the people, who avoided excommunicated persons, and made their 

lives unhappy.  So, the King said to the New Archbishop, 'Take off 

this Excommunication from this gentleman of Kent.'  To which the 

Archbishop replied, 'I shall do no such thing.'



The quarrel went on.  A priest in Worcestershire committed a most 

dreadful murder, that aroused the horror of the whole nation.  The 

King demanded to have this wretch delivered up, to be tried in the 

same court and in the same way as any other murderer.  The 

Archbishop refused, and kept him in the Bishop's prison.  The King, 

holding a solemn assembly in Westminster Hall, demanded that in 

future all priests found guilty before their Bishops of crimes 

against the law of the land should be considered priests no longer, 

and should be delivered over to the law of the land for punishment.  

The Archbishop again refused.  The King required to know whether 

the clergy would obey the ancient customs of the country?  Every 

priest there, but one, said, after Thomas a Becket, 'Saving my 

order.'  This really meant that they would only obey those customs 

when they did not interfere with their own claims; and the King 

went out of the Hall in great wrath.



Some of the clergy began to be afraid, now, that they were going 

too far.  Though Thomas a Becket was otherwise as unmoved as 

Westminster Hall, they prevailed upon him, for the sake of their 

fears, to go to the King at Woodstock, and promise to observe the 

ancient customs of the country, without saying anything about his 

order.  The King received this submission favourably, and summoned 

a great council of the clergy to meet at the Castle of Clarendon, 

by Salisbury.  But when the council met, the Archbishop again 

insisted on the words 'saying my order;' and he still insisted, 

though lords entreated him, and priests wept before him and knelt 

to him, and an adjoining room was thrown open, filled with armed 

soldiers of the King, to threaten him.  At length he gave way, for 

that time, and the ancient customs (which included what the King 

had demanded in vain) were stated in writing, and were signed and 

sealed by the chief of the clergy, and were called the 

Constitutions of Clarendon.



The quarrel went on, for all that.  The Archbishop tried to see the 

King.  The King would not see him.  The Archbishop tried to escape 

from England.  The sailors on the coast would launch no boat to 

take him away.  Then, he again resolved to do his worst in 

opposition to the King, and began openly to set the ancient customs 

at defiance.



The King summoned him before a great council at Northampton, where 

he accused him of high treason, and made a claim against him, which 

was not a just one, for an enormous sum of money.  Thomas a Becket 

was alone against the whole assembly, and the very Bishops advised 

him to resign his office and abandon his contest with the King.  

His great anxiety and agitation stretched him on a sick-bed for two 

days, but he was still undaunted.  He went to the adjourned 

council, carrying a great cross in his right hand, and sat down 

holding it erect before him.  The King angrily retired into an 

inner room.  The whole assembly angrily retired and left him there.  

But there he sat.  The Bishops came out again in a body, and 

renounced him as a traitor.  He only said, 'I hear!' and sat there 

still.  They retired again into the inner room, and his trial 

proceeded without him.  By-and-by, the Earl of Leicester, heading 

the barons, came out to read his sentence.  He refused to hear it, 

denied the power of the court, and said he would refer his cause to 

the Pope.  As he walked out of the hall, with the cross in his 

hand, some of those present picked up rushes - rushes were strewn 

upon the floors in those days by way of carpet - and threw them at 

him.  He proudly turned his head, and said that were he not 

Archbishop, he would chastise those cowards with the sword he had 

known how to use in bygone days.  He then mounted his horse, and 

rode away, cheered and surrounded by the common people, to whom he 

threw open his house that night and gave a supper, supping with 

them himself.  That same night he secretly departed from the town; 

and so, travelling by night and hiding by day, and calling himself 

'Brother Dearman,' got away, not without difficulty, to Flanders.



The struggle still went on.  The angry King took possession of the 

revenues of the archbishopric, and banished all the relations and 

servants of Thomas a Becket, to the number of four hundred.  The 

Pope and the French King both protected him, and an abbey was 

assigned for his residence.  Stimulated by this support, Thomas a 

Becket, on a great festival day, formally proceeded to a great 

church crowded with people, and going up into the pulpit publicly 

cursed and excommunicated all who had supported the Constitutions 

of Clarendon:  mentioning many English noblemen by name, and not 

distantly hinting at the King of England himself.



When intelligence of this new affront was carried to the King in 

his chamber, his passion was so furious that he tore his clothes, 

and rolled like a madman on his bed of straw and rushes.  But he 

was soon up and doing.  He ordered all the ports and coasts of 

England to be narrowly watched, that no letters of Interdict might 

be brought into the kingdom; and sent messengers and bribes to the 

Pope's palace at Rome.  Meanwhile, Thomas a Becket, for his part, 

was not idle at Rome, but constantly employed his utmost arts in 

his own behalf.  Thus the contest stood, until there was peace 

between France and England (which had been for some time at war), 

and until the two children of the two Kings were married in 

celebration of it.  Then, the French King brought about a meeting 

between Henry and his old favourite, so long his enemy.



Even then, though Thomas a Becket knelt before the King, he was 

obstinate and immovable as to those words about his order.  King 

Louis of France was weak enough in his veneration for Thomas a 

Becket and such men, but this was a little too much for him.  He 

said that a Becket 'wanted to be greater than the saints and better 

than St. Peter,' and rode away from him with the King of England.  

His poor French Majesty asked a Becket's pardon for so doing, 

however, soon afterwards, and cut a very pitiful figure.



At last, and after a world of trouble, it came to this.  There was 

another meeting on French ground between King Henry and Thomas a 

Becket, and it was agreed that Thomas a Becket should be Archbishop 

of Canterbury, according to the customs of former Archbishops, and 

that the King should put him in possession of the revenues of that 

post.  And now, indeed, you might suppose the struggle at an end, 

and Thomas a Becket at rest.  NO, not even yet.  For Thomas a 

Becket hearing, by some means, that King Henry, when he was in 

dread of his kingdom being placed under an interdict, had had his 

eldest son Prince Henry secretly crowned, not only persuaded the 

Pope to suspend the Archbishop of York who had performed that 

ceremony, and to excommunicate the Bishops who had assisted at it, 

but sent a messenger of his own into England, in spite of all the 

King's precautions along the coast, who delivered the letters of 

excommunication into the Bishops' own hands.  Thomas a Becket then 

came over to England himself, after an absence of seven years.  He 

was privately warned that it was dangerous to come, and that an 

ireful knight, named RANULF DE BROC, had threatened that he should 

not live to eat a loaf of bread in England; but he came.



The common people received him well, and marched about with him in 

a soldierly way, armed with such rustic weapons as they could get.  

He tried to see the young prince who had once been his pupil, but 

was prevented.  He hoped for some little support among the nobles 

and priests, but found none.  He made the most of the peasants who 

attended him, and feasted them, and went from Canterbury to Harrow-

on-the-Hill, and from Harrow-on-the-Hill back to Canterbury, and on 

Christmas Day preached in the Cathedral there, and told the people 

in his sermon that he had come to die among them, and that it was 

likely he would be murdered.  He had no fear, however - or, if he 

had any, he had much more obstinacy - for he, then and there, 

excommunicated three of his enemies, of whom Ranulf de Broc, the 

ireful knight, was one.



As men in general had no fancy for being cursed, in their sitting 

and walking, and gaping and sneezing, and all the rest of it, it 

was very natural in the persons so freely excommunicated to 

complain to the King.  It was equally natural in the King, who had 

hoped that this troublesome opponent was at last quieted, to fall 

into a mighty rage when he heard of these new affronts; and, on the 

Archbishop of York telling him that he never could hope for rest 

while Thomas a Becket lived, to cry out hastily before his court, 

'Have I no one here who will deliver me from this man?'  There were 

four knights present, who, hearing the King's words, looked at one 

another, and went out.



The names of these knights were REGINALD FITZURSE, WILLIAM TRACY, 

HUGH DE MORVILLE, and RICHARD BRITO; three of whom had been in the 

train of Thomas a Becket in the old days of his splendour.  They 

rode away on horseback, in a very secret manner, and on the third 

day after Christmas Day arrived at Saltwood House, not far from 

Canterbury, which belonged to the family of Ranulf de Broc.  They 

quietly collected some followers here, in case they should need 

any; and proceeding to Canterbury, suddenly appeared (the four 

knights and twelve men) before the Archbishop, in his own house, at 

two o'clock in the afternoon.  They neither bowed nor spoke, but 

sat down on the floor in silence, staring at the Archbishop.



Thomas a Becket said, at length, 'What do you want?'



'We want,' said Reginald Fitzurse, 'the excommunication taken from 

the Bishops, and you to answer for your offences to the King.'  

Thomas a Becket defiantly replied, that the power of the clergy was 

above the power of the King.  That it was not for such men as they 

were, to threaten him.  That if he were threatened by all the 

swords in England, he would never yield.



'Then we will do more than threaten!' said the knights.  And they 

went out with the twelve men, and put on their armour, and drew 

their shining swords, and came back.



His servants, in the meantime, had shut up and barred the great 

gate of the palace.  At first, the knights tried to shatter it with 

their battle-axes; but, being shown a window by which they could 

enter, they let the gate alone, and climbed in that way.  While 

they were battering at the door, the attendants of Thomas a Becket 

had implored him to take refuge in the Cathedral; in which, as a 

sanctuary or sacred place, they thought the knights would dare to 

do no violent deed.  He told them, again and again, that he would 

not stir.  Hearing the distant voices of the monks singing the 

evening service, however, he said it was now his duty to attend, 

and therefore, and for no other reason, he would go.



There was a near way between his Palace and the Cathedral, by some 

beautiful old cloisters which you may yet see.  He went into the 

Cathedral, without any hurry, and having the Cross carried before 

him as usual.  When he was safely there, his servants would have 

fastened the door, but he said NO! it was the house of God and not 

a fortress.



As he spoke, the shadow of Reginald Fitzurse appeared in the 

Cathedral doorway, darkening the little light there was outside, on 

the dark winter evening.  This knight said, in a strong voice, 

'Follow me, loyal servants of the King!'  The rattle of the armour 

of the other knights echoed through the Cathedral, as they came 

clashing in.



It was so dark, in the lofty aisles and among the stately pillars 

of the church, and there were so many hiding-places in the crypt 

below and in the narrow passages above, that Thomas a Becket might 

even at that pass have saved himself if he would.  But he would 

not.  He told the monks resolutely that he would not.  And though 

they all dispersed and left him there with no other follower than 

EDWARD GRYME, his faithful cross-bearer, he was as firm then, as 

ever he had been in his life.



The knights came on, through the darkness, making a terrible noise 

with their armed tread upon the stone pavement of the church.  

'Where is the traitor?' they cried out.  He made no answer.  But 

when they cried, 'Where is the Archbishop?' he said proudly, 'I am 

here!' and came out of the shade and stood before them.



The knights had no desire to kill him, if they could rid the King 

and themselves of him by any other means.  They told him he must 

either fly or go with them.  He said he would do neither; and he 

threw William Tracy off with such force when he took hold of his 

sleeve, that Tracy reeled again.  By his reproaches and his 

steadiness, he so incensed them, and exasperated their fierce 

humour, that Reginald Fitzurse, whom he called by an ill name, 

said, 'Then die!' and struck at his head.  But the faithful Edward 

Gryme put out his arm, and there received the main force of the 

blow, so that it only made his master bleed.  Another voice from 

among the knights again called to Thomas a Becket to fly; but, with 

his blood running down his face, and his hands clasped, and his 

head bent, he commanded himself to God, and stood firm.  Then they 

cruelly killed him close to the altar of St. Bennet; and his body 

fell upon the pavement, which was dirtied with his blood and 

brains.



It is an awful thing to think of the murdered mortal, who had so 

showered his curses about, lying, all disfigured, in the church, 

where a few lamps here and there were but red specks on a pall of 

darkness; and to think of the guilty knights riding away on 

horseback, looking over their shoulders at the dim Cathedral, and 

remembering what they had left inside.





PART THE SECOND





WHEN the King heard how Thomas a Becket had lost his life in 

Canterbury Cathedral, through the ferocity of the four Knights, he 

was filled with dismay.  Some have supposed that when the King 

spoke those hasty words, 'Have I no one here who will deliver me 

from this man?' he wished, and meant a Becket to be slain.  But few 

things are more unlikely; for, besides that the King was not 

naturally cruel (though very passionate), he was wise, and must 

have known full well what any stupid man in his dominions must have 

known, namely, that such a murder would rouse the Pope and the 

whole Church against him.



He sent respectful messengers to the Pope, to represent his 

innocence (except in having uttered the hasty words); and he swore 

solemnly and publicly to his innocence, and contrived in time to 

make his peace.  As to the four guilty Knights, who fled into 

Yorkshire, and never again dared to show themselves at Court, the 

Pope excommunicated them; and they lived miserably for some time, 

shunned by all their countrymen.  At last, they went humbly to 

Jerusalem as a penance, and there died and were buried.



It happened, fortunately for the pacifying of the Pope, that an 

opportunity arose very soon after the murder of a Becket, for the 

King to declare his power in Ireland - which was an acceptable 

undertaking to the Pope, as the Irish, who had been converted to 

Christianity by one Patricius (otherwise Saint Patrick) long ago, 

before any Pope existed, considered that the Pope had nothing at 

all to do with them, or they with the Pope, and accordingly refused 

to pay him Peter's Pence, or that tax of a penny a house which I 

have elsewhere mentioned.  The King's opportunity arose in this 

way.



The Irish were, at that time, as barbarous a people as you can well 

imagine.  They were continually quarrelling and fighting, cutting 

one another's throats, slicing one another's noses, burning one 

another's houses, carrying away one another's wives, and committing 

all sorts of violence.  The country was divided into five kingdoms 

- DESMOND, THOMOND, CONNAUGHT, ULSTER, and LEINSTER - each governed 

by a separate King, of whom one claimed to be the chief of the 

rest.  Now, one of these Kings, named DERMOND MAC MURROUGH (a wild 

kind of name, spelt in more than one wild kind of way), had carried 

off the wife of a friend of his, and concealed her on an island in 

a bog.  The friend resenting this (though it was quite the custom 

of the country), complained to the chief King, and, with the chief 

King's help, drove Dermond Mac Murrough out of his dominions.  

Dermond came over to England for revenge; and offered to hold his 

realm as a vassal of King Henry, if King Henry would help him to 

regain it.  The King consented to these terms; but only assisted 

him, then, with what were called Letters Patent, authorising any 

English subjects who were so disposed, to enter into his service, 

and aid his cause.



There was, at Bristol, a certain EARL RICHARD DE CLARE, called 

STRONGBOW; of no very good character; needy and desperate, and 

ready for anything that offered him a chance of improving his 

fortunes.  There were, in South Wales, two other broken knights of 

the same good-for-nothing sort, called ROBERT FITZ-STEPHEN, and 

MAURICE FITZ-GERALD.  These three, each with a small band of 

followers, took up Dermond's cause; and it was agreed that if it 

proved successful, Strongbow should marry Dermond's daughter EVA, 

and be declared his heir.



The trained English followers of these knights were so superior in 

all the discipline of battle to the Irish, that they beat them 

against immense superiority of numbers.  In one fight, early in the 

war, they cut off three hundred heads, and laid them before Mac 

Murrough; who turned them every one up with his hands, rejoicing, 

and, coming to one which was the head of a man whom he had much 

disliked, grasped it by the hair and ears, and tore off the nose 

and lips with his teeth.  You may judge from this, what kind of a 

gentleman an Irish King in those times was.  The captives, all 

through this war, were horribly treated; the victorious party 

making nothing of breaking their limbs, and casting them into the 

sea from the tops of high rocks.  It was in the midst of the 

miseries and cruelties attendant on the taking of Waterford, where 

the dead lay piled in the streets, and the filthy gutters ran with 

blood, that Strongbow married Eva.  An odious marriage-company 

those mounds of corpse's must have made, I think, and one quite 

worthy of the young lady's father.



He died, after Waterford and Dublin had been taken, and various 

successes achieved; and Strongbow became King of Leinster.  Now 

came King Henry's opportunity.  To restrain the growing power of 

Strongbow, he himself repaired to Dublin, as Strongbow's Royal 

Master, and deprived him of his kingdom, but confirmed him in the 

enjoyment of great possessions.  The King, then, holding state in 

Dublin, received the homage of nearly all the Irish Kings and 

Chiefs, and so came home again with a great addition to his 

reputation as Lord of Ireland, and with a new claim on the favour 

of the Pope.  And now, their reconciliation was completed - more 

easily and mildly by the Pope, than the King might have expected, I 

think.



At this period of his reign, when his troubles seemed so few and 

his prospects so bright, those domestic miseries began which 

gradually made the King the most unhappy of men, reduced his great 

spirit, wore away his health, and broke his heart.



He had four sons.  HENRY, now aged eighteen - his secret crowning 

of whom had given such offence to Thomas a Becket.  RICHARD, aged 

sixteen; GEOFFREY, fifteen; and JOHN, his favourite, a young boy 

whom the courtiers named LACKLAND, because he had no inheritance, 

but to whom the King meant to give the Lordship of Ireland.  All 

these misguided boys, in their turn, were unnatural sons to him, 

and unnatural brothers to each other.  Prince Henry, stimulated by 

the French King, and by his bad mother, Queen Eleanor, began the 

undutiful history,



First, he demanded that his young wife, MARGARET, the French King's 

daughter, should be crowned as well as he.  His father, the King, 

consented, and it was done.  It was no sooner done, than he 

demanded to have a part of his father's dominions, during his 

father's life.  This being refused, he made off from his father in 

the night, with his bad heart full of bitterness, and took refuge 

at the French King's Court.  Within a day or two, his brothers 

Richard and Geoffrey followed.  Their mother tried to join them - 

escaping in man's clothes - but she was seized by King Henry's men, 

and immured in prison, where she lay, deservedly, for sixteen 

years.  Every day, however, some grasping English noblemen, to whom 

the King's protection of his people from their avarice and 

oppression had given offence, deserted him and joined the Princes.  

Every day he heard some fresh intelligence of the Princes levying 

armies against him; of Prince Henry's wearing a crown before his 

own ambassadors at the French Court, and being called the Junior 

King of England; of all the Princes swearing never to make peace 

with him, their father, without the consent and approval of the 

Barons of France.  But, with his fortitude and energy unshaken, 

King Henry met the shock of these disasters with a resolved and 

cheerful face.  He called upon all Royal fathers who had sons, to 

help him, for his cause was theirs; he hired, out of his riches, 

twenty thousand men to fight the false French King, who stirred his 

own blood against him; and he carried on the war with such vigour, 

that Louis soon proposed a conference to treat for peace.



The conference was held beneath an old wide-spreading green elm-

tree, upon a plain in France.  It led to nothing.  The war 

recommenced.  Prince Richard began his fighting career, by leading 

an army against his father; but his father beat him and his army 

back; and thousands of his men would have rued the day in which 

they fought in such a wicked cause, had not the King received news 

of an invasion of England by the Scots, and promptly come home 

through a great storm to repress it.  And whether he really began 

to fear that he suffered these troubles because a Becket had been 

murdered; or whether he wished to rise in the favour of the Pope, 

who had now declared a Becket to be a saint, or in the favour of 

his own people, of whom many believed that even a Becket's 

senseless tomb could work miracles, I don't know:  but the King no 

sooner landed in England than he went straight to Canterbury; and 

when he came within sight of the distant Cathedral, he dismounted 

from his horse, took off his shoes, and walked with bare and 

bleeding feet to a Becket's grave.  There, he lay down on the 

ground, lamenting, in the presence of many people; and by-and-by he 

went into the Chapter House, and, removing his clothes from his 

back and shoulders, submitted himself to be beaten with knotted 

cords (not beaten very hard, I dare say though) by eighty Priests, 

one after another.  It chanced that on the very day when the King 

made this curious exhibition of himself, a complete victory was 

obtained over the Scots; which very much delighted the Priests, who 

said that it was won because of his great example of repentance.  

For the Priests in general had found out, since a Becket's death, 

that they admired him of all things - though they had hated him 

very cordially when he was alive.



The Earl of Flanders, who was at the head of the base conspiracy of 

the King's undutiful sons and their foreign friends, took the 

opportunity of the King being thus employed at home, to lay siege 

to Rouen, the capital of Normandy.  But the King, who was 

extraordinarily quick and active in all his movements, was at 

Rouen, too, before it was supposed possible that he could have left 

England; and there he so defeated the said Earl of Flanders, that 

the conspirators proposed peace, and his bad sons Henry and 

Geoffrey submitted.  Richard resisted for six weeks; but, being 

beaten out of castle after castle, he at last submitted too, and 

his father forgave him.



To forgive these unworthy princes was only to afford them 

breathing-time for new faithlessness.  They were so false, 

disloyal, and dishonourable, that they were no more to be trusted 

than common thieves.  In the very next year, Prince Henry rebelled 

again, and was again forgiven.  In eight years more, Prince Richard 

rebelled against his elder brother; and Prince Geoffrey infamously 

said that the brothers could never agree well together, unless they 

were united against their father.  In the very next year after 

their reconciliation by the King, Prince Henry again rebelled 

against his father; and again submitted, swearing to be true; and 

was again forgiven; and again rebelled with Geoffrey.



But the end of this perfidious Prince was come.  He fell sick at a 

French town; and his conscience terribly reproaching him with his 

baseness, he sent messengers to the King his father, imploring him 

to come and see him, and to forgive him for the last time on his 

bed of death.  The generous King, who had a royal and forgiving 

mind towards his children always, would have gone; but this Prince 

had been so unnatural, that the noblemen about the King suspected 

treachery, and represented to him that he could not safely trust 

his life with such a traitor, though his own eldest son.  Therefore 

the King sent him a ring from off his finger as a token of 

forgiveness; and when the Prince had kissed it, with much grief and 

many tears, and had confessed to those around him how bad, and 

wicked, and undutiful a son he had been; he said to the attendant 

Priests:  'O, tie a rope about my body, and draw me out of bed, and 

lay me down upon a bed of ashes, that I may die with prayers to God 

in a repentant manner!'  And so he died, at twenty-seven years old.



Three years afterwards, Prince Geoffrey, being unhorsed at a 

tournament, had his brains trampled out by a crowd of horses 

passing over him.  So, there only remained Prince Richard, and 

Prince John - who had grown to be a young man now, and had solemnly 

sworn to be faithful to his father.  Richard soon rebelled again, 

encouraged by his friend the French King, PHILIP THE SECOND (son of 

Louis, who was dead); and soon submitted and was again forgiven, 

swearing on the New Testament never to rebel again; and in another 

year or so, rebelled again; and, in the presence of his father, 

knelt down on his knee before the King of France; and did the 

French King homage:  and declared that with his aid he would 

possess himself, by force, of all his father's French dominions.



And yet this Richard called himself a soldier of Our Saviour!  And 

yet this Richard wore the Cross, which the Kings of France and 

England had both taken, in the previous year, at a brotherly 

meeting underneath the old wide-spreading elm-tree on the plain, 

when they had sworn (like him) to devote themselves to a new 

Crusade, for the love and honour of the Truth!



Sick at heart, wearied out by the falsehood of his sons, and almost 

ready to lie down and die, the unhappy King who had so long stood 

firm, began to fail.  But the Pope, to his honour, supported him; 

and obliged the French King and Richard, though successful in 

fight, to treat for peace.  Richard wanted to be Crowned King of 

England, and pretended that he wanted to be married (which he 

really did not) to the French King's sister, his promised wife, 

whom King Henry detained in England.  King Henry wanted, on the 

other hand, that the French King's sister should be married to his 

favourite son, John:  the only one of his sons (he said) who had 

never rebelled against him.  At last King Henry, deserted by his 

nobles one by one, distressed, exhausted, broken-hearted, consented 

to establish peace.



One final heavy sorrow was reserved for him, even yet.  When they 

brought him the proposed treaty of peace, in writing, as he lay 

very ill in bed, they brought him also the list of the deserters 

from their allegiance, whom he was required to pardon.  The first 

name upon this list was John, his favourite son, in whom he had 

trusted to the last.



'O John! child of my heart!' exclaimed the King, in a great agony 

of mind.  'O John, whom I have loved the best!  O John, for whom I 

have contended through these many troubles!  Have you betrayed me 

too!'  And then he lay down with a heavy groan, and said, 'Now let 

the world go as it will.  I care for nothing more!'



After a time, he told his attendants to take him to the French town 

of Chinon - a town he had been fond of, during many years.  But he 

was fond of no place now; it was too true that he could care for 

nothing more upon this earth.  He wildly cursed the hour when he 

was born, and cursed the children whom he left behind him; and 

expired.



As, one hundred years before, the servile followers of the Court 

had abandoned the Conqueror in the hour of his death, so they now 

abandoned his descendant.  The very body was stripped, in the 

plunder of the Royal chamber; and it was not easy to find the means 

of carrying it for burial to the abbey church of Fontevraud.



Richard was said in after years, by way of flattery, to have the 

heart of a Lion.  It would have been far better, I think, to have 

had the heart of a Man.  His heart, whatever it was, had cause to 

beat remorsefully within his breast, when he came - as he did - 

into the solemn abbey, and looked on his dead father's uncovered 

face.  His heart, whatever it was, had been a black and perjured 

heart, in all its dealings with the deceased King, and more 

deficient in a single touch of tenderness than any wild beast's in 

the forest.



There is a pretty story told of this Reign, called the story of 

FAIR ROSAMOND.  It relates how the King doted on Fair Rosamond, who 

was the loveliest girl in all the world; and how he had a beautiful 

Bower built for her in a Park at Woodstock; and how it was erected 

in a labyrinth, and could only be found by a clue of silk.  How the 

bad Queen Eleanor, becoming jealous of Fair Rosamond, found out the 

secret of the clue, and one day, appeared before her, with a dagger 

and a cup of poison, and left her to the choice between those 

deaths.  How Fair Rosamond, after shedding many piteous tears and 

offering many useless prayers to the cruel Queen, took the poison, 

and fell dead in the midst of the beautiful bower, while the 

unconscious birds sang gaily all around her.



Now, there WAS a fair Rosamond, and she was (I dare say) the 

loveliest girl in all the world, and the King was certainly very 

fond of her, and the bad Queen Eleanor was certainly made jealous.  

But I am afraid - I say afraid, because I like the story so much - 

that there was no bower, no labyrinth, no silken clue, no dagger, 

no poison.  I am afraid fair Rosamond retired to a nunnery near 

Oxford, and died there, peaceably; her sister-nuns hanging a silken 

drapery over her tomb, and often dressing it with flowers, in 

remembrance of the youth and beauty that had enchanted the King 

when he too was young, and when his life lay fair before him.



It was dark and ended now; faded and gone.  Henry Plantagenet lay 

quiet in the abbey church of Fontevraud, in the fifty-seventh year 

of his age - never to be completed - after governing England well, 

for nearly thirty-five years.

