





CHAPTER II - ANCIENT ENGLAND UNDER THE EARLY SAXONS







THE Romans had scarcely gone away from Britain, when the Britons 

began to wish they had never left it.  For, the Romans being gone, 

and the Britons being much reduced in numbers by their long wars, 

the Picts and Scots came pouring in, over the broken and unguarded 

wall of SEVERUS, in swarms.  They plundered the richest towns, and 

killed the people; and came back so often for more booty and more 

slaughter, that the unfortunate Britons lived a life of terror.  As 

if the Picts and Scots were not bad enough on land, the Saxons 

attacked the islanders by sea; and, as if something more were still 

wanting to make them miserable, they quarrelled bitterly among 

themselves as to what prayers they ought to say, and how they ought 

to say them.  The priests, being very angry with one another on 

these questions, cursed one another in the heartiest manner; and 

(uncommonly like the old Druids) cursed all the people whom they 

could not persuade.  So, altogether, the Britons were very badly 

off, you may believe.



They were in such distress, in short, that they sent a letter to 

Rome entreating help - which they called the Groans of the Britons; 

and in which they said, 'The barbarians chase us into the sea, the 

sea throws us back upon the barbarians, and we have only the hard 

choice left us of perishing by the sword, or perishing by the 

waves.'  But, the Romans could not help them, even if they were so 

inclined; for they had enough to do to defend themselves against 

their own enemies, who were then very fierce and strong.  At last, 

the Britons, unable to bear their hard condition any longer, 

resolved to make peace with the Saxons, and to invite the Saxons to 

come into their country, and help them to keep out the Picts and 

Scots.



It was a British Prince named VORTIGERN who took this resolution, 

and who made a treaty of friendship with HENGIST and HORSA, two 

Saxon chiefs.  Both of these names, in the old Saxon language, 

signify Horse; for the Saxons, like many other nations in a rough 

state, were fond of giving men the names of animals, as Horse, 

Wolf, Bear, Hound.  The Indians of North America, - a very inferior 

people to the Saxons, though - do the same to this day.



HENGIST and HORSA drove out the Picts and Scots; and VORTIGERN, 

being grateful to them for that service, made no opposition to 

their settling themselves in that part of England which is called 

the Isle of Thanet, or to their inviting over more of their 

countrymen to join them.  But HENGIST had a beautiful daughter 

named ROWENA; and when, at a feast, she filled a golden goblet to 

the brim with wine, and gave it to VORTIGERN, saying in a sweet 

voice, 'Dear King, thy health!' the King fell in love with her.  My 

opinion is, that the cunning HENGIST meant him to do so, in order 

that the Saxons might have greater influence with him; and that the 

fair ROWENA came to that feast, golden goblet and all, on purpose.



At any rate, they were married; and, long afterwards, whenever the 

King was angry with the Saxons, or jealous of their encroachments, 

ROWENA would put her beautiful arms round his neck, and softly say, 

'Dear King, they are my people!  Be favourable to them, as you 

loved that Saxon girl who gave you the golden goblet of wine at the 

feast!'  And, really, I don't see how the King could help himself.



Ah!  We must all die!  In the course of years, VORTIGERN died - he 

was dethroned, and put in prison, first, I am afraid; and ROWENA 

died; and generations of Saxons and Britons died; and events that 

happened during a long, long time, would have been quite forgotten 

but for the tales and songs of the old Bards, who used to go about 

from feast to feast, with their white beards, recounting the deeds 

of their forefathers.  Among the histories of which they sang and 

talked, there was a famous one, concerning the bravery and virtues 

of KING ARTHUR, supposed to have been a British Prince in those old 

times.  But, whether such a person really lived, or whether there 

were several persons whose histories came to be confused together 

under that one name, or whether all about him was invention, no one 

knows.



I will tell you, shortly, what is most interesting in the early 

Saxon times, as they are described in these songs and stories of 

the Bards.



In, and long after, the days of VORTIGERN, fresh bodies of Saxons, 

under various chiefs, came pouring into Britain.  One body, 

conquering the Britons in the East, and settling there, called 

their kingdom Essex; another body settled in the West, and called 

their kingdom Wessex; the Northfolk, or Norfolk people, established 

themselves in one place; the Southfolk, or Suffolk people, 

established themselves in another; and gradually seven kingdoms or 

states arose in England, which were called the Saxon Heptarchy.  

The poor Britons, falling back before these crowds of fighting men 

whom they had innocently invited over as friends, retired into 

Wales and the adjacent country; into Devonshire, and into Cornwall.  

Those parts of England long remained unconquered.  And in Cornwall 

now - where the sea-coast is very gloomy, steep, and rugged - 

where, in the dark winter-time, ships have often been wrecked close 

to the land, and every soul on board has perished - where the winds 

and waves howl drearily and split the solid rocks into arches and 

caverns - there are very ancient ruins, which the people call the 

ruins of KING ARTHUR'S Castle.



Kent is the most famous of the seven Saxon kingdoms, because the 

Christian religion was preached to the Saxons there (who domineered 

over the Britons too much, to care for what THEY said about their 

religion, or anything else) by AUGUSTINE, a monk from Rome.  KING 

ETHELBERT, of Kent, was soon converted; and the moment he said he 

was a Christian, his courtiers all said THEY were Christians; after 

which, ten thousand of his subjects said they were Christians too.  

AUGUSTINE built a little church, close to this King's palace, on 

the ground now occupied by the beautiful cathedral of Canterbury.  

SEBERT, the King's nephew, built on a muddy marshy place near 

London, where there had been a temple to Apollo, a church dedicated 

to Saint Peter, which is now Westminster Abbey.  And, in London 

itself, on the foundation of a temple to Diana, he built another 

little church which has risen up, since that old time, to be Saint 

Paul's.



After the death of ETHELBERT, EDWIN, King of Northumbria, who was 

such a good king that it was said a woman or child might openly 

carry a purse of gold, in his reign, without fear, allowed his 

child to be baptised, and held a great council to consider whether 

he and his people should all be Christians or not.  It was decided 

that they should be.  COIFI, the chief priest of the old religion, 

made a great speech on the occasion.  In this discourse, he told 

the people that he had found out the old gods to be impostors.  'I 

am quite satisfied of it,' he said.  'Look at me!  I have been 

serving them all my life, and they have done nothing for me; 

whereas, if they had been really powerful, they could not have 

decently done less, in return for all I have done for them, than 

make my fortune.  As they have never made my fortune, I am quite 

convinced they are impostors!'  When this singular priest had 

finished speaking, he hastily armed himself with sword and lance, 

mounted a war-horse, rode at a furious gallop in sight of all the 

people to the temple, and flung his lance against it as an insult.  

From that time, the Christian religion spread itself among the 

Saxons, and became their faith.



The next very famous prince was EGBERT.  He lived about a hundred 

and fifty years afterwards, and claimed to have a better right to 

the throne of Wessex than BEORTRIC, another Saxon prince who was at 

the head of that kingdom, and who married EDBURGA, the daughter of 

OFFA, king of another of the seven kingdoms.  This QUEEN EDBURGA 

was a handsome murderess, who poisoned people when they offended 

her.  One day, she mixed a cup of poison for a certain noble 

belonging to the court; but her husband drank of it too, by 

mistake, and died.  Upon this, the people revolted, in great 

crowds; and running to the palace, and thundering at the gates, 

cried, 'Down with the wicked queen, who poisons men!'  They drove 

her out of the country, and abolished the title she had disgraced.  

When years had passed away, some travellers came home from Italy, 

and said that in the town of Pavia they had seen a ragged beggar-

woman, who had once been handsome, but was then shrivelled, bent, 

and yellow, wandering about the streets, crying for bread; and that 

this beggar-woman was the poisoning English queen.  It was, indeed, 

EDBURGA; and so she died, without a shelter for her wretched head.



EGBERT, not considering himself safe in England, in consequence of 

his having claimed the crown of Wessex (for he thought his rival 

might take him prisoner and put him to death), sought refuge at the 

court of CHARLEMAGNE, King of France.  On the death of BEORTRIC, so 

unhappily poisoned by mistake, EGBERT came back to Britain; 

succeeded to the throne of Wessex; conquered some of the other 

monarchs of the seven kingdoms; added their territories to his own; 

and, for the first time, called the country over which he ruled, 

ENGLAND.



And now, new enemies arose, who, for a long time, troubled England 

sorely.  These were the Northmen, the people of Denmark and Norway, 

whom the English called the Danes.  They were a warlike people, 

quite at home upon the sea; not Christians; very daring and cruel.  

They came over in ships, and plundered and burned wheresoever they 

landed.  Once, they beat EGBERT in battle.  Once, EGBERT beat them.  

But, they cared no more for being beaten than the English 

themselves.  In the four following short reigns, of ETHELWULF, and 

his sons, ETHELBALD, ETHELBERT, and ETHELRED, they came back, over 

and over again, burning and plundering, and laying England waste.  

In the last-mentioned reign, they seized EDMUND, King of East 

England, and bound him to a tree.  Then, they proposed to him that 

he should change his religion; but he, being a good Christian, 

steadily refused.  Upon that, they beat him, made cowardly jests 

upon him, all defenceless as he was, shot arrows at him, and, 

finally, struck off his head.  It is impossible to say whose head 

they might have struck off next, but for the death of KING ETHELRED 

from a wound he had received in fighting against them, and the 

succession to his throne of the best and wisest king that ever 

lived in England.

