






CHAPTER VI - ENGLAND UNDER HAROLD HAREFOOT, HARDICANUTE, AND EDWARD 

THE CONFESSOR







CANUTE left three sons, by name SWEYN, HAROLD, and HARDICANUTE; but 

his Queen, Emma, once the Flower of Normandy, was the mother of 

only Hardicanute.  Canute had wished his dominions to be divided 

between the three, and had wished Harold to have England; but the 

Saxon people in the South of England, headed by a nobleman with 

great possessions, called the powerful EARL GODWIN (who is said to 

have been originally a poor cow-boy), opposed this, and desired to 

have, instead, either Hardicanute, or one of the two exiled Princes 

who were over in Normandy.  It seemed so certain that there would 

be more bloodshed to settle this dispute, that many people left 

their homes, and took refuge in the woods and swamps.  Happily, 

however, it was agreed to refer the whole question to a great 

meeting at Oxford, which decided that Harold should have all the 

country north of the Thames, with London for his capital city, and 

that Hardicanute should have all the south.  The quarrel was so 

arranged; and, as Hardicanute was in Denmark troubling himself very 

little about anything but eating and getting drunk, his mother and 

Earl Godwin governed the south for him.



They had hardly begun to do so, and the trembling people who had 

hidden themselves were scarcely at home again, when Edward, the 

elder of the two exiled Princes, came over from Normandy with a few 

followers, to claim the English Crown.  His mother Emma, however, 

who only cared for her last son Hardicanute, instead of assisting 

him, as he expected, opposed him so strongly with all her influence 

that he was very soon glad to get safely back.  His brother Alfred 

was not so fortunate.  Believing in an affectionate letter, written 

some time afterwards to him and his brother, in his mother's name 

(but whether really with or without his mother's knowledge is now 

uncertain), he allowed himself to be tempted over to England, with 

a good force of soldiers, and landing on the Kentish coast, and 

being met and welcomed by Earl Godwin, proceeded into Surrey, as 

far as the town of Guildford.  Here, he and his men halted in the 

evening to rest, having still the Earl in their company; who had 

ordered lodgings and good cheer for them.  But, in the dead of the 

night, when they were off their guard, being divided into small 

parties sleeping soundly after a long march and a plentiful supper 

in different houses, they were set upon by the King's troops, and 

taken prisoners.  Next morning they were drawn out in a line, to 

the number of six hundred men, and were barbarously tortured and 

killed; with the exception of every tenth man, who was sold into 

slavery.  As to the wretched Prince Alfred, he was stripped naked, 

tied to a horse and sent away into the Isle of Ely, where his eyes 

were torn out of his head, and where in a few days he miserably 

died.  I am not sure that the Earl had wilfully entrapped him, but 

I suspect it strongly.



Harold was now King all over England, though it is doubtful whether 

the Archbishop of Canterbury (the greater part of the priests were 

Saxons, and not friendly to the Danes) ever consented to crown him.  

Crowned or uncrowned, with the Archbishop's leave or without it, he 

was King for four years:  after which short reign he died, and was 

buried; having never done much in life but go a hunting.  He was 

such a fast runner at this, his favourite sport, that the people 

called him Harold Harefoot.



Hardicanute was then at Bruges, in Flanders, plotting, with his 

mother (who had gone over there after the cruel murder of Prince 

Alfred), for the invasion of England.  The Danes and Saxons, 

finding themselves without a King, and dreading new disputes, made 

common cause, and joined in inviting him to occupy the Throne.  He 

consented, and soon troubled them enough; for he brought over 

numbers of Danes, and taxed the people so insupportably to enrich 

those greedy favourites that there were many insurrections, 

especially one at Worcester, where the citizens rose and killed his 

tax-collectors; in revenge for which he burned their city.  He was 

a brutal King, whose first public act was to order the dead body of 

poor Harold Harefoot to be dug up, beheaded, and thrown into the 

river.  His end was worthy of such a beginning.  He fell down 

drunk, with a goblet of wine in his hand, at a wedding-feast at 

Lambeth, given in honour of the marriage of his standard-bearer, a 

Dane named TOWED THE PROUD.  And he never spoke again.



EDWARD, afterwards called by the monks THE CONFESSOR, succeeded; 

and his first act was to oblige his mother Emma, who had favoured 

him so little, to retire into the country; where she died some ten 

years afterwards.  He was the exiled prince whose brother Alfred 

had been so foully killed.  He had been invited over from Normandy 

by Hardicanute, in the course of his short reign of two years, and 

had been handsomely treated at court.  His cause was now favoured 

by the powerful Earl Godwin, and he was soon made King.  This Earl 

had been suspected by the people, ever since Prince Alfred's cruel 

death; he had even been tried in the last reign for the Prince's 

murder, but had been pronounced not guilty; chiefly, as it was 

supposed, because of a present he had made to the swinish King, of 

a gilded ship with a figure-head of solid gold, and a crew of 

eighty splendidly armed men.  It was his interest to help the new 

King with his power, if the new King would help him against the 

popular distrust and hatred.  So they made a bargain.  Edward the 

Confessor got the Throne.  The Earl got more power and more land, 

and his daughter Editha was made queen; for it was a part of their 

compact that the King should take her for his wife.



But, although she was a gentle lady, in all things worthy to be 

beloved - good, beautiful, sensible, and kind - the King from the 

first neglected her.  Her father and her six proud brothers, 

resenting this cold treatment, harassed the King greatly by 

exerting all their power to make him unpopular.  Having lived so 

long in Normandy, he preferred the Normans to the English.  He made 

a Norman Archbishop, and Norman Bishops; his great officers and 

favourites were all Normans; he introduced the Norman fashions and 

the Norman language; in imitation of the state custom of Normandy, 

he attached a great seal to his state documents, instead of merely 

marking them, as the Saxon Kings had done, with the sign of the 

cross - just as poor people who have never been taught to write, 

now make the same mark for their names.  All this, the powerful 

Earl Godwin and his six proud sons represented to the people as 

disfavour shown towards the English; and thus they daily increased 

their own power, and daily diminished the power of the King.



They were greatly helped by an event that occurred when he had 

reigned eight years.  Eustace, Earl of Bologne, who had married the 

King's sister, came to England on a visit.  After staying at the 

court some time, he set forth, with his numerous train of 

attendants, to return home.  They were to embark at Dover.  

Entering that peaceful town in armour, they took possession of the 

best houses, and noisily demanded to be lodged and entertained 

without payment.  One of the bold men of Dover, who would not 

endure to have these domineering strangers jingling their heavy 

swords and iron corselets up and down his house, eating his meat 

and drinking his strong liquor, stood in his doorway and refused 

admission to the first armed man who came there.  The armed man 

drew, and wounded him.  The man of Dover struck the armed man dead.  

Intelligence of what he had done, spreading through the streets to 

where the Count Eustace and his men were standing by their horses, 

bridle in hand, they passionately mounted, galloped to the house, 

surrounded it, forced their way in (the doors and windows being 

closed when they came up), and killed the man of Dover at his own 

fireside.  They then clattered through the streets, cutting down 

and riding over men, women, and children.  This did not last long, 

you may believe.  The men of Dover set upon them with great fury, 

killed nineteen of the foreigners, wounded many more, and, 

blockading the road to the port so that they should not embark, 

beat them out of the town by the way they had come.  Hereupon, 

Count Eustace rides as hard as man can ride to Gloucester, where 

Edward is, surrounded by Norman monks and Norman lords.  'Justice!' 

cries the Count, 'upon the men of Dover, who have set upon and 

slain my people!'  The King sends immediately for the powerful Earl 

Godwin, who happens to be near; reminds him that Dover is under his 

government; and orders him to repair to Dover and do military 

execution on the inhabitants.  'It does not become you,' says the 

proud Earl in reply, 'to condemn without a hearing those whom you 

have sworn to protect.  I will not do it.'



The King, therefore, summoned the Earl, on pain of banishment and 

loss of his titles and property, to appear before the court to 

answer this disobedience.  The Earl refused to appear.  He, his 

eldest son Harold, and his second son Sweyn, hastily raised as many 

fighting men as their utmost power could collect, and demanded to 

have Count Eustace and his followers surrendered to the justice of 

the country.  The King, in his turn, refused to give them up, and 

raised a strong force.  After some treaty and delay, the troops of 

the great Earl and his sons began to fall off.  The Earl, with a 

part of his family and abundance of treasure, sailed to Flanders; 

Harold escaped to Ireland; and the power of the great family was 

for that time gone in England.  But, the people did not forget 

them.



Then, Edward the Confessor, with the true meanness of a mean 

spirit, visited his dislike of the once powerful father and sons 

upon the helpless daughter and sister, his unoffending wife, whom 

all who saw her (her husband and his monks excepted) loved.  He 

seized rapaciously upon her fortune and her jewels, and allowing 

her only one attendant, confined her in a gloomy convent, of which 

a sister of his - no doubt an unpleasant lady after his own heart - 

was abbess or jailer.



Having got Earl Godwin and his six sons well out of his way, the 

King favoured the Normans more than ever.  He invited over WILLIAM, 

DUKE OF NORMANDY, the son of that Duke who had received him and his 

murdered brother long ago, and of a peasant girl, a tanner's 

daughter, with whom that Duke had fallen in love for her beauty as 

he saw her washing clothes in a brook.  William, who was a great 

warrior, with a passion for fine horses, dogs, and arms, accepted 

the invitation; and the Normans in England, finding themselves more 

numerous than ever when he arrived with his retinue, and held in 

still greater honour at court than before, became more and more 

haughty towards the people, and were more and more disliked by 

them.



The old Earl Godwin, though he was abroad, knew well how the people 

felt; for, with part of the treasure he had carried away with him, 

he kept spies and agents in his pay all over England.



Accordingly, he thought the time was come for fitting out a great 

expedition against the Norman-loving King.  With it, he sailed to 

the Isle of Wight, where he was joined by his son Harold, the most 

gallant and brave of all his family.  And so the father and son 

came sailing up the Thames to Southwark; great numbers of the 

people declaring for them, and shouting for the English Earl and 

the English Harold, against the Norman favourites!



The King was at first as blind and stubborn as kings usually have 

been whensoever they have been in the hands of monks.  But the 

people rallied so thickly round the old Earl and his son, and the 

old Earl was so steady in demanding without bloodshed the 

restoration of himself and his family to their rights, that at last 

the court took the alarm.  The Norman Archbishop of Canterbury, and 

the Norman Bishop of London, surrounded by their retainers, fought 

their way out of London, and escaped from Essex to France in a 

fishing-boat.  The other Norman favourites dispersed in all 

directions.  The old Earl and his sons (except Sweyn, who had 

committed crimes against the law) were restored to their 

possessions and dignities.  Editha, the virtuous and lovely Queen 

of the insensible King, was triumphantly released from her prison, 

the convent, and once more sat in her chair of state, arrayed in 

the jewels of which, when she had no champion to support her 

rights, her cold-blooded husband had deprived her.



The old Earl Godwin did not long enjoy his restored fortune.  He 

fell down in a fit at the King's table, and died upon the third day 

afterwards.  Harold succeeded to his power, and to a far higher 

place in the attachment of the people than his father had ever 

held.  By his valour he subdued the King's enemies in many bloody 

fights.  He was vigorous against rebels in Scotland - this was the 

time when Macbeth slew Duncan, upon which event our English 

Shakespeare, hundreds of years afterwards, wrote his great tragedy; 

and he killed the restless Welsh King GRIFFITH, and brought his 

head to England.



What Harold was doing at sea, when he was driven on the French 

coast by a tempest, is not at all certain; nor does it at all 

matter.  That his ship was forced by a storm on that shore, and 

that he was taken prisoner, there is no doubt.  In those barbarous 

days, all shipwrecked strangers were taken prisoners, and obliged 

to pay ransom.  So, a certain Count Guy, who was the Lord of 

Ponthieu where Harold's disaster happened, seized him, instead of 

relieving him like a hospitable and Christian lord as he ought to 

have done, and expected to make a very good thing of it.



But Harold sent off immediately to Duke William of Normandy, 

complaining of this treatment; and the Duke no sooner heard of it 

than he ordered Harold to be escorted to the ancient town of Rouen, 

where he then was, and where he received him as an honoured guest.  

Now, some writers tell us that Edward the Confessor, who was by 

this time old and had no children, had made a will, appointing Duke 

William of Normandy his successor, and had informed the Duke of his 

having done so.  There is no doubt that he was anxious about his 

successor; because he had even invited over, from abroad, EDWARD 

THE OUTLAW, a son of Ironside, who had come to England with his 

wife and three children, but whom the King had strangely refused to 

see when he did come, and who had died in London suddenly (princes 

were terribly liable to sudden death in those days), and had been 

buried in St. Paul's Cathedral.  The King might possibly have made 

such a will; or, having always been fond of the Normans, he might 

have encouraged Norman William to aspire to the English crown, by 

something that he said to him when he was staying at the English 

court.  But, certainly William did now aspire to it; and knowing 

that Harold would be a powerful rival, he called together a great 

assembly of his nobles, offered Harold his daughter ADELE in 

marriage, informed him that he meant on King Edward's death to 

claim the English crown as his own inheritance, and required Harold 

then and there to swear to aid him.  Harold, being in the Duke's 

power, took this oath upon the Missal, or Prayer-book.  It is a 

good example of the superstitions of the monks, that this Missal, 

instead of being placed upon a table, was placed upon a tub; which, 

when Harold had sworn, was uncovered, and shown to be full of dead 

men's bones - bones, as the monks pretended, of saints.  This was 

supposed to make Harold's oath a great deal more impressive and 

binding.  As if the great name of the Creator of Heaven and earth 

could be made more solemn by a knuckle-bone, or a double-tooth, or 

a finger-nail, of Dunstan!



Within a week or two after Harold's return to England, the dreary 

old Confessor was found to be dying.  After wandering in his mind 

like a very weak old man, he died.  As he had put himself entirely 

in the hands of the monks when he was alive, they praised him 

lustily when he was dead.  They had gone so far, already, as to 

persuade him that he could work miracles; and had brought people 

afflicted with a bad disorder of the skin, to him, to be touched 

and cured.  This was called 'touching for the King's Evil,' which 

afterwards became a royal custom.  You know, however, Who really 

touched the sick, and healed them; and you know His sacred name is 

not among the dusty line of human kings.

