





CHAPTER XIII - ENGLAND UNDER RICHARD THE FIRST, CALLED THE LION-

HEART







IN the year of our Lord one thousand one hundred and eighty-nine, 

Richard of the Lion Heart succeeded to the throne of King Henry the 

Second, whose paternal heart he had done so much to break.  He had 

been, as we have seen, a rebel from his boyhood; but, the moment he 

became a king against whom others might rebel, he found out that 

rebellion was a great wickedness.  In the heat of this pious 

discovery, he punished all the leading people who had befriended 

him against his father.  He could scarcely have done anything that 

would have been a better instance of his real nature, or a better 

warning to fawners and parasites not to trust in lion-hearted 

princes.



He likewise put his late father's treasurer in chains, and locked 

him up in a dungeon from which he was not set free until he had 

relinquished, not only all the Crown treasure, but all his own 

money too.  So, Richard certainly got the Lion's share of the 

wealth of this wretched treasurer, whether he had a Lion's heart or 

not.



He was crowned King of England, with great pomp, at Westminster:  

walking to the Cathedral under a silken canopy stretched on the 

tops of four lances, each carried by a great lord.  On the day of 

his coronation, a dreadful murdering of the Jews took place, which 

seems to have given great delight to numbers of savage persons 

calling themselves Christians.  The King had issued a proclamation 

forbidding the Jews (who were generally hated, though they were the 

most useful merchants in England) to appear at the ceremony; but as 

they had assembled in London from all parts, bringing presents to 

show their respect for the new Sovereign, some of them ventured 

down to Westminster Hall with their gifts; which were very readily 

accepted.  It is supposed, now, that some noisy fellow in the 

crowd, pretending to be a very delicate Christian, set up a howl at 

this, and struck a Jew who was trying to get in at the Hall door 

with his present.  A riot arose.  The Jews who had got into the 

Hall, were driven forth; and some of the rabble cried out that the 

new King had commanded the unbelieving race to be put to death.  

Thereupon the crowd rushed through the narrow streets of the city, 

slaughtering all the Jews they met; and when they could find no 

more out of doors (on account of their having fled to their houses, 

and fastened themselves in), they ran madly about, breaking open 

all the houses where the Jews lived, rushing in and stabbing or 

spearing them, sometimes even flinging old people and children out 

of window into blazing fires they had lighted up below.  This great 

cruelty lasted four-and-twenty hours, and only three men were 

punished for it.  Even they forfeited their lives not for murdering 

and robbing the Jews, but for burning the houses of some 

Christians.



King Richard, who was a strong, restless, burly man, with one idea 

always in his head, and that the very troublesome idea of breaking 

the heads of other men, was mightily impatient to go on a Crusade 

to the Holy Land, with a great army.  As great armies could not be 

raised to go, even to the Holy Land, without a great deal of money, 

he sold the Crown domains, and even the high offices of State; 

recklessly appointing noblemen to rule over his English subjects, 

not because they were fit to govern, but because they could pay 

high for the privilege.  In this way, and by selling pardons at a 

dear rate and by varieties of avarice and oppression, he scraped 

together a large treasure.  He then appointed two Bishops to take 

care of his kingdom in his absence, and gave great powers and 

possessions to his brother John, to secure his friendship.  John 

would rather have been made Regent of England; but he was a sly 

man, and friendly to the expedition; saying to himself, no doubt, 

'The more fighting, the more chance of my brother being killed; and 

when he IS killed, then I become King John!'



Before the newly levied army departed from England, the recruits 

and the general populace distinguished themselves by astonishing 

cruelties on the unfortunate Jews:  whom, in many large towns, they 

murdered by hundreds in the most horrible manner.



At York, a large body of Jews took refuge in the Castle, in the 

absence of its Governor, after the wives and children of many of 

them had been slain before their eyes.  Presently came the 

Governor, and demanded admission.  'How can we give it thee, O 

Governor!' said the Jews upon the walls, 'when, if we open the gate 

by so much as the width of a foot, the roaring crowd behind thee 

will press in and kill us?'



Upon this, the unjust Governor became angry, and told the people 

that he approved of their killing those Jews; and a mischievous 

maniac of a friar, dressed all in white, put himself at the head of 

the assault, and they assaulted the Castle for three days.



Then said JOCEN, the head-Jew (who was a Rabbi or Priest), to the 

rest, 'Brethren, there is no hope for us with the Christians who 

are hammering at the gates and walls, and who must soon break in.  

As we and our wives and children must die, either by Christian 

hands, or by our own, let it be by our own.  Let us destroy by fire 

what jewels and other treasure we have here, then fire the castle, 

and then perish!'



A few could not resolve to do this, but the greater part complied.  

They made a blazing heap of all their valuables, and, when those 

were consumed, set the castle in flames.  While the flames roared 

and crackled around them, and shooting up into the sky, turned it 

blood-red, Jocen cut the throat of his beloved wife, and stabbed 

himself.  All the others who had wives or children, did the like 

dreadful deed.  When the populace broke in, they found (except the 

trembling few, cowering in corners, whom they soon killed) only 

heaps of greasy cinders, with here and there something like part of 

the blackened trunk of a burnt tree, but which had lately been a 

human creature, formed by the beneficent hand of the Creator as 

they were.



After this bad beginning, Richard and his troops went on, in no 

very good manner, with the Holy Crusade.  It was undertaken jointly 

by the King of England and his old friend Philip of France.  They 

commenced the business by reviewing their forces, to the number of 

one hundred thousand men.  Afterwards, they severally embarked 

their troops for Messina, in Sicily, which was appointed as the 

next place of meeting.



King Richard's sister had married the King of this place, but he 

was dead:  and his uncle TANCRED had usurped the crown, cast the 

Royal Widow into prison, and possessed himself of her estates.  

Richard fiercely demanded his sister's release, the restoration of 

her lands, and (according to the Royal custom of the Island) that 

she should have a golden chair, a golden table, four-and-twenty 

silver cups, and four-and-twenty silver dishes.  As he was too 

powerful to be successfully resisted, Tancred yielded to his 

demands; and then the French King grew jealous, and complained that 

the English King wanted to be absolute in the Island of Messina and 

everywhere else.  Richard, however, cared little or nothing for 

this complaint; and in consideration of a present of twenty 

thousand pieces of gold, promised his pretty little nephew ARTHUR, 

then a child of two years old, in marriage to Tancred's daughter.  

We shall hear again of pretty little Arthur by-and-by.



This Sicilian affair arranged without anybody's brains being 

knocked out (which must have rather disappointed him), King Richard 

took his sister away, and also a fair lady named BERENGARIA, with 

whom he had fallen in love in France, and whom his mother, Queen 

Eleanor (so long in prison, you remember, but released by Richard 

on his coming to the Throne), had brought out there to be his wife; 

and sailed with them for Cyprus.



He soon had the pleasure of fighting the King of the Island of 

Cyprus, for allowing his subjects to pillage some of the English 

troops who were shipwrecked on the shore; and easily conquering 

this poor monarch, he seized his only daughter, to be a companion 

to the lady Berengaria, and put the King himself into silver 

fetters.  He then sailed away again with his mother, sister, wife, 

and the captive princess; and soon arrived before the town of Acre, 

which the French King with his fleet was besieging from the sea.  

But the French King was in no triumphant condition, for his army 

had been thinned by the swords of the Saracens, and wasted by the 

plague; and SALADIN, the brave Sultan of the Turks, at the head of 

a numerous army, was at that time gallantly defending the place 

from the hills that rise above it.



Wherever the united army of Crusaders went, they agreed in few 

points except in gaming, drinking, and quarrelling, in a most 

unholy manner; in debauching the people among whom they tarried, 

whether they were friends or foes; and in carrying disturbance and 

ruin into quiet places.  The French King was jealous of the English 

King, and the English King was jealous of the French King, and the 

disorderly and violent soldiers of the two nations were jealous of 

one another; consequently, the two Kings could not at first agree, 

even upon a joint assault on Acre; but when they did make up their 

quarrel for that purpose, the Saracens promised to yield the town, 

to give up to the Christians the wood of the Holy Cross, to set at 

liberty all their Christian captives, and to pay two hundred 

thousand pieces of gold.  All this was to be done within forty 

days; but, not being done, King Richard ordered some three thousand 

Saracen prisoners to be brought out in the front of his camp, and 

there, in full view of their own countrymen, to be butchered.



The French King had no part in this crime; for he was by that time 

travelling homeward with the greater part of his men; being 

offended by the overbearing conduct of the English King; being 

anxious to look after his own dominions; and being ill, besides, 

from the unwholesome air of that hot and sandy country.  King 

Richard carried on the war without him; and remained in the East, 

meeting with a variety of adventures, nearly a year and a half.  

Every night when his army was on the march, and came to a halt, the 

heralds cried out three times, to remind all the soldiers of the 

cause in which they were engaged, 'Save the Holy Sepulchre!' and 

then all the soldiers knelt and said 'Amen!'  Marching or 

encamping, the army had continually to strive with the hot air of 

the glaring desert, or with the Saracen soldiers animated and 

directed by the brave Saladin, or with both together.  Sickness and 

death, battle and wounds, were always among them; but through every 

difficulty King Richard fought like a giant, and worked like a 

common labourer.  Long and long after he was quiet in his grave, 

his terrible battle-axe, with twenty English pounds of English 

steel in its mighty head, was a legend among the Saracens; and when 

all the Saracen and Christian hosts had been dust for many a year, 

if a Saracen horse started at any object by the wayside, his rider 

would exclaim, 'What dost thou fear, Fool?  Dost thou think King 

Richard is behind it?'



No one admired this King's renown for bravery more than Saladin 

himself, who was a generous and gallant enemy.  When Richard lay 

ill of a fever, Saladin sent him fresh fruits from Damascus, and 

snow from the mountain-tops.  Courtly messages and compliments were 

frequently exchanged between them - and then King Richard would 

mount his horse and kill as many Saracens as he could; and Saladin 

would mount his, and kill as many Christians as he could.  In this 

way King Richard fought to his heart's content at Arsoof and at 

Jaffa; and finding himself with nothing exciting to do at Ascalon, 

except to rebuild, for his own defence, some fortifications there 

which the Saracens had destroyed, he kicked his ally the Duke of 

Austria, for being too proud to work at them.



The army at last came within sight of the Holy City of Jerusalem; 

but, being then a mere nest of jealousy, and quarrelling and 

fighting, soon retired, and agreed with the Saracens upon a truce 

for three years, three months, three days, and three hours.  Then, 

the English Christians, protected by the noble Saladin from Saracen 

revenge, visited Our Saviour's tomb; and then King Richard embarked 

with a small force at Acre to return home.



But he was shipwrecked in the Adriatic Sea, and was fain to pass 

through Germany, under an assumed name.  Now, there were many 

people in Germany who had served in the Holy Land under that proud 

Duke of Austria who had been kicked; and some of them, easily 

recognising a man so remarkable as King Richard, carried their 

intelligence to the kicked Duke, who straightway took him prisoner 

at a little inn near Vienna.



The Duke's master the Emperor of Germany, and the King of France, 

were equally delighted to have so troublesome a monarch in safe 

keeping.  Friendships which are founded on a partnership in doing 

wrong, are never true; and the King of France was now quite as 

heartily King Richard's foe, as he had ever been his friend in his 

unnatural conduct to his father.  He monstrously pretended that 

King Richard had designed to poison him in the East; he charged him 

with having murdered, there, a man whom he had in truth befriended; 

he bribed the Emperor of Germany to keep him close prisoner; and, 

finally, through the plotting of these two princes, Richard was 

brought before the German legislature, charged with the foregoing 

crimes, and many others.  But he defended himself so well, that 

many of the assembly were moved to tears by his eloquence and 

earnestness.  It was decided that he should be treated, during the 

rest of his captivity, in a manner more becoming his dignity than 

he had been, and that he should be set free on the payment of a 

heavy ransom.  This ransom the English people willingly raised.  

When Queen Eleanor took it over to Germany, it was at first evaded 

and refused.  But she appealed to the honour of all the princes of 

the German Empire in behalf of her son, and appealed so well that 

it was accepted, and the King released.  Thereupon, the King of 

France wrote to Prince John - 'Take care of thyself.  The devil is 

unchained!'



Prince John had reason to fear his brother, for he had been a 

traitor to him in his captivity.  He had secretly joined the French 

King; had vowed to the English nobles and people that his brother 

was dead; and had vainly tried to seize the crown.  He was now in 

France, at a place called Evreux.  Being the meanest and basest of 

men, he contrived a mean and base expedient for making himself 

acceptable to his brother.  He invited the French officers of the 

garrison in that town to dinner, murdered them all, and then took 

the fortress.  With this recommendation to the good will of a lion-

hearted monarch, he hastened to King Richard, fell on his knees 

before him, and obtained the intercession of Queen Eleanor.  'I 

forgive him,' said the King, 'and I hope I may forget the injury he 

has done me, as easily as I know he will forget my pardon.'



While King Richard was in Sicily, there had been trouble in his 

dominions at home:  one of the bishops whom he had left in charge 

thereof, arresting the other; and making, in his pride and 

ambition, as great a show as if he were King himself.  But the King 

hearing of it at Messina, and appointing a new Regency, this 

LONGCHAMP (for that was his name) had fled to France in a woman's 

dress, and had there been encouraged and supported by the French 

King.  With all these causes of offence against Philip in his mind, 

King Richard had no sooner been welcomed home by his enthusiastic 

subjects with great display and splendour, and had no sooner been 

crowned afresh at Winchester, than he resolved to show the French 

King that the Devil was unchained indeed, and made war against him 

with great fury.



There was fresh trouble at home about this time, arising out of the 

discontents of the poor people, who complained that they were far 

more heavily taxed than the rich, and who found a spirited champion 

in WILLIAM FITZ-OSBERT, called LONGBEARD.  He became the leader of 

a secret society, comprising fifty thousand men; he was seized by 

surprise; he stabbed the citizen who first laid hands upon him; and 

retreated, bravely fighting, to a church, which he maintained four 

days, until he was dislodged by fire, and run through the body as 

he came out.  He was not killed, though; for he was dragged, half 

dead, at the tail of a horse to Smithfield, and there hanged.  

Death was long a favourite remedy for silencing the people's 

advocates; but as we go on with this history, I fancy we shall find 

them difficult to make an end of, for all that.



The French war, delayed occasionally by a truce, was still in 

progress when a certain Lord named VIDOMAR, Viscount of Limoges, 

chanced to find in his ground a treasure of ancient coins.  As the 

King's vassal, he sent the King half of it; but the King claimed 

the whole.  The lord refused to yield the whole.  The King besieged 

the lord in his castle, swore that he would take the castle by 

storm, and hang every man of its defenders on the battlements.



There was a strange old song in that part of the country, to the 

effect that in Limoges an arrow would be made by which King Richard 

would die.  It may be that BERTRAND DE GOURDON, a young man who was 

one of the defenders of the castle, had often sung it or heard it 

sung of a winter night, and remembered it when he saw, from his 

post upon the ramparts, the King attended only by his chief officer 

riding below the walls surveying the place.  He drew an arrow to 

the head, took steady aim, said between his teeth, 'Now I pray God 

speed thee well, arrow!' discharged it, and struck the King in the 

left shoulder.



Although the wound was not at first considered dangerous, it was 

severe enough to cause the King to retire to his tent, and direct 

the assault to be made without him.  The castle was taken; and 

every man of its defenders was hanged, as the King had sworn all 

should be, except Bertrand de Gourdon, who was reserved until the 

royal pleasure respecting him should be known.



By that time unskilful treatment had made the wound mortal and the 

King knew that he was dying.  He directed Bertrand to be brought 

into his tent.  The young man was brought there, heavily chained, 

King Richard looked at him steadily.  He looked, as steadily, at 

the King.



'Knave!' said King Richard.  'What have I done to thee that thou 

shouldest take my life?'



'What hast thou done to me?' replied the young man.  'With thine 

own hands thou hast killed my father and my two brothers.  Myself 

thou wouldest have hanged.  Let me die now, by any torture that 

thou wilt.  My comfort is, that no torture can save Thee.  Thou too 

must die; and, through me, the world is quit of thee!'



Again the King looked at the young man steadily.  Again the young 

man looked steadily at him.  Perhaps some remembrance of his 

generous enemy Saladin, who was not a Christian, came into the mind 

of the dying King.



'Youth!' he said, 'I forgive thee.  Go unhurt!'  Then, turning to 

the chief officer who had been riding in his company when he 

received the wound, King Richard said:



'Take off his chains, give him a hundred shillings, and let him 

depart.'



He sunk down on his couch, and a dark mist seemed in his weakened 

eyes to fill the tent wherein he had so often rested, and he died.  

His age was forty-two; he had reigned ten years.  His last command 

was not obeyed; for the chief officer flayed Bertrand de Gourdon 

alive, and hanged him.



There is an old tune yet known - a sorrowful air will sometimes 

outlive many generations of strong men, and even last longer than 

battle-axes with twenty pounds of steel in the head - by which this 

King is said to have been discovered in his captivity.  BLONDEL, a 

favourite Minstrel of King Richard, as the story relates, 

faithfully seeking his Royal master, went singing it outside the 

gloomy walls of many foreign fortresses and prisons; until at last 

he heard it echoed from within a dungeon, and knew the voice, and 

cried out in ecstasy, 'O Richard, O my King!'  You may believe it, 

if you like; it would be easy to believe worse things.  Richard was 

himself a Minstrel and a Poet.  If he had not been a Prince too, he 

might have been a better man perhaps, and might have gone out of 

the world with less bloodshed and waste of life to answer for.

