





CHAPTER XXXVI - ENGLAND UNDER JAMES THE SECOND







KING JAMES THE SECOND was a man so very disagreeable, that even the 

best of historians has favoured his brother Charles, as becoming, 

by comparison, quite a pleasant character.  The one object of his 

short reign was to re-establish the Catholic religion in England; 

and this he doggedly pursued with such a stupid obstinacy, that his 

career very soon came to a close.



The first thing he did, was, to assure his council that he would 

make it his endeavour to preserve the Government, both in Church 

and State, as it was by law established; and that he would always 

take care to defend and support the Church.  Great public 

acclamations were raised over this fair speech, and a great deal 

was said, from the pulpits and elsewhere, about the word of a King 

which was never broken, by credulous people who little supposed 

that he had formed a secret council for Catholic affairs, of which 

a mischievous Jesuit, called FATHER PETRE, was one of the chief 

members.  With tears of joy in his eyes, he received, as the 

beginning of HIS pension from the King of France, five hundred 

thousand livres; yet, with a mixture of meanness and arrogance that 

belonged to his contemptible character, he was always jealous of 

making some show of being independent of the King of France, while 

he pocketed his money.  As - notwithstanding his publishing two 

papers in favour of Popery (and not likely to do it much service, I 

should think) written by the King, his brother, and found in his 

strong-box; and his open display of himself attending mass - the 

Parliament was very obsequious, and granted him a large sum of 

money, he began his reign with a belief that he could do what he 

pleased, and with a determination to do it.



Before we proceed to its principal events, let us dispose of Titus 

Oates.  He was tried for perjury, a fortnight after the coronation, 

and besides being very heavily fined, was sentenced to stand twice 

in the pillory, to be whipped from Aldgate to Newgate one day, and 

from Newgate to Tyburn two days afterwards, and to stand in the 

pillory five times a year as long as he lived.  This fearful 

sentence was actually inflicted on the rascal.  Being unable to 

stand after his first flogging, he was dragged on a sledge from 

Newgate to Tyburn, and flogged as he was drawn along.  He was so 

strong a villain that he did not die under the torture, but lived 

to be afterwards pardoned and rewarded, though not to be ever 

believed in any more.  Dangerfield, the only other one of that crew 

left alive, was not so fortunate.  He was almost killed by a 

whipping from Newgate to Tyburn, and, as if that were not 

punishment enough, a ferocious barrister of Gray's Inn gave him a 

poke in the eye with his cane, which caused his death; for which 

the ferocious barrister was deservedly tried and executed.



As soon as James was on the throne, Argyle and Monmouth went from 

Brussels to Rotterdam, and attended a meeting of Scottish exiles 

held there, to concert measures for a rising in England.  It was 

agreed that Argyle should effect a landing in Scotland, and 

Monmouth in England; and that two Englishmen should be sent with 

Argyle to be in his confidence, and two Scotchmen with the Duke of 

Monmouth.



Argyle was the first to act upon this contract.  But, two of his 

men being taken prisoners at the Orkney Islands, the Government 

became aware of his intention, and was able to act against him with 

such vigour as to prevent his raising more than two or three 

thousand Highlanders, although he sent a fiery cross, by trusty 

messengers, from clan to clan and from glen to glen, as the custom 

then was when those wild people were to be excited by their chiefs.  

As he was moving towards Glasgow with his small force, he was 

betrayed by some of his followers, taken, and carried, with his 

hands tied behind his back, to his old prison in Edinburgh Castle.  

James ordered him to be executed, on his old shamefully unjust 

sentence, within three days; and he appears to have been anxious 

that his legs should have been pounded with his old favourite the 

boot.  However, the boot was not applied; he was simply beheaded, 

and his head was set upon the top of Edinburgh Jail.  One of those 

Englishmen who had been assigned to him was that old soldier 

Rumbold, the master of the Rye House.  He was sorely wounded, and 

within a week after Argyle had suffered with great courage, was 

brought up for trial, lest he should die and disappoint the King.  

He, too, was executed, after defending himself with great spirit, 

and saying that he did not believe that God had made the greater 

part of mankind to carry saddles on their backs and bridles in 

their mouths, and to be ridden by a few, booted and spurred for the 

purpose - in which I thoroughly agree with Rumbold.



The Duke of Monmouth, partly through being detained and partly 

through idling his time away, was five or six weeks behind his 

friend when he landed at Lyme, in Dorset:  having at his right hand 

an unlucky nobleman called LORD GREY OF WERK, who of himself would 

have ruined a far more promising expedition.  He immediately set up 

his standard in the market-place, and proclaimed the King a tyrant, 

and a Popish usurper, and I know not what else; charging him, not 

only with what he had done, which was bad enough, but with what 

neither he nor anybody else had done, such as setting fire to 

London, and poisoning the late King.  Raising some four thousand 

men by these means, he marched on to Taunton, where there were many 

Protestant dissenters who were strongly opposed to the Catholics.  

Here, both the rich and poor turned out to receive him, ladies 

waved a welcome to him from all the windows as he passed along the 

streets, flowers were strewn in his way, and every compliment and 

honour that could be devised was showered upon him.  Among the 

rest, twenty young ladies came forward, in their best clothes, and 

in their brightest beauty, and gave him a Bible ornamented with 

their own fair hands, together with other presents.



Encouraged by this homage, he proclaimed himself King, and went on 

to Bridgewater.  But, here the Government troops, under the EARL OF 

FEVERSHAM, were close at hand; and he was so dispirited at finding 

that he made but few powerful friends after all, that it was a 

question whether he should disband his army and endeavour to 

escape.  It was resolved, at the instance of that unlucky Lord 

Grey, to make a night attack on the King's army, as it lay encamped 

on the edge of a morass called Sedgemoor.  The horsemen were 

commanded by the same unlucky lord, who was not a brave man.  He 

gave up the battle almost at the first obstacle - which was a deep 

drain; and although the poor countrymen, who had turned out for 

Monmouth, fought bravely with scythes, poles, pitchforks, and such 

poor weapons as they had, they were soon dispersed by the trained 

soldiers, and fled in all directions.  When the Duke of Monmouth 

himself fled, was not known in the confusion; but the unlucky Lord 

Grey was taken early next day, and then another of the party was 

taken, who confessed that he had parted from the Duke only four 

hours before.  Strict search being made, he was found disguised as 

a peasant, hidden in a ditch under fern and nettles, with a few 

peas in his pocket which he had gathered in the fields to eat.  The 

only other articles he had upon him were a few papers and little 

books:  one of the latter being a strange jumble, in his own 

writing, of charms, songs, recipes, and prayers.  He was completely 

broken.  He wrote a miserable letter to the King, beseeching and 

entreating to be allowed to see him.  When he was taken to London, 

and conveyed bound into the King's presence, he crawled to him on 

his knees, and made a most degrading exhibition.  As James never 

forgave or relented towards anybody, he was not likely to soften 

towards the issuer of the Lyme proclamation, so he told the 

suppliant to prepare for death.



On the fifteenth of July, one thousand six hundred and eighty-five, 

this unfortunate favourite of the people was brought out to die on 

Tower Hill.  The crowd was immense, and the tops of all the houses 

were covered with gazers.  He had seen his wife, the daughter of 

the Duke of Buccleuch, in the Tower, and had talked much of a lady 

whom he loved far better - the LADY HARRIET WENTWORTH - who was one 

of the last persons he remembered in this life.  Before laying down 

his head upon the block he felt the edge of the axe, and told the 

executioner that he feared it was not sharp enough, and that the 

axe was not heavy enough.  On the executioner replying that it was 

of the proper kind, the Duke said, 'I pray you have a care, and do 

not use me so awkwardly as you used my Lord Russell.'  The 

executioner, made nervous by this, and trembling, struck once and 

merely gashed him in the neck.  Upon this, the Duke of Monmouth 

raised his head and looked the man reproachfully in the face.  Then 

he struck twice, and then thrice, and then threw down the axe, and 

cried out in a voice of horror that he could not finish that work.  

The sheriffs, however, threatening him with what should be done to 

himself if he did not, he took it up again and struck a fourth time 

and a fifth time.  Then the wretched head at last fell off, and 

James, Duke of Monmouth, was dead, in the thirty-sixth year of his 

age.  He was a showy, graceful man, with many popular qualities, 

and had found much favour in the open hearts of the English.



The atrocities, committed by the Government, which followed this 

Monmouth rebellion, form the blackest and most lamentable page in 

English history.  The poor peasants, having been dispersed with 

great loss, and their leaders having been taken, one would think 

that the implacable King might have been satisfied.  But no; he let 

loose upon them, among other intolerable monsters, a COLONEL KIRK, 

who had served against the Moors, and whose soldiers - called by 

the people Kirk's lambs, because they bore a lamb upon their flag, 

as the emblem of Christianity - were worthy of their leader.  The 

atrocities committed by these demons in human shape are far too 

horrible to be related here.  It is enough to say, that besides 

most ruthlessly murdering and robbing them, and ruining them by 

making them buy their pardons at the price of all they possessed, 

it was one of Kirk's favourite amusements, as he and his officers 

sat drinking after dinner, and toasting the King, to have batches 

of prisoners hanged outside the windows for the company's 

diversion; and that when their feet quivered in the convulsions of 

death, he used to swear that they should have music to their 

dancing, and would order the drums to beat and the trumpets to 

play.  The detestable King informed him, as an acknowledgment of 

these services, that he was 'very well satisfied with his 

proceedings.'  But the King's great delight was in the proceedings 

of Jeffreys, now a peer, who went down into the west, with four 

other judges, to try persons accused of having had any share in the 

rebellion.  The King pleasantly called this 'Jeffreys's campaign.'  

The people down in that part of the country remember it to this day 

as The Bloody Assize.



It began at Winchester, where a poor deaf old lady, MRS. ALICIA 

LISLE, the widow of one of the judges of Charles the First (who had 

been murdered abroad by some Royalist assassins), was charged with 

having given shelter in her house to two fugitives from Sedgemoor.  

Three times the jury refused to find her guilty, until Jeffreys 

bullied and frightened them into that false verdict.  When he had 

extorted it from them, he said, 'Gentlemen, if I had been one of 

you, and she had been my own mother, I would have found her 

guilty;' - as I dare say he would.  He sentenced her to be burned 

alive, that very afternoon.  The clergy of the cathedral and some 

others interfered in her favour, and she was beheaded within a 

week.  As a high mark of his approbation, the King made Jeffreys 

Lord Chancellor; and he then went on to Dorchester, to Exeter, to 

Taunton, and to Wells.  It is astonishing, when we read of the 

enormous injustice and barbarity of this beast, to know that no one 

struck him dead on the judgment-seat.  It was enough for any man or 

woman to be accused by an enemy, before Jeffreys, to be found 

guilty of high treason.  One man who pleaded not guilty, he ordered 

to be taken out of court upon the instant, and hanged; and this so 

terrified the prisoners in general that they mostly pleaded guilty 

at once.  At Dorchester alone, in the course of a few days, 

Jeffreys hanged eighty people; besides whipping, transporting, 

imprisoning, and selling as slaves, great numbers.  He executed, in 

all, two hundred and fifty, or three hundred.



These executions took place, among the neighbours and friends of 

the sentenced, in thirty-six towns and villages.  Their bodies were 

mangled, steeped in caldrons of boiling pitch and tar, and hung up 

by the roadsides, in the streets, over the very churches.  The 

sight and smell of heads and limbs, the hissing and bubbling of the 

infernal caldrons, and the tears and terrors of the people, were 

dreadful beyond all description.  One rustic, who was forced to 

steep the remains in the black pot, was ever afterwards called 'Tom 

Boilman.'  The hangman has ever since been called Jack Ketch, 

because a man of that name went hanging and hanging, all day long, 

in the train of Jeffreys.  You will hear much of the horrors of the 

great French Revolution.  Many and terrible they were, there is no 

doubt; but I know of nothing worse, done by the maddened people of 

France in that awful time, than was done by the highest judge in 

England, with the express approval of the King of England, in The 

Bloody Assize.



Nor was even this all.  Jeffreys was as fond of money for himself 

as of misery for others, and he sold pardons wholesale to fill his 

pockets.  The King ordered, at one time, a thousand prisoners to be 

given to certain of his favourites, in order that they might 

bargain with them for their pardons.  The young ladies of Taunton 

who had presented the Bible, were bestowed upon the maids of honour 

at court; and those precious ladies made very hard bargains with 

them indeed.  When The Bloody Assize was at its most dismal height, 

the King was diverting himself with horse-races in the very place 

where Mrs. Lisle had been executed.  When Jeffreys had done his 

worst, and came home again, he was particularly complimented in the 

Royal Gazette; and when the King heard that through drunkenness and 

raging he was very ill, his odious Majesty remarked that such 

another man could not easily be found in England.  Besides all 

this, a former sheriff of London, named CORNISH, was hanged within 

sight of his own house, after an abominably conducted trial, for 

having had a share in the Rye House Plot, on evidence given by 

Rumsey, which that villain was obliged to confess was directly 

opposed to the evidence he had given on the trial of Lord Russell.  

And on the very same day, a worthy widow, named ELIZABETH GAUNT, 

was burned alive at Tyburn, for having sheltered a wretch who 

himself gave evidence against her.  She settled the fuel about 

herself with her own hands, so that the flames should reach her 

quickly:  and nobly said, with her last breath, that she had obeyed 

the sacred command of God, to give refuge to the outcast, and not 

to betray the wanderer.



After all this hanging, beheading, burning, boiling, mutilating, 

exposing, robbing, transporting, and selling into slavery, of his 

unhappy subjects, the King not unnaturally thought that he could do 

whatever he would.  So, he went to work to change the religion of 

the country with all possible speed; and what he did was this.



He first of all tried to get rid of what was called the Test Act - 

which prevented the Catholics from holding public employments - by 

his own power of dispensing with the penalties.  He tried it in one 

case, and, eleven of the twelve judges deciding in his favour, he 

exercised it in three others, being those of three dignitaries of 

University College, Oxford, who had become Papists, and whom he 

kept in their places and sanctioned.  He revived the hated 

Ecclesiastical Commission, to get rid of COMPTON, Bishop of London, 

who manfully opposed him.  He solicited the Pope to favour England 

with an ambassador, which the Pope (who was a sensible man then) 

rather unwillingly did.  He flourished Father Petre before the eyes 

of the people on all possible occasions.  He favoured the 

establishment of convents in several parts of London.  He was 

delighted to have the streets, and even the court itself, filled 

with Monks and Friars in the habits of their orders.  He constantly 

endeavoured to make Catholics of the Protestants about him.  He 

held private interviews, which he called 'closetings,' with those 

Members of Parliament who held offices, to persuade them to consent 

to the design he had in view.  When they did not consent, they were 

removed, or resigned of themselves, and their places were given to 

Catholics.  He displaced Protestant officers from the army, by 

every means in his power, and got Catholics into their places too.  

He tried the same thing with the corporations, and also (though not 

so successfully) with the Lord Lieutenants of counties.  To terrify 

the people into the endurance of all these measures, he kept an 

army of fifteen thousand men encamped on Hounslow Heath, where mass 

was openly performed in the General's tent, and where priests went 

among the soldiers endeavouring to persuade them to become 

Catholics.  For circulating a paper among those men advising them 

to be true to their religion, a Protestant clergyman, named 

JOHNSON, the chaplain of the late Lord Russell, was actually 

sentenced to stand three times in the pillory, and was actually 

whipped from Newgate to Tyburn.  He dismissed his own brother-in-

law from his Council because he was a Protestant, and made a Privy 

Councillor of the before-mentioned Father Petre.  He handed Ireland 

over to RICHARD TALBOT, EARL OF TYRCONNELL, a worthless, dissolute 

knave, who played the same game there for his master, and who 

played the deeper game for himself of one day putting it under the 

protection of the French King.  In going to these extremities, 

every man of sense and judgment among the Catholics, from the Pope 

to a porter, knew that the King was a mere bigoted fool, who would 

undo himself and the cause he sought to advance; but he was deaf to 

all reason, and, happily for England ever afterwards, went tumbling 

off his throne in his own blind way.



A spirit began to arise in the country, which the besotted 

blunderer little expected.  He first found it out in the University 

of Cambridge.  Having made a Catholic a dean at Oxford without any 

opposition, he tried to make a monk a master of arts at Cambridge:  

which attempt the University resisted, and defeated him.  He then 

went back to his favourite Oxford.  On the death of the President 

of Magdalen College, he commanded that there should be elected to 

succeed him, one MR. ANTHONY FARMER, whose only recommendation was, 

that he was of the King's religion.  The University plucked up 

courage at last, and refused.  The King substituted another man, 

and it still refused, resolving to stand by its own election of a 

MR. HOUGH.  The dull tyrant, upon this, punished Mr. Hough, and 

five-and-twenty more, by causing them to be expelled and declared 

incapable of holding any church preferment; then he proceeded to 

what he supposed to be his highest step, but to what was, in fact, 

his last plunge head-foremost in his tumble off his throne.



He had issued a declaration that there should be no religious tests 

or penal laws, in order to let in the Catholics more easily; but 

the Protestant dissenters, unmindful of themselves, had gallantly 

joined the regular church in opposing it tooth and nail.  The King 

and Father Petre now resolved to have this read, on a certain 

Sunday, in all the churches, and to order it to be circulated for 

that purpose by the bishops.  The latter took counsel with the 

Archbishop of Canterbury, who was in disgrace; and they resolved 

that the declaration should not be read, and that they would 

petition the King against it.  The Archbishop himself wrote out the 

petition, and six bishops went into the King's bedchamber the same 

night to present it, to his infinite astonishment.  Next day was 

the Sunday fixed for the reading, and it was only read by two 

hundred clergymen out of ten thousand.  The King resolved against 

all advice to prosecute the bishops in the Court of King's Bench, 

and within three weeks they were summoned before the Privy Council, 

and committed to the Tower.  As the six bishops were taken to that 

dismal place, by water, the people who were assembled in immense 

numbers fell upon their knees, and wept for them, and prayed for 

them.  When they got to the Tower, the officers and soldiers on 

guard besought them for their blessing.  While they were confined 

there, the soldiers every day drank to their release with loud 

shouts.  When they were brought up to the Court of King's Bench for 

their trial, which the Attorney-General said was for the high 

offence of censuring the Government, and giving their opinion about 

affairs of state, they were attended by similar multitudes, and 

surrounded by a throng of noblemen and gentlemen.  When the jury 

went out at seven o'clock at night to consider of their verdict, 

everybody (except the King) knew that they would rather starve than 

yield to the King's brewer, who was one of them, and wanted a 

verdict for his customer.  When they came into court next morning, 

after resisting the brewer all night, and gave a verdict of not 

guilty, such a shout rose up in Westminster Hall as it had never 

heard before; and it was passed on among the people away to Temple 

Bar, and away again to the Tower.  It did not pass only to the 

east, but passed to the west too, until it reached the camp at 

Hounslow, where the fifteen thousand soldiers took it up and echoed 

it.  And still, when the dull King, who was then with Lord 

Feversham, heard the mighty roar, asked in alarm what it was, and 

was told that it was 'nothing but the acquittal of the bishops,' he 

said, in his dogged way, 'Call you that nothing?  It is so much the 

worse for them.'



Between the petition and the trial, the Queen had given birth to a 

son, which Father Petre rather thought was owing to Saint Winifred.  

But I doubt if Saint Winifred had much to do with it as the King's 

friend, inasmuch as the entirely new prospect of a Catholic 

successor (for both the King's daughters were Protestants) 

determined the EARLS OF SHREWSBURY, DANBY, and DEVONSHIRE, LORD 

LUMLEY, the BISHOP OF LONDON, ADMIRAL RUSSELL, and COLONEL SIDNEY, 

to invite the Prince of Orange over to England.  The Royal Mole, 

seeing his danger at last, made, in his fright, many great 

concessions, besides raising an army of forty thousand men; but the 

Prince of Orange was not a man for James the Second to cope with.  

His preparations were extraordinarily vigorous, and his mind was 

resolved.



For a fortnight after the Prince was ready to sail for England, a 

great wind from the west prevented the departure of his fleet.  

Even when the wind lulled, and it did sail, it was dispersed by a 

storm, and was obliged to put back to refit.  At last, on the first 

of November, one thousand six hundred and eighty-eight, the 

Protestant east wind, as it was long called, began to blow; and on 

the third, the people of Dover and the people of Calais saw a fleet 

twenty miles long sailing gallantly by, between the two places.  On 

Monday, the fifth, it anchored at Torbay in Devonshire, and the 

Prince, with a splendid retinue of officers and men, marched into 

Exeter.  But the people in that western part of the country had 

suffered so much in The Bloody Assize, that they had lost heart.  

Few people joined him; and he began to think of returning, and 

publishing the invitation he had received from those lords, as his 

justification for having come at all.  At this crisis, some of the 

gentry joined him; the Royal army began to falter; an engagement 

was signed, by which all who set their hand to it declared that 

they would support one another in defence of the laws and liberties 

of the three Kingdoms, of the Protestant religion, and of the 

Prince of Orange.  From that time, the cause received no check; the 

greatest towns in England began, one after another, to declare for 

the Prince; and he knew that it was all safe with him when the 

University of Oxford offered to melt down its plate, if he wanted 

any money.



By this time the King was running about in a pitiable way, touching 

people for the King's evil in one place, reviewing his troops in 

another, and bleeding from the nose in a third.  The young Prince 

was sent to Portsmouth, Father Petre went off like a shot to 

France, and there was a general and swift dispersal of all the 

priests and friars.  One after another, the King's most important 

officers and friends deserted him and went over to the Prince.  In 

the night, his daughter Anne fled from Whitehall Palace; and the 

Bishop of London, who had once been a soldier, rode before her with 

a drawn sword in his hand, and pistols at his saddle.  'God help 

me,' cried the miserable King:  'my very children have forsaken 

me!'  In his wildness, after debating with such lords as were in 

London, whether he should or should not call a Parliament, and 

after naming three of them to negotiate with the Prince, he 

resolved to fly to France.  He had the little Prince of Wales 

brought back from Portsmouth; and the child and the Queen crossed 

the river to Lambeth in an open boat, on a miserable wet night, and 

got safely away.  This was on the night of the ninth of December.



At one o'clock on the morning of the eleventh, the King, who had, 

in the meantime, received a letter from the Prince of Orange, 

stating his objects, got out of bed, told LORD NORTHUMBERLAND who 

lay in his room not to open the door until the usual hour in the 

morning, and went down the back stairs (the same, I suppose, by 

which the priest in the wig and gown had come up to his brother) 

and crossed the river in a small boat:  sinking the great seal of 

England by the way.  Horses having been provided, he rode, 

accompanied by SIR EDWARD HALES, to Feversham, where he embarked in 

a Custom House Hoy.  The master of this Hoy, wanting more ballast, 

ran into the Isle of Sheppy to get it, where the fishermen and 

smugglers crowded about the boat, and informed the King of their 

suspicions that he was a 'hatchet-faced Jesuit.'  As they took his 

money and would not let him go, he told them who he was, and that 

the Prince of Orange wanted to take his life; and he began to 

scream for a boat - and then to cry, because he had lost a piece of 

wood on his ride which he called a fragment of Our Saviour's cross.  

He put himself into the hands of the Lord Lieutenant of the county, 

and his detention was made known to the Prince of Orange at Windsor 

- who, only wanting to get rid of him, and not caring where he 

went, so that he went away, was very much disconcerted that they 

did not let him go.  However, there was nothing for it but to have 

him brought back, with some state in the way of Life Guards, to 

Whitehall.  And as soon as he got there, in his infatuation, he 

heard mass, and set a Jesuit to say grace at his public dinner.



The people had been thrown into the strangest state of confusion by 

his flight, and had taken it into their heads that the Irish part 

of the army were going to murder the Protestants.  Therefore, they 

set the bells a ringing, and lighted watch-fires, and burned 

Catholic Chapels, and looked about in all directions for Father 

Petre and the Jesuits, while the Pope's ambassador was running away 

in the dress of a footman.  They found no Jesuits; but a man, who 

had once been a frightened witness before Jeffreys in court, saw a 

swollen, drunken face looking through a window down at Wapping, 

which he well remembered.  The face was in a sailor's dress, but he 

knew it to be the face of that accursed judge, and he seized him.  

The people, to their lasting honour, did not tear him to pieces.  

After knocking him about a little, they took him, in the basest 

agonies of terror, to the Lord Mayor, who sent him, at his own 

shrieking petition, to the Tower for safety.  There, he died.



Their bewilderment continuing, the people now lighted bonfires and 

made rejoicings, as if they had any reason to be glad to have the 

King back again.  But, his stay was very short, for the English 

guards were removed from Whitehall, Dutch guards were marched up to 

it, and he was told by one of his late ministers that the Prince 

would enter London, next day, and he had better go to Ham.  He 

said, Ham was a cold, damp place, and he would rather go to 

Rochester.  He thought himself very cunning in this, as he meant to 

escape from Rochester to France.  The Prince of Orange and his 

friends knew that, perfectly well, and desired nothing more.  So, 

he went to Gravesend, in his royal barge, attended by certain 

lords, and watched by Dutch troops, and pitied by the generous 

people, who were far more forgiving than he had ever been, when 

they saw him in his humiliation.  On the night of the twenty-third 

of December, not even then understanding that everybody wanted to 

get rid of him, he went out, absurdly, through his Rochester 

garden, down to the Medway, and got away to France, where he 

rejoined the Queen.



There had been a council in his absence, of the lords, and the 

authorities of London.  When the Prince came, on the day after the 

King's departure, he summoned the Lords to meet him, and soon 

afterwards, all those who had served in any of the Parliaments of 

King Charles the Second.  It was finally resolved by these 

authorities that the throne was vacant by the conduct of King James 

the Second; that it was inconsistent with the safety and welfare of 

this Protestant kingdom, to be governed by a Popish prince; that 

the Prince and Princess of Orange should be King and Queen during 

their lives and the life of the survivor of them; and that their 

children should succeed them, if they had any.  That if they had 

none, the Princess Anne and her children should succeed; that if 

she had none, the heirs of the Prince of Orange should succeed.



On the thirteenth of January, one thousand six hundred and eighty-

nine, the Prince and Princess, sitting on a throne in Whitehall, 

bound themselves to these conditions.  The Protestant religion was 

established in England, and England's great and glorious Revolution 

was complete.

