




CHAPTER V - ENGLAND UNDER CANUTE THE DANE







CANUTE reigned eighteen years.  He was a merciless King at first.  

After he had clasped the hands of the Saxon chiefs, in token of the 

sincerity with which he swore to be just and good to them in return 

for their acknowledging him, he denounced and slew many of them, as 

well as many relations of the late King.  'He who brings me the 

head of one of my enemies,' he used to say, 'shall be dearer to me 

than a brother.'  And he was so severe in hunting down his enemies, 

that he must have got together a pretty large family of these dear 

brothers.  He was strongly inclined to kill EDMUND and EDWARD, two 

children, sons of poor Ironside; but, being afraid to do so in 

England, he sent them over to the King of Sweden, with a request 

that the King would be so good as 'dispose of them.'  If the King 

of Sweden had been like many, many other men of that day, he would 

have had their innocent throats cut; but he was a kind man, and 

brought them up tenderly.



Normandy ran much in Canute's mind.  In Normandy were the two 

children of the late king - EDWARD and ALFRED by name; and their 

uncle the Duke might one day claim the crown for them.  But the 

Duke showed so little inclination to do so now, that he proposed to 

Canute to marry his sister, the widow of The Unready; who, being 

but a showy flower, and caring for nothing so much as becoming a 

queen again, left her children and was wedded to him.



Successful and triumphant, assisted by the valour of the English in 

his foreign wars, and with little strife to trouble him at home, 

Canute had a prosperous reign, and made many improvements.  He was 

a poet and a musician.  He grew sorry, as he grew older, for the 

blood he had shed at first; and went to Rome in a Pilgrim's dress, 

by way of washing it out.  He gave a great deal of money to 

foreigners on his journey; but he took it from the English before 

he started.  On the whole, however, he certainly became a far 

better man when he had no opposition to contend with, and was as 

great a King as England had known for some time.



The old writers of history relate how that Canute was one day 

disgusted with his courtiers for their flattery, and how he caused 

his chair to be set on the sea-shore, and feigned to command the 

tide as it came up not to wet the edge of his robe, for the land 

was his; how the tide came up, of course, without regarding him; 

and how he then turned to his flatterers, and rebuked them, saying, 

what was the might of any earthly king, to the might of the 

Creator, who could say unto the sea, 'Thus far shalt thou go, and 

no farther!'  We may learn from this, I think, that a little sense 

will go a long way in a king; and that courtiers are not easily 

cured of flattery, nor kings of a liking for it.  If the courtiers 

of Canute had not known, long before, that the King was fond of 

flattery, they would have known better than to offer it in such 

large doses.  And if they had not known that he was vain of this 

speech (anything but a wonderful speech it seems to me, if a good 

child had made it), they would not have been at such great pains to 

repeat it.  I fancy I see them all on the sea-shore together; the 

King's chair sinking in the sand; the King in a mighty good humour 

with his own wisdom; and the courtiers pretending to be quite 

stunned by it!



It is not the sea alone that is bidden to go 'thus far, and no 

farther.'  The great command goes forth to all the kings upon the 

earth, and went to Canute in the year one thousand and thirty-five, 

and stretched him dead upon his bed.  Beside it, stood his Norman 

wife.  Perhaps, as the King looked his last upon her, he, who had 

so often thought distrustfully of Normandy, long ago, thought once 

more of the two exiled Princes in their uncle's court, and of the 

little favour they could feel for either Danes or Saxons, and of a 

rising cloud in Normandy that slowly moved towards England.

