





CHAPTER XXXV - ENGLAND UNDER CHARLES THE SECOND, CALLED THE MERRY 

MONARCH







THERE never were such profligate times in England as under Charles 

the Second.  Whenever you see his portrait, with his swarthy, ill-

looking face and great nose, you may fancy him in his Court at 

Whitehall, surrounded by some of the very worst vagabonds in the 

kingdom (though they were lords and ladies), drinking, gambling, 

indulging in vicious conversation, and committing every kind of 

profligate excess.  It has been a fashion to call Charles the 

Second 'The Merry Monarch.'  Let me try to give you a general idea 

of some of the merry things that were done, in the merry days when 

this merry gentleman sat upon his merry throne, in merry England.



The first merry proceeding was - of course - to declare that he was 

one of the greatest, the wisest, and the noblest kings that ever 

shone, like the blessed sun itself, on this benighted earth.  The 

next merry and pleasant piece of business was, for the Parliament, 

in the humblest manner, to give him one million two hundred 

thousand pounds a year, and to settle upon him for life that old 

disputed tonnage and poundage which had been so bravely fought for.  

Then, General Monk being made EARL OF ALBEMARLE, and a few other 

Royalists similarly rewarded, the law went to work to see what was 

to be done to those persons (they were called Regicides) who had 

been concerned in making a martyr of the late King.  Ten of these 

were merrily executed; that is to say, six of the judges, one of 

the council, Colonel Hacker and another officer who had commanded 

the Guards, and HUGH PETERS, a preacher who had preached against 

the martyr with all his heart.  These executions were so extremely 

merry, that every horrible circumstance which Cromwell had 

abandoned was revived with appalling cruelty.  The hearts of the 

sufferers were torn out of their living bodies; their bowels were 

burned before their faces; the executioner cut jokes to the next 

victim, as he rubbed his filthy hands together, that were reeking 

with the blood of the last; and the heads of the dead were drawn on 

sledges with the living to the place of suffering.  Still, even so 

merry a monarch could not force one of these dying men to say that 

he was sorry for what he had done.  Nay, the most memorable thing 

said among them was, that if the thing were to do again they would 

do it.



Sir Harry Vane, who had furnished the evidence against Strafford, 

and was one of the most staunch of the Republicans, was also tried, 

found guilty, and ordered for execution.  When he came upon the 

scaffold on Tower Hill, after conducting his own defence with great 

power, his notes of what he had meant to say to the people were 

torn away from him, and the drums and trumpets were ordered to 

sound lustily and drown his voice; for, the people had been so much 

impressed by what the Regicides had calmly said with their last 

breath, that it was the custom now, to have the drums and trumpets 

always under the scaffold, ready to strike up.  Vane said no more 

than this:  'It is a bad cause which cannot bear the words of a 

dying man:' and bravely died.



These merry scenes were succeeded by another, perhaps even merrier.  

On the anniversary of the late King's death, the bodies of Oliver 

Cromwell, Ireton, and Bradshaw, were torn out of their graves in 

Westminster Abbey, dragged to Tyburn, hanged there on a gallows all 

day long, and then beheaded.  Imagine the head of Oliver Cromwell 

set upon a pole to be stared at by a brutal crowd, not one of whom 

would have dared to look the living Oliver in the face for half a 

moment!  Think, after you have read this reign, what England was 

under Oliver Cromwell who was torn out of his grave, and what it 

was under this merry monarch who sold it, like a merry Judas, over 

and over again.



Of course, the remains of Oliver's wife and daughter were not to be 

spared either, though they had been most excellent women.  The base 

clergy of that time gave up their bodies, which had been buried in 

the Abbey, and - to the eternal disgrace of England - they were 

thrown into a pit, together with the mouldering bones of Pym and of 

the brave and bold old Admiral Blake.



The clergy acted this disgraceful part because they hoped to get 

the nonconformists, or dissenters, thoroughly put down in this 

reign, and to have but one prayer-book and one service for all 

kinds of people, no matter what their private opinions were.  This 

was pretty well, I think, for a Protestant Church, which had 

displaced the Romish Church because people had a right to their own 

opinions in religious matters.  However, they carried it with a 

high hand, and a prayer-book was agreed upon, in which the 

extremest opinions of Archbishop Laud were not forgotten.  An Act 

was passed, too, preventing any dissenter from holding any office 

under any corporation.  So, the regular clergy in their triumph 

were soon as merry as the King.  The army being by this time 

disbanded, and the King crowned, everything was to go on easily for 

evermore.



I must say a word here about the King's family.  He had not been 

long upon the throne when his brother the Duke of Gloucester, and 

his sister the PRINCESS OF ORANGE, died within a few months of each 

other, of small-pox.  His remaining sister, the PRINCESS HENRIETTA, 

married the DUKE OF ORLEANS, the brother of LOUIS THE FOURTEENTH, 

King of France.  His brother JAMES, DUKE OF YORK, was made High 

Admiral, and by-and-by became a Catholic.  He was a gloomy, sullen, 

bilious sort of man, with a remarkable partiality for the ugliest 

women in the country.  He married, under very discreditable 

circumstances, ANNE HYDE, the daughter of LORD CLARENDON, then the 

King's principal Minister - not at all a delicate minister either, 

but doing much of the dirty work of a very dirty palace.  It became 

important now that the King himself should be married; and divers 

foreign Monarchs, not very particular about the character of their 

son-in-law, proposed their daughters to him.  The KING OF PORTUGAL 

offered his daughter, CATHERINE OF BRAGANZA, and fifty thousand 

pounds:  in addition to which, the French King, who was favourable 

to that match, offered a loan of another fifty thousand.  The King 

of Spain, on the other hand, offered any one out of a dozen of 

Princesses, and other hopes of gain.  But the ready money carried 

the day, and Catherine came over in state to her merry marriage.



The whole Court was a great flaunting crowd of debauched men and 

shameless women; and Catherine's merry husband insulted and 

outraged her in every possible way, until she consented to receive 

those worthless creatures as her very good friends, and to degrade 

herself by their companionship.  A MRS. PALMER, whom the King made 

LADY CASTLEMAINE, and afterwards DUCHESS OF CLEVELAND, was one of 

the most powerful of the bad women about the Court, and had great 

influence with the King nearly all through his reign.  Another 

merry lady named MOLL DAVIES, a dancer at the theatre, was 

afterwards her rival.  So was NELL GWYN, first an orange girl and 

then an actress, who really had good in her, and of whom one of the 

worst things I know is, that actually she does seem to have been 

fond of the King.  The first DUKE OF ST. ALBANS was this orange 

girl's child.  In like manner the son of a merry waiting-lady, whom 

the King created DUCHESS OF PORTSMOUTH, became the DUKE OF 

RICHMOND.  Upon the whole it is not so bad a thing to be a 

commoner.



The Merry Monarch was so exceedingly merry among these merry 

ladies, and some equally merry (and equally infamous) lords and 

gentlemen, that he soon got through his hundred thousand pounds, 

and then, by way of raising a little pocket-money, made a merry 

bargain.  He sold Dunkirk to the French King for five millions of 

livres.  When I think of the dignity to which Oliver Cromwell 

raised England in the eyes of foreign powers, and when I think of 

the manner in which he gained for England this very Dunkirk, I am 

much inclined to consider that if the Merry Monarch had been made 

to follow his father for this action, he would have received his 

just deserts.



Though he was like his father in none of that father's greater 

qualities, he was like him in being worthy of no trust.  When he 

sent that letter to the Parliament, from Breda, he did expressly 

promise that all sincere religious opinions should be respected.  

Yet he was no sooner firm in his power than he consented to one of 

the worst Acts of Parliament ever passed.  Under this law, every 

minister who should not give his solemn assent to the Prayer-Book 

by a certain day, was declared to be a minister no longer, and to 

be deprived of his church.  The consequence of this was that some 

two thousand honest men were taken from their congregations, and 

reduced to dire poverty and distress.  It was followed by another 

outrageous law, called the Conventicle Act, by which any person 

above the age of sixteen who was present at any religious service 

not according to the Prayer-Book, was to be imprisoned three months 

for the first offence, six for the second, and to be transported 

for the third.  This Act alone filled the prisons, which were then 

most dreadful dungeons, to overflowing.



The Covenanters in Scotland had already fared no better.  A base 

Parliament, usually known as the Drunken Parliament, in consequence 

of its principal members being seldom sober, had been got together 

to make laws against the Covenanters, and to force all men to be of 

one mind in religious matters.  The MARQUIS OF ARGYLE, relying on 

the King's honour, had given himself up to him; but, he was 

wealthy, and his enemies wanted his wealth.  He was tried for 

treason, on the evidence of some private letters in which he had 

expressed opinions - as well he might - more favourable to the 

government of the late Lord Protector than of the present merry and 

religious King.  He was executed, as were two men of mark among the 

Covenanters; and SHARP, a traitor who had once been the friend of 

the Presbyterians and betrayed them, was made Archbishop of St. 

Andrew's, to teach the Scotch how to like bishops.



Things being in this merry state at home, the Merry Monarch 

undertook a war with the Dutch; principally because they interfered 

with an African company, established with the two objects of buying 

gold-dust and slaves, of which the Duke of York was a leading 

member.  After some preliminary hostilities, the said Duke sailed 

to the coast of Holland with a fleet of ninety-eight vessels of 

war, and four fire-ships.  This engaged with the Dutch fleet, of no 

fewer than one hundred and thirteen ships.  In the great battle 

between the two forces, the Dutch lost eighteen ships, four 

admirals, and seven thousand men.  But, the English on shore were 

in no mood of exultation when they heard the news.



For, this was the year and the time of the Great Plague in London.  

During the winter of one thousand six hundred and sixty-four it had 

been whispered about, that some few people had died here and there 

of the disease called the Plague, in some of the unwholesome 

suburbs around London.  News was not published at that time as it 

is now, and some people believed these rumours, and some 

disbelieved them, and they were soon forgotten.  But, in the month 

of May, one thousand six hundred and sixty-five, it began to be 

said all over the town that the disease had burst out with great 

violence in St. Giles's, and that the people were dying in great 

numbers.  This soon turned out to be awfully true.  The roads out 

of London were choked up by people endeavouring to escape from the 

infected city, and large sums were paid for any kind of conveyance.  

The disease soon spread so fast, that it was necessary to shut up 

the houses in which sick people were, and to cut them off from 

communication with the living.  Every one of these houses was 

marked on the outside of the door with a red cross, and the words, 

Lord, have mercy upon us!  The streets were all deserted, grass 

grew in the public ways, and there was a dreadful silence in the 

air.  When night came on, dismal rumblings used to be heard, and 

these were the wheels of the death-carts, attended by men with 

veiled faces and holding cloths to their mouths, who rang doleful 

bells and cried in a loud and solemn voice, 'Bring out your dead!'  

The corpses put into these carts were buried by torchlight in great 

pits; no service being performed over them; all men being afraid to 

stay for a moment on the brink of the ghastly graves.  In the 

general fear, children ran away from their parents, and parents 

from their children.  Some who were taken ill, died alone, and 

without any help.  Some were stabbed or strangled by hired nurses 

who robbed them of all their money, and stole the very beds on 

which they lay.  Some went mad, dropped from the windows, ran 

through the streets, and in their pain and frenzy flung themselves 

into the river.



These were not all the horrors of the time.  The wicked and 

dissolute, in wild desperation, sat in the taverns singing roaring 

songs, and were stricken as they drank, and went out and died.  The 

fearful and superstitious persuaded themselves that they saw 

supernatural sights - burning swords in the sky, gigantic arms and 

darts.  Others pretended that at nights vast crowds of ghosts 

walked round and round the dismal pits.  One madman, naked, and 

carrying a brazier full of burning coals upon his head, stalked 

through the streets, crying out that he was a Prophet, commissioned 

to denounce the vengeance of the Lord on wicked London.  Another 

always went to and fro, exclaiming, 'Yet forty days, and London 

shall be destroyed!'  A third awoke the echoes in the dismal 

streets, by night and by day, and made the blood of the sick run 

cold, by calling out incessantly, in a deep hoarse voice, 'O, the 

great and dreadful God!'



Through the months of July and August and September, the Great 

Plague raged more and more.  Great fires were lighted in the 

streets, in the hope of stopping the infection; but there was a 

plague of rain too, and it beat the fires out.  At last, the winds 

which usually arise at that time of the year which is called the 

equinox, when day and night are of equal length all over the world, 

began to blow, and to purify the wretched town.  The deaths began 

to decrease, the red crosses slowly to disappear, the fugitives to 

return, the shops to open, pale frightened faces to be seen in the 

streets.  The Plague had been in every part of England, but in 

close and unwholesome London it had killed one hundred thousand 

people.



All this time, the Merry Monarch was as merry as ever, and as 

worthless as ever.  All this time, the debauched lords and 

gentlemen and the shameless ladies danced and gamed and drank, and 

loved and hated one another, according to their merry ways.



So little humanity did the government learn from the late 

affliction, that one of the first things the Parliament did when it 

met at Oxford (being as yet afraid to come to London), was to make 

a law, called the Five Mile Act, expressly directed against those 

poor ministers who, in the time of the Plague, had manfully come 

back to comfort the unhappy people.  This infamous law, by 

forbidding them to teach in any school, or to come within five 

miles of any city, town, or village, doomed them to starvation and 

death.



The fleet had been at sea, and healthy.  The King of France was now 

in alliance with the Dutch, though his navy was chiefly employed in 

looking on while the English and Dutch fought.  The Dutch gained 

one victory; and the English gained another and a greater; and 

Prince Rupert, one of the English admirals, was out in the Channel 

one windy night, looking for the French Admiral, with the intention 

of giving him something more to do than he had had yet, when the 

gale increased to a storm, and blew him into Saint Helen's.  That 

night was the third of September, one thousand six hundred and 

sixty-six, and that wind fanned the Great Fire of London.



It broke out at a baker's shop near London Bridge, on the spot on 

which the Monument now stands as a remembrance of those raging 

flames.  It spread and spread, and burned and burned, for three 

days.  The nights were lighter than the days; in the daytime there 

was an immense cloud of smoke, and in the night-time there was a 

great tower of fire mounting up into the sky, which lighted the 

whole country landscape for ten miles round.  Showers of hot ashes 

rose into the air and fell on distant places; flying sparks carried 

the conflagration to great distances, and kindled it in twenty new 

spots at a time; church steeples fell down with tremendous crashes; 

houses crumbled into cinders by the hundred and the thousand.  The 

summer had been intensely hot and dry, the streets were very 

narrow, and the houses mostly built of wood and plaster.  Nothing 

could stop the tremendous fire, but the want of more houses to 

burn; nor did it stop until the whole way from the Tower to Temple 

Bar was a desert, composed of the ashes of thirteen thousand houses 

and eighty-nine churches.



This was a terrible visitation at the time, and occasioned great 

loss and suffering to the two hundred thousand burnt-out people, 

who were obliged to lie in the fields under the open night sky, or 

in hastily-made huts of mud and straw, while the lanes and roads 

were rendered impassable by carts which had broken down as they 

tried to save their goods.  But the Fire was a great blessing to 

the City afterwards, for it arose from its ruins very much improved 

- built more regularly, more widely, more cleanly and carefully, 

and therefore much more healthily.  It might be far more healthy 

than it is, but there are some people in it still - even now, at 

this time, nearly two hundred years later - so selfish, so pig-

headed, and so ignorant, that I doubt if even another Great Fire 

would warm them up to do their duty.



The Catholics were accused of having wilfully set London in flames; 

one poor Frenchman, who had been mad for years, even accused 

himself of having with his own hand fired the first house.  There 

is no reasonable doubt, however, that the fire was accidental.  An 

inscription on the Monument long attributed it to the Catholics; 

but it is removed now, and was always a malicious and stupid 

untruth.





SECOND PART





THAT the Merry Monarch might be very merry indeed, in the merry 

times when his people were suffering under pestilence and fire, he 

drank and gambled and flung away among his favourites the money 

which the Parliament had voted for the war.  The consequence of 

this was that the stout-hearted English sailors were merrily 

starving of want, and dying in the streets; while the Dutch, under 

their admirals DE WITT and DE RUYTER, came into the River Thames, 

and up the River Medway as far as Upnor, burned the guard-ships, 

silenced the weak batteries, and did what they would to the English 

coast for six whole weeks.  Most of the English ships that could 

have prevented them had neither powder nor shot on board; in this 

merry reign, public officers made themselves as merry as the King 

did with the public money; and when it was entrusted to them to 

spend in national defences or preparations, they put it into their 

own pockets with the merriest grace in the world.



Lord Clarendon had, by this time, run as long a course as is 

usually allotted to the unscrupulous ministers of bad kings.  He 

was impeached by his political opponents, but unsuccessfully.  The 

King then commanded him to withdraw from England and retire to 

France, which he did, after defending himself in writing.  He was 

no great loss at home, and died abroad some seven years afterwards.



There then came into power a ministry called the Cabal Ministry, 

because it was composed of LORD CLIFFORD, the EARL OF ARLINGTON, 

the DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM (a great rascal, and the King's most 

powerful favourite), LORD ASHLEY, and the DUKE OF LAUDERDALE, C. A. 

B. A. L.  As the French were making conquests in Flanders, the 

first Cabal proceeding was to make a treaty with the Dutch, for 

uniting with Spain to oppose the French.  It was no sooner made 

than the Merry Monarch, who always wanted to get money without 

being accountable to a Parliament for his expenditure, apologised 

to the King of France for having had anything to do with it, and 

concluded a secret treaty with him, making himself his infamous 

pensioner to the amount of two millions of livres down, and three 

millions more a year; and engaging to desert that very Spain, to 

make war against those very Dutch, and to declare himself a 

Catholic when a convenient time should arrive.  This religious king 

had lately been crying to his Catholic brother on the subject of 

his strong desire to be a Catholic; and now he merrily concluded 

this treasonable conspiracy against the country he governed, by 

undertaking to become one as soon as he safely could.  For all of 

which, though he had had ten merry heads instead of one, he richly 

deserved to lose them by the headsman's axe.



As his one merry head might have been far from safe, if these 

things had been known, they were kept very quiet, and war was 

declared by France and England against the Dutch.  But, a very 

uncommon man, afterwards most important to English history and to 

the religion and liberty of this land, arose among them, and for 

many long years defeated the whole projects of France.  This was 

WILLIAM OF NASSAU, PRINCE OF ORANGE, son of the last Prince of 

Orange of the same name, who married the daughter of Charles the 

First of England.  He was a young man at this time, only just of 

age; but he was brave, cool, intrepid, and wise.  His father had 

been so detested that, upon his death, the Dutch had abolished the 

authority to which this son would have otherwise succeeded 

(Stadtholder it was called), and placed the chief power in the 

hands of JOHN DE WITT, who educated this young prince.  Now, the 

Prince became very popular, and John de Witt's brother CORNELIUS 

was sentenced to banishment on a false accusation of conspiring to 

kill him.  John went to the prison where he was, to take him away 

to exile, in his coach; and a great mob who collected on the 

occasion, then and there cruelly murdered both the brothers.  This 

left the government in the hands of the Prince, who was really the 

choice of the nation; and from this time he exercised it with the 

greatest vigour, against the whole power of France, under its 

famous generals CONDE and TURENNE, and in support of the Protestant 

religion.  It was full seven years before this war ended in a 

treaty of peace made at Nimeguen, and its details would occupy a 

very considerable space.  It is enough to say that William of 

Orange established a famous character with the whole world; and 

that the Merry Monarch, adding to and improving on his former 

baseness, bound himself to do everything the King of France liked, 

and nothing the King of France did not like, for a pension of one 

hundred thousand pounds a year, which was afterwards doubled.  

Besides this, the King of France, by means of his corrupt 

ambassador - who wrote accounts of his proceedings in England, 

which are not always to be believed, I think - bought our English 

members of Parliament, as he wanted them.  So, in point of fact, 

during a considerable portion of this merry reign, the King of 

France was the real King of this country.



But there was a better time to come, and it was to come (though his 

royal uncle little thought so) through that very William, Prince of 

Orange.  He came over to England, saw Mary, the elder daughter of 

the Duke of York, and married her.  We shall see by-and-by what 

came of that marriage, and why it is never to be forgotten.



This daughter was a Protestant, but her mother died a Catholic.  

She and her sister ANNE, also a Protestant, were the only survivors 

of eight children.  Anne afterwards married GEORGE, PRINCE OF 

DENMARK, brother to the King of that country.



Lest you should do the Merry Monarch the injustice of supposing 

that he was even good humoured (except when he had everything his 

own way), or that he was high spirited and honourable, I will 

mention here what was done to a member of the House of Commons, SIR 

JOHN COVENTRY.  He made a remark in a debate about taxing the 

theatres, which gave the King offence.  The King agreed with his 

illegitimate son, who had been born abroad, and whom he had made 

DUKE OF MONMOUTH, to take the following merry vengeance.  To waylay 

him at night, fifteen armed men to one, and to slit his nose with a 

penknife.  Like master, like man.  The King's favourite, the Duke 

of Buckingham, was strongly suspected of setting on an assassin to 

murder the DUKE OF ORMOND as he was returning home from a dinner; 

and that Duke's spirited son, LORD OSSORY, was so persuaded of his 

guilt, that he said to him at Court, even as he stood beside the 

King, 'My lord, I know very well that you are at the bottom of this 

late attempt upon my father.  But I give you warning, if he ever 

come to a violent end, his blood shall be upon you, and wherever I 

meet you I will pistol you!  I will do so, though I find you 

standing behind the King's chair; and I tell you this in his 

Majesty's presence, that you may be quite sure of my doing what I 

threaten.'  Those were merry times indeed.



There was a fellow named BLOOD, who was seized for making, with two 

companions, an audacious attempt to steal the crown, the globe, and 

sceptre, from the place where the jewels were kept in the Tower.  

This robber, who was a swaggering ruffian, being taken, declared 

that he was the man who had endeavoured to kill the Duke of Ormond, 

and that he had meant to kill the King too, but was overawed by the 

majesty of his appearance, when he might otherwise have done it, as 

he was bathing at Battersea.  The King being but an ill-looking 

fellow, I don't believe a word of this.  Whether he was flattered, 

or whether he knew that Buckingham had really set Blood on to 

murder the Duke, is uncertain.  But it is quite certain that he 

pardoned this thief, gave him an estate of five hundred a year in 

Ireland (which had had the honour of giving him birth), and 

presented him at Court to the debauched lords and the shameless 

ladies, who made a great deal of him - as I have no doubt they 

would have made of the Devil himself, if the King had introduced 

him.



Infamously pensioned as he was, the King still wanted money, and 

consequently was obliged to call Parliaments.  In these, the great 

object of the Protestants was to thwart the Catholic Duke of York, 

who married a second time; his new wife being a young lady only 

fifteen years old, the Catholic sister of the DUKE OF MODENA.  In 

this they were seconded by the Protestant Dissenters, though to 

their own disadvantage:  since, to exclude Catholics from power, 

they were even willing to exclude themselves.  The King's object 

was to pretend to be a Protestant, while he was really a Catholic; 

to swear to the bishops that he was devoutly attached to the 

English Church, while he knew he had bargained it away to the King 

of France; and by cheating and deceiving them, and all who were 

attached to royalty, to become despotic and be powerful enough to 

confess what a rascal he was.  Meantime, the King of France, 

knowing his merry pensioner well, intrigued with the King's 

opponents in Parliament, as well as with the King and his friends.



The fears that the country had of the Catholic religion being 

restored, if the Duke of York should come to the throne, and the 

low cunning of the King in pretending to share their alarms, led to 

some very terrible results.  A certain DR. TONGE, a dull clergyman 

in the City, fell into the hands of a certain TITUS OATES, a most 

infamous character, who pretended to have acquired among the 

Jesuits abroad a knowledge of a great plot for the murder of the 

King, and the re-establishment if the Catholic religion.  Titus 

Oates, being produced by this unlucky Dr. Tonge and solemnly 

examined before the council, contradicted himself in a thousand 

ways, told the most ridiculous and improbable stories, and 

implicated COLEMAN, the Secretary of the Duchess of York.  Now, 

although what he charged against Coleman was not true, and although 

you and I know very well that the real dangerous Catholic plot was 

that one with the King of France of which the Merry Monarch was 

himself the head, there happened to be found among Coleman's 

papers, some letters, in which he did praise the days of Bloody 

Queen Mary, and abuse the Protestant religion.  This was great good 

fortune for Titus, as it seemed to confirm him; but better still 

was in store.  SIR EDMUNDBURY GODFREY, the magistrate who had first 

examined him, being unexpectedly found dead near Primrose Hill, was 

confidently believed to have been killed by the Catholics.  I think 

there is no doubt that he had been melancholy mad, and that he 

killed himself; but he had a great Protestant funeral, and Titus 

was called the Saver of the Nation, and received a pension of 

twelve hundred pounds a year.



As soon as Oates's wickedness had met with this success, up started 

another villain, named WILLIAM BEDLOE, who, attracted by a reward 

of five hundred pounds offered for the apprehension of the 

murderers of Godfrey, came forward and charged two Jesuits and some 

other persons with having committed it at the Queen's desire.  

Oates, going into partnership with this new informer, had the 

audacity to accuse the poor Queen herself of high treason.  Then 

appeared a third informer, as bad as either of the two, and accused 

a Catholic banker named STAYLEY of having said that the King was 

the greatest rogue in the world (which would not have been far from 

the truth), and that he would kill him with his own hand.  This 

banker, being at once tried and executed, Coleman and two others 

were tried and executed.  Then, a miserable wretch named PRANCE, a 

Catholic silversmith, being accused by Bedloe, was tortured into 

confessing that he had taken part in Godfrey's murder, and into 

accusing three other men of having committed it.  Then, five 

Jesuits were accused by Oates, Bedloe, and Prance together, and 

were all found guilty, and executed on the same kind of 

contradictory and absurd evidence.  The Queen's physician and three 

monks were next put on their trial; but Oates and Bedloe had for 

the time gone far enough and these four were acquitted.  The public 

mind, however, was so full of a Catholic plot, and so strong 

against the Duke of York, that James consented to obey a written 

order from his brother, and to go with his family to Brussels, 

provided that his rights should never be sacrificed in his absence 

to the Duke of Monmouth.  The House of Commons, not satisfied with 

this as the King hoped, passed a bill to exclude the Duke from ever 

succeeding to the throne.  In return, the King dissolved the 

Parliament.  He had deserted his old favourite, the Duke of 

Buckingham, who was now in the opposition.



To give any sufficient idea of the miseries of Scotland in this 

merry reign, would occupy a hundred pages.  Because the people 

would not have bishops, and were resolved to stand by their solemn 

League and Covenant, such cruelties were inflicted upon them as 

make the blood run cold.  Ferocious dragoons galloped through the 

country to punish the peasants for deserting the churches; sons 

were hanged up at their fathers' doors for refusing to disclose 

where their fathers were concealed; wives were tortured to death 

for not betraying their husbands; people were taken out of their 

fields and gardens, and shot on the public roads without trial; 

lighted matches were tied to the fingers of prisoners, and a most 

horrible torment called the Boot was invented, and constantly 

applied, which ground and mashed the victims' legs with iron 

wedges.  Witnesses were tortured as well as prisoners.  All the 

prisons were full; all the gibbets were heavy with bodies; murder 

and plunder devastated the whole country.  In spite of all, the 

Covenanters were by no means to be dragged into the churches, and 

persisted in worshipping God as they thought right.  A body of 

ferocious Highlanders, turned upon them from the mountains of their 

own country, had no greater effect than the English dragoons under 

GRAHAME OF CLAVERHOUSE, the most cruel and rapacious of all their 

enemies, whose name will ever be cursed through the length and 

breadth of Scotland.  Archbishop Sharp had ever aided and abetted 

all these outrages.  But he fell at last; for, when the injuries of 

the Scottish people were at their height, he was seen, in his 

coach-and-six coming across a moor, by a body of men, headed by one 

JOHN BALFOUR, who were waiting for another of their oppressors.  

Upon this they cried out that Heaven had delivered him into their 

hands, and killed him with many wounds.  If ever a man deserved 

such a death, I think Archbishop Sharp did.



It made a great noise directly, and the Merry Monarch - strongly 

suspected of having goaded the Scottish people on, that he might 

have an excuse for a greater army than the Parliament were willing 

to give him - sent down his son, the Duke of Monmouth, as 

commander-in-chief, with instructions to attack the Scottish 

rebels, or Whigs as they were called, whenever he came up with 

them.  Marching with ten thousand men from Edinburgh, he found 

them, in number four or five thousand, drawn up at Bothwell Bridge, 

by the Clyde.  They were soon dispersed; and Monmouth showed a more 

humane character towards them, than he had shown towards that 

Member of Parliament whose nose he had caused to be slit with a 

penknife.  But the Duke of Lauderdale was their bitter foe, and 

sent Claverhouse to finish them.



As the Duke of York became more and more unpopular, the Duke of 

Monmouth became more and more popular.  It would have been decent 

in the latter not to have voted in favour of the renewed bill for 

the exclusion of James from the throne; but he did so, much to the 

King's amusement, who used to sit in the House of Lords by the 

fire, hearing the debates, which he said were as good as a play.  

The House of Commons passed the bill by a large majority, and it 

was carried up to the House of Lords by LORD RUSSELL, one of the 

best of the leaders on the Protestant side.  It was rejected there, 

chiefly because the bishops helped the King to get rid of it; and 

the fear of Catholic plots revived again.  There had been another 

got up, by a fellow out of Newgate, named DANGERFIELD, which is 

more famous than it deserves to be, under the name of the MEAL-TUB 

PLOT.  This jail-bird having been got out of Newgate by a MRS. 

CELLIER, a Catholic nurse, had turned Catholic himself, and 

pretended that he knew of a plot among the Presbyterians against 

the King's life.  This was very pleasant to the Duke of York, who 

hated the Presbyterians, who returned the compliment.  He gave 

Dangerfield twenty guineas, and sent him to the King his brother.  

But Dangerfield, breaking down altogether in his charge, and being 

sent back to Newgate, almost astonished the Duke out of his five 

senses by suddenly swearing that the Catholic nurse had put that 

false design into his head, and that what he really knew about, 

was, a Catholic plot against the King; the evidence of which would 

be found in some papers, concealed in a meal-tub in Mrs. Cellier's 

house.  There they were, of course - for he had put them there 

himself - and so the tub gave the name to the plot.  But, the nurse 

was acquitted on her trial, and it came to nothing.



Lord Ashley, of the Cabal, was now Lord Shaftesbury, and was strong 

against the succession of the Duke of York.  The House of Commons, 

aggravated to the utmost extent, as we may well suppose, by 

suspicions of the King's conspiracy with the King of France, made a 

desperate point of the exclusion, still, and were bitter against 

the Catholics generally.  So unjustly bitter were they, I grieve to 

say, that they impeached the venerable Lord Stafford, a Catholic 

nobleman seventy years old, of a design to kill the King.  The 

witnesses were that atrocious Oates and two other birds of the same 

feather.  He was found guilty, on evidence quite as foolish as it 

was false, and was beheaded on Tower Hill.  The people were opposed 

to him when he first appeared upon the scaffold; but, when he had 

addressed them and shown them how innocent he was and how wickedly 

he was sent there, their better nature was aroused, and they said, 

'We believe you, my Lord.  God bless you, my Lord!'



The House of Commons refused to let the King have any money until 

he should consent to the Exclusion Bill; but, as he could get it 

and did get it from his master the King of France, he could afford 

to hold them very cheap.  He called a Parliament at Oxford, to 

which he went down with a great show of being armed and protected 

as if he were in danger of his life, and to which the opposition 

members also went armed and protected, alleging that they were in 

fear of the Papists, who were numerous among the King's guards.  

However, they went on with the Exclusion Bill, and were so earnest 

upon it that they would have carried it again, if the King had not 

popped his crown and state robes into a sedan-chair, bundled 

himself into it along with them, hurried down to the chamber where 

the House of Lords met, and dissolved the Parliament.  After which 

he scampered home, and the members of Parliament scampered home 

too, as fast as their legs could carry them.



The Duke of York, then residing in Scotland, had, under the law 

which excluded Catholics from public trust, no right whatever to 

public employment.  Nevertheless, he was openly employed as the 

King's representative in Scotland, and there gratified his sullen 

and cruel nature to his heart's content by directing the dreadful 

cruelties against the Covenanters.  There were two ministers named 

CARGILL and CAMERON who had escaped from the battle of Bothwell 

Bridge, and who returned to Scotland, and raised the miserable but 

still brave and unsubdued Covenanters afresh, under the name of 

Cameronians.  As Cameron publicly posted a declaration that the 

King was a forsworn tyrant, no mercy was shown to his unhappy 

followers after he was slain in battle.  The Duke of York, who was 

particularly fond of the Boot and derived great pleasure from 

having it applied, offered their lives to some of these people, if 

they would cry on the scaffold 'God save the King!'  But their 

relations, friends, and countrymen, had been so barbarously 

tortured and murdered in this merry reign, that they preferred to 

die, and did die.  The Duke then obtained his merry brother's 

permission to hold a Parliament in Scotland, which first, with most 

shameless deceit, confirmed the laws for securing the Protestant 

religion against Popery, and then declared that nothing must or 

should prevent the succession of the Popish Duke.  After this 

double-faced beginning, it established an oath which no human being 

could understand, but which everybody was to take, as a proof that 

his religion was the lawful religion.  The Earl of Argyle, taking 

it with the explanation that he did not consider it to prevent him 

from favouring any alteration either in the Church or State which 

was not inconsistent with the Protestant religion or with his 

loyalty, was tried for high treason before a Scottish jury of which 

the MARQUIS OF MONTROSE was foreman, and was found guilty.  He 

escaped the scaffold, for that time, by getting away, in the 

disguise of a page, in the train of his daughter, LADY SOPHIA 

LINDSAY.  It was absolutely proposed, by certain members of the 

Scottish Council, that this lady should be whipped through the 

streets of Edinburgh.  But this was too much even for the Duke, who 

had the manliness then (he had very little at most times) to remark 

that Englishmen were not accustomed to treat ladies in that manner.  

In those merry times nothing could equal the brutal servility of 

the Scottish fawners, but the conduct of similar degraded beings in 

England.



After the settlement of these little affairs, the Duke returned to 

England, and soon resumed his place at the Council, and his office 

of High Admiral - all this by his brother's favour, and in open 

defiance of the law.  It would have been no loss to the country, if 

he had been drowned when his ship, in going to Scotland to fetch 

his family, struck on a sand-bank, and was lost with two hundred 

souls on board.  But he escaped in a boat with some friends; and 

the sailors were so brave and unselfish, that, when they saw him 

rowing away, they gave three cheers, while they themselves were 

going down for ever.



The Merry Monarch, having got rid of his Parliament, went to work 

to make himself despotic, with all speed.  Having had the villainy 

to order the execution of OLIVER PLUNKET, BISHOP OF ARMAGH, falsely 

accused of a plot to establish Popery in that country by means of a 

French army - the very thing this royal traitor was himself trying 

to do at home - and having tried to ruin Lord Shaftesbury, and 

failed - he turned his hand to controlling the corporations all 

over the country; because, if he could only do that, he could get 

what juries he chose, to bring in perjured verdicts, and could get 

what members he chose returned to Parliament.  These merry times 

produced, and made Chief Justice of the Court of King's Bench, a 

drunken ruffian of the name of JEFFREYS; a red-faced, swollen, 

bloated, horrible creature, with a bullying, roaring voice, and a 

more savage nature perhaps than was ever lodged in any human 

breast.  This monster was the Merry Monarch's especial favourite, 

and he testified his admiration of him by giving him a ring from 

his own finger, which the people used to call Judge Jeffreys's 

Bloodstone.  Him the King employed to go about and bully the 

corporations, beginning with London; or, as Jeffreys himself 

elegantly called it, 'to give them a lick with the rough side of 

his tongue.'  And he did it so thoroughly, that they soon became 

the basest and most sycophantic bodies in the kingdom - except the 

University of Oxford, which, in that respect, was quite pre-eminent 

and unapproachable.



Lord Shaftesbury (who died soon after the King's failure against 

him), LORD WILLIAM RUSSELL, the Duke of Monmouth, LORD HOWARD, LORD 

JERSEY, ALGERNON SIDNEY, JOHN HAMPDEN (grandson of the great 

Hampden), and some others, used to hold a council together after 

the dissolution of the Parliament, arranging what it might be 

necessary to do, if the King carried his Popish plot to the utmost 

height.  Lord Shaftesbury having been much the most violent of this 

party, brought two violent men into their secrets - RUMSEY, who had 

been a soldier in the Republican army; and WEST, a lawyer.  These 

two knew an old officer of CROMWELL'S, called RUMBOLD, who had 

married a maltster's widow, and so had come into possession of a 

solitary dwelling called the Rye House, near Hoddesdon, in 

Hertfordshire.  Rumbold said to them what a capital place this 

house of his would be from which to shoot at the King, who often 

passed there going to and fro from Newmarket.  They liked the idea, 

and entertained it.  But, one of their body gave information; and 

they, together with SHEPHERD a wine merchant, Lord Russell, 

Algernon Sidney, LORD ESSEX, LORD HOWARD, and Hampden, were all 

arrested.



Lord Russell might have easily escaped, but scorned to do so, being 

innocent of any wrong; Lord Essex might have easily escaped, but 

scorned to do so, lest his flight should prejudice Lord Russell.  

But it weighed upon his mind that he had brought into their 

council, Lord Howard - who now turned a miserable traitor - against 

a great dislike Lord Russell had always had of him.  He could not 

bear the reflection, and destroyed himself before Lord Russell was 

brought to trial at the Old Bailey.



He knew very well that he had nothing to hope, having always been 

manful in the Protestant cause against the two false brothers, the 

one on the throne, and the other standing next to it.  He had a 

wife, one of the noblest and best of women, who acted as his 

secretary on his trial, who comforted him in his prison, who supped 

with him on the night before he died, and whose love and virtue and 

devotion have made her name imperishable.  Of course, he was found 

guilty, and was sentenced to be beheaded in Lincoln's Inn-fields, 

not many yards from his own house.  When he had parted from his 

children on the evening before his death, his wife still stayed 

with him until ten o'clock at night; and when their final 

separation in this world was over, and he had kissed her many 

times, he still sat for a long while in his prison, talking of her 

goodness.  Hearing the rain fall fast at that time, he calmly said, 

'Such a rain to-morrow will spoil a great show, which is a dull 

thing on a rainy day.'  At midnight he went to bed, and slept till 

four; even when his servant called him, he fell asleep again while 

his clothes were being made ready.  He rode to the scaffold in his 

own carriage, attended by two famous clergymen, TILLOTSON and 

BURNET, and sang a psalm to himself very softly, as he went along.  

He was as quiet and as steady as if he had been going out for an 

ordinary ride.  After saying that he was surprised to see so great 

a crowd, he laid down his head upon the block, as if upon the 

pillow of his bed, and had it struck off at the second blow.  His 

noble wife was busy for him even then; for that true-hearted lady 

printed and widely circulated his last words, of which he had given 

her a copy.  They made the blood of all the honest men in England 

boil.



The University of Oxford distinguished itself on the very same day 

by pretending to believe that the accusation against Lord Russell 

was true, and by calling the King, in a written paper, the Breath 

of their Nostrils and the Anointed of the Lord.  This paper the 

Parliament afterwards caused to be burned by the common hangman; 

which I am sorry for, as I wish it had been framed and glazed and 

hung up in some public place, as a monument of baseness for the 

scorn of mankind.



Next, came the trial of Algernon Sidney, at which Jeffreys 

presided, like a great crimson toad, sweltering and swelling with 

rage.  'I pray God, Mr. Sidney,' said this Chief Justice of a merry 

reign, after passing sentence, 'to work in you a temper fit to go 

to the other world, for I see you are not fit for this.'  'My 

lord,' said the prisoner, composedly holding out his arm, 'feel my 

pulse, and see if I be disordered.  I thank Heaven I never was in 

better temper than I am now.'  Algernon Sidney was executed on 

Tower Hill, on the seventh of December, one thousand six hundred 

and eighty-three.  He died a hero, and died, in his own words, 'For 

that good old cause in which he had been engaged from his youth, 

and for which God had so often and so wonderfully declared 

himself.'



The Duke of Monmouth had been making his uncle, the Duke of York, 

very jealous, by going about the country in a royal sort of way, 

playing at the people's games, becoming godfather to their 

children, and even touching for the King's evil, or stroking the 

faces of the sick to cure them - though, for the matter of that, I 

should say he did them about as much good as any crowned king could 

have done.  His father had got him to write a letter, confessing 

his having had a part in the conspiracy, for which Lord Russell had 

been beheaded; but he was ever a weak man, and as soon as he had 

written it, he was ashamed of it and got it back again.  For this, 

he was banished to the Netherlands; but he soon returned and had an 

interview with his father, unknown to his uncle.  It would seem 

that he was coming into the Merry Monarch's favour again, and that 

the Duke of York was sliding out of it, when Death appeared to the 

merry galleries at Whitehall, and astonished the debauched lords 

and gentlemen, and the shameless ladies, very considerably.



On Monday, the second of February, one thousand six hundred and 

eighty-five, the merry pensioner and servant of the King of France 

fell down in a fit of apoplexy.  By the Wednesday his case was 

hopeless, and on the Thursday he was told so.  As he made a 

difficulty about taking the sacrament from the Protestant Bishop of 

Bath, the Duke of York got all who were present away from the bed, 

and asked his brother, in a whisper, if he should send for a 

Catholic priest?   The King replied, 'For God's sake, brother, do!'  

The Duke smuggled in, up the back stairs, disguised in a wig and 

gown, a priest named HUDDLESTON, who had saved the King's life 

after the battle of Worcester:  telling him that this worthy man in 

the wig had once saved his body, and was now come to save his soul.



The Merry Monarch lived through that night, and died before noon on 

the next day, which was Friday, the sixth.  Two of the last things 

he said were of a human sort, and your remembrance will give him 

the full benefit of them.  When the Queen sent to say she was too 

unwell to attend him and to ask his pardon, he said, 'Alas! poor 

woman, SHE beg MY pardon!  I beg hers with all my heart.  Take back 

that answer to her.'  And he also said, in reference to Nell Gwyn, 

'Do not let poor Nelly starve.'



He died in the fifty-fifth year of his age, and the twenty-fifth of 

his reign.

