





CHAPTER XVII - ENGLAND UNDER EDWARD THE SECOND







KING Edward the Second, the first Prince of Wales, was twenty-three 

years old when his father died.  There was a certain favourite of 

his, a young man from Gascony, named PIERS GAVESTON, of whom his 

father had so much disapproved that he had ordered him out of 

England, and had made his son swear by the side of his sick-bed, 

never to bring him back.  But, the Prince no sooner found himself 

King, than he broke his oath, as so many other Princes and Kings 

did (they were far too ready to take oaths), and sent for his dear 

friend immediately.



Now, this same Gaveston was handsome enough, but was a reckless, 

insolent, audacious fellow.  He was detested by the proud English 

Lords:  not only because he had such power over the King, and made 

the Court such a dissipated place, but, also, because he could ride 

better than they at tournaments, and was used, in his impudence, to 

cut very bad jokes on them; calling one, the old hog; another, the 

stage-player; another, the Jew; another, the black dog of Ardenne.  

This was as poor wit as need be, but it made those Lords very 

wroth; and the surly Earl of Warwick, who was the black dog, swore 

that the time should come when Piers Gaveston should feel the black 

dog's teeth.



It was not come yet, however, nor did it seem to be coming.  The 

King made him Earl of Cornwall, and gave him vast riches; and, when 

the King went over to France to marry the French Princess, 

ISABELLA, daughter of PHILIP LE BEL:  who was said to be the most 

beautiful woman in the world:  he made Gaveston, Regent of the 

Kingdom.  His splendid marriage-ceremony in the Church of Our Lady 

at Boulogne, where there were four Kings and three Queens present 

(quite a pack of Court Cards, for I dare say the Knaves were not 

wanting), being over, he seemed to care little or nothing for his 

beautiful wife; but was wild with impatience to meet Gaveston 

again.



When he landed at home, he paid no attention to anybody else, but 

ran into the favourite's arms before a great concourse of people, 

and hugged him, and kissed him, and called him his brother.  At the 

coronation which soon followed, Gaveston was the richest and 

brightest of all the glittering company there, and had the honour 

of carrying the crown.  This made the proud Lords fiercer than 

ever; the people, too, despised the favourite, and would never call 

him Earl of Cornwall, however much he complained to the King and 

asked him to punish them for not doing so, but persisted in styling 

him plain Piers Gaveston.



The Barons were so unceremonious with the King in giving him to 

understand that they would not bear this favourite, that the King 

was obliged to send him out of the country.  The favourite himself 

was made to take an oath (more oaths!) that he would never come 

back, and the Barons supposed him to be banished in disgrace, until 

they heard that he was appointed Governor of Ireland.  Even this 

was not enough for the besotted King, who brought him home again in 

a year's time, and not only disgusted the Court and the people by 

his doting folly, but offended his beautiful wife too, who never 

liked him afterwards.



He had now the old Royal want - of money - and the Barons had the 

new power of positively refusing to let him raise any.  He summoned 

a Parliament at York; the Barons refused to make one, while the 

favourite was near him.  He summoned another Parliament at 

Westminster, and sent Gaveston away.  Then, the Barons came, 

completely armed, and appointed a committee of themselves to 

correct abuses in the state and in the King's household.  He got 

some money on these conditions, and directly set off with Gaveston 

to the Border-country, where they spent it in idling away the time, 

and feasting, while Bruce made ready to drive the English out of 

Scotland.  For, though the old King had even made this poor weak 

son of his swear (as some say) that he would not bury his bones, 

but would have them boiled clean in a caldron, and carried before 

the English army until Scotland was entirely subdued, the second 

Edward was so unlike the first that Bruce gained strength and power 

every day.



The committee of Nobles, after some months of deliberation, 

ordained that the King should henceforth call a Parliament 

together, once every year, and even twice if necessary, instead of 

summoning it only when he chose.  Further, that Gaveston should 

once more be banished, and, this time, on pain of death if he ever 

came back.  The King's tears were of no avail; he was obliged to 

send his favourite to Flanders.  As soon as he had done so, 

however, he dissolved the Parliament, with the low cunning of a 

mere fool, and set off to the North of England, thinking to get an 

army about him to oppose the Nobles.  And once again he brought 

Gaveston home, and heaped upon him all the riches and titles of 

which the Barons had deprived him.



The Lords saw, now, that there was nothing for it but to put the 

favourite to death.  They could have done so, legally, according to 

the terms of his banishment; but they did so, I am sorry to say, in 

a shabby manner.  Led by the Earl of Lancaster, the King's cousin, 

they first of all attacked the King and Gaveston at Newcastle.  

They had time to escape by sea, and the mean King, having his 

precious Gaveston with him, was quite content to leave his lovely 

wife behind.  When they were comparatively safe, they separated; 

the King went to York to collect a force of soldiers; and the 

favourite shut himself up, in the meantime, in Scarborough Castle 

overlooking the sea.  This was what the Barons wanted.  They knew 

that the Castle could not hold out; they attacked it, and made 

Gaveston surrender.  He delivered himself up to the Earl of 

Pembroke - that Lord whom he had called the Jew - on the Earl's 

pledging his faith and knightly word, that no harm should happen to 

him and no violence be done him.



Now, it was agreed with Gaveston that he should be taken to the 

Castle of Wallingford, and there kept in honourable custody.  They 

travelled as far as Dedington, near Banbury, where, in the Castle 

of that place, they stopped for a night to rest.  Whether the Earl 

of Pembroke left his prisoner there, knowing what would happen, or 

really left him thinking no harm, and only going (as he pretended) 

to visit his wife, the Countess, who was in the neighbourhood, is 

no great matter now; in any case, he was bound as an honourable 

gentleman to protect his prisoner, and he did not do it.  In the 

morning, while the favourite was yet in bed, he was required to 

dress himself and come down into the court-yard.  He did so without 

any mistrust, but started and turned pale when he found it full of 

strange armed men.  'I think you know me?' said their leader, also 

armed from head to foot.  'I am the black dog of Ardenne!'  The 

time was come when Piers Gaveston was to feel the black dog's teeth 

indeed.  They set him on a mule, and carried him, in mock state and 

with military music, to the black dog's kennel - Warwick Castle - 

where a hasty council, composed of some great noblemen, considered 

what should be done with him.  Some were for sparing him, but one 

loud voice - it was the black dog's bark, I dare say - sounded 

through the Castle Hall, uttering these words:  'You have the fox 

in your power.  Let him go now, and you must hunt him again.'



They sentenced him to death.  He threw himself at the feet of the 

Earl of Lancaster - the old hog - but the old hog was as savage as 

the dog.  He was taken out upon the pleasant road, leading from 

Warwick to Coventry, where the beautiful river Avon, by which, long 

afterwards, WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE was born and now lies buried, 

sparkled in the bright landscape of the beautiful May-day; and 

there they struck off his wretched head, and stained the dust with 

his blood.



When the King heard of this black deed, in his grief and rage he 

denounced relentless war against his Barons, and both sides were in 

arms for half a year.  But, it then became necessary for them to 

join their forces against Bruce, who had used the time well while 

they were divided, and had now a great power in Scotland.



Intelligence was brought that Bruce was then besieging Stirling 

Castle, and that the Governor had been obliged to pledge himself to 

surrender it, unless he should be relieved before a certain day.  

Hereupon, the King ordered the nobles and their fighting-men to 

meet him at Berwick; but, the nobles cared so little for the King, 

and so neglected the summons, and lost time, that only on the day 

before that appointed for the surrender, did the King find himself 

at Stirling, and even then with a smaller force than he had 

expected.  However, he had, altogether, a hundred thousand men, and 

Bruce had not more than forty thousand; but, Bruce's army was 

strongly posted in three square columns, on the ground lying 

between the Burn or Brook of Bannock and the walls of Stirling 

Castle.



On the very evening, when the King came up, Bruce did a brave act 

that encouraged his men.  He was seen by a certain HENRY DE BOHUN, 

an English Knight, riding about before his army on a little horse, 

with a light battle-axe in his hand, and a crown of gold on his 

head.  This English Knight, who was mounted on a strong war-horse, 

cased in steel, strongly armed, and able (as he thought) to 

overthrow Bruce by crushing him with his mere weight, set spurs to 

his great charger, rode on him, and made a thrust at him with his 

heavy spear.  Bruce parried the thrust, and with one blow of his 

battle-axe split his skull.



The Scottish men did not forget this, next day when the battle 

raged.  RANDOLPH, Bruce's valiant Nephew, rode, with the small body 

of men he commanded, into such a host of the English, all shining 

in polished armour in the sunlight, that they seemed to be 

swallowed up and lost, as if they had plunged into the sea.  But, 

they fought so well, and did such dreadful execution, that the 

English staggered.  Then came Bruce himself upon them, with all the 

rest of his army.  While they were thus hard pressed and amazed, 

there appeared upon the hills what they supposed to be a new 

Scottish army, but what were really only the camp followers, in 

number fifteen thousand:  whom Bruce had taught to show themselves 

at that place and time.  The Earl of Gloucester, commanding the 

English horse, made a last rush to change the fortune of the day; 

but Bruce (like Jack the Giant-killer in the story) had had pits 

dug in the ground, and covered over with turfs and stakes.  Into 

these, as they gave way beneath the weight of the horses, riders 

and horses rolled by hundreds.  The English were completely routed; 

all their treasure, stores, and engines, were taken by the Scottish 

men; so many waggons and other wheeled vehicles were seized, that 

it is related that they would have reached, if they had been drawn 

out in a line, one hundred and eighty miles.  The fortunes of 

Scotland were, for the time, completely changed; and never was a 

battle won, more famous upon Scottish ground, than this great 

battle of BANNOCKBURN.



Plague and famine succeeded in England; and still the powerless 

King and his disdainful Lords were always in contention.  Some of 

the turbulent chiefs of Ireland made proposals to Bruce, to accept 

the rule of that country.  He sent his brother Edward to them, who 

was crowned King of Ireland.  He afterwards went himself to help 

his brother in his Irish wars, but his brother was defeated in the 

end and killed.  Robert Bruce, returning to Scotland, still 

increased his strength there.



As the King's ruin had begun in a favourite, so it seemed likely to 

end in one.  He was too poor a creature to rely at all upon 

himself; and his new favourite was one HUGH LE DESPENSER, the son 

of a gentleman of ancient family.  Hugh was handsome and brave, but 

he was the favourite of a weak King, whom no man cared a rush for, 

and that was a dangerous place to hold.  The Nobles leagued against 

him, because the King liked him; and they lay in wait, both for his 

ruin and his father's.  Now, the King had married him to the 

daughter of the late Earl of Gloucester, and had given both him and 

his father great possessions in Wales.  In their endeavours to 

extend these, they gave violent offence to an angry Welsh 

gentleman, named JOHN DE MOWBRAY, and to divers other angry Welsh 

gentlemen, who resorted to arms, took their castles, and seized 

their estates.  The Earl of Lancaster had first placed the 

favourite (who was a poor relation of his own) at Court, and he 

considered his own dignity offended by the preference he received 

and the honours he acquired; so he, and the Barons who were his 

friends, joined the Welshmen, marched on London, and sent a message 

to the King demanding to have the favourite and his father 

banished.  At first, the King unaccountably took it into his head 

to be spirited, and to send them a bold reply; but when they 

quartered themselves around Holborn and Clerkenwell, and went down, 

armed, to the Parliament at Westminster, he gave way, and complied 

with their demands.



His turn of triumph came sooner than he expected.  It arose out of 

an accidental circumstance.  The beautiful Queen happening to be 

travelling, came one night to one of the royal castles, and 

demanded to be lodged and entertained there until morning.  The 

governor of this castle, who was one of the enraged lords, was 

away, and in his absence, his wife refused admission to the Queen; 

a scuffle took place among the common men on either side, and some 

of the royal attendants were killed.  The people, who cared nothing 

for the King, were very angry that their beautiful Queen should be 

thus rudely treated in her own dominions; and the King, taking 

advantage of this feeling, besieged the castle, took it, and then 

called the two Despensers home.  Upon this, the confederate lords 

and the Welshmen went over to Bruce.  The King encountered them at 

Boroughbridge, gained the victory, and took a number of 

distinguished prisoners; among them, the Earl of Lancaster, now an 

old man, upon whose destruction he was resolved.  This Earl was 

taken to his own castle of Pontefract, and there tried and found 

guilty by an unfair court appointed for the purpose; he was not 

even allowed to speak in his own defence.  He was insulted, pelted, 

mounted on a starved pony without saddle or bridle, carried out, 

and beheaded.  Eight-and-twenty knights were hanged, drawn, and 

quartered.  When the King had despatched this bloody work, and had 

made a fresh and a long truce with Bruce, he took the Despensers 

into greater favour than ever, and made the father Earl of 

Winchester.



One prisoner, and an important one, who was taken at Boroughbridge, 

made his escape, however, and turned the tide against the King.  

This was ROGER MORTIMER, always resolutely opposed to him, who was 

sentenced to death, and placed for safe custody in the Tower of 

London.  He treated his guards to a quantity of wine into which he 

had put a sleeping potion; and, when they were insensible, broke 

out of his dungeon, got into a kitchen, climbed up the chimney, let 

himself down from the roof of the building with a rope-ladder, 

passed the sentries, got down to the river, and made away in a boat 

to where servants and horses were waiting for him.  He finally 

escaped to France, where CHARLES LE BEL, the brother of the 

beautiful Queen, was King.  Charles sought to quarrel with the King 

of England, on pretence of his not having come to do him homage at 

his coronation.  It was proposed that the beautiful Queen should go 

over to arrange the dispute; she went, and wrote home to the King, 

that as he was sick and could not come to France himself, perhaps 

it would be better to send over the young Prince, their son, who 

was only twelve years old, who could do homage to her brother in 

his stead, and in whose company she would immediately return.  The 

King sent him:  but, both he and the Queen remained at the French 

Court, and Roger Mortimer became the Queen's lover.



When the King wrote, again and again, to the Queen to come home, 

she did not reply that she despised him too much to live with him 

any more (which was the truth), but said she was afraid of the two 

Despensers.  In short, her design was to overthrow the favourites' 

power, and the King's power, such as it was, and invade England.  

Having obtained a French force of two thousand men, and being 

joined by all the English exiles then in France, she landed, within 

a year, at Orewell, in Suffolk, where she was immediately joined by 

the Earls of Kent and Norfolk, the King's two brothers; by other 

powerful noblemen; and lastly, by the first English general who was 

despatched to check her:  who went over to her with all his men.  

The people of London, receiving these tidings, would do nothing for 

the King, but broke open the Tower, let out all his prisoners, and 

threw up their caps and hurrahed for the beautiful Queen.



The King, with his two favourites, fled to Bristol, where he left 

old Despenser in charge of the town and castle, while he went on 

with the son to Wales.  The Bristol men being opposed to the King, 

and it being impossible to hold the town with enemies everywhere 

within the walls, Despenser yielded it up on the third day, and was 

instantly brought to trial for having traitorously influenced what 

was called 'the King's mind' - though I doubt if the King ever had 

any.  He was a venerable old man, upwards of ninety years of age, 

but his age gained no respect or mercy.  He was hanged, torn open 

while he was yet alive, cut up into pieces, and thrown to the dogs.  

His son was soon taken, tried at Hereford before the same judge on 

a long series of foolish charges, found guilty, and hanged upon a 

gallows fifty feet high, with a chaplet of nettles round his head.  

His poor old father and he were innocent enough of any worse crimes 

than the crime of having been friends of a King, on whom, as a mere 

man, they would never have deigned to cast a favourable look.  It 

is a bad crime, I know, and leads to worse; but, many lords and 

gentlemen - I even think some ladies, too, if I recollect right - 

have committed it in England, who have neither been given to the 

dogs, nor hanged up fifty feet high.



The wretched King was running here and there, all this time, and 

never getting anywhere in particular, until he gave himself up, and 

was taken off to Kenilworth Castle.  When he was safely lodged 

there, the Queen went to London and met the Parliament.  And the 

Bishop of Hereford, who was the most skilful of her friends, said, 

What was to be done now?  Here was an imbecile, indolent, miserable 

King upon the throne; wouldn't it be better to take him off, and 

put his son there instead?  I don't know whether the Queen really 

pitied him at this pass, but she began to cry; so, the Bishop said, 

Well, my Lords and Gentlemen, what do you think, upon the whole, of 

sending down to Kenilworth, and seeing if His Majesty (God bless 

him, and forbid we should depose him!) won't resign?



My Lords and Gentlemen thought it a good notion, so a deputation of 

them went down to Kenilworth; and there the King came into the 

great hall of the Castle, commonly dressed in a poor black gown; 

and when he saw a certain bishop among them, fell down, poor 

feeble-headed man, and made a wretched spectacle of himself.  

Somebody lifted him up, and then SIR WILLIAM TRUSSEL, the Speaker 

of the House of Commons, almost frightened him to death by making 

him a tremendous speech to the effect that he was no longer a King, 

and that everybody renounced allegiance to him.  After which, SIR 

THOMAS BLOUNT, the Steward of the Household, nearly finished him, 

by coming forward and breaking his white wand - which was a 

ceremony only performed at a King's death.  Being asked in this 

pressing manner what he thought of resigning, the King said he 

thought it was the best thing he could do.  So, he did it, and they 

proclaimed his son next day.



I wish I could close his history by saying that he lived a harmless 

life in the Castle and the Castle gardens at Kenilworth, many years 

- that he had a favourite, and plenty to eat and drink - and, 

having that, wanted nothing.  But he was shamefully humiliated.  He 

was outraged, and slighted, and had dirty water from ditches given 

him to shave with, and wept and said he would have clean warm 

water, and was altogether very miserable.  He was moved from this 

castle to that castle, and from that castle to the other castle, 

because this lord or that lord, or the other lord, was too kind to 

him:  until at last he came to Berkeley Castle, near the River 

Severn, where (the Lord Berkeley being then ill and absent) he fell 

into the hands of two black ruffians, called THOMAS GOURNAY and 

WILLIAM OGLE.



One night - it was the night of September the twenty-first, one 

thousand three hundred and twenty-seven - dreadful screams were 

heard, by the startled people in the neighbouring town, ringing 

through the thick walls of the Castle, and the dark, deep night; 

and they said, as they were thus horribly awakened from their 

sleep, 'May Heaven be merciful to the King; for those cries forbode 

that no good is being done to him in his dismal prison!'  Next 

morning he was dead - not bruised, or stabbed, or marked upon the 

body, but much distorted in the face; and it was whispered 

afterwards, that those two villains, Gournay and Ogle, had burnt up 

his inside with a red-hot iron.



If you ever come near Gloucester, and see the centre tower of its 

beautiful Cathedral, with its four rich pinnacles, rising lightly 

in the air; you may remember that the wretched Edward the Second 

was buried in the old abbey of that ancient city, at forty-three 

years old, after being for nineteen years and a half a perfectly 

incapable King.

