





CHAPTER XXXIV - ENGLAND UNDER OLIVER CROMWELL







BEFORE sunset on the memorable day on which King Charles the First 

was executed, the House of Commons passed an act declaring it 

treason in any one to proclaim the Prince of Wales - or anybody 

else - King of England.  Soon afterwards, it declared that the 

House of Lords was useless and dangerous, and ought to be 

abolished; and directed that the late King's statue should be taken 

down from the Royal Exchange in the City and other public places.  

Having laid hold of some famous Royalists who had escaped from 

prison, and having beheaded the DUKE OF HAMILTON, LORD HOLLAND, and 

LORD CAPEL, in Palace Yard (all of whom died very courageously), 

they then appointed a Council of State to govern the country.  It 

consisted of forty-one members, of whom five were peers.  Bradshaw 

was made president.  The House of Commons also re-admitted members 

who had opposed the King's death, and made up its numbers to about 

a hundred and fifty.



But, it still had an army of more than forty thousand men to deal 

with, and a very hard task it was to manage them.  Before the 

King's execution, the army had appointed some of its officers to 

remonstrate between them and the Parliament; and now the common 

soldiers began to take that office upon themselves.  The regiments 

under orders for Ireland mutinied; one troop of horse in the city 

of London seized their own flag, and refused to obey orders.  For 

this, the ringleader was shot:  which did not mend the matter, for, 

both his comrades and the people made a public funeral for him, and 

accompanied the body to the grave with sound of trumpets and with a 

gloomy procession of persons carrying bundles of rosemary steeped 

in blood.  Oliver was the only man to deal with such difficulties 

as these, and he soon cut them short by bursting at midnight into 

the town of Burford, near Salisbury, where the mutineers were 

sheltered, taking four hundred of them prisoners, and shooting a 

number of them by sentence of court-martial.  The soldiers soon 

found, as all men did, that Oliver was not a man to be trifled 

with.  And there was an end of the mutiny.



The Scottish Parliament did not know Oliver yet; so, on hearing of 

the King's execution, it proclaimed the Prince of Wales King 

Charles the Second, on condition of his respecting the Solemn 

League and Covenant.  Charles was abroad at that time, and so was 

Montrose, from whose help he had hopes enough to keep him holding 

on and off with commissioners from Scotland, just as his father 

might have done.  These hopes were soon at an end; for, Montrose, 

having raised a few hundred exiles in Germany, and landed with them 

in Scotland, found that the people there, instead of joining him, 

deserted the country at his approach.  He was soon taken prisoner 

and carried to Edinburgh.  There he was received with every 

possible insult, and carried to prison in a cart, his officers 

going two and two before him.  He was sentenced by the Parliament 

to be hanged on a gallows thirty feet high, to have his head set on 

a spike in Edinburgh, and his limbs distributed in other places, 

according to the old barbarous manner.  He said he had always acted 

under the Royal orders, and only wished he had limbs enough to be 

distributed through Christendom, that it might be the more widely 

known how loyal he had been.  He went to the scaffold in a bright 

and brilliant dress, and made a bold end at thirty-eight years of 

age.  The breath was scarcely out of his body when Charles 

abandoned his memory, and denied that he had ever given him orders 

to rise in his behalf.  O the family failing was strong in that 

Charles then!



Oliver had been appointed by the Parliament to command the army in 

Ireland, where he took a terrible vengeance for the sanguinary 

rebellion, and made tremendous havoc, particularly in the siege of 

Drogheda, where no quarter was given, and where he found at least a 

thousand of the inhabitants shut up together in the great church:  

every one of whom was killed by his soldiers, usually known as 

OLIVER'S IRONSIDES.  There were numbers of friars and priests among 

them, and Oliver gruffly wrote home in his despatch that these were 

'knocked on the head' like the rest.



But, Charles having got over to Scotland where the men of the 

Solemn League and Covenant led him a prodigiously dull life and 

made him very weary with long sermons and grim Sundays, the 

Parliament called the redoubtable Oliver home to knock the Scottish 

men on the head for setting up that Prince.  Oliver left his son-

in-law, Ireton, as general in Ireland in his stead (he died there 

afterwards), and he imitated the example of his father-in-law with 

such good will that he brought the country to subjection, and laid 

it at the feet of the Parliament.  In the end, they passed an act 

for the settlement of Ireland, generally pardoning all the common 

people, but exempting from this grace such of the wealthier sort as 

had been concerned in the rebellion, or in any killing of 

Protestants, or who refused to lay down their arms.  Great numbers 

of Irish were got out of the country to serve under Catholic powers 

abroad, and a quantity of land was declared to have been forfeited 

by past offences, and was given to people who had lent money to the 

Parliament early in the war.  These were sweeping measures; but, if 

Oliver Cromwell had had his own way fully, and had stayed in 

Ireland, he would have done more yet.



However, as I have said, the Parliament wanted Oliver for Scotland; 

so, home Oliver came, and was made Commander of all the Forces of 

the Commonwealth of England, and in three days away he went with 

sixteen thousand soldiers to fight the Scottish men.  Now, the 

Scottish men, being then - as you will generally find them now - 

mighty cautious, reflected that the troops they had were not used 

to war like the Ironsides, and would be beaten in an open fight.  

Therefore they said, 'If we live quiet in our trenches in Edinburgh 

here, and if all the farmers come into the town and desert the 

country, the Ironsides will be driven out by iron hunger and be 

forced to go away.'  This was, no doubt, the wisest plan; but as 

the Scottish clergy WOULD interfere with what they knew nothing 

about, and would perpetually preach long sermons exhorting the 

soldiers to come out and fight, the soldiers got it in their heads 

that they absolutely must come out and fight.  Accordingly, in an 

evil hour for themselves, they came out of their safe position.  

Oliver fell upon them instantly, and killed three thousand, and 

took ten thousand prisoners.



To gratify the Scottish Parliament, and preserve their favour, 

Charles had signed a declaration they laid before him, reproaching 

the memory of his father and mother, and representing himself as a 

most religious Prince, to whom the Solemn League and Covenant was 

as dear as life.  He meant no sort of truth in this, and soon 

afterwards galloped away on horseback to join some tiresome 

Highland friends, who were always flourishing dirks and 

broadswords.  He was overtaken and induced to return; but this 

attempt, which was called 'The Start,' did him just so much 

service, that they did not preach quite such long sermons at him 

afterwards as they had done before.



On the first of January, one thousand six hundred and fifty-one, 

the Scottish people crowned him at Scone.  He immediately took the 

chief command of an army of twenty thousand men, and marched to 

Stirling.  His hopes were heightened, I dare say, by the 

redoubtable Oliver being ill of an ague; but Oliver scrambled out 

of bed in no time, and went to work with such energy that he got 

behind the Royalist army and cut it off from all communication with 

Scotland.  There was nothing for it then, but to go on to England; 

so it went on as far as Worcester, where the mayor and some of the 

gentry proclaimed King Charles the Second straightway.  His 

proclamation, however, was of little use to him, for very few 

Royalists appeared; and, on the very same day, two people were 

publicly beheaded on Tower Hill for espousing his cause.  Up came 

Oliver to Worcester too, at double quick speed, and he and his 

Ironsides so laid about them in the great battle which was fought 

there, that they completely beat the Scottish men, and destroyed 

the Royalist army; though the Scottish men fought so gallantly that 

it took five hours to do.



The escape of Charles after this battle of Worcester did him good 

service long afterwards, for it induced many of the generous 

English people to take a romantic interest in him, and to think 

much better of him than he ever deserved.  He fled in the night, 

with not more than sixty followers, to the house of a Catholic lady 

in Staffordshire.  There, for his greater safety, the whole sixty 

left him.  He cropped his hair, stained his face and hands brown as 

if they were sunburnt, put on the clothes of a labouring 

countryman, and went out in the morning with his axe in his hand, 

accompanied by four wood-cutters who were brothers, and another man 

who was their brother-in-law.  These good fellows made a bed for 

him under a tree, as the weather was very bad; and the wife of one 

of them brought him food to eat; and the old mother of the four 

brothers came and fell down on her knees before him in the wood, 

and thanked God that her sons were engaged in saving his life.  At 

night, he came out of the forest and went on to another house which 

was near the river Severn, with the intention of passing into 

Wales; but the place swarmed with soldiers, and the bridges were 

guarded, and all the boats were made fast.  So, after lying in a 

hayloft covered over with hay, for some time, he came out of his 

place, attended by COLONEL CARELESS, a Catholic gentleman who had 

met him there, and with whom he lay hid, all next day, up in the 

shady branches of a fine old oak.  It was lucky for the King that 

it was September-time, and that the leaves had not begun to fall, 

since he and the Colonel, perched up in this tree, could catch 

glimpses of the soldiers riding about below, and could hear the 

crash in the wood as they went about beating the boughs.



After this, he walked and walked until his feet were all blistered; 

and, having been concealed all one day in a house which was 

searched by the troopers while he was there, went with LORD WILMOT, 

another of his good friends, to a place called Bentley, where one 

MISS LANE, a Protestant lady, had obtained a pass to be allowed to 

ride through the guards to see a relation of hers near Bristol.  

Disguised as a servant, he rode in the saddle before this young 

lady to the house of SIR JOHN WINTER, while Lord Wilmot rode there 

boldly, like a plain country gentleman, with dogs at his heels.  It 

happened that Sir John Winter's butler had been servant in Richmond 

Palace, and knew Charles the moment he set eyes upon him; but, the 

butler was faithful and kept the secret.  As no ship could be found 

to carry him abroad, it was planned that he should go - still 

travelling with Miss Lane as her servant - to another house, at 

Trent near Sherborne in Dorsetshire; and then Miss Lane and her 

cousin, MR. LASCELLES, who had gone on horseback beside her all the 

way, went home.  I hope Miss Lane was going to marry that cousin, 

for I am sure she must have been a brave, kind girl.  If I had been 

that cousin, I should certainly have loved Miss Lane.



When Charles, lonely for the loss of Miss Lane, was safe at Trent, 

a ship was hired at Lyme, the master of which engaged to take two 

gentlemen to France.  In the evening of the same day, the King - 

now riding as servant before another young lady - set off for a 

public-house at a place called Charmouth, where the captain of the 

vessel was to take him on board.  But, the captain's wife, being 

afraid of her husband getting into trouble, locked him up and would 

not let him sail.  Then they went away to Bridport; and, coming to 

the inn there, found the stable-yard full of soldiers who were on 

the look-out for Charles, and who talked about him while they 

drank.  He had such presence of mind, that he led the horses of his 

party through the yard as any other servant might have done, and 

said, 'Come out of the way, you soldiers; let us have room to pass 

here!'  As he went along, he met a half-tipsy ostler, who rubbed 

his eyes and said to him, 'Why, I was formerly servant to Mr. 

Potter at Exeter, and surely I have sometimes seen you there, young 

man?'  He certainly had, for Charles had lodged there.  His ready 

answer was, 'Ah, I did live with him once; but I have no time to 

talk now.  We'll have a pot of beer together when I come back.'



From this dangerous place he returned to Trent, and lay there 

concealed several days.  Then he escaped to Heale, near Salisbury; 

where, in the house of a widow lady, he was hidden five days, until 

the master of a collier lying off Shoreham in Sussex, undertook to 

convey a 'gentleman' to France.  On the night of the fifteenth of 

October, accompanied by two colonels and a merchant, the King rode 

to Brighton, then a little fishing village, to give the captain of 

the ship a supper before going on board; but, so many people knew 

him, that this captain knew him too, and not only he, but the 

landlord and landlady also.  Before he went away, the landlord came 

behind his chair, kissed his hand, and said he hoped to live to be 

a lord and to see his wife a lady; at which Charles laughed.  They 

had had a good supper by this time, and plenty of smoking and 

drinking, at which the King was a first-rate hand; so, the captain 

assured him that he would stand by him, and he did.  It was agreed 

that the captain should pretend to sail to Deal, and that Charles 

should address the sailors and say he was a gentleman in debt who 

was running away from his creditors, and that he hoped they would 

join him in persuading the captain to put him ashore in France.  As 

the King acted his part very well indeed, and gave the sailors 

twenty shillings to drink, they begged the captain to do what such 

a worthy gentleman asked.  He pretended to yield to their 

entreaties, and the King got safe to Normandy.



Ireland being now subdued, and Scotland kept quiet by plenty of 

forts and soldiers put there by Oliver, the Parliament would have 

gone on quietly enough, as far as fighting with any foreign enemy 

went, but for getting into trouble with the Dutch, who in the 

spring of the year one thousand six hundred and fifty-one sent a 

fleet into the Downs under their ADMIRAL VAN TROMP, to call upon 

the bold English ADMIRAL BLAKE (who was there with half as many 

ships as the Dutch) to strike his flag.  Blake fired a raging 

broadside instead, and beat off Van Tromp; who, in the autumn, came 

back again with seventy ships, and challenged the bold Blake - who 

still was only half as strong - to fight him.  Blake fought him all 

day; but, finding that the Dutch were too many for him, got quietly 

off at night.  What does Van Tromp upon this, but goes cruising and 

boasting about the Channel, between the North Foreland and the Isle 

of Wight, with a great Dutch broom tied to his masthead, as a sign 

that he could and would sweep the English of the sea!  Within three 

months, Blake lowered his tone though, and his broom too; for, he 

and two other bold commanders, DEAN and MONK, fought him three 

whole days, took twenty-three of his ships, shivered his broom to 

pieces, and settled his business.



Things were no sooner quiet again, than the army began to complain 

to the Parliament that they were not governing the nation properly, 

and to hint that they thought they could do it better themselves.  

Oliver, who had now made up his mind to be the head of the state, 

or nothing at all, supported them in this, and called a meeting of 

officers and his own Parliamentary friends, at his lodgings in 

Whitehall, to consider the best way of getting rid of the 

Parliament.  It had now lasted just as many years as the King's 

unbridled power had lasted, before it came into existence.  The end 

of the deliberation was, that Oliver went down to the House in his 

usual plain black dress, with his usual grey worsted stockings, but 

with an unusual party of soldiers behind him.  These last he left 

in the lobby, and then went in and sat down.  Presently he got up, 

made the Parliament a speech, told them that the Lord had done with 

them, stamped his foot and said, 'You are no Parliament.  Bring 

them in!  Bring them in!'  At this signal the door flew open, and 

the soldiers appeared.  'This is not honest,' said Sir Harry Vane, 

one of the members.  'Sir Harry Vane!' cried Cromwell; 'O, Sir 

Harry Vane!  The Lord deliver me from Sir Harry Vane!'  Then he 

pointed out members one by one, and said this man was a drunkard, 

and that man a dissipated fellow, and that man a liar, and so on.  

Then he caused the Speaker to be walked out of his chair, told the 

guard to clear the House, called the mace upon the table - which is 

a sign that the House is sitting - 'a fool's bauble,' and said, 

'here, carry it away!'  Being obeyed in all these orders, he 

quietly locked the door, put the key in his pocket, walked back to 

Whitehall again, and told his friends, who were still assembled 

there, what he had done.



They formed a new Council of State after this extraordinary 

proceeding, and got a new Parliament together in their own way:  

which Oliver himself opened in a sort of sermon, and which he said 

was the beginning of a perfect heaven upon earth.  In this 

Parliament there sat a well-known leather-seller, who had taken the 

singular name of Praise God Barebones, and from whom it was called, 

for a joke, Barebones's Parliament, though its general name was the 

Little Parliament.  As it soon appeared that it was not going to 

put Oliver in the first place, it turned out to be not at all like 

the beginning of heaven upon earth, and Oliver said it really was 

not to be borne with.  So he cleared off that Parliament in much 

the same way as he had disposed of the other; and then the council 

of officers decided that he must be made the supreme authority of 

the kingdom, under the title of the Lord Protector of the 

Commonwealth.



So, on the sixteenth of December, one thousand six hundred and 

fifty-three, a great procession was formed at Oliver's door, and he 

came out in a black velvet suit and a big pair of boots, and got 

into his coach and went down to Westminster, attended by the 

judges, and the lord mayor, and the aldermen, and all the other 

great and wonderful personages of the country.  There, in the Court 

of Chancery, he publicly accepted the office of Lord Protector.  

Then he was sworn, and the City sword was handed to him, and the 

seal was handed to him, and all the other things were handed to him 

which are usually handed to Kings and Queens on state occasions.  

When Oliver had handed them all back, he was quite made and 

completely finished off as Lord Protector; and several of the 

Ironsides preached about it at great length, all the evening.





SECOND PART





OLIVER CROMWELL - whom the people long called OLD NOLL - in 

accepting the office of Protector, had bound himself by a certain 

paper which was handed to him, called 'the Instrument,' to summon a 

Parliament, consisting of between four and five hundred members, in 

the election of which neither the Royalists nor the Catholics were 

to have any share.  He had also pledged himself that this 

Parliament should not be dissolved without its own consent until it 

had sat five months.



When this Parliament met, Oliver made a speech to them of three 

hours long, very wisely advising them what to do for the credit and 

happiness of the country.  To keep down the more violent members, 

he required them to sign a recognition of what they were forbidden 

by 'the Instrument' to do; which was, chiefly, to take the power 

from one single person at the head of the state or to command the 

army.  Then he dismissed them to go to work.  With his usual vigour 

and resolution he went to work himself with some frantic preachers 

- who were rather overdoing their sermons in calling him a villain 

and a tyrant - by shutting up their chapels, and sending a few of 

them off to prison.



There was not at that time, in England or anywhere else, a man so 

able to govern the country as Oliver Cromwell.  Although he ruled 

with a strong hand, and levied a very heavy tax on the Royalists 

(but not until they had plotted against his life), he ruled wisely, 

and as the times required.  He caused England to be so respected 

abroad, that I wish some lords and gentlemen who have governed it 

under kings and queens in later days would have taken a leaf out of 

Oliver Cromwell's book.  He sent bold Admiral Blake to the 

Mediterranean Sea, to make the Duke of Tuscany pay sixty thousand 

pounds for injuries he had done to British subjects, and spoliation 

he had committed on English merchants.  He further despatched him 

and his fleet to Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli, to have every English 

ship and every English man delivered up to him that had been taken 

by pirates in those parts.  All this was gloriously done; and it 

began to be thoroughly well known, all over the world, that England 

was governed by a man in earnest, who would not allow the English 

name to be insulted or slighted anywhere.



These were not all his foreign triumphs.  He sent a fleet to sea 

against the Dutch; and the two powers, each with one hundred ships 

upon its side, met in the English Channel off the North Foreland, 

where the fight lasted all day long.  Dean was killed in this 

fight; but Monk, who commanded in the same ship with him, threw his 

cloak over his body, that the sailors might not know of his death, 

and be disheartened.  Nor were they.  The English broadsides so 

exceedingly astonished the Dutch that they sheered off at last, 

though the redoubtable Van Tromp fired upon them with his own guns 

for deserting their flag.  Soon afterwards, the two fleets engaged 

again, off the coast of Holland.  There, the valiant Van Tromp was 

shot through the heart, and the Dutch gave in, and peace was made.



Further than this, Oliver resolved not to bear the domineering and 

bigoted conduct of Spain, which country not only claimed a right to 

all the gold and silver that could be found in South America, and 

treated the ships of all other countries who visited those regions, 

as pirates, but put English subjects into the horrible Spanish 

prisons of the Inquisition.  So, Oliver told the Spanish ambassador 

that English ships must be free to go wherever they would, and that 

English merchants must not be thrown into those same dungeons, no, 

not for the pleasure of all the priests in Spain.  To this, the 

Spanish ambassador replied that the gold and silver country, and 

the Holy Inquisition, were his King's two eyes, neither of which he 

could submit to have put out.  Very well, said Oliver, then he was 

afraid he (Oliver) must damage those two eyes directly.



So, another fleet was despatched under two commanders, PENN and 

VENABLES, for Hispaniola; where, however, the Spaniards got the 

better of the fight.  Consequently, the fleet came home again, 

after taking Jamaica on the way.  Oliver, indignant with the two 

commanders who had not done what bold Admiral Blake would have 

done, clapped them both into prison, declared war against Spain, 

and made a treaty with France, in virtue of which it was to shelter 

the King and his brother the Duke of York no longer.  Then, he sent 

a fleet abroad under bold Admiral Blake, which brought the King of 

Portugal to his senses - just to keep its hand in - and then 

engaged a Spanish fleet, sunk four great ships, and took two more, 

laden with silver to the value of two millions of pounds:  which 

dazzling prize was brought from Portsmouth to London in waggons, 

with the populace of all the towns and villages through which the 

waggons passed, shouting with all their might.  After this victory, 

bold Admiral Blake sailed away to the port of Santa Cruz to cut off 

the Spanish treasure-ships coming from Mexico.  There, he found 

them, ten in number, with seven others to take care of them, and a 

big castle, and seven batteries, all roaring and blazing away at 

him with great guns.  Blake cared no more for great guns than for 

pop-guns - no more for their hot iron balls than for snow-balls.  

He dashed into the harbour, captured and burnt every one of the 

ships, and came sailing out again triumphantly, with the victorious 

English flag flying at his masthead.  This was the last triumph of 

this great commander, who had sailed and fought until he was quite 

worn out.  He died, as his successful ship was coming into Plymouth 

Harbour amidst the joyful acclamations of the people, and was 

buried in state in Westminster Abbey.  Not to lie there, long.



Over and above all this, Oliver found that the VAUDOIS, or 

Protestant people of the valleys of Lucerne, were insolently 

treated by the Catholic powers, and were even put to death for 

their religion, in an audacious and bloody manner.  Instantly, he 

informed those powers that this was a thing which Protestant 

England would not allow; and he speedily carried his point, through 

the might of his great name, and established their right to worship 

God in peace after their own harmless manner.



Lastly, his English army won such admiration in fighting with the 

French against the Spaniards, that, after they had assaulted the 

town of Dunkirk together, the French King in person gave it up to 

the English, that it might be a token to them of their might and 

valour.



There were plots enough against Oliver among the frantic 

religionists (who called themselves Fifth Monarchy Men), and among 

the disappointed Republicans.  He had a difficult game to play, for 

the Royalists were always ready to side with either party against 

him.  The 'King over the water,' too, as Charles was called, had no 

scruples about plotting with any one against his life; although 

there is reason to suppose that he would willingly have married one 

of his daughters, if Oliver would have had such a son-in-law.  

There was a certain COLONEL SAXBY of the army, once a great 

supporter of Oliver's but now turned against him, who was a 

grievous trouble to him through all this part of his career; and 

who came and went between the discontented in England and Spain, 

and Charles who put himself in alliance with Spain on being thrown 

off by France.  This man died in prison at last; but not until 

there had been very serious plots between the Royalists and 

Republicans, and an actual rising of them in England, when they 

burst into the city of Salisbury, on a Sunday night, seized the 

judges who were going to hold the assizes there next day, and would 

have hanged them but for the merciful objections of the more 

temperate of their number.  Oliver was so vigorous and shrewd that 

he soon put this revolt down, as he did most other conspiracies; 

and it was well for one of its chief managers - that same Lord 

Wilmot who had assisted in Charles's flight, and was now EARL OF 

ROCHESTER - that he made his escape.  Oliver seemed to have eyes 

and ears everywhere, and secured such sources of information as his 

enemies little dreamed of.  There was a chosen body of six persons, 

called the Sealed Knot, who were in the closest and most secret 

confidence of Charles.  One of the foremost of these very men, a 

SIR RICHARD WILLIS, reported to Oliver everything that passed among 

them, and had two hundred a year for it.



MILES SYNDARCOMB, also of the old army, was another conspirator 

against the Protector.  He and a man named CECIL, bribed one of his 

Life Guards to let them have good notice when he was going out - 

intending to shoot him from a window.  But, owing either to his 

caution or his good fortune, they could never get an aim at him.  

Disappointed in this design, they got into the chapel in Whitehall, 

with a basketful of combustibles, which were to explode by means of 

a slow match in six hours; then, in the noise and confusion of the 

fire, they hoped to kill Oliver.  But, the Life Guardsman himself 

disclosed this plot; and they were seized, and Miles died (or 

killed himself in prison) a little while before he was ordered for 

execution.  A few such plotters Oliver caused to be beheaded, a few 

more to be hanged, and many more, including those who rose in arms 

against him, to be sent as slaves to the West Indies.  If he were 

rigid, he was impartial too, in asserting the laws of England.  

When a Portuguese nobleman, the brother of the Portuguese 

ambassador, killed a London citizen in mistake for another man with 

whom he had had a quarrel, Oliver caused him to be tried before a 

jury of Englishmen and foreigners, and had him executed in spite of 

the entreaties of all the ambassadors in London.



One of Oliver's own friends, the DUKE OF OLDENBURGH, in sending him 

a present of six fine coach-horses, was very near doing more to 

please the Royalists than all the plotters put together.  One day, 

Oliver went with his coach, drawn by these six horses, into Hyde 

Park, to dine with his secretary and some of his other gentlemen 

under the trees there.  After dinner, being merry, he took it into 

his head to put his friends inside and to drive them home:  a 

postillion riding one of the foremost horses, as the custom was.  

On account of Oliver's being too free with the whip, the six fine 

horses went off at a gallop, the postillion got thrown, and Oliver 

fell upon the coach-pole and narrowly escaped being shot by his own 

pistol, which got entangled with his clothes in the harness, and 

went off.  He was dragged some distance by the foot, until his foot 

came out of the shoe, and then he came safely to the ground under 

the broad body of the coach, and was very little the worse.  The 

gentlemen inside were only bruised, and the discontented people of 

all parties were much disappointed.



The rest of the history of the Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell is a 

history of his Parliaments.  His first one not pleasing him at all, 

he waited until the five months were out, and then dissolved it.  

The next was better suited to his views; and from that he desired 

to get - if he could with safety to himself - the title of King.  

He had had this in his mind some time:  whether because he thought 

that the English people, being more used to the title, were more 

likely to obey it; or whether because he really wished to be a king 

himself, and to leave the succession to that title in his family, 

is far from clear.  He was already as high, in England and in all 

the world, as he would ever be, and I doubt if he cared for the 

mere name.  However, a paper, called the 'Humble Petition and 

Advice,' was presented to him by the House of Commons, praying him 

to take a high title and to appoint his successor.  That he would 

have taken the title of King there is no doubt, but for the strong 

opposition of the army.  This induced him to forbear, and to assent 

only to the other points of the petition.  Upon which occasion 

there was another grand show in Westminster Hall, when the Speaker 

of the House of Commons formally invested him with a purple robe 

lined with ermine, and presented him with a splendidly bound Bible, 

and put a golden sceptre in his hand.  The next time the Parliament 

met, he called a House of Lords of sixty members, as the petition 

gave him power to do; but as that Parliament did not please him 

either, and would not proceed to the business of the country, he 

jumped into a coach one morning, took six Guards with him, and sent 

them to the right-about.  I wish this had been a warning to 

Parliaments to avoid long speeches, and do more work.



It was the month of August, one thousand six hundred and fifty-

eight, when Oliver Cromwell's favourite daughter, ELIZABETH 

CLAYPOLE (who had lately lost her youngest son), lay very ill, and 

his mind was greatly troubled, because he loved her dearly.  

Another of his daughters was married to LORD FALCONBERG, another to 

the grandson of the Earl of Warwick, and he had made his son 

RICHARD one of the Members of the Upper House.  He was very kind 

and loving to them all, being a good father and a good husband; but 

he loved this daughter the best of the family, and went down to 

Hampton Court to see her, and could hardly be induced to stir from 

her sick room until she died.  Although his religion had been of a 

gloomy kind, his disposition had been always cheerful.  He had been 

fond of music in his home, and had kept open table once a week for 

all officers of the army not below the rank of captain, and had 

always preserved in his house a quiet, sensible dignity.  He 

encouraged men of genius and learning, and loved to have them about 

him.  MILTON was one of his great friends.  He was good humoured 

too, with the nobility, whose dresses and manners were very 

different from his; and to show them what good information he had, 

he would sometimes jokingly tell them when they were his guests, 

where they had last drunk the health of the 'King over the water,' 

and would recommend them to be more private (if they could) another 

time.  But he had lived in busy times, had borne the weight of 

heavy State affairs, and had often gone in fear of his life.  He 

was ill of the gout and ague; and when the death of his beloved 

child came upon him in addition, he sank, never to raise his head 

again.  He told his physicians on the twenty-fourth of August that 

the Lord had assured him that he was not to die in that illness, 

and that he would certainly get better.  This was only his sick 

fancy, for on the third of September, which was the anniversary of 

the great battle of Worcester, and the day of the year which he 

called his fortunate day, he died, in the sixtieth year of his age.  

He had been delirious, and had lain insensible some hours, but he 

had been overheard to murmur a very good prayer the day before.  

The whole country lamented his death.  If you want to know the real 

worth of Oliver Cromwell, and his real services to his country, you 

can hardly do better than compare England under him, with England 

under CHARLES THE SECOND.



He had appointed his son Richard to succeed him, and after there 

had been, at Somerset House in the Strand, a lying in state more 

splendid than sensible - as all such vanities after death are, I 

think - Richard became Lord Protector.  He was an amiable country 

gentleman, but had none of his father's great genius, and was quite 

unfit for such a post in such a storm of parties.  Richard's 

Protectorate, which only lasted a year and a half, is a history of 

quarrels between the officers of the army and the Parliament, and 

between the officers among themselves; and of a growing discontent 

among the people, who had far too many long sermons and far too few 

amusements, and wanted a change.  At last, General Monk got the 

army well into his own hands, and then in pursuance of a secret 

plan he seems to have entertained from the time of Oliver's death, 

declared for the King's cause.  He did not do this openly; but, in 

his place in the House of Commons, as one of the members for 

Devonshire, strongly advocated the proposals of one SIR JOHN 

GREENVILLE, who came to the House with a letter from Charles, dated 

from Breda, and with whom he had previously been in secret 

communication.  There had been plots and counterplots, and a recall 

of the last members of the Long Parliament, and an end of the Long 

Parliament, and risings of the Royalists that were made too soon; 

and most men being tired out, and there being no one to head the 

country now great Oliver was dead, it was readily agreed to welcome 

Charles Stuart.  Some of the wiser and better members said - what 

was most true - that in the letter from Breda, he gave no real 

promise to govern well, and that it would be best to make him 

pledge himself beforehand as to what he should be bound to do for 

the benefit of the kingdom.  Monk said, however, it would be all 

right when he came, and he could not come too soon.



So, everybody found out all in a moment that the country MUST be 

prosperous and happy, having another Stuart to condescend to reign 

over it; and there was a prodigious firing off of guns, lighting of 

bonfires, ringing of bells, and throwing up of caps.  The people 

drank the King's health by thousands in the open streets, and 

everybody rejoiced.  Down came the Arms of the Commonwealth, up 

went the Royal Arms instead, and out came the public money.  Fifty 

thousand pounds for the King, ten thousand pounds for his brother 

the Duke of York, five thousand pounds for his brother the Duke of 

Gloucester.  Prayers for these gracious Stuarts were put up in all 

the churches; commissioners were sent to Holland (which suddenly 

found out that Charles was a great man, and that it loved him) to 

invite the King home; Monk and the Kentish grandees went to Dover, 

to kneel down before him as he landed.  He kissed and embraced 

Monk, made him ride in the coach with himself and his brothers, 

came on to London amid wonderful shoutings, and passed through the 

army at Blackheath on the twenty-ninth of May (his birthday), in 

the year one thousand six hundred and sixty.  Greeted by splendid 

dinners under tents, by flags and tapestry streaming from all the 

houses, by delighted crowds in all the streets, by troops of 

noblemen and gentlemen in rich dresses, by City companies, train-

bands, drummers, trumpeters, the great Lord Mayor, and the majestic 

Aldermen, the King went on to Whitehall.  On entering it, he 

commemorated his Restoration with the joke that it really would 

seem to have been his own fault that he had not come long ago, 

since everybody told him that he had always wished for him with all 

his heart.

