





CHAPTER VII - ENGLAND UNDER HAROLD THE SECOND, AND CONQUERED BY THE 

NORMANS







HAROLD was crowned King of England on the very day of the maudlin 

Confessor's funeral.  He had good need to be quick about it.  When 

the news reached Norman William, hunting in his park at Rouen, he 

dropped his bow, returned to his palace, called his nobles to 

council, and presently sent ambassadors to Harold, calling on him 

to keep his oath and resign the Crown.  Harold would do no such 

thing.  The barons of France leagued together round Duke William 

for the invasion of England.  Duke William promised freely to 

distribute English wealth and English lands among them.  The Pope 

sent to Normandy a consecrated banner, and a ring containing a hair 

which he warranted to have grown on the head of Saint Peter.  He 

blessed the enterprise; and cursed Harold; and requested that the 

Normans would pay 'Peter's Pence' - or a tax to himself of a penny 

a year on every house - a little more regularly in future, if they 

could make it convenient.



King Harold had a rebel brother in Flanders, who was a vassal of 

HAROLD HARDRADA, King of Norway.  This brother, and this Norwegian 

King, joining their forces against England, with Duke William's 

help, won a fight in which the English were commanded by two 

nobles; and then besieged York.  Harold, who was waiting for the 

Normans on the coast at Hastings, with his army, marched to 

Stamford Bridge upon the river Derwent to give them instant battle.



He found them drawn up in a hollow circle, marked out by their 

shining spears.  Riding round this circle at a distance, to survey 

it, he saw a brave figure on horseback, in a blue mantle and a 

bright helmet, whose horse suddenly stumbled and threw him.



'Who is that man who has fallen?' Harold asked of one of his 

captains.



'The King of Norway,' he replied.



'He is a tall and stately king,' said Harold, 'but his end is 

near.'



He added, in a little while, 'Go yonder to my brother, and tell 

him, if he withdraw his troops, he shall be Earl of Northumberland, 

and rich and powerful in England.'



The captain rode away and gave the message.



'What will he give to my friend the King of Norway?' asked the 

brother.



'Seven feet of earth for a grave,' replied the captain.



'No more?' returned the brother, with a smile.



'The King of Norway being a tall man, perhaps a little more,' 

replied the captain.



'Ride back!' said the brother, 'and tell King Harold to make ready 

for the fight!'



He did so, very soon.  And such a fight King Harold led against 

that force, that his brother, and the Norwegian King, and every 

chief of note in all their host, except the Norwegian King's son, 

Olave, to whom he gave honourable dismissal, were left dead upon 

the field.  The victorious army marched to York.  As King Harold 

sat there at the feast, in the midst of all his company, a stir was 

heard at the doors; and messengers all covered with mire from 

riding far and fast through broken ground came hurrying in, to 

report that the Normans had landed in England.



The intelligence was true.  They had been tossed about by contrary 

winds, and some of their ships had been wrecked.  A part of their 

own shore, to which they had been driven back, was strewn with 

Norman bodies.  But they had once more made sail, led by the Duke's 

own galley, a present from his wife, upon the prow whereof the 

figure of a golden boy stood pointing towards England.  By day, the 

banner of the three Lions of Normandy, the diverse coloured sails, 

the gilded vans, the many decorations of this gorgeous ship, had 

glittered in the sun and sunny water; by night, a light had 

sparkled like a star at her mast-head.  And now, encamped near 

Hastings, with their leader lying in the old Roman castle of 

Pevensey, the English retiring in all directions, the land for 

miles around scorched and smoking, fired and pillaged, was the 

whole Norman power, hopeful and strong on English ground.



Harold broke up the feast and hurried to London.  Within a week, 

his army was ready.  He sent out spies to ascertain the Norman 

strength.  William took them, caused them to be led through his 

whole camp, and then dismissed.  'The Normans,' said these spies to 

Harold, 'are not bearded on the upper lip as we English are, but 

are shorn.  They are priests.'  'My men,' replied Harold, with a 

laugh, 'will find those priests good soldiers!'



'The Saxons,' reported Duke William's outposts of Norman soldiers, 

who were instructed to retire as King Harold's army advanced, 'rush 

on us through their pillaged country with the fury of madmen.'



'Let them come, and come soon!' said Duke William.



Some proposals for a reconciliation were made, but were soon 

abandoned.  In the middle of the month of October, in the year one 

thousand and sixty-six, the Normans and the English came front to 

front.  All night the armies lay encamped before each other, in a 

part of the country then called Senlac, now called (in remembrance 

of them) Battle.  With the first dawn of day, they arose.  There, 

in the faint light, were the English on a hill; a wood behind them; 

in their midst, the Royal banner, representing a fighting warrior, 

woven in gold thread, adorned with precious stones; beneath the 

banner, as it rustled in the wind, stood King Harold on foot, with 

two of his remaining brothers by his side; around them, still and 

silent as the dead, clustered the whole English army - every 

soldier covered by his shield, and bearing in his hand his dreaded 

English battle-axe.



On an opposite hill, in three lines, archers, foot-soldiers, 

horsemen, was the Norman force.  Of a sudden, a great battle-cry, 

'God help us!' burst from the Norman lines.  The English answered 

with their own battle-cry, 'God's Rood!  Holy Rood!'  The Normans 

then came sweeping down the hill to attack the English.



There was one tall Norman Knight who rode before the Norman army on 

a prancing horse, throwing up his heavy sword and catching it, and 

singing of the bravery of his countrymen.  An English Knight, who 

rode out from the English force to meet him, fell by this Knight's 

hand.  Another English Knight rode out, and he fell too.  But then 

a third rode out, and killed the Norman.  This was in the first 

beginning of the fight.  It soon raged everywhere.



The English, keeping side by side in a great mass, cared no more 

for the showers of Norman arrows than if they had been showers of 

Norman rain.  When the Norman horsemen rode against them, with 

their battle-axes they cut men and horses down.  The Normans gave 

way.  The English pressed forward.  A cry went forth among the 

Norman troops that Duke William was killed.  Duke William took off 

his helmet, in order that his face might be distinctly seen, and 

rode along the line before his men.  This gave them courage.  As 

they turned again to face the English, some of their Norman horse 

divided the pursuing body of the English from the rest, and thus 

all that foremost portion of the English army fell, fighting 

bravely.  The main body still remaining firm, heedless of the 

Norman arrows, and with their battle-axes cutting down the crowds 

of horsemen when they rode up, like forests of young trees, Duke 

William pretended to retreat.  The eager English followed.  The 

Norman army closed again, and fell upon them with great slaughter.



'Still,' said Duke William, 'there are thousands of the English, 

firms as rocks around their King.  Shoot upward, Norman archers, 

that your arrows may fall down upon their faces!'



The sun rose high, and sank, and the battle still raged.  Through 

all the wild October day, the clash and din resounded in the air.  

In the red sunset, and in the white moonlight, heaps upon heaps of 

dead men lay strewn, a dreadful spectacle, all over the ground.



King Harold, wounded with an arrow in the eye, was nearly blind.  

His brothers were already killed.  Twenty Norman Knights, whose 

battered armour had flashed fiery and golden in the sunshine all 

day long, and now looked silvery in the moonlight, dashed forward 

to seize the Royal banner from the English Knights and soldiers, 

still faithfully collected round their blinded King.  The King 

received a mortal wound, and dropped.  The English broke and fled.  

The Normans rallied, and the day was lost.



O what a sight beneath the moon and stars, when lights were shining 

in the tent of the victorious Duke William, which was pitched near 

the spot where Harold fell - and he and his knights were carousing, 

within - and soldiers with torches, going slowly to and fro, 

without, sought for the corpse of Harold among piles of dead - and 

the Warrior, worked in golden thread and precious stones, lay low, 

all torn and soiled with blood - and the three Norman Lions kept 

watch over the field!


