






CHAPTER XXVII - ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE EIGHTH, CALLED BLUFF KING 

HAL AND BURLY KING HARRY







PART THE FIRST





WE now come to King Henry the Eighth, whom it has been too much the 

fashion to call 'Bluff King Hal,' and 'Burly King Harry,' and other 

fine names; but whom I shall take the liberty to call, plainly, one 

of the most detestable villains that ever drew breath.  You will be 

able to judge, long before we come to the end of his life, whether 

he deserves the character.



He was just eighteen years of age when he came to the throne.  

People said he was handsome then; but I don't believe it.  He was a 

big, burly, noisy, small-eyed, large-faced, double-chinned, 

swinish-looking fellow in later life (as we know from the 

likenesses of him, painted by the famous HANS HOLBEIN), and it is 

not easy to believe that so bad a character can ever have been 

veiled under a prepossessing appearance.



He was anxious to make himself popular; and the people, who had 

long disliked the late King, were very willing to believe that he 

deserved to be so.  He was extremely fond of show and display, and 

so were they.  Therefore there was great rejoicing when he married 

the Princess Catherine, and when they were both crowned.  And the 

King fought at tournaments and always came off victorious - for the 

courtiers took care of that - and there was a general outcry that 

he was a wonderful man.  Empson, Dudley, and their supporters were 

accused of a variety of crimes they had never committed, instead of 

the offences of which they really had been guilty; and they were 

pilloried, and set upon horses with their faces to the tails, and 

knocked about and beheaded, to the satisfaction of the people, and 

the enrichment of the King.



The Pope, so indefatigable in getting the world into trouble, had 

mixed himself up in a war on the continent of Europe, occasioned by 

the reigning Princes of little quarrelling states in Italy having 

at various times married into other Royal families, and so led to 

THEIR claiming a share in those petty Governments.  The King, who 

discovered that he was very fond of the Pope, sent a herald to the 

King of France, to say that he must not make war upon that holy 

personage, because he was the father of all Christians.  As the 

French King did not mind this relationship in the least, and also 

refused to admit a claim King Henry made to certain lands in 

France, war was declared between the two countries.  Not to perplex 

this story with an account of the tricks and designs of all the 

sovereigns who were engaged in it, it is enough to say that England 

made a blundering alliance with Spain, and got stupidly taken in by 

that country; which made its own terms with France when it could 

and left England in the lurch.  SIR EDWARD HOWARD, a bold admiral, 

son of the Earl of Surrey, distinguished himself by his bravery 

against the French in this business; but, unfortunately, he was 

more brave than wise, for, skimming into the French harbour of 

Brest with only a few row-boats, he attempted (in revenge for the 

defeat and death of SIR THOMAS KNYVETT, another bold English 

admiral) to take some strong French ships, well defended with 

batteries of cannon.  The upshot was, that he was left on board of 

one of them (in consequence of its shooting away from his own 

boat), with not more than about a dozen men, and was thrown into 

the sea and drowned:  though not until he had taken from his breast 

his gold chain and gold whistle, which were the signs of his 

office, and had cast them into the sea to prevent their being made 

a boast of by the enemy.  After this defeat - which was a great 

one, for Sir Edward Howard was a man of valour and fame - the King 

took it into his head to invade France in person; first executing 

that dangerous Earl of Suffolk whom his father had left in the 

Tower, and appointing Queen Catherine to the charge of his kingdom 

in his absence.  He sailed to Calais, where he was joined by 

MAXIMILIAN, Emperor of Germany, who pretended to be his soldier, 

and who took pay in his service:  with a good deal of nonsense of 

that sort, flattering enough to the vanity of a vain blusterer.  

The King might be successful enough in sham fights; but his idea of 

real battles chiefly consisted in pitching silken tents of bright 

colours that were ignominiously blown down by the wind, and in 

making a vast display of gaudy flags and golden curtains.  Fortune, 

however, favoured him better than he deserved; for, after much 

waste of time in tent pitching, flag flying, gold curtaining, and 

other such masquerading, he gave the French battle at a place 

called Guinegate:  where they took such an unaccountable panic, and 

fled with such swiftness, that it was ever afterwards called by the 

English the Battle of Spurs.  Instead of following up his 

advantage, the King, finding that he had had enough of real 

fighting, came home again.



The Scottish King, though nearly related to Henry by marriage, had 

taken part against him in this war.  The Earl of Surrey, as the 

English general, advanced to meet him when he came out of his own 

dominions and crossed the river Tweed.  The two armies came up with 

one another when the Scottish King had also crossed the river Till, 

and was encamped upon the last of the Cheviot Hills, called the 

Hill of Flodden.  Along the plain below it, the English, when the 

hour of battle came, advanced.  The Scottish army, which had been 

drawn up in five great bodies, then came steadily down in perfect 

silence.  So they, in their turn, advanced to meet the English 

army, which came on in one long line; and they attacked it with a 

body of spearmen, under LORD HOME.  At first they had the best of 

it; but the English recovered themselves so bravely, and fought 

with such valour, that, when the Scottish King had almost made his 

way up to the Royal Standard, he was slain, and the whole Scottish 

power routed.  Ten thousand Scottish men lay dead that day on 

Flodden Field; and among them, numbers of the nobility and gentry.  

For a long time afterwards, the Scottish peasantry used to believe 

that their King had not been really killed in this battle, because 

no Englishman had found an iron belt he wore about his body as a 

penance for having been an unnatural and undutiful son.  But, 

whatever became of his belt, the English had his sword and dagger, 

and the ring from his finger, and his body too, covered with 

wounds.  There is no doubt of it; for it was seen and recognised by 

English gentlemen who had known the Scottish King well.



When King Henry was making ready to renew the war in France, the 

French King was contemplating peace.  His queen, dying at this 

time, he proposed, though he was upwards of fifty years old, to 

marry King Henry's sister, the Princess Mary, who, besides being 

only sixteen, was betrothed to the Duke of Suffolk.  As the 

inclinations of young Princesses were not much considered in such 

matters, the marriage was concluded, and the poor girl was escorted 

to France, where she was immediately left as the French King's 

bride, with only one of all her English attendants.  That one was a 

pretty young girl named ANNE BOLEYN, niece of the Earl of Surrey, 

who had been made Duke of Norfolk, after the victory of Flodden 

Field.  Anne Boleyn's is a name to be remembered, as you will 

presently find.



And now the French King, who was very proud of his young wife, was 

preparing for many years of happiness, and she was looking forward, 

I dare say, to many years of misery, when he died within three 

months, and left her a young widow.  The new French monarch, 

FRANCIS THE FIRST, seeing how important it was to his interests 

that she should take for her second husband no one but an 

Englishman, advised her first lover, the Duke of Suffolk, when King 

Henry sent him over to France to fetch her home, to marry her.  The 

Princess being herself so fond of that Duke, as to tell him that he 

must either do so then, or for ever lose her, they were wedded; and 

Henry afterwards forgave them.  In making interest with the King, 

the Duke of Suffolk had addressed his most powerful favourite and 

adviser, THOMAS WOLSEY - a name very famous in history for its rise 

and downfall.



Wolsey was the son of a respectable butcher at Ipswich, in Suffolk 

and received so excellent an education that he became a tutor to 

the family of the Marquis of Dorset, who afterwards got him 

appointed one of the late King's chaplains.  On the accession of 

Henry the Eighth, he was promoted and taken into great favour.  He 

was now Archbishop of York; the Pope had made him a Cardinal 

besides; and whoever wanted influence in England or favour with the 

King - whether he were a foreign monarch or an English nobleman - 

was obliged to make a friend of the great Cardinal Wolsey.



He was a gay man, who could dance and jest, and sing and drink; and 

those were the roads to so much, or rather so little, of a heart as 

King Henry had.  He was wonderfully fond of pomp and glitter, and 

so was the King.  He knew a good deal of the Church learning of 

that time; much of which consisted in finding artful excuses and 

pretences for almost any wrong thing, and in arguing that black was 

white, or any other colour.  This kind of learning pleased the King 

too.  For many such reasons, the Cardinal was high in estimation 

with the King; and, being a man of far greater ability, knew as 

well how to manage him, as a clever keeper may know how to manage a 

wolf or a tiger, or any other cruel and uncertain beast, that may 

turn upon him and tear him any day.  Never had there been seen in 

England such state as my Lord Cardinal kept.  His wealth was 

enormous; equal, it was reckoned, to the riches of the Crown.  His 

palaces were as splendid as the King's, and his retinue was eight 

hundred strong.  He held his Court, dressed out from top to toe in 

flaming scarlet; and his very shoes were golden, set with precious 

stones.  His followers rode on blood horses; while he, with a 

wonderful affectation of humility in the midst of his great 

splendour, ambled on a mule with a red velvet saddle and bridle and 

golden stirrups.



Through the influence of this stately priest, a grand meeting was 

arranged to take place between the French and English Kings in 

France; but on ground belonging to England.  A prodigious show of 

friendship and rejoicing was to be made on the occasion; and 

heralds were sent to proclaim with brazen trumpets through all the 

principal cities of Europe, that, on a certain day, the Kings of 

France and England, as companions and brothers in arms, each 

attended by eighteen followers, would hold a tournament against all 

knights who might choose to come.



CHARLES, the new Emperor of Germany (the old one being dead), 

wanted to prevent too cordial an alliance between these sovereigns, 

and came over to England before the King could repair to the place 

of meeting; and, besides making an agreeable impression upon him, 

secured Wolsey's interest by promising that his influence should 

make him Pope when the next vacancy occurred.  On the day when the 

Emperor left England, the King and all the Court went over to 

Calais, and thence to the place of meeting, between Ardres and 

Guisnes, commonly called the Field of the Cloth of Gold.  Here, all 

manner of expense and prodigality was lavished on the decorations 

of the show; many of the knights and gentlemen being so superbly 

dressed that it was said they carried their whole estates upon 

their shoulders.



There were sham castles, temporary chapels, fountains running wine, 

great cellars full of wine free as water to all comers, silk tents, 

gold lace and foil, gilt lions, and such things without end; and, 

in the midst of all, the rich Cardinal out-shone and out-glittered 

all the noblemen and gentlemen assembled.  After a treaty made 

between the two Kings with as much solemnity as if they had 

intended to keep it, the lists - nine hundred feet long, and three 

hundred and twenty broad - were opened for the tournament; the 

Queens of France and England looking on with great array of lords 

and ladies.  Then, for ten days, the two sovereigns fought five 

combats every day, and always beat their polite adversaries; though 

they DO write that the King of England, being thrown in a wrestle 

one day by the King of France, lost his kingly temper with his 

brother-in-arms, and wanted to make a quarrel of it.  Then, there 

is a great story belonging to this Field of the Cloth of Gold, 

showing how the English were distrustful of the French, and the 

French of the English, until Francis rode alone one morning to 

Henry's tent; and, going in before he was out of bed, told him in 

joke that he was his prisoner; and how Henry jumped out of bed and 

embraced Francis; and how Francis helped Henry to dress, and warmed 

his linen for him; and how Henry gave Francis a splendid jewelled 

collar, and how Francis gave Henry, in return, a costly bracelet.  

All this and a great deal more was so written about, and sung 

about, and talked about at that time (and, indeed, since that time 

too), that the world has had good cause to be sick of it, for ever.



Of course, nothing came of all these fine doings but a speedy 

renewal of the war between England and France, in which the two 

Royal companions and brothers in arms longed very earnestly to 

damage one another.  But, before it broke out again, the Duke of 

Buckingham was shamefully executed on Tower Hill, on the evidence 

of a discharged servant - really for nothing, except the folly of 

having believed in a friar of the name of HOPKINS, who had 

pretended to be a prophet, and who had mumbled and jumbled out some 

nonsense about the Duke's son being destined to be very great in 

the land.  It was believed that the unfortunate Duke had given 

offence to the great Cardinal by expressing his mind freely about 

the expense and absurdity of the whole business of the Field of the 

Cloth of Gold.  At any rate, he was beheaded, as I have said, for 

nothing.  And the people who saw it done were very angry, and cried 

out that it was the work of 'the butcher's son!'



The new war was a short one, though the Earl of Surrey invaded 

France again, and did some injury to that country.  It ended in 

another treaty of peace between the two kingdoms, and in the 

discovery that the Emperor of Germany was not such a good friend to 

England in reality, as he pretended to be.  Neither did he keep his 

promise to Wolsey to make him Pope, though the King urged him.  Two 

Popes died in pretty quick succession; but the foreign priests were 

too much for the Cardinal, and kept him out of the post.  So the 

Cardinal and King together found out that the Emperor of Germany 

was not a man to keep faith with; broke off a projected marriage 

between the King's daughter MARY, Princess of Wales, and that 

sovereign; and began to consider whether it might not be well to 

marry the young lady, either to Francis himself, or to his eldest 

son.



There now arose at Wittemberg, in Germany, the great leader of the 

mighty change in England which is called The Reformation, and which 

set the people free from their slavery to the priests.  This was a 

learned Doctor, named MARTIN LUTHER, who knew all about them, for 

he had been a priest, and even a monk, himself.  The preaching and 

writing of Wickliffe had set a number of men thinking on this 

subject; and Luther, finding one day to his great surprise, that 

there really was a book called the New Testament which the priests 

did not allow to be read, and which contained truths that they 

suppressed, began to be very vigorous against the whole body, from 

the Pope downward.  It happened, while he was yet only beginning 

his vast work of awakening the nation, that an impudent fellow 

named TETZEL, a friar of very bad character, came into his 

neighbourhood selling what were called Indulgences, by wholesale, 

to raise money for beautifying the great Cathedral of St. Peter's, 

at Rome.  Whoever bought an Indulgence of the Pope was supposed to 

buy himself off from the punishment of Heaven for his offences.  

Luther told the people that these Indulgences were worthless bits 

of paper, before God, and that Tetzel and his masters were a crew 

of impostors in selling them.



The King and the Cardinal were mightily indignant at this 

presumption; and the King (with the help of SIR THOMAS MORE, a wise 

man, whom he afterwards repaid by striking off his head) even wrote 

a book about it, with which the Pope was so well pleased that he 

gave the King the title of Defender of the Faith.  The King and the 

Cardinal also issued flaming warnings to the people not to read 

Luther's books, on pain of excommunication.  But they did read them 

for all that; and the rumour of what was in them spread far and 

wide.



When this great change was thus going on, the King began to show 

himself in his truest and worst colours.  Anne Boleyn, the pretty 

little girl who had gone abroad to France with his sister, was by 

this time grown up to be very beautiful, and was one of the ladies 

in attendance on Queen Catherine.  Now, Queen Catherine was no 

longer young or handsome, and it is likely that she was not 

particularly good-tempered; having been always rather melancholy, 

and having been made more so by the deaths of four of her children 

when they were very young.  So, the King fell in love with the fair 

Anne Boleyn, and said to himself, 'How can I be best rid of my own 

troublesome wife whom I am tired of, and marry Anne?'



You recollect that Queen Catherine had been the wife of Henry's 

brother.  What does the King do, after thinking it over, but calls 

his favourite priests about him, and says, O! his mind is in such a 

dreadful state, and he is so frightfully uneasy, because he is 

afraid it was not lawful for him to marry the Queen!  Not one of 

those priests had the courage to hint that it was rather curious he 

had never thought of that before, and that his mind seemed to have 

been in a tolerably jolly condition during a great many years, in 

which he certainly had not fretted himself thin; but, they all 

said, Ah! that was very true, and it was a serious business; and 

perhaps the best way to make it right, would be for his Majesty to 

be divorced!  The King replied, Yes, he thought that would be the 

best way, certainly; so they all went to work.



If I were to relate to you the intrigues and plots that took place 

in the endeavour to get this divorce, you would think the History 

of England the most tiresome book in the world.  So I shall say no 

more, than that after a vast deal of negotiation and evasion, the 

Pope issued a commission to Cardinal Wolsey and CARDINAL CAMPEGGIO 

(whom he sent over from Italy for the purpose), to try the whole 

case in England.  It is supposed - and I think with reason - that 

Wolsey was the Queen's enemy, because she had reproved him for his 

proud and gorgeous manner of life.  But, he did not at first know 

that the King wanted to marry Anne Boleyn; and when he did know it, 

he even went down on his knees, in the endeavour to dissuade him.



The Cardinals opened their court in the Convent of the Black 

Friars, near to where the bridge of that name in London now stands; 

and the King and Queen, that they might be near it, took up their 

lodgings at the adjoining palace of Bridewell, of which nothing now 

remains but a bad prison.  On the opening of the court, when the 

King and Queen were called on to appear, that poor ill-used lady, 

with a dignity and firmness and yet with a womanly affection worthy 

to be always admired, went and kneeled at the King's feet, and said 

that she had come, a stranger, to his dominions; that she had been 

a good and true wife to him for twenty years; and that she could 

acknowledge no power in those Cardinals to try whether she should 

be considered his wife after all that time, or should be put away.  

With that, she got up and left the court, and would never 

afterwards come back to it.



The King pretended to be very much overcome, and said, O! my lords 

and gentlemen, what a good woman she was to be sure, and how 

delighted he would be to live with her unto death, but for that 

terrible uneasiness in his mind which was quite wearing him away!  

So, the case went on, and there was nothing but talk for two 

months.  Then Cardinal Campeggio, who, on behalf of the Pope, 

wanted nothing so much as delay, adjourned it for two more months; 

and before that time was elapsed, the Pope himself adjourned it 

indefinitely, by requiring the King and Queen to come to Rome and 

have it tried there.  But by good luck for the King, word was 

brought to him by some of his people, that they had happened to 

meet at supper, THOMAS CRANMER, a learned Doctor of Cambridge, who 

had proposed to urge the Pope on, by referring the case to all the 

learned doctors and bishops, here and there and everywhere, and 

getting their opinions that the King's marriage was unlawful.  The 

King, who was now in a hurry to marry Anne Boleyn, thought this 

such a good idea, that he sent for Cranmer, post haste, and said to 

LORD ROCHFORT, Anne Boleyn's father, 'Take this learned Doctor down 

to your country-house, and there let him have a good room for a 

study, and no end of books out of which to prove that I may marry 

your daughter.'  Lord Rochfort, not at all reluctant, made the 

learned Doctor as comfortable as he could; and the learned Doctor 

went to work to prove his case.  All this time, the King and Anne 

Boleyn were writing letters to one another almost daily, full of 

impatience to have the case settled; and Anne Boleyn was showing 

herself (as I think) very worthy of the fate which afterwards befel 

her.



It was bad for Cardinal Wolsey that he had left Cranmer to render 

this help.  It was worse for him that he had tried to dissuade the 

King from marrying Anne Boleyn.  Such a servant as he, to such a 

master as Henry, would probably have fallen in any case; but, 

between the hatred of the party of the Queen that was, and the 

hatred of the party of the Queen that was to be, he fell suddenly 

and heavily.  Going down one day to the Court of Chancery, where he 

now presided, he was waited upon by the Dukes of Norfolk and 

Suffolk, who told him that they brought an order to him to resign 

that office, and to withdraw quietly to a house he had at Esher, in 

Surrey.  The Cardinal refusing, they rode off to the King; and next 

day came back with a letter from him, on reading which, the 

Cardinal submitted.  An inventory was made out of all the riches in 

his palace at York Place (now Whitehall), and he went sorrowfully 

up the river, in his barge, to Putney.  An abject man he was, in 

spite of his pride; for being overtaken, riding out of that place 

towards Esher, by one of the King's chamberlains who brought him a 

kind message and a ring, he alighted from his mule, took off his 

cap, and kneeled down in the dirt.  His poor Fool, whom in his 

prosperous days he had always kept in his palace to entertain him, 

cut a far better figure than he; for, when the Cardinal said to the 

chamberlain that he had nothing to send to his lord the King as a 

present, but that jester who was a most excellent one, it took six 

strong yeomen to remove the faithful fool from his master.



The once proud Cardinal was soon further disgraced, and wrote the 

most abject letters to his vile sovereign; who humbled him one day 

and encouraged him the next, according to his humour, until he was 

at last ordered to go and reside in his diocese of York.  He said 

he was too poor; but I don't know how he made that out, for he took 

a hundred and sixty servants with him, and seventy-two cart-loads 

of furniture, food, and wine.  He remained in that part of the 

country for the best part of a year, and showed himself so improved 

by his misfortunes, and was so mild and so conciliating, that he 

won all hearts.  And indeed, even in his proud days, he had done 

some magnificent things for learning and education.  At last, he 

was arrested for high treason; and, coming slowly on his journey 

towards London, got as far as Leicester.  Arriving at Leicester 

Abbey after dark, and very ill, he said - when the monks came out 

at the gate with lighted torches to receive him - that he had come 

to lay his bones among them.  He had indeed; for he was taken to a 

bed, from which he never rose again.  His last words were, 'Had I 

but served God as diligently as I have served the King, He would 

not have given me over, in my grey hairs.  Howbeit, this is my just 

reward for my pains and diligence, not regarding my service to God, 

but only my duty to my prince.'  The news of his death was quickly 

carried to the King, who was amusing himself with archery in the 

garden of the magnificent Palace at Hampton Court, which that very 

Wolsey had presented to him.  The greatest emotion his royal mind 

displayed at the loss of a servant so faithful and so ruined, was a 

particular desire to lay hold of fifteen hundred pounds which the 

Cardinal was reported to have hidden somewhere.



The opinions concerning the divorce, of the learned doctors and 

bishops and others, being at last collected, and being generally in 

the King's favour, were forwarded to the Pope, with an entreaty 

that he would now grant it.  The unfortunate Pope, who was a timid 

man, was half distracted between his fear of his authority being 

set aside in England if he did not do as he was asked, and his 

dread of offending the Emperor of Germany, who was Queen 

Catherine's nephew.  In this state of mind he still evaded and did 

nothing.  Then, THOMAS CROMWELL, who had been one of Wolsey's 

faithful attendants, and had remained so even in his decline, 

advised the King to take the matter into his own hands, and make 

himself the head of the whole Church.  This, the King by various 

artful means, began to do; but he recompensed the clergy by 

allowing them to burn as many people as they pleased, for holding 

Luther's opinions.  You must understand that Sir Thomas More, the 

wise man who had helped the King with his book, had been made 

Chancellor in Wolsey's place.  But, as he was truly attached to the 

Church as it was even in its abuses, he, in this state of things, 

resigned.



Being now quite resolved to get rid of Queen Catherine, and to 

marry Anne Boleyn without more ado, the King made Cranmer 

Archbishop of Canterbury, and directed Queen Catherine to leave the 

Court.  She obeyed; but replied that wherever she went, she was 

Queen of England still, and would remain so, to the last.  The King 

then married Anne Boleyn privately; and the new Archbishop of 

Canterbury, within half a year, declared his marriage with Queen 

Catherine void, and crowned Anne Boleyn Queen.



She might have known that no good could ever come from such wrong, 

and that the corpulent brute who had been so faithless and so cruel 

to his first wife, could be more faithless and more cruel to his 

second.  She might have known that, even when he was in love with 

her, he had been a mean and selfish coward, running away, like a 

frightened cur, from her society and her house, when a dangerous 

sickness broke out in it, and when she might easily have taken it 

and died, as several of the household did.  But, Anne Boleyn 

arrived at all this knowledge too late, and bought it at a dear 

price.  Her bad marriage with a worse man came to its natural end.  

Its natural end was not, as we shall too soon see, a natural death 

for her.

