





CHAPTER XXVI - ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE SEVENTH







KING HENRY THE SEVENTH did not turn out to be as fine a fellow as 

the nobility and people hoped, in the first joy of their 

deliverance from Richard the Third.  He was very cold, crafty, and 

calculating, and would do almost anything for money.  He possessed 

considerable ability, but his chief merit appears to have been that 

he was not cruel when there was nothing to be got by it.



The new King had promised the nobles who had espoused his cause 

that he would marry the Princess Elizabeth.  The first thing he 

did, was, to direct her to be removed from the castle of Sheriff 

Hutton in Yorkshire, where Richard had placed her, and restored to 

the care of her mother in London.  The young Earl of Warwick, 

Edward Plantagenet, son and heir of the late Duke of Clarence, had 

been kept a prisoner in the same old Yorkshire Castle with her.  

This boy, who was now fifteen, the new King placed in the Tower for 

safety.  Then he came to London in great state, and gratified the 

people with a fine procession; on which kind of show he often very 

much relied for keeping them in good humour.  The sports and feasts 

which took place were followed by a terrible fever, called the 

Sweating Sickness; of which great numbers of people died.  Lord 

Mayors and Aldermen are thought to have suffered most from it; 

whether, because they were in the habit of over-eating themselves, 

or because they were very jealous of preserving filth and nuisances 

in the City (as they have been since), I don't know.



The King's coronation was postponed on account of the general ill-

health, and he afterwards deferred his marriage, as if he were not 

very anxious that it should take place:  and, even after that, 

deferred the Queen's coronation so long that he gave offence to the 

York party.  However, he set these things right in the end, by 

hanging some men and seizing on the rich possessions of others; by 

granting more popular pardons to the followers of the late King 

than could, at first, be got from him; and, by employing about his 

Court, some very scrupulous persons who had been employed in the 

previous reign.



As this reign was principally remarkable for two very curious 

impostures which have become famous in history, we will make those 

two stories its principal feature.



There was a priest at Oxford of the name of Simons, who had for a 

pupil a handsome boy named Lambert Simnel, the son of a baker.  

Partly to gratify his own ambitious ends, and partly to carry out 

the designs of a secret party formed against the King, this priest 

declared that his pupil, the boy, was no other than the young Earl 

of Warwick; who (as everybody might have known) was safely locked 

up in the Tower of London.  The priest and the boy went over to 

Ireland; and, at Dublin, enlisted in their cause all ranks of the 

people:  who seem to have been generous enough, but exceedingly 

irrational.  The Earl of Kildare, the governor of Ireland, declared 

that he believed the boy to be what the priest represented; and the 

boy, who had been well tutored by the priest, told them such things 

of his childhood, and gave them so many descriptions of the Royal 

Family, that they were perpetually shouting and hurrahing, and 

drinking his health, and making all kinds of noisy and thirsty 

demonstrations, to express their belief in him.  Nor was this 

feeling confined to Ireland alone, for the Earl of Lincoln - whom 

the late usurper had named as his successor - went over to the 

young Pretender; and, after holding a secret correspondence with 

the Dowager Duchess of Burgundy - the sister of Edward the Fourth, 

who detested the present King and all his race - sailed to Dublin 

with two thousand German soldiers of her providing.  In this 

promising state of the boy's fortunes, he was crowned there, with a 

crown taken off the head of a statue of the Virgin Mary; and was 

then, according to the Irish custom of those days, carried home on 

the shoulders of a big chieftain possessing a great deal more 

strength than sense.  Father Simons, you may be sure, was mighty 

busy at the coronation.



Ten days afterwards, the Germans, and the Irish, and the priest, 

and the boy, and the Earl of Lincoln, all landed in Lancashire to 

invade England.  The King, who had good intelligence of their 

movements, set up his standard at Nottingham, where vast numbers 

resorted to him every day; while the Earl of Lincoln could gain but 

very few.  With his small force he tried to make for the town of 

Newark; but the King's army getting between him and that place, he 

had no choice but to risk a battle at Stoke.  It soon ended in the 

complete destruction of the Pretender's forces, one half of whom 

were killed; among them, the Earl himself.  The priest and the 

baker's boy were taken prisoners.  The priest, after confessing the 

trick, was shut up in prison, where he afterwards died - suddenly 

perhaps.  The boy was taken into the King's kitchen and made a 

turnspit.  He was afterwards raised to the station of one of the 

King's falconers; and so ended this strange imposition.



There seems reason to suspect that the Dowager Queen - always a 

restless and busy woman - had had some share in tutoring the 

baker's son.  The King was very angry with her, whether or no.  He 

seized upon her property, and shut her up in a convent at 

Bermondsey.



One might suppose that the end of this story would have put the 

Irish people on their guard; but they were quite ready to receive a 

second impostor, as they had received the first, and that same 

troublesome Duchess of Burgundy soon gave them the opportunity.  

All of a sudden there appeared at Cork, in a vessel arriving from 

Portugal, a young man of excellent abilities, of very handsome 

appearance and most winning manners, who declared himself to be 

Richard, Duke of York, the second son of King Edward the Fourth.  

'O,' said some, even of those ready Irish believers, 'but surely 

that young Prince was murdered by his uncle in the Tower!' - 'It IS 

supposed so,' said the engaging young man; 'and my brother WAS 

killed in that gloomy prison; but I escaped - it don't matter how, 

at present - and have been wandering about the world for seven long 

years.'  This explanation being quite satisfactory to numbers of 

the Irish people, they began again to shout and to hurrah, and to 

drink his health, and to make the noisy and thirsty demonstrations 

all over again.  And the big chieftain in Dublin began to look out 

for another coronation, and another young King to be carried home 

on his back.



Now, King Henry being then on bad terms with France, the French 

King, Charles the Eighth, saw that, by pretending to believe in the 

handsome young man, he could trouble his enemy sorely.  So, he 

invited him over to the French Court, and appointed him a body-

guard, and treated him in all respects as if he really were the 

Duke of York.  Peace, however, being soon concluded between the two 

Kings, the pretended Duke was turned adrift, and wandered for 

protection to the Duchess of Burgundy.  She, after feigning to 

inquire into the reality of his claims, declared him to be the very 

picture of her dear departed brother; gave him a body-guard at her 

Court, of thirty halberdiers; and called him by the sounding name 

of the White Rose of England.



The leading members of the White Rose party in England sent over an 

agent, named Sir Robert Clifford, to ascertain whether the White 

Rose's claims were good:  the King also sent over his agents to 

inquire into the Rose's history.  The White Roses declared the 

young man to be really the Duke of York; the King declared him to 

be PERKIN WARBECK, the son of a merchant of the city of Tournay, 

who had acquired his knowledge of England, its language and 

manners, from the English merchants who traded in Flanders; it was 

also stated by the Royal agents that he had been in the service of 

Lady Brompton, the wife of an exiled English nobleman, and that the 

Duchess of Burgundy had caused him to be trained and taught, 

expressly for this deception.  The King then required the Archduke 

Philip - who was the sovereign of Burgundy - to banish this new 

Pretender, or to deliver him up; but, as the Archduke replied that 

he could not control the Duchess in her own land, the King, in 

revenge, took the market of English cloth away from Antwerp, and 

prevented all commercial intercourse between the two countries.



He also, by arts and bribes, prevailed on Sir Robert Clifford to 

betray his employers; and he denouncing several famous English 

noblemen as being secretly the friends of Perkin Warbeck, the King 

had three of the foremost executed at once.  Whether he pardoned 

the remainder because they were poor, I do not know; but it is only 

too probable that he refused to pardon one famous nobleman against 

whom the same Clifford soon afterwards informed separately, because 

he was rich.  This was no other than Sir William Stanley, who had 

saved the King's life at the battle of Bosworth Field.  It is very 

doubtful whether his treason amounted to much more than his having 

said, that if he were sure the young man was the Duke of York, he 

would not take arms against him.  Whatever he had done he admitted, 

like an honourable spirit; and he lost his head for it, and the 

covetous King gained all his wealth.



Perkin Warbeck kept quiet for three years; but, as the Flemings 

began to complain heavily of the loss of their trade by the 

stoppage of the Antwerp market on his account, and as it was not 

unlikely that they might even go so far as to take his life, or 

give him up, he found it necessary to do something.  Accordingly he 

made a desperate sally, and landed, with only a few hundred men, on 

the coast of Deal.  But he was soon glad to get back to the place 

from whence he came; for the country people rose against his 

followers, killed a great many, and took a hundred and fifty 

prisoners:  who were all driven to London, tied together with 

ropes, like a team of cattle.  Every one of them was hanged on some 

part or other of the sea-shore; in order, that if any more men 

should come over with Perkin Warbeck, they might see the bodies as 

a warning before they landed.



Then the wary King, by making a treaty of commerce with the 

Flemings, drove Perkin Warbeck out of that country; and, by 

completely gaining over the Irish to his side, deprived him of that 

asylum too.  He wandered away to Scotland, and told his story at 

that Court.  King James the Fourth of Scotland, who was no friend 

to King Henry, and had no reason to be (for King Henry had bribed 

his Scotch lords to betray him more than once; but had never 

succeeded in his plots), gave him a great reception, called him his 

cousin, and gave him in marriage the Lady Catherine Gordon, a 

beautiful and charming creature related to the royal house of 

Stuart.



Alarmed by this successful reappearance of the Pretender, the King 

still undermined, and bought, and bribed, and kept his doings and 

Perkin Warbeck's story in the dark, when he might, one would 

imagine, have rendered the matter clear to all England.  But, for 

all this bribing of the Scotch lords at the Scotch King's Court, he 

could not procure the Pretender to be delivered up to him.  James, 

though not very particular in many respects, would not betray him; 

and the ever-busy Duchess of Burgundy so provided him with arms, 

and good soldiers, and with money besides, that he had soon a 

little army of fifteen hundred men of various nations.  With these, 

and aided by the Scottish King in person, he crossed the border 

into England, and made a proclamation to the people, in which he 

called the King 'Henry Tudor;' offered large rewards to any who 

should take or distress him; and announced himself as King Richard 

the Fourth come to receive the homage of his faithful subjects.  

His faithful subjects, however, cared nothing for him, and hated 

his faithful troops:  who, being of different nations, quarrelled 

also among themselves.  Worse than this, if worse were possible, 

they began to plunder the country; upon which the White Rose said, 

that he would rather lose his rights, than gain them through the 

miseries of the English people.  The Scottish King made a jest of 

his scruples; but they and their whole force went back again 

without fighting a battle.



The worst consequence of this attempt was, that a rising took place 

among the people of Cornwall, who considered themselves too heavily 

taxed to meet the charges of the expected war.  Stimulated by 

Flammock, a lawyer, and Joseph, a blacksmith, and joined by Lord 

Audley and some other country gentlemen, they marched on all the 

way to Deptford Bridge, where they fought a battle with the King's 

army.  They were defeated - though the Cornish men fought with 

great bravery - and the lord was beheaded, and the lawyer and the 

blacksmith were hanged, drawn, and quartered.  The rest were 

pardoned.  The King, who believed every man to be as avaricious as 

himself, and thought that money could settle anything, allowed them 

to make bargains for their liberty with the soldiers who had taken 

them.



Perkin Warbeck, doomed to wander up and down, and never to find 

rest anywhere - a sad fate:  almost a sufficient punishment for an 

imposture, which he seems in time to have half believed himself - 

lost his Scottish refuge through a truce being made between the two 

Kings; and found himself, once more, without a country before him 

in which he could lay his head.  But James (always honourable and 

true to him, alike when he melted down his plate, and even the 

great gold chain he had been used to wear, to pay soldiers in his 

cause; and now, when that cause was lost and hopeless) did not 

conclude the treaty, until he had safely departed out of the 

Scottish dominions.  He, and his beautiful wife, who was faithful 

to him under all reverses, and left her state and home to follow 

his poor fortunes, were put aboard ship with everything necessary 

for their comfort and protection, and sailed for Ireland.



But, the Irish people had had enough of counterfeit Earls of 

Warwick and Dukes of York, for one while; and would give the White 

Rose no aid.  So, the White Rose - encircled by thorns indeed - 

resolved to go with his beautiful wife to Cornwall as a forlorn 

resource, and see what might be made of the Cornish men, who had 

risen so valiantly a little while before, and who had fought so 

bravely at Deptford Bridge.



To Whitsand Bay, in Cornwall, accordingly, came Perkin Warbeck and 

his wife; and the lovely lady he shut up for safety in the Castle 

of St. Michael's Mount, and then marched into Devonshire at the 

head of three thousand Cornishmen.  These were increased to six 

thousand by the time of his arrival in Exeter; but, there the 

people made a stout resistance, and he went on to Taunton, where he 

came in sight of the King's army.  The stout Cornish men, although 

they were few in number, and badly armed, were so bold, that they 

never thought of retreating; but bravely looked forward to a battle 

on the morrow.  Unhappily for them, the man who was possessed of so 

many engaging qualities, and who attracted so many people to his 

side when he had nothing else with which to tempt them, was not as 

brave as they.  In the night, when the two armies lay opposite to 

each other, he mounted a swift horse and fled.  When morning 

dawned, the poor confiding Cornish men, discovering that they had 

no leader, surrendered to the King's power.  Some of them were 

hanged, and the rest were pardoned and went miserably home.



Before the King pursued Perkin Warbeck to the sanctuary of Beaulieu 

in the New Forest, where it was soon known that he had taken 

refuge, he sent a body of horsemen to St. Michael's Mount, to seize 

his wife.  She was soon taken and brought as a captive before the 

King.  But she was so beautiful, and so good, and so devoted to the 

man in whom she believed, that the King regarded her with 

compassion, treated her with great respect, and placed her at 

Court, near the Queen's person.  And many years after Perkin 

Warbeck was no more, and when his strange story had become like a 

nursery tale, SHE was called the White Rose, by the people, in 

remembrance of her beauty.



The sanctuary at Beaulieu was soon surrounded by the King's men; 

and the King, pursuing his usual dark, artful ways, sent pretended 

friends to Perkin Warbeck to persuade him to come out and surrender 

himself.  This he soon did; the King having taken a good look at 

the man of whom he had heard so much - from behind a screen - 

directed him to be well mounted, and to ride behind him at a little 

distance, guarded, but not bound in any way.  So they entered 

London with the King's favourite show - a procession; and some of 

the people hooted as the Pretender rode slowly through the streets 

to the Tower; but the greater part were quiet, and very curious to 

see him.  From the Tower, he was taken to the Palace at 

Westminster, and there lodged like a gentleman, though closely 

watched.  He was examined every now and then as to his imposture; 

but the King was so secret in all he did, that even then he gave it 

a consequence, which it cannot be supposed to have in itself 

deserved.



At last Perkin Warbeck ran away, and took refuge in another 

sanctuary near Richmond in Surrey.  From this he was again 

persuaded to deliver himself up; and, being conveyed to London, he 

stood in the stocks for a whole day, outside Westminster Hall, and 

there read a paper purporting to be his full confession, and 

relating his history as the King's agents had originally described 

it.  He was then shut up in the Tower again, in the company of the 

Earl of Warwick, who had now been there for fourteen years:  ever 

since his removal out of Yorkshire, except when the King had had 

him at Court, and had shown him to the people, to prove the 

imposture of the Baker's boy.  It is but too probable, when we 

consider the crafty character of Henry the Seventh, that these two 

were brought together for a cruel purpose.  A plot was soon 

discovered between them and the keepers, to murder the Governor, 

get possession of the keys, and proclaim Perkin Warbeck as King 

Richard the Fourth.  That there was some such plot, is likely; that 

they were tempted into it, is at least as likely; that the 

unfortunate Earl of Warwick - last male of the Plantagenet line - 

was too unused to the world, and too ignorant and simple to know 

much about it, whatever it was, is perfectly certain; and that it 

was the King's interest to get rid of him, is no less so.  He was 

beheaded on Tower Hill, and Perkin Warbeck was hanged at Tyburn.



Such was the end of the pretended Duke of York, whose shadowy 

history was made more shadowy - and ever will be - by the mystery 

and craft of the King.  If he had turned his great natural 

advantages to a more honest account, he might have lived a happy 

and respected life, even in those days.  But he died upon a gallows 

at Tyburn, leaving the Scottish lady, who had loved him so well, 

kindly protected at the Queen's Court.  After some time she forgot 

her old loves and troubles, as many people do with Time's merciful 

assistance, and married a Welsh gentleman.  Her second husband, SIR 

MATTHEW CRADOC, more honest and more happy than her first, lies 

beside her in a tomb in the old church of Swansea.



The ill-blood between France and England in this reign, arose out 

of the continued plotting of the Duchess of Burgundy, and disputes 

respecting the affairs of Brittany.  The King feigned to be very 

patriotic, indignant, and warlike; but he always contrived so as 

never to make war in reality, and always to make money.  His 

taxation of the people, on pretence of war with France, involved, 

at one time, a very dangerous insurrection, headed by Sir John 

Egremont, and a common man called John a Chambre.  But it was 

subdued by the royal forces, under the command of the Earl of 

Surrey.  The knighted John escaped to the Duchess of Burgundy, who 

was ever ready to receive any one who gave the King trouble; and 

the plain John was hanged at York, in the midst of a number of his 

men, but on a much higher gibbet, as being a greater traitor.  Hung 

high or hung low, however, hanging is much the same to the person 

hung.



Within a year after her marriage, the Queen had given birth to a 

son, who was called Prince Arthur, in remembrance of the old 

British prince of romance and story; and who, when all these events 

had happened, being then in his fifteenth year, was married to 

CATHERINE, the daughter of the Spanish monarch, with great 

rejoicings and bright prospects; but in a very few months he 

sickened and died.  As soon as the King had recovered from his 

grief, he thought it a pity that the fortune of the Spanish 

Princess, amounting to two hundred thousand crowns, should go out 

of the family; and therefore arranged that the young widow should 

marry his second son HENRY, then twelve years of age, when he too 

should be fifteen.  There were objections to this marriage on the 

part of the clergy; but, as the infallible Pope was gained over, 

and, as he MUST be right, that settled the business for the time.  

The King's eldest daughter was provided for, and a long course of 

disturbance was considered to be set at rest, by her being married 

to the Scottish King.



And now the Queen died.  When the King had got over that grief too, 

his mind once more reverted to his darling money for consolation, 

and he thought of marrying the Dowager Queen of Naples, who was 

immensely rich:  but, as it turned out not to be practicable to 

gain the money however practicable it might have been to gain the 

lady, he gave up the idea.  He was not so fond of her but that he 

soon proposed to marry the Dowager Duchess of Savoy; and, soon 

afterwards, the widow of the King of Castile, who was raving mad.  

But he made a money-bargain instead, and married neither.



The Duchess of Burgundy, among the other discontented people to 

whom she had given refuge, had sheltered EDMUND DE LA POLE (younger 

brother of that Earl of Lincoln who was killed at Stoke), now Earl 

of Suffolk.  The King had prevailed upon him to return to the 

marriage of Prince Arthur; but, he soon afterwards went away again; 

and then the King, suspecting a conspiracy, resorted to his 

favourite plan of sending him some treacherous friends, and buying 

of those scoundrels the secrets they disclosed or invented.  Some 

arrests and executions took place in consequence.  In the end, the 

King, on a promise of not taking his life, obtained possession of 

the person of Edmund de la Pole, and shut him up in the Tower.



This was his last enemy.  If he had lived much longer he would have 

made many more among the people, by the grinding exaction to which 

he constantly exposed them, and by the tyrannical acts of his two 

prime favourites in all money-raising matters, EDMUND DUDLEY and 

RICHARD EMPSON.  But Death - the enemy who is not to be bought off 

or deceived, and on whom no money, and no treachery has any effect 

- presented himself at this juncture, and ended the King's reign.  

He died of the gout, on the twenty-second of April, one thousand 

five hundred and nine, and in the fifty-third year of his age, 

after reigning twenty-four years; he was buried in the beautiful 

Chapel of Westminster Abbey, which he had himself founded, and 

which still bears his name.



It was in this reign that the great CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS, on behalf 

of Spain, discovered what was then called The New World.  Great 

wonder, interest, and hope of wealth being awakened in England 

thereby, the King and the merchants of London and Bristol fitted 

out an English expedition for further discoveries in the New World, 

and entrusted it to SEBASTIAN CABOT, of Bristol, the son of a 

Venetian pilot there.  He was very successful in his voyage, and 

gained high reputation, both for himself and England.

