





CHAPTER XXXIII - ENGLAND UNDER CHARLES THE FIRST







BABY CHARLES became KING CHARLES THE FIRST, in the twenty-fifth 

year of his age.  Unlike his father, he was usually amiable in his 

private character, and grave and dignified in his bearing; but, 

like his father, he had monstrously exaggerated notions of the 

rights of a king, and was evasive, and not to be trusted.  If his 

word could have been relied upon, his history might have had a 

different end.



His first care was to send over that insolent upstart, Buckingham, 

to bring Henrietta Maria from Paris to be his Queen; upon which 

occasion Buckingham - with his usual audacity - made love to the 

young Queen of Austria, and was very indignant indeed with CARDINAL 

RICHELIEU, the French Minister, for thwarting his intentions.  The 

English people were very well disposed to like their new Queen, and 

to receive her with great favour when she came among them as a 

stranger.  But, she held the Protestant religion in great dislike, 

and brought over a crowd of unpleasant priests, who made her do 

some very ridiculous things, and forced themselves upon the public 

notice in many disagreeable ways.  Hence, the people soon came to 

dislike her, and she soon came to dislike them; and she did so much 

all through this reign in setting the King (who was dotingly fond 

of her) against his subjects, that it would have been better for 

him if she had never been born.



Now, you are to understand that King Charles the First - of his own 

determination to be a high and mighty King not to be called to 

account by anybody, and urged on by his Queen besides - 

deliberately set himself to put his Parliament down and to put 

himself up. You are also to understand, that even in pursuit of 

this wrong idea (enough in itself to have ruined any king) he never 

took a straight course, but always took a crooked one.



He was bent upon war with Spain, though neither the House of 

Commons nor the people were quite clear as to the justice of that 

war, now that they began to think a little more about the story of 

the Spanish match.  But the King rushed into it hotly, raised money 

by illegal means to meet its expenses, and encountered a miserable 

failure at Cadiz, in the very first year of his reign.  An 

expedition to Cadiz had been made in the hope of plunder, but as it 

was not successful, it was necessary to get a grant of money from 

the Parliament; and when they met, in no very complying humour, 

the, King told them, 'to make haste to let him have it, or it would 

be the worse for themselves.'  Not put in a more complying humour 

by this, they impeached the King's favourite, the Duke of 

Buckingham, as the cause (which he undoubtedly was) of many great 

public grievances and wrongs.  The King, to save him, dissolved the 

Parliament without getting the money he wanted; and when the Lords 

implored him to consider and grant a little delay, he replied, 'No, 

not one minute.'  He then began to raise money for himself by the 

following means among others.



He levied certain duties called tonnage and poundage which had not 

been granted by the Parliament, and could lawfully be levied by no 

other power; he called upon the seaport towns to furnish, and to 

pay all the cost for three months of, a fleet of armed ships; and 

he required the people to unite in lending him large sums of money, 

the repayment of which was very doubtful.  If the poor people 

refused, they were pressed as soldiers or sailors; if the gentry 

refused, they were sent to prison.  Five gentlemen, named SIR 

THOMAS DARNEL, JOHN CORBET, WALTER EARL, JOHN HEVENINGHAM, and 

EVERARD HAMPDEN, for refusing were taken up by a warrant of the 

King's privy council, and were sent to prison without any cause but 

the King's pleasure being stated for their imprisonment.  Then the 

question came to be solemnly tried, whether this was not a 

violation of Magna Charta, and an encroachment by the King on the 

highest rights of the English people.  His lawyers contended No, 

because to encroach upon the rights of the English people would be 

to do wrong, and the King could do no wrong.  The accommodating 

judges decided in favour of this wicked nonsense; and here was a 

fatal division between the King and the people.



For all this, it became necessary to call another Parliament.  The 

people, sensible of the danger in which their liberties were, chose 

for it those who were best known for their determined opposition to 

the King; but still the King, quite blinded by his determination to 

carry everything before him, addressed them when they met, in a 

contemptuous manner, and just told them in so many words that he 

had only called them together because he wanted money.  The 

Parliament, strong enough and resolute enough to know that they 

would lower his tone, cared little for what he said, and laid 

before him one of the great documents of history, which is called 

the PETITION OF RIGHT, requiring that the free men of England 

should no longer be called upon to lend the King money, and should 

no longer be pressed or imprisoned for refusing to do so; further, 

that the free men of England should no longer be seized by the 

King's special mandate or warrant, it being contrary to their 

rights and liberties and the laws of their country.  At first the 

King returned an answer to this petition, in which he tried to 

shirk it altogether; but, the House of Commons then showing their 

determination to go on with the impeachment of Buckingham, the King 

in alarm returned an answer, giving his consent to all that was 

required of him.  He not only afterwards departed from his word and 

honour on these points, over and over again, but, at this very 

time, he did the mean and dissembling act of publishing his first 

answer and not his second - merely that the people might suppose 

that the Parliament had not got the better of him.



That pestilent Buckingham, to gratify his own wounded vanity, had 

by this time involved the country in war with France, as well as 

with Spain.  For such miserable causes and such miserable creatures 

are wars sometimes made!  But he was destined to do little more 

mischief in this world.  One morning, as he was going out of his 

house to his carriage, he turned to speak to a certain Colonel 

FRYER who was with him; and he was violently stabbed with a knife, 

which the murderer left sticking in his heart.  This happened in 

his hall.  He had had angry words up-stairs, just before, with some 

French gentlemen, who were immediately suspected by his servants, 

and had a close escape from being set upon and killed.  In the 

midst of the noise, the real murderer, who had gone to the kitchen 

and might easily have got away, drew his sword and cried out, 'I am 

the man!'  His name was JOHN FELTON, a Protestant and a retired 

officer in the army.  He said he had had no personal ill-will to 

the Duke, but had killed him as a curse to the country.  He had 

aimed his blow well, for Buckingham had only had time to cry out, 

'Villain!' and then he drew out the knife, fell against a table, 

and died.



The council made a mighty business of examining John Felton about 

this murder, though it was a plain case enough, one would think.  

He had come seventy miles to do it, he told them, and he did it for 

the reason he had declared; if they put him upon the rack, as that 

noble MARQUIS OF DORSET whom he saw before him, had the goodness to 

threaten, he gave that marquis warning, that he would accuse HIM as 

his accomplice!  The King was unpleasantly anxious to have him 

racked, nevertheless; but as the judges now found out that torture 

was contrary to the law of England - it is a pity they did not make 

the discovery a little sooner - John Felton was simply executed for 

the murder he had done.  A murder it undoubtedly was, and not in 

the least to be defended:  though he had freed England from one of 

the most profligate, contemptible, and base court favourites to 

whom it has ever yielded.



A very different man now arose.  This was SIR THOMAS WENTWORTH, a 

Yorkshire gentleman, who had sat in Parliament for a long time, and 

who had favoured arbitrary and haughty principles, but who had gone 

over to the people's side on receiving offence from Buckingham.  

The King, much wanting such a man - for, besides being naturally 

favourable to the King's cause, he had great abilities - made him 

first a Baron, and then a Viscount, and gave him high employment, 

and won him most completely.



A Parliament, however, was still in existence, and was NOT to be 

won.  On the twentieth of January, one thousand six hundred and 

twenty-nine, SIR JOHN ELIOT, a great man who had been active in the 

Petition of Right, brought forward other strong resolutions against 

the King's chief instruments, and called upon the Speaker to put 

them to the vote.  To this the Speaker answered, 'he was commanded 

otherwise by the King,' and got up to leave the chair - which, 

according to the rules of the House of Commons would have obliged 

it to adjourn without doing anything more - when two members, named 

Mr. HOLLIS and Mr. VALENTINE, held him down.  A scene of great 

confusion arose among the members; and while many swords were drawn 

and flashing about, the King, who was kept informed of all that was 

going on, told the captain of his guard to go down to the House and 

force the doors.  The resolutions were by that time, however, 

voted, and the House adjourned.  Sir John Eliot and those two 

members who had held the Speaker down, were quickly summoned before 

the council.  As they claimed it to be their privilege not to 

answer out of Parliament for anything they had said in it, they 

were committed to the Tower.  The King then went down and dissolved 

the Parliament, in a speech wherein he made mention of these 

gentlemen as 'Vipers' - which did not do him much good that ever I 

have heard of.



As they refused to gain their liberty by saying they were sorry for 

what they had done, the King, always remarkably unforgiving, never 

overlooked their offence.  When they demanded to be brought up 

before the court of King's Bench, he even resorted to the meanness 

of having them moved about from prison to prison, so that the writs 

issued for that purpose should not legally find them.  At last they 

came before the court and were sentenced to heavy fines, and to be 

imprisoned during the King's pleasure.  When Sir John Eliot's 

health had quite given way, and he so longed for change of air and 

scene as to petition for his release, the King sent back the answer 

(worthy of his Sowship himself) that the petition was not humble 

enough.  When he sent another petition by his young son, in which 

he pathetically offered to go back to prison when his health was 

restored, if he might be released for its recovery, the King still 

disregarded it.  When he died in the Tower, and his children 

petitioned to be allowed to take his body down to Cornwall, there 

to lay it among the ashes of his forefathers, the King returned for 

answer, 'Let Sir John Eliot's body be buried in the church of that 

parish where he died.'  All this was like a very little King 

indeed, I think.



And now, for twelve long years, steadily pursuing his design of 

setting himself up and putting the people down, the King called no 

Parliament; but ruled without one.  If twelve thousand volumes were 

written in his praise (as a good many have been) it would still 

remain a fact, impossible to be denied, that for twelve years King 

Charles the First reigned in England unlawfully and despotically, 

seized upon his subjects' goods and money at his pleasure, and 

punished according to his unbridled will all who ventured to oppose 

him.  It is a fashion with some people to think that this King's 

career was cut short; but I must say myself that I think he ran a 

pretty long one.



WILLIAM LAUD, Archbishop of Canterbury, was the King's right-hand 

man in the religious part of the putting down of the people's 

liberties.  Laud, who was a sincere man, of large learning but 

small sense - for the two things sometimes go together in very 

different quantities - though a Protestant, held opinions so near 

those of the Catholics, that the Pope wanted to make a Cardinal of 

him, if he would have accepted that favour.  He looked upon vows, 

robes, lighted candles, images, and so forth, as amazingly 

important in religious ceremonies; and he brought in an immensity 

of bowing and candle-snuffing.  He also regarded archbishops and 

bishops as a sort of miraculous persons, and was inveterate in the 

last degree against any who thought otherwise.  Accordingly, he 

offered up thanks to Heaven, and was in a state of much pious 

pleasure, when a Scotch clergyman, named LEIGHTON, was pilloried, 

whipped, branded in the cheek, and had one of his ears cut off and 

one of his nostrils slit, for calling bishops trumpery and the 

inventions of men.  He originated on a Sunday morning the 

prosecution of WILLIAM PRYNNE, a barrister who was of similar 

opinions, and who was fined a thousand pounds; who was pilloried; 

who had his ears cut off on two occasions - one ear at a time - and 

who was imprisoned for life.  He highly approved of the punishment 

of DOCTOR BASTWICK, a physician; who was also fined a thousand 

pounds; and who afterwards had HIS ears cut off, and was imprisoned 

for life.  These were gentle methods of persuasion, some will tell 

you:  I think, they were rather calculated to be alarming to the 

people.



In the money part of the putting down of the people's liberties, 

the King was equally gentle, as some will tell you:  as I think, 

equally alarming.  He levied those duties of tonnage and poundage, 

and increased them as he thought fit.  He granted monopolies to 

companies of merchants on their paying him for them, 

notwithstanding the great complaints that had, for years and years, 

been made on the subject of monopolies.  He fined the people for 

disobeying proclamations issued by his Sowship in direct violation 

of law.  He revived the detested Forest laws, and took private 

property to himself as his forest right.  Above all, he determined 

to have what was called Ship Money; that is to say, money for the 

support of the fleet - not only from the seaports, but from all the 

counties of England:  having found out that, in some ancient time 

or other, all the counties paid it.  The grievance of this ship 

money being somewhat too strong, JOHN CHAMBERS, a citizen of 

London, refused to pay his part of it.  For this the Lord Mayor 

ordered John Chambers to prison, and for that John Chambers brought 

a suit against the Lord Mayor.  LORD SAY, also, behaved like a real 

nobleman, and declared he would not pay.  But, the sturdiest and 

best opponent of the ship money was JOHN HAMPDEN, a gentleman of 

Buckinghamshire, who had sat among the 'vipers' in the House of 

Commons when there was such a thing, and who had been the bosom 

friend of Sir John Eliot.  This case was tried before the twelve 

judges in the Court of Exchequer, and again the King's lawyers said 

it was impossible that ship money could be wrong, because the King 

could do no wrong, however hard he tried - and he really did try 

very hard during these twelve years.  Seven of the judges said that 

was quite true, and Mr. Hampden was bound to pay:  five of the 

judges said that was quite false, and Mr. Hampden was not bound to 

pay.  So, the King triumphed (as he thought), by making Hampden the 

most popular man in England; where matters were getting to that 

height now, that many honest Englishmen could not endure their 

country, and sailed away across the seas to found a colony in 

Massachusetts Bay in America.  It is said that Hampden himself and 

his relation OLIVER CROMWELL were going with a company of such 

voyagers, and were actually on board ship, when they were stopped 

by a proclamation, prohibiting sea captains to carry out such 

passengers without the royal license.  But O! it would have been 

well for the King if he had let them go!  This was the state of 

England.  If Laud had been a madman just broke loose, he could not 

have done more mischief than he did in Scotland.  In his endeavours 

(in which he was seconded by the King, then in person in that part 

of his dominions) to force his own ideas of bishops, and his own 

religious forms and ceremonies upon the Scotch, he roused that 

nation to a perfect frenzy.  They formed a solemn league, which 

they called The Covenant, for the preservation of their own 

religious forms; they rose in arms throughout the whole country; 

they summoned all their men to prayers and sermons twice a day by 

beat of drum; they sang psalms, in which they compared their 

enemies to all the evil spirits that ever were heard of; and they 

solemnly vowed to smite them with the sword.  At first the King 

tried force, then treaty, then a Scottish Parliament which did not 

answer at all.  Then he tried the EARL OF STRAFFORD, formerly Sir 

Thomas Wentworth; who, as LORD WENTWORTH, had been governing 

Ireland.  He, too, had carried it with a very high hand there, 

though to the benefit and prosperity of that country.



Strafford and Laud were for conquering the Scottish people by force 

of arms.  Other lords who were taken into council, recommended that 

a Parliament should at last be called; to which the King 

unwillingly consented.  So, on the thirteenth of April, one 

thousand six hundred and forty, that then strange sight, a 

Parliament, was seen at Westminster.  It is called the Short 

Parliament, for it lasted a very little while.  While the members 

were all looking at one another, doubtful who would dare to speak, 

MR. PYM arose and set forth all that the King had done unlawfully 

during the past twelve years, and what was the position to which 

England was reduced.  This great example set, other members took 

courage and spoke the truth freely, though with great patience and 

moderation.  The King, a little frightened, sent to say that if 

they would grant him a certain sum on certain terms, no more ship 

money should be raised.  They debated the matter for two days; and 

then, as they would not give him all he asked without promise or 

inquiry, he dissolved them.



But they knew very well that he must have a Parliament now; and he 

began to make that discovery too, though rather late in the day.  

Wherefore, on the twenty-fourth of September, being then at York 

with an army collected against the Scottish people, but his own men 

sullen and discontented like the rest of the nation, the King told 

the great council of the Lords, whom he had called to meet him 

there, that he would summon another Parliament to assemble on the 

third of November.  The soldiers of the Covenant had now forced 

their way into England and had taken possession of the northern 

counties, where the coals are got.  As it would never do to be 

without coals, and as the King's troops could make no head against 

the Covenanters so full of gloomy zeal, a truce was made, and a 

treaty with Scotland was taken into consideration.  Meanwhile the 

northern counties paid the Covenanters to leave the coals alone, 

and keep quiet.



We have now disposed of the Short Parliament.  We have next to see 

what memorable things were done by the Long one.





SECOND PART





THE Long Parliament assembled on the third of November, one 

thousand six hundred and forty-one.  That day week the Earl of 

Strafford arrived from York, very sensible that the spirited and 

determined men who formed that Parliament were no friends towards 

him, who had not only deserted the cause of the people, but who had 

on all occasions opposed himself to their liberties.  The King told 

him, for his comfort, that the Parliament 'should not hurt one hair 

of his head.'  But, on the very next day Mr. Pym, in the House of 

Commons, and with great solemnity, impeached the Earl of Strafford 

as a traitor.  He was immediately taken into custody and fell from 

his proud height.



It was the twenty-second of March before he was brought to trial in 

Westminster Hall; where, although he was very ill and suffered 

great pain, he defended himself with such ability and majesty, that 

it was doubtful whether he would not get the best of it.  But on 

the thirteenth day of the trial, Pym produced in the House of 

Commons a copy of some notes of a council, found by young SIR HARRY 

VANE in a red velvet cabinet belonging to his father (Secretary 

Vane, who sat at the council-table with the Earl), in which 

Strafford had distinctly told the King that he was free from all 

rules and obligations of government, and might do with his people 

whatever he liked; and in which he had added - 'You have an army in 

Ireland that you may employ to reduce this kingdom to obedience.'  

It was not clear whether by the words 'this kingdom,' he had really 

meant England or Scotland; but the Parliament contended that he 

meant England, and this was treason.  At the same sitting of the 

House of Commons it was resolved to bring in a bill of attainder 

declaring the treason to have been committed:  in preference to 

proceeding with the trial by impeachment, which would have required 

the treason to be proved.



So, a bill was brought in at once, was carried through the House of 

Commons by a large majority, and was sent up to the House of Lords.  

While it was still uncertain whether the House of Lords would pass 

it and the King consent to it, Pym disclosed to the House of 

Commons that the King and Queen had both been plotting with the 

officers of the army to bring up the soldiers and control the 

Parliament, and also to introduce two hundred soldiers into the 

Tower of London to effect the Earl's escape.  The plotting with the 

army was revealed by one GEORGE GORING, the son of a lord of that 

name:  a bad fellow who was one of the original plotters, and 

turned traitor.  The King had actually given his warrant for the 

admission of the two hundred men into the Tower, and they would 

have got in too, but for the refusal of the governor - a sturdy 

Scotchman of the name of BALFOUR - to admit them.  These matters 

being made public, great numbers of people began to riot outside 

the Houses of Parliament, and to cry out for the execution of the 

Earl of Strafford, as one of the King's chief instruments against 

them.  The bill passed the House of Lords while the people were in 

this state of agitation, and was laid before the King for his 

assent, together with another bill declaring that the Parliament 

then assembled should not be dissolved or adjourned without their 

own consent.  The King - not unwilling to save a faithful servant, 

though he had no great attachment for him - was in some doubt what 

to do; but he gave his consent to both bills, although he in his 

heart believed that the bill against the Earl of Strafford was 

unlawful and unjust.  The Earl had written to him, telling him that 

he was willing to die for his sake.  But he had not expected that 

his royal master would take him at his word quite so readily; for, 

when he heard his doom, he laid his hand upon his heart, and said, 

'Put not your trust in Princes!'



The King, who never could be straightforward and plain, through one 

single day or through one single sheet of paper, wrote a letter to 

the Lords, and sent it by the young Prince of Wales, entreating 

them to prevail with the Commons that 'that unfortunate man should 

fulfil the natural course of his life in a close imprisonment.'  In 

a postscript to the very same letter, he added, 'If he must die, it 

were charity to reprieve him till Saturday.'  If there had been any 

doubt of his fate, this weakness and meanness would have settled 

it.  The very next day, which was the twelfth of May, he was 

brought out to be beheaded on Tower Hill.



Archbishop Laud, who had been so fond of having people's ears 

cropped off and their noses slit, was now confined in the Tower 

too; and when the Earl went by his window to his death, he was 

there, at his request, to give him his blessing.  They had been 

great friends in the King's cause, and the Earl had written to him 

in the days of their power that he thought it would be an admirable 

thing to have Mr. Hampden publicly whipped for refusing to pay the 

ship money.  However, those high and mighty doings were over now, 

and the Earl went his way to death with dignity and heroism.  The 

governor wished him to get into a coach at the Tower gate, for fear 

the people should tear him to pieces; but he said it was all one to 

him whether he died by the axe or by the people's hands.  So, he 

walked, with a firm tread and a stately look, and sometimes pulled 

off his hat to them as he passed along.  They were profoundly 

quiet.  He made a speech on the scaffold from some notes he had 

prepared (the paper was found lying there after his head was struck 

off), and one blow of the axe killed him, in the forty-ninth year 

of his age.



This bold and daring act, the Parliament accompanied by other 

famous measures, all originating (as even this did) in the King's 

having so grossly and so long abused his power.  The name of 

DELINQUENTS was applied to all sheriffs and other officers who had 

been concerned in raising the ship money, or any other money, from 

the people, in an unlawful manner; the Hampden judgment was 

reversed; the judges who had decided against Hampden were called 

upon to give large securities that they would take such 

consequences as Parliament might impose upon them; and one was 

arrested as he sat in High Court, and carried off to prison.  Laud 

was impeached; the unfortunate victims whose ears had been cropped 

and whose noses had been slit, were brought out of prison in 

triumph; and a bill was passed declaring that a Parliament should 

be called every third year, and that if the King and the King's 

officers did not call it, the people should assemble of themselves 

and summon it, as of their own right and power.  Great 

illuminations and rejoicings took place over all these things, and 

the country was wildly excited.  That the Parliament took advantage 

of this excitement and stirred them up by every means, there is no 

doubt; but you are always to remember those twelve long years, 

during which the King had tried so hard whether he really could do 

any wrong or not.



All this time there was a great religious outcry against the right 

of the Bishops to sit in Parliament; to which the Scottish people 

particularly objected.  The English were divided on this subject, 

and, partly on this account and partly because they had had foolish 

expectations that the Parliament would be able to take off nearly 

all the taxes, numbers of them sometimes wavered and inclined 

towards the King.



I believe myself, that if, at this or almost any other period of 

his life, the King could have been trusted by any man not out of 

his senses, he might have saved himself and kept his throne.  But, 

on the English army being disbanded, he plotted with the officers 

again, as he had done before, and established the fact beyond all 

doubt by putting his signature of approval to a petition against 

the Parliamentary leaders, which was drawn up by certain officers.  

When the Scottish army was disbanded, he went to Edinburgh in four 

days - which was going very fast at that time - to plot again, and 

so darkly too, that it is difficult to decide what his whole object 

was.  Some suppose that he wanted to gain over the Scottish 

Parliament, as he did in fact gain over, by presents and favours, 

many Scottish lords and men of power.  Some think that he went to 

get proofs against the Parliamentary leaders in England of their 

having treasonably invited the Scottish people to come and help 

them.  With whatever object he went to Scotland, he did little good 

by going.  At the instigation of the EARL OF MONTROSE, a desperate 

man who was then in prison for plotting, he tried to kidnap three 

Scottish lords who escaped.  A committee of the Parliament at home, 

who had followed to watch him, writing an account of this INCIDENT, 

as it was called, to the Parliament, the Parliament made a fresh 

stir about it; were, or feigned to be, much alarmed for themselves; 

and wrote to the EARL OF ESSEX, the commander-in-chief, for a guard 

to protect them.



It is not absolutely proved that the King plotted in Ireland 

besides, but it is very probable that he did, and that the Queen 

did, and that he had some wild hope of gaining the Irish people 

over to his side by favouring a rise among them.  Whether or no, 

they did rise in a most brutal and savage rebellion; in which, 

encouraged by their priests, they committed such atrocities upon 

numbers of the English, of both sexes and of all ages, as nobody 

could believe, but for their being related on oath by eye-

witnesses.  Whether one hundred thousand or two hundred thousand 

Protestants were murdered in this outbreak, is uncertain; but, that 

it was as ruthless and barbarous an outbreak as ever was known 

among any savage people, is certain.



The King came home from Scotland, determined to make a great 

struggle for his lost power.  He believed that, through his 

presents and favours, Scotland would take no part against him; and 

the Lord Mayor of London received him with such a magnificent 

dinner that he thought he must have become popular again in 

England.  It would take a good many Lord Mayors, however, to make a 

people, and the King soon found himself mistaken.



Not so soon, though, but that there was a great opposition in the 

Parliament to a celebrated paper put forth by Pym and Hampden and 

the rest, called 'THE REMONSTRANCE,' which set forth all the 

illegal acts that the King had ever done, but politely laid the 

blame of them on his bad advisers.  Even when it was passed and 

presented to him, the King still thought himself strong enough to 

discharge Balfour from his command in the Tower, and to put in his 

place a man of bad character; to whom the Commons instantly 

objected, and whom he was obliged to abandon.  At this time, the 

old outcry about the Bishops became louder than ever, and the old 

Archbishop of York was so near being murdered as he went down to 

the House of Lords - being laid hold of by the mob and violently 

knocked about, in return for very foolishly scolding a shrill boy 

who was yelping out 'No Bishops!' - that he sent for all the 

Bishops who were in town, and proposed to them to sign a 

declaration that, as they could no longer without danger to their 

lives attend their duty in Parliament, they protested against the 

lawfulness of everything done in their absence.  This they asked 

the King to send to the House of Lords, which he did.  Then the 

House of Commons impeached the whole party of Bishops and sent them 

off to the Tower:



Taking no warning from this; but encouraged by there being a 

moderate party in the Parliament who objected to these strong 

measures, the King, on the third of January, one thousand six 

hundred and forty-two, took the rashest step that ever was taken by 

mortal man.



Of his own accord and without advice, he sent the Attorney-General 

to the House of Lords, to accuse of treason certain members of 

Parliament who as popular leaders were the most obnoxious to him; 

LORD KIMBOLTON, SIR ARTHUR HASELRIG, DENZIL HOLLIS, JOHN PYM (they 

used to call him King Pym, he possessed such power and looked so 

big), JOHN HAMPDEN, and WILLIAM STRODE.  The houses of those 

members he caused to be entered, and their papers to be sealed up.  

At the same time, he sent a messenger to the House of Commons 

demanding to have the five gentlemen who were members of that House 

immediately produced.  To this the House replied that they should 

appear as soon as there was any legal charge against them, and 

immediately adjourned.



Next day, the House of Commons send into the City to let the Lord 

Mayor know that their privileges are invaded by the King, and that 

there is no safety for anybody or anything.  Then, when the five 

members are gone out of the way, down comes the King himself, with 

all his guard and from two to three hundred gentlemen and soldiers, 

of whom the greater part were armed.  These he leaves in the hall; 

and then, with his nephew at his side, goes into the House, takes 

off his hat, and walks up to the Speaker's chair.  The Speaker 

leaves it, the King stands in front of it, looks about him steadily 

for a little while, and says he has come for those five members.  

No one speaks, and then he calls John Pym by name.  No one speaks, 

and then he calls Denzil Hollis by name.  No one speaks, and then 

he asks the Speaker of the House where those five members are?  The 

Speaker, answering on his knee, nobly replies that he is the 

servant of that House, and that he has neither eyes to see, nor 

tongue to speak, anything but what the House commands him.  Upon 

this, the King, beaten from that time evermore, replies that he 

will seek them himself, for they have committed treason; and goes 

out, with his hat in his hand, amid some audible murmurs from the 

members.



No words can describe the hurry that arose out of doors when all 

this was known.  The five members had gone for safety to a house in 

Coleman-street, in the City, where they were guarded all night; and 

indeed the whole city watched in arms like an army.  At ten o'clock 

in the morning, the King, already frightened at what he had done, 

came to the Guildhall, with only half a dozen lords, and made a 

speech to the people, hoping they would not shelter those whom he 

accused of treason.  Next day, he issued a proclamation for the 

apprehension of the five members; but the Parliament minded it so 

little that they made great arrangements for having them brought 

down to Westminster in great state, five days afterwards.  The King 

was so alarmed now at his own imprudence, if not for his own 

safety, that he left his palace at Whitehall, and went away with 

his Queen and children to Hampton Court.



It was the eleventh of May, when the five members were carried in 

state and triumph to Westminster.  They were taken by water.  The 

river could not be seen for the boats on it; and the five members 

were hemmed in by barges full of men and great guns, ready to 

protect them, at any cost.  Along the Strand a large body of the 

train-bands of London, under their commander, SKIPPON, marched to 

be ready to assist the little fleet.  Beyond them, came a crowd who 

choked the streets, roaring incessantly about the Bishops and the 

Papists, and crying out contemptuously as they passed Whitehall, 

'What has become of the King?'  With this great noise outside the 

House of Commons, and with great silence within, Mr. Pym rose and 

informed the House of the great kindness with which they had been 

received in the City.  Upon that, the House called the sheriffs in 

and thanked them, and requested the train-bands, under their 

commander Skippon, to guard the House of Commons every day.  Then, 

came four thousand men on horseback out of Buckinghamshire, 

offering their services as a guard too, and bearing a petition to 

the King, complaining of the injury that had been done to Mr. 

Hampden, who was their county man and much beloved and honoured.



When the King set off for Hampton Court, the gentlemen and soldiers 

who had been with him followed him out of town as far as Kingston-

upon-Thames; next day, Lord Digby came to them from the King at 

Hampton Court, in his coach and six, to inform them that the King 

accepted their protection.  This, the Parliament said, was making 

war against the kingdom, and Lord Digby fled abroad.  The 

Parliament then immediately applied themselves to getting hold of 

the military power of the country, well knowing that the King was 

already trying hard to use it against them, and that he had 

secretly sent the Earl of Newcastle to Hull, to secure a valuable 

magazine of arms and gunpowder that was there.  In those times, 

every county had its own magazines of arms and powder, for its own 

train-bands or militia; so, the Parliament brought in a bill 

claiming the right (which up to this time had belonged to the King) 

of appointing the Lord Lieutenants of counties, who commanded these 

train-bands; also, of having all the forts, castles, and garrisons 

in the kingdom, put into the hands of such governors as they, the 

Parliament, could confide in.  It also passed a law depriving the 

Bishops of their votes.  The King gave his assent to that bill, but 

would not abandon the right of appointing the Lord Lieutenants, 

though he said he was willing to appoint such as might be suggested 

to him by the Parliament.  When the Earl of Pembroke asked him 

whether he would not give way on that question for a time, he said, 

'By God! not for one hour!' and upon this he and the Parliament 

went to war.



His young daughter was betrothed to the Prince of Orange.  On 

pretence of taking her to the country of her future husband, the 

Queen was already got safely away to Holland, there to pawn the 

Crown jewels for money to raise an army on the King's side.  The 

Lord Admiral being sick, the House of Commons now named the Earl of 

Warwick to hold his place for a year.  The King named another 

gentleman; the House of Commons took its own way, and the Earl of 

Warwick became Lord Admiral without the King's consent.  The 

Parliament sent orders down to Hull to have that magazine removed 

to London; the King went down to Hull to take it himself.  The 

citizens would not admit him into the town, and the governor would 

not admit him into the castle.  The Parliament resolved that 

whatever the two Houses passed, and the King would not consent to, 

should be called an ORDINANCE, and should be as much a law as if he 

did consent to it.  The King protested against this, and gave 

notice that these ordinances were not to be obeyed.  The King, 

attended by the majority of the House of Peers, and by many members 

of the House of Commons, established himself at York.  The 

Chancellor went to him with the Great Seal, and the Parliament made 

a new Great Seal.  The Queen sent over a ship full of arms and 

ammunition, and the King issued letters to borrow money at high 

interest.  The Parliament raised twenty regiments of foot and 

seventy-five troops of horse; and the people willingly aided them 

with their money, plate, jewellery, and trinkets - the married 

women even with their wedding-rings.  Every member of Parliament 

who could raise a troop or a regiment in his own part of the 

country, dressed it according to his taste and in his own colours, 

and commanded it.  Foremost among them all, OLIVER CROMWELL raised 

a troop of horse - thoroughly in earnest and thoroughly well armed 

- who were, perhaps, the best soldiers that ever were seen.



In some of their proceedings, this famous Parliament passed the 

bounds of previous law and custom, yielded to and favoured riotous 

assemblages of the people, and acted tyrannically in imprisoning 

some who differed from the popular leaders.  But again, you are 

always to remember that the twelve years during which the King had 

had his own wilful way, had gone before; and that nothing could 

make the times what they might, could, would, or should have been, 

if those twelve years had never rolled away.





THIRD PART





I SHALL not try to relate the particulars of the great civil war 

between King Charles the First and the Long Parliament, which 

lasted nearly four years, and a full account of which would fill 

many large books.  It was a sad thing that Englishmen should once 

more be fighting against Englishmen on English ground; but, it is 

some consolation to know that on both sides there was great 

humanity, forbearance, and honour.  The soldiers of the Parliament 

were far more remarkable for these good qualities than the soldiers 

of the King (many of whom fought for mere pay without much caring 

for the cause); but those of the nobility and gentry who were on 

the King's side were so brave, and so faithful to him, that their 

conduct cannot but command our highest admiration.  Among them were 

great numbers of Catholics, who took the royal side because the 

Queen was so strongly of their persuasion.



The King might have distinguished some of these gallant spirits, if 

he had been as generous a spirit himself, by giving them the 

command of his army.  Instead of that, however, true to his old 

high notions of royalty, he entrusted it to his two nephews, PRINCE 

RUPERT and PRINCE MAURICE, who were of royal blood and came over 

from abroad to help him.  It might have been better for him if they 

had stayed away; since Prince Rupert was an impetuous, hot-headed 

fellow, whose only idea was to dash into battle at all times and 

seasons, and lay about him.



The general-in-chief of the Parliamentary army was the Earl of 

Essex, a gentleman of honour and an excellent soldier.  A little 

while before the war broke out, there had been some rioting at 

Westminster between certain officious law students and noisy 

soldiers, and the shopkeepers and their apprentices, and the 

general people in the streets.  At that time the King's friends 

called the crowd, Roundheads, because the apprentices wore short 

hair; the crowd, in return, called their opponents Cavaliers, 

meaning that they were a blustering set, who pretended to be very 

military.  These two words now began to be used to distinguish the 

two sides in the civil war.  The Royalists also called the 

Parliamentary men Rebels and Rogues, while the Parliamentary men 

called THEM Malignants, and spoke of themselves as the Godly, the 

Honest, and so forth.



The war broke out at Portsmouth, where that double traitor Goring 

had again gone over to the King and was besieged by the 

Parliamentary troops.  Upon this, the King proclaimed the Earl of 

Essex and the officers serving under him, traitors, and called upon 

his loyal subjects to meet him in arms at Nottingham on the twenty-

fifth of August.  But his loyal subjects came about him in scanty 

numbers, and it was a windy, gloomy day, and the Royal Standard got 

blown down, and the whole affair was very melancholy.  The chief 

engagements after this, took place in the vale of the Red Horse 

near Banbury, at Brentford, at Devizes, at Chalgrave Field (where 

Mr. Hampden was so sorely wounded while fighting at the head of his 

men, that he died within a week), at Newbury (in which battle LORD 

FALKLAND, one of the best noblemen on the King's side, was killed), 

at Leicester, at Naseby, at Winchester, at Marston Moor near York, 

at Newcastle, and in many other parts of England and Scotland.  

These battles were attended with various successes.  At one time, 

the King was victorious; at another time, the Parliament.  But 

almost all the great and busy towns were against the King; and when 

it was considered necessary to fortify London, all ranks of people, 

from labouring men and women, up to lords and ladies, worked hard 

together with heartiness and good will.  The most distinguished 

leaders on the Parliamentary side were HAMPDEN, SIR THOMAS FAIRFAX, 

and, above all, OLIVER CROMWELL, and his son-in-law IRETON.



During the whole of this war, the people, to whom it was very 

expensive and irksome, and to whom it was made the more distressing 

by almost every family being divided - some of its members 

attaching themselves to one side and some to the other - were over 

and over again most anxious for peace.  So were some of the best 

men in each cause.  Accordingly, treaties of peace were discussed 

between commissioners from the Parliament and the King; at York, at 

Oxford (where the King held a little Parliament of his own), and at 

Uxbridge.  But they came to nothing.  In all these negotiations, 

and in all his difficulties, the King showed himself at his best.  

He was courageous, cool, self-possessed, and clever; but, the old 

taint of his character was always in him, and he was never for one 

single moment to be trusted.  Lord Clarendon, the historian, one of 

his highest admirers, supposes that he had unhappily promised the 

Queen never to make peace without her consent, and that this must 

often be taken as his excuse.  He never kept his word from night to 

morning.  He signed a cessation of hostilities with the blood-

stained Irish rebels for a sum of money, and invited the Irish 

regiments over, to help him against the Parliament.  In the battle 

of Naseby, his cabinet was seized and was found to contain a 

correspondence with the Queen, in which he expressly told her that 

he had deceived the Parliament - a mongrel Parliament, he called it 

now, as an improvement on his old term of vipers - in pretending to 

recognise it and to treat with it; and from which it further 

appeared that he had long been in secret treaty with the Duke of 

Lorraine for a foreign army of ten thousand men.  Disappointed in 

this, he sent a most devoted friend of his, the EARL OF GLAMORGAN, 

to Ireland, to conclude a secret treaty with the Catholic powers, 

to send him an Irish army of ten thousand men; in return for which 

he was to bestow great favours on the Catholic religion.  And, when 

this treaty was discovered in the carriage of a fighting Irish 

Archbishop who was killed in one of the many skirmishes of those 

days, he basely denied and deserted his attached friend, the Earl, 

on his being charged with high treason; and - even worse than this 

- had left blanks in the secret instructions he gave him with his 

own kingly hand, expressly that he might thus save himself.



At last, on the twenty-seventh day of April, one thousand six 

hundred and forty-six, the King found himself in the city of 

Oxford, so surrounded by the Parliamentary army who were closing in 

upon him on all sides that he felt that if he would escape he must 

delay no longer.  So, that night, having altered the cut of his 

hair and beard, he was dressed up as a servant and put upon a horse 

with a cloak strapped behind him, and rode out of the town behind 

one of his own faithful followers, with a clergyman of that country 

who knew the road well, for a guide.  He rode towards London as far 

as Harrow, and then altered his plans and resolved, it would seem, 

to go to the Scottish camp.  The Scottish men had been invited over 

to help the Parliamentary army, and had a large force then in 

England.  The King was so desperately intriguing in everything he 

did, that it is doubtful what he exactly meant by this step.  He 

took it, anyhow, and delivered himself up to the EARL OF LEVEN, the 

Scottish general-in-chief, who treated him as an honourable 

prisoner.  Negotiations between the Parliament on the one hand and 

the Scottish authorities on the other, as to what should be done 

with him, lasted until the following February.  Then, when the King 

had refused to the Parliament the concession of that old militia 

point for twenty years, and had refused to Scotland the recognition 

of its Solemn League and Covenant, Scotland got a handsome sum for 

its army and its help, and the King into the bargain.  He was 

taken, by certain Parliamentary commissioners appointed to receive 

him, to one of his own houses, called Holmby House, near Althorpe, 

in Northamptonshire.



While the Civil War was still in progress, John Pym died, and was 

buried with great honour in Westminster Abbey - not with greater 

honour than he deserved, for the liberties of Englishmen owe a 

mighty debt to Pym and Hampden.  The war was but newly over when 

the Earl of Essex died, of an illness brought on by his having 

overheated himself in a stag hunt in Windsor Forest.  He, too, was 

buried in Westminster Abbey, with great state.  I wish it were not 

necessary to add that Archbishop Laud died upon the scaffold when 

the war was not yet done.  His trial lasted in all nearly a year, 

and, it being doubtful even then whether the charges brought 

against him amounted to treason, the odious old contrivance of the 

worst kings was resorted to, and a bill of attainder was brought in 

against him.  He was a violently prejudiced and mischievous person; 

had had strong ear-cropping and nose-splitting propensities, as you 

know; and had done a world of harm.  But he died peaceably, and 

like a brave old man.





FOURTH PART





WHEN the Parliament had got the King into their hands, they became 

very anxious to get rid of their army, in which Oliver Cromwell had 

begun to acquire great power; not only because of his courage and 

high abilities, but because he professed to be very sincere in the 

Scottish sort of Puritan religion that was then exceedingly popular 

among the soldiers.  They were as much opposed to the Bishops as to 

the Pope himself; and the very privates, drummers, and trumpeters, 

had such an inconvenient habit of starting up and preaching long-

winded discourses, that I would not have belonged to that army on 

any account.



So, the Parliament, being far from sure but that the army might 

begin to preach and fight against them now it had nothing else to 

do, proposed to disband the greater part of it, to send another 

part to serve in Ireland against the rebels, and to keep only a 

small force in England.  But, the army would not consent to be 

broken up, except upon its own conditions; and, when the Parliament 

showed an intention of compelling it, it acted for itself in an 

unexpected manner.  A certain cornet, of the name of JOICE, arrived 

at Holmby House one night, attended by four hundred horsemen, went 

into the King's room with his hat in one hand and a pistol in the 

other, and told the King that he had come to take him away.  The 

King was willing enough to go, and only stipulated that he should 

be publicly required to do so next morning.  Next morning, 

accordingly, he appeared on the top of the steps of the house, and 

asked Comet Joice before his men and the guard set there by the 

Parliament, what authority he had for taking him away?  To this 

Cornet Joice replied, 'The authority of the army.'  'Have you a 

written commission?' said the King.  Joice, pointing to his four 

hundred men on horseback, replied, 'That is my commission.'  

'Well,' said the King, smiling, as if he were pleased, 'I never 

before read such a commission; but it is written in fair and 

legible characters.  This is a company of as handsome proper 

gentlemen as I have seen a long while.'  He was asked where he 

would like to live, and he said at Newmarket.  So, to Newmarket he 

and Cornet Joice and the four hundred horsemen rode; the King 

remarking, in the same smiling way, that he could ride as far at a 

spell as Cornet Joice, or any man there.



The King quite believed, I think, that the army were his friends.  

He said as much to Fairfax when that general, Oliver Cromwell, and 

Ireton, went to persuade him to return to the custody of the 

Parliament.  He preferred to remain as he was, and resolved to 

remain as he was.  And when the army moved nearer and nearer London 

to frighten the Parliament into yielding to their demands, they 

took the King with them.  It was a deplorable thing that England 

should be at the mercy of a great body of soldiers with arms in 

their hands; but the King certainly favoured them at this important 

time of his life, as compared with the more lawful power that tried 

to control him.  It must be added, however, that they treated him, 

as yet, more respectfully and kindly than the Parliament had done.  

They allowed him to be attended by his own servants, to be 

splendidly entertained at various houses, and to see his children - 

at Cavesham House, near Reading - for two days.  Whereas, the 

Parliament had been rather hard with him, and had only allowed him 

to ride out and play at bowls.



It is much to be believed that if the King could have been trusted, 

even at this time, he might have been saved.  Even Oliver Cromwell 

expressly said that he did believe that no man could enjoy his 

possessions in peace, unless the King had his rights.  He was not 

unfriendly towards the King; he had been present when he received 

his children, and had been much affected by the pitiable nature of 

the scene; he saw the King often; he frequently walked and talked 

with him in the long galleries and pleasant gardens of the Palace 

at Hampton Court, whither he was now removed; and in all this 

risked something of his influence with the army.  But, the King was 

in secret hopes of help from the Scottish people; and the moment he 

was encouraged to join them he began to be cool to his new friends, 

the army, and to tell the officers that they could not possibly do 

without him.  At the very time, too, when he was promising to make 

Cromwell and Ireton noblemen, if they would help him up to his old 

height, he was writing to the Queen that he meant to hang them.  

They both afterwards declared that they had been privately informed 

that such a letter would be found, on a certain evening, sewed up 

in a saddle which would be taken to the Blue Boar in Holborn to be 

sent to Dover; and that they went there, disguised as common 

soldiers, and sat drinking in the inn-yard until a man came with 

the saddle, which they ripped up with their knives, and therein 

found the letter.  I see little reason to doubt the story.  It is 

certain that Oliver Cromwell told one of the King's most faithful 

followers that the King could not be trusted, and that he would not 

be answerable if anything amiss were to happen to him.  Still, even 

after that, he kept a promise he had made to the King, by letting 

him know that there was a plot with a certain portion of the army 

to seize him.  I believe that, in fact, he sincerely wanted the 

King to escape abroad, and so to be got rid of without more trouble 

or danger.  That Oliver himself had work enough with the army is 

pretty plain; for some of the troops were so mutinous against him, 

and against those who acted with him at this time, that he found it 

necessary to have one man shot at the head of his regiment to 

overawe the rest.



The King, when he received Oliver's warning, made his escape from 

Hampton Court; after some indecision and uncertainty, he went to 

Carisbrooke Castle in the Isle of Wight.  At first, he was pretty 

free there; but, even there, he carried on a pretended treaty with 

the Parliament, while he was really treating with commissioners 

from Scotland to send an army into England to take his part.  When 

he broke off this treaty with the Parliament (having settled with 

Scotland) and was treated as a prisoner, his treatment was not 

changed too soon, for he had plotted to escape that very night to a 

ship sent by the Queen, which was lying off the island.



He was doomed to be disappointed in his hopes from Scotland.  The 

agreement he had made with the Scottish Commissioners was not 

favourable enough to the religion of that country to please the 

Scottish clergy; and they preached against it.  The consequence 

was, that the army raised in Scotland and sent over, was too small 

to do much; and that, although it was helped by a rising of the 

Royalists in England and by good soldiers from Ireland, it could 

make no head against the Parliamentary army under such men as 

Cromwell and Fairfax.  The King's eldest son, the Prince of Wales, 

came over from Holland with nineteen ships (a part of the English 

fleet having gone over to him) to help his father; but nothing came 

of his voyage, and he was fain to return.  The most remarkable 

event of this second civil war was the cruel execution by the 

Parliamentary General, of SIR CHARLES LUCAS and SIR GEORGE LISLE, 

two grand Royalist generals, who had bravely defended Colchester 

under every disadvantage of famine and distress for nearly three 

months.  When Sir Charles Lucas was shot, Sir George Lisle kissed 

his body, and said to the soldiers who were to shoot him, 'Come 

nearer, and make sure of me.'  'I warrant you, Sir George,' said 

one of the soldiers, 'we shall hit you.'  'AY?' he returned with a 

smile, 'but I have been nearer to you, my friends, many a time, and 

you have missed me.'



The Parliament, after being fearfully bullied by the army - who 

demanded to have seven members whom they disliked given up to them 

- had voted that they would have nothing more to do with the King.  

On the conclusion, however, of this second civil war (which did not 

last more than six months), they appointed commissioners to treat 

with him.  The King, then so far released again as to be allowed to 

live in a private house at Newport in the Isle of Wight, managed 

his own part of the negotiation with a sense that was admired by 

all who saw him, and gave up, in the end, all that was asked of him 

- even yielding (which he had steadily refused, so far) to the 

temporary abolition of the bishops, and the transfer of their 

church land to the Crown.  Still, with his old fatal vice upon him, 

when his best friends joined the commissioners in beseeching him to 

yield all those points as the only means of saving himself from the 

army, he was plotting to escape from the island; he was holding 

correspondence with his friends and the Catholics in Ireland, 

though declaring that he was not; and he was writing, with his own 

hand, that in what he yielded he meant nothing but to get time to 

escape.



Matters were at this pass when the army, resolved to defy the 

Parliament, marched up to London.  The Parliament, not afraid of 

them now, and boldly led by Hollis, voted that the King's 

concessions were sufficient ground for settling the peace of the 

kingdom.  Upon that, COLONEL RICH and COLONEL PRIDE went down to 

the House of Commons with a regiment of horse soldiers and a 

regiment of foot; and Colonel Pride, standing in the lobby with a 

list of the members who were obnoxious to the army in his hand, had 

them pointed out to him as they came through, and took them all 

into custody.  This proceeding was afterwards called by the people, 

for a joke, PRIDE'S PURGE.  Cromwell was in the North, at the head 

of his men, at the time, but when he came home, approved of what 

had been done.



What with imprisoning some members and causing others to stay away, 

the army had now reduced the House of Commons to some fifty or so.  

These soon voted that it was treason in a king to make war against 

his parliament and his people, and sent an ordinance up to the 

House of Lords for the King's being tried as a traitor.  The House 

of Lords, then sixteen in number, to a man rejected it.  Thereupon, 

the Commons made an ordinance of their own, that they were the 

supreme government of the country, and would bring the King to 

trial.



The King had been taken for security to a place called Hurst 

Castle:  a lonely house on a rock in the sea, connected with the 

coast of Hampshire by a rough road two miles long at low water.  

Thence, he was ordered to be removed to Windsor; thence, after 

being but rudely used there, and having none but soldiers to wait 

upon him at table, he was brought up to St. James's Palace in 

London, and told that his trial was appointed for next day.



On Saturday, the twentieth of January, one thousand six hundred and 

forty-nine, this memorable trial began.  The House of Commons had 

settled that one hundred and thirty-five persons should form the 

Court, and these were taken from the House itself, from among the 

officers of the army, and from among the lawyers and citizens.  

JOHN BRADSHAW, serjeant-at-law, was appointed president.  The place 

was Westminster Hall.  At the upper end, in a red velvet chair, sat 

the president, with his hat (lined with plates of iron for his 

protection) on his head.  The rest of the Court sat on side 

benches, also wearing their hats.  The King's seat was covered with 

velvet, like that of the president, and was opposite to it.  He was 

brought from St. James's to Whitehall, and from Whitehall he came 

by water to his trial.



When he came in, he looked round very steadily on the Court, and on 

the great number of spectators, and then sat down:  presently he 

got up and looked round again.  On the indictment 'against Charles 

Stuart, for high treason,' being read, he smiled several times, and 

he denied the authority of the Court, saying that there could be no 

parliament without a House of Lords, and that he saw no House of 

Lords there.  Also, that the King ought to be there, and that he 

saw no King in the King's right place.  Bradshaw replied, that the 

Court was satisfied with its authority, and that its authority was 

God's authority and the kingdom's.  He then adjourned the Court to 

the following Monday.  On that day, the trial was resumed, and went 

on all the week.  When the Saturday came, as the King passed 

forward to his place in the Hall, some soldiers and others cried 

for 'justice!' and execution on him.  That day, too, Bradshaw, like 

an angry Sultan, wore a red robe, instead of the black robe he had 

worn before.  The King was sentenced to death that day.  As he went 

out, one solitary soldier said, 'God bless you, Sir!'  For this, 

his officer struck him.  The King said he thought the punishment 

exceeded the offence.  The silver head of his walking-stick had 

fallen off while he leaned upon it, at one time of the trial.  The 

accident seemed to disturb him, as if he thought it ominous of the 

falling of his own head; and he admitted as much, now it was all 

over.



Being taken back to Whitehall, he sent to the House of Commons, 

saying that as the time of his execution might be nigh, he wished 

he might be allowed to see his darling children.  It was granted.  

On the Monday he was taken back to St. James's; and his two 

children then in England, the PRINCESS ELIZABETH thirteen years 

old, and the DUKE OF GLOUCESTER nine years old, were brought to 

take leave of him, from Sion House, near Brentford.  It was a sad 

and touching scene, when he kissed and fondled those poor children, 

and made a little present of two diamond seals to the Princess, and 

gave them tender messages to their mother (who little deserved 

them, for she had a lover of her own whom she married soon 

afterwards), and told them that he died 'for the laws and liberties 

of the land.'  I am bound to say that I don't think he did, but I 

dare say he believed so.



There were ambassadors from Holland that day, to intercede for the 

unhappy King, whom you and I both wish the Parliament had spared; 

but they got no answer.  The Scottish Commissioners interceded too; 

so did the Prince of Wales, by a letter in which he offered as the 

next heir to the throne, to accept any conditions from the 

Parliament; so did the Queen, by letter likewise.



Notwithstanding all, the warrant for the execution was this day 

signed.  There is a story that as Oliver Cromwell went to the table 

with the pen in his hand to put his signature to it, he drew his 

pen across the face of one of the commissioners, who was standing 

near, and marked it with ink.  That commissioner had not signed his 

own name yet, and the story adds that when he came to do it he 

marked Cromwell's face with ink in the same way.



The King slept well, untroubled by the knowledge that it was his 

last night on earth, and rose on the thirtieth of January, two 

hours before day, and dressed himself carefully.  He put on two 

shirts lest he should tremble with the cold, and had his hair very 

carefully combed.  The warrant had been directed to three officers 

of the army, COLONEL HACKER, COLONEL HUNKS, and COLONEL PHAYER.  At 

ten o'clock, the first of these came to the door and said it was 

time to go to Whitehall.  The King, who had always been a quick 

walker, walked at his usual speed through the Park, and called out 

to the guard, with his accustomed voice of command, 'March on 

apace!'  When he came to Whitehall, he was taken to his own 

bedroom, where a breakfast was set forth.  As he had taken the 

Sacrament, he would eat nothing more; but, at about the time when 

the church bells struck twelve at noon (for he had to wait, through 

the scaffold not being ready), he took the advice of the good 

BISHOP JUXON who was with him, and ate a little bread and drank a 

glass of claret.  Soon after he had taken this refreshment, Colonel 

Hacker came to the chamber with the warrant in his hand, and called 

for Charles Stuart.



And then, through the long gallery of Whitehall Palace, which he 

had often seen light and gay and merry and crowded, in very 

different times, the fallen King passed along, until he came to the 

centre window of the Banqueting House, through which he emerged 

upon the scaffold, which was hung with black.  He looked at the two 

executioners, who were dressed in black and masked; he looked at 

the troops of soldiers on horseback and on foot, and all looked up 

at him in silence; he looked at the vast array of spectators, 

filling up the view beyond, and turning all their faces upon him; 

he looked at his old Palace of St. James's; and he looked at the 

block.  He seemed a little troubled to find that it was so low, and 

asked, 'if there were no place higher?'  Then, to those upon the 

scaffold, he said, 'that it was the Parliament who had begun the 

war, and not he; but he hoped they might be guiltless too, as ill 

instruments had gone between them.  In one respect,' he said, 'he 

suffered justly; and that was because he had permitted an unjust 

sentence to be executed on another.'  In this he referred to the 

Earl of Strafford.



He was not at all afraid to die; but he was anxious to die easily.  

When some one touched the axe while he was speaking, he broke off 

and called out, 'Take heed of the axe! take heed of the axe!'  He 

also said to Colonel Hacker, 'Take care that they do not put me to 

pain.'  He told the executioner, 'I shall say but very short 

prayers, and then thrust out my hands' - as the sign to strike.



He put his hair up, under a white satin cap which the bishop had 

carried, and said, 'I have a good cause and a gracious God on my 

side.'  The bishop told him that he had but one stage more to 

travel in this weary world, and that, though it was a turbulent and 

troublesome stage, it was a short one, and would carry him a great 

way - all the way from earth to Heaven.  The King's last word, as 

he gave his cloak and the George - the decoration from his breast - 

to the bishop, was, 'Remember!'  He then kneeled down, laid his 

head on the block, spread out his hands, and was instantly killed.  

One universal groan broke from the crowd; and the soldiers, who had 

sat on their horses and stood in their ranks immovable as statues, 

were of a sudden all in motion, clearing the streets.



Thus, in the forty-ninth year of his age, falling at the same time 

of his career as Strafford had fallen in his, perished Charles the 

First.  With all my sorrow for him, I cannot agree with him that he 

died 'the martyr of the people;' for the people had been martyrs to 

him, and to his ideas of a King's rights, long before.  Indeed, I 

am afraid that he was but a bad judge of martyrs; for he had called 

that infamous Duke of Buckingham 'the Martyr of his Sovereign.'

