





CHAPTER IX - ENGLAND UNDER WILLIAM THE SECOND, CALLED RUFUS







WILLIAM THE RED, in breathless haste, secured the three great forts 

of Dover, Pevensey, and Hastings, and made with hot speed for 

Winchester, where the Royal treasure was kept.  The treasurer 

delivering him the keys, he found that it amounted to sixty 

thousand pounds in silver, besides gold and jewels.  Possessed of 

this wealth, he soon persuaded the Archbishop of Canterbury to 

crown him, and became William the Second, King of England.



Rufus was no sooner on the throne, than he ordered into prison 

again the unhappy state captives whom his father had set free, and 

directed a goldsmith to ornament his father's tomb profusely with 

gold and silver.  It would have been more dutiful in him to have 

attended the sick Conqueror when he was dying; but England itself, 

like this Red King, who once governed it, has sometimes made 

expensive tombs for dead men whom it treated shabbily when they 

were alive.



The King's brother, Robert of Normandy, seeming quite content to be 

only Duke of that country; and the King's other brother, Fine-

Scholar, being quiet enough with his five thousand pounds in a 

chest; the King flattered himself, we may suppose, with the hope of 

an easy reign.  But easy reigns were difficult to have in those 

days.  The turbulent Bishop ODO (who had blessed the Norman army at 

the Battle of Hastings, and who, I dare say, took all the credit of 

the victory to himself) soon began, in concert with some powerful 

Norman nobles, to trouble the Red King.



The truth seems to be that this bishop and his friends, who had 

lands in England and lands in Normandy, wished to hold both under 

one Sovereign; and greatly preferred a thoughtless good-natured 

person, such as Robert was, to Rufus; who, though far from being an 

amiable man in any respect, was keen, and not to be imposed upon.  

They declared in Robert's favour, and retired to their castles 

(those castles were very troublesome to kings) in a sullen humour.  

The Red King, seeing the Normans thus falling from him, revenged 

himself upon them by appealing to the English; to whom he made a 

variety of promises, which he never meant to perform - in 

particular, promises to soften the cruelty of the Forest Laws; and 

who, in return, so aided him with their valour, that ODO was 

besieged in the Castle of Rochester, and forced to abandon it, and 

to depart from England for ever:  whereupon the other rebellious 

Norman nobles were soon reduced and scattered.



Then, the Red King went over to Normandy, where the people suffered 

greatly under the loose rule of Duke Robert.  The King's object was 

to seize upon the Duke's dominions.  This, the Duke, of course, 

prepared to resist; and miserable war between the two brothers 

seemed inevitable, when the powerful nobles on both sides, who had 

seen so much of war, interfered to prevent it.  A treaty was made.  

Each of the two brothers agreed to give up something of his claims, 

and that the longer-liver of the two should inherit all the 

dominions of the other.  When they had come to this loving 

understanding, they embraced and joined their forces against Fine-

Scholar; who had bought some territory of Robert with a part of his 

five thousand pounds, and was considered a dangerous individual in 

consequence.



St. Michael's Mount, in Normandy (there is another St. Michael's 

Mount, in Cornwall, wonderfully like it), was then, as it is now, a 

strong place perched upon the top of a high rock, around which, 

when the tide is in, the sea flows, leaving no road to the 

mainland.  In this place, Fine-Scholar shut himself up with his 

soldiers, and here he was closely besieged by his two brothers.  At 

one time, when he was reduced to great distress for want of water, 

the generous Robert not only permitted his men to get water, but 

sent Fine-Scholar wine from his own table; and, on being 

remonstrated with by the Red King, said 'What! shall we let our own 

brother die of thirst?  Where shall we get another, when he is 

gone?'  At another time, the Red King riding alone on the shore of 

the bay, looking up at the Castle, was taken by two of Fine-

Scholar's men, one of whom was about to kill him, when he cried 

out, 'Hold, knave!  I am the King of England!'  The story says that 

the soldier raised him from the ground respectfully and humbly, and 

that the King took him into his service.  The story may or may not 

be true; but at any rate it is true that Fine-Scholar could not 

hold out against his united brothers, and that he abandoned Mount 

St. Michael, and wandered about - as poor and forlorn as other 

scholars have been sometimes known to be.



The Scotch became unquiet in the Red King's time, and were twice 

defeated - the second time, with the loss of their King, Malcolm, 

and his son.  The Welsh became unquiet too.  Against them, Rufus 

was less successful; for they fought among their native mountains, 

and did great execution on the King's troops.  Robert of Normandy 

became unquiet too; and, complaining that his brother the King did 

not faithfully perform his part of their agreement, took up arms, 

and obtained assistance from the King of France, whom Rufus, in the 

end, bought off with vast sums of money.  England became unquiet 

too.  Lord Mowbray, the powerful Earl of Northumberland, headed a 

great conspiracy to depose the King, and to place upon the throne, 

STEPHEN, the Conqueror's near relative.  The plot was discovered; 

all the chief conspirators were seized; some were fined, some were 

put in prison, some were put to death.  The Earl of Northumberland 

himself was shut up in a dungeon beneath Windsor Castle, where he 

died, an old man, thirty long years afterwards.  The Priests in 

England were more unquiet than any other class or power; for the 

Red King treated them with such small ceremony that he refused to 

appoint new bishops or archbishops when the old ones died, but kept 

all the wealth belonging to those offices in his own hands.  In 

return for this, the Priests wrote his life when he was dead, and 

abused him well.  I am inclined to think, myself, that there was 

little to choose between the Priests and the Red King; that both 

sides were greedy and designing; and that they were fairly matched.



The Red King was false of heart, selfish, covetous, and mean.  He 

had a worthy minister in his favourite, Ralph, nicknamed - for 

almost every famous person had a nickname in those rough days - 

Flambard, or the Firebrand.  Once, the King being ill, became 

penitent, and made ANSELM, a foreign priest and a good man, 

Archbishop of Canterbury.  But he no sooner got well again than he 

repented of his repentance, and persisted in wrongfully keeping to 

himself some of the wealth belonging to the archbishopric.  This 

led to violent disputes, which were aggravated by there being in 

Rome at that time two rival Popes; each of whom declared he was the 

only real original infallible Pope, who couldn't make a mistake.  

At last, Anselm, knowing the Red King's character, and not feeling 

himself safe in England, asked leave to return abroad.  The Red 

King gladly gave it; for he knew that as soon as Anselm was gone, 

he could begin to store up all the Canterbury money again, for his 

own use.



By such means, and by taxing and oppressing the English people in 

every possible way, the Red King became very rich.  When he wanted 

money for any purpose, he raised it by some means or other, and 

cared nothing for the injustice he did, or the misery he caused.  

Having the opportunity of buying from Robert the whole duchy of 

Normandy for five years, he taxed the English people more than 

ever, and made the very convents sell their plate and valuables to 

supply him with the means to make the purchase.  But he was as 

quick and eager in putting down revolt as he was in raising money; 

for, a part of the Norman people objecting - very naturally, I 

think - to being sold in this way, he headed an army against them 

with all the speed and energy of his father.  He was so impatient, 

that he embarked for Normandy in a great gale of wind.  And when 

the sailors told him it was dangerous to go to sea in such angry 

weather, he replied, 'Hoist sail and away!  Did you ever hear of a 

king who was drowned?'



You will wonder how it was that even the careless Robert came to 

sell his dominions.  It happened thus.  It had long been the custom 

for many English people to make journeys to Jerusalem, which were 

called pilgrimages, in order that they might pray beside the tomb 

of Our Saviour there.  Jerusalem belonging to the Turks, and the 

Turks hating Christianity, these Christian travellers were often 

insulted and ill used.  The Pilgrims bore it patiently for some 

time, but at length a remarkable man, of great earnestness and 

eloquence, called PETER THE HERMIT, began to preach in various 

places against the Turks, and to declare that it was the duty of 

good Christians to drive away those unbelievers from the tomb of 

Our Saviour, and to take possession of it, and protect it.  An 

excitement such as the world had never known before was created.  

Thousands and thousands of men of all ranks and conditions departed 

for Jerusalem to make war against the Turks.  The war is called in 

history the first Crusade, and every Crusader wore a cross marked 

on his right shoulder.



All the Crusaders were not zealous Christians.  Among them were 

vast numbers of the restless, idle, profligate, and adventurous 

spirit of the time.  Some became Crusaders for the love of change; 

some, in the hope of plunder; some, because they had nothing to do 

at home; some, because they did what the priests told them; some, 

because they liked to see foreign countries; some, because they 

were fond of knocking men about, and would as soon knock a Turk 

about as a Christian.  Robert of Normandy may have been influenced 

by all these motives; and by a kind desire, besides, to save the 

Christian Pilgrims from bad treatment in future.  He wanted to 

raise a number of armed men, and to go to the Crusade.  He could 

not do so without money.  He had no money; and he sold his 

dominions to his brother, the Red King, for five years.  With the 

large sum he thus obtained, he fitted out his Crusaders gallantly, 

and went away to Jerusalem in martial state.  The Red King, who 

made money out of everything, stayed at home, busily squeezing more 

money out of Normans and English.



After three years of great hardship and suffering - from shipwreck 

at sea; from travel in strange lands; from hunger, thirst, and 

fever, upon the burning sands of the desert; and from the fury of 

the Turks - the valiant Crusaders got possession of Our Saviour's 

tomb.  The Turks were still resisting and fighting bravely, but 

this success increased the general desire in Europe to join the 

Crusade.  Another great French Duke was proposing to sell his 

dominions for a term to the rich Red King, when the Red King's 

reign came to a sudden and violent end.



You have not forgotten the New Forest which the Conqueror made, and 

which the miserable people whose homes he had laid waste, so hated.  

The cruelty of the Forest Laws, and the torture and death they 

brought upon the peasantry, increased this hatred.  The poor 

persecuted country people believed that the New Forest was 

enchanted.  They said that in thunder-storms, and on dark nights, 

demons appeared, moving beneath the branches of the gloomy trees.  

They said that a terrible spectre had foretold to Norman hunters 

that the Red King should be punished there.  And now, in the 

pleasant season of May, when the Red King had reigned almost 

thirteen years; and a second Prince of the Conqueror's blood - 

another Richard, the son of Duke Robert - was killed by an arrow in 

this dreaded Forest; the people said that the second time was not 

the last, and that there was another death to come.



It was a lonely forest, accursed in the people's hearts for the 

wicked deeds that had been done to make it; and no man save the 

King and his Courtiers and Huntsmen, liked to stray there.  But, in 

reality, it was like any other forest.  In the spring, the green 

leaves broke out of the buds; in the summer, flourished heartily, 

and made deep shades; in the winter, shrivelled and blew down, and 

lay in brown heaps on the moss.  Some trees were stately, and grew 

high and strong; some had fallen of themselves; some were felled by 

the forester's axe; some were hollow, and the rabbits burrowed at 

their roots; some few were struck by lightning, and stood white and 

bare.  There were hill-sides covered with rich fern, on which the 

morning dew so beautifully sparkled; there were brooks, where the 

deer went down to drink, or over which the whole herd bounded, 

flying from the arrows of the huntsmen; there were sunny glades, 

and solemn places where but little light came through the rustling 

leaves.  The songs of the birds in the New Forest were pleasanter 

to hear than the shouts of fighting men outside; and even when the 

Red King and his Court came hunting through its solitudes, cursing 

loud and riding hard, with a jingling of stirrups and bridles and 

knives and daggers, they did much less harm there than among the 

English or Normans, and the stags died (as they lived) far easier 

than the people.



Upon a day in August, the Red King, now reconciled to his brother, 

Fine-Scholar, came with a great train to hunt in the New Forest.  

Fine-Scholar was of the party.  They were a merry party, and had 

lain all night at Malwood-Keep, a hunting-lodge in the forest, 

where they had made good cheer, both at supper and breakfast, and 

had drunk a deal of wine.  The party dispersed in various 

directions, as the custom of hunters then was.  The King took with 

him only SIR WALTER TYRREL, who was a famous sportsman, and to whom 

he had given, before they mounted horse that morning, two fine 

arrows.



The last time the King was ever seen alive, he was riding with Sir 

Walter Tyrrel, and their dogs were hunting together.



It was almost night, when a poor charcoal-burner, passing through 

the forest with his cart, came upon the solitary body of a dead 

man, shot with an arrow in the breast, and still bleeding.  He got 

it into his cart.  It was the body of the King.  Shaken and 

tumbled, with its red beard all whitened with lime and clotted with 

blood, it was driven in the cart by the charcoal-burner next day to 

Winchester Cathedral, where it was received and buried.



Sir Walter Tyrrel, who escaped to Normandy, and claimed the 

protection of the King of France, swore in France that the Red King 

was suddenly shot dead by an arrow from an unseen hand, while they 

were hunting together; that he was fearful of being suspected as 

the King's murderer; and that he instantly set spurs to his horse, 

and fled to the sea-shore.  Others declared that the King and Sir 

Walter Tyrrel were hunting in company, a little before sunset, 

standing in bushes opposite one another, when a stag came between 

them.  That the King drew his bow and took aim, but the string 

broke.  That the King then cried, 'Shoot, Walter, in the Devil's 

name!'  That Sir Walter shot.  That the arrow glanced against a 

tree, was turned aside from the stag, and struck the King from his 

horse, dead.



By whose hand the Red King really fell, and whether that hand 

despatched the arrow to his breast by accident or by design, is 

only known to GOD.  Some think his brother may have caused him to 

be killed; but the Red King had made so many enemies, both among 

priests and people, that suspicion may reasonably rest upon a less 

unnatural murderer.  Men know no more than that he was found dead 

in the New Forest, which the suffering people had regarded as a 

doomed ground for his race.

