





CHAPTER IV - ENGLAND UNDER ATHELSTAN AND THE SIX BOY-KINGS







ATHELSTAN, the son of Edward the Elder, succeeded that king.  He 

reigned only fifteen years; but he remembered the glory of his 

grandfather, the great Alfred, and governed England well.  He 

reduced the turbulent people of Wales, and obliged them to pay him 

a tribute in money, and in cattle, and to send him their best hawks 

and hounds.  He was victorious over the Cornish men, who were not 

yet quite under the Saxon government.  He restored such of the old 

laws as were good, and had fallen into disuse; made some wise new 

laws, and took care of the poor and weak.  A strong alliance, made 

against him by ANLAF a Danish prince, CONSTANTINE King of the 

Scots, and the people of North Wales, he broke and defeated in one 

great battle, long famous for the vast numbers slain in it.  After 

that, he had a quiet reign; the lords and ladies about him had 

leisure to become polite and agreeable; and foreign princes were 

glad (as they have sometimes been since) to come to England on 

visits to the English court.



When Athelstan died, at forty-seven years old, his brother EDMUND, 

who was only eighteen, became king.  He was the first of six boy-

kings, as you will presently know.



They called him the Magnificent, because he showed a taste for 

improvement and refinement.  But he was beset by the Danes, and had 

a short and troubled reign, which came to a troubled end.  One 

night, when he was feasting in his hall, and had eaten much and 

drunk deep, he saw, among the company, a noted robber named LEOF, 

who had been banished from England.  Made very angry by the 

boldness of this man, the King turned to his cup-bearer, and said, 

'There is a robber sitting at the table yonder, who, for his 

crimes, is an outlaw in the land - a hunted wolf, whose life any 

man may take, at any time.  Command that robber to depart!'  'I 

will not depart!' said Leof.  'No?' cried the King.  'No, by the 

Lord!' said Leof.  Upon that the King rose from his seat, and, 

making passionately at the robber, and seizing him by his long 

hair, tried to throw him down.  But the robber had a dagger 

underneath his cloak, and, in the scuffle, stabbed the King to 

death.  That done, he set his back against the wall, and fought so 

desperately, that although he was soon cut to pieces by the King's 

armed men, and the wall and pavement were splashed with his blood, 

yet it was not before he had killed and wounded many of them.  You 

may imagine what rough lives the kings of those times led, when one 

of them could struggle, half drunk, with a public robber in his own 

dining-hall, and be stabbed in presence of the company who ate and 

drank with him.



Then succeeded the boy-king EDRED, who was weak and sickly in body, 

but of a strong mind.  And his armies fought the Northmen, the 

Danes, and Norwegians, or the Sea-Kings, as they were called, and 

beat them for the time.  And, in nine years, Edred died, and passed 

away.



Then came the boy-king EDWY, fifteen years of age; but the real 

king, who had the real power, was a monk named DUNSTAN - a clever 

priest, a little mad, and not a little proud and cruel.



Dunstan was then Abbot of Glastonbury Abbey, whither the body of 

King Edmund the Magnificent was carried, to be buried.  While yet a 

boy, he had got out of his bed one night (being then in a fever), 

and walked about Glastonbury Church when it was under repair; and, 

because he did not tumble off some scaffolds that were there, and 

break his neck, it was reported that he had been shown over the 

building by an angel.  He had also made a harp that was said to 

play of itself - which it very likely did, as AEolian Harps, which 

are played by the wind, and are understood now, always do.  For 

these wonders he had been once denounced by his enemies, who were 

jealous of his favour with the late King Athelstan, as a magician; 

and he had been waylaid, bound hand and foot, and thrown into a 

marsh.  But he got out again, somehow, to cause a great deal of 

trouble yet.



The priests of those days were, generally, the only scholars.  They 

were learned in many things.  Having to make their own convents and 

monasteries on uncultivated grounds that were granted to them by 

the Crown, it was necessary that they should be good farmers and 

good gardeners, or their lands would have been too poor to support 

them.  For the decoration of the chapels where they prayed, and for 

the comfort of the refectories where they ate and drank, it was 

necessary that there should be good carpenters, good smiths, good 

painters, among them.  For their greater safety in sickness and 

accident, living alone by themselves in solitary places, it was 

necessary that they should study the virtues of plants and herbs, 

and should know how to dress cuts, burns, scalds, and bruises, and 

how to set broken limbs.  Accordingly, they taught themselves, and 

one another, a great variety of useful arts; and became skilful in 

agriculture, medicine, surgery, and handicraft.  And when they 

wanted the aid of any little piece of machinery, which would be 

simple enough now, but was marvellous then, to impose a trick upon 

the poor peasants, they knew very well how to make it; and DID make 

it many a time and often, I have no doubt.



Dunstan, Abbot of Glastonbury Abbey, was one of the most sagacious 

of these monks.  He was an ingenious smith, and worked at a forge 

in a little cell.  This cell was made too short to admit of his 

lying at full length when he went to sleep - as if THAT did any 

good to anybody! - and he used to tell the most extraordinary lies 

about demons and spirits, who, he said, came there to persecute 

him.  For instance, he related that one day when he was at work, 

the devil looked in at the little window, and tried to tempt him to 

lead a life of idle pleasure; whereupon, having his pincers in the 

fire, red hot, he seized the devil by the nose, and put him to such 

pain, that his bellowings were heard for miles and miles.  Some 

people are inclined to think this nonsense a part of Dunstan's 

madness (for his head never quite recovered the fever), but I think 

not.  I observe that it induced the ignorant people to consider him 

a holy man, and that it made him very powerful.  Which was exactly 

what he always wanted.



On the day of the coronation of the handsome boy-king Edwy, it was 

remarked by ODO, Archbishop of Canterbury (who was a Dane by 

birth), that the King quietly left the coronation feast, while all 

the company were there.  Odo, much displeased, sent his friend 

Dunstan to seek him.  Dunstan finding him in the company of his 

beautiful young wife ELGIVA, and her mother ETHELGIVA, a good and 

virtuous lady, not only grossly abused them, but dragged the young 

King back into the feasting-hall by force.  Some, again, think 

Dunstan did this because the young King's fair wife was his own 

cousin, and the monks objected to people marrying their own 

cousins; but I believe he did it, because he was an imperious, 

audacious, ill-conditioned priest, who, having loved a young lady 

himself before he became a sour monk, hated all love now, and 

everything belonging to it.



The young King was quite old enough to feel this insult.  Dunstan 

had been Treasurer in the last reign, and he soon charged Dunstan 

with having taken some of the last king's money.  The Glastonbury 

Abbot fled to Belgium (very narrowly escaping some pursuers who 

were sent to put out his eyes, as you will wish they had, when you 

read what follows), and his abbey was given to priests who were 

married; whom he always, both before and afterwards, opposed.  But 

he quickly conspired with his friend, Odo the Dane, to set up the 

King's young brother, EDGAR, as his rival for the throne; and, not 

content with this revenge, he caused the beautiful queen Elgiva, 

though a lovely girl of only seventeen or eighteen, to be stolen 

from one of the Royal Palaces, branded in the cheek with a red-hot 

iron, and sold into slavery in Ireland.  But the Irish people 

pitied and befriended her; and they said, 'Let us restore the girl-

queen to the boy-king, and make the young lovers happy!' and they 

cured her of her cruel wound, and sent her home as beautiful as 

before.  But the villain Dunstan, and that other villain, Odo, 

caused her to be waylaid at Gloucester as she was joyfully hurrying 

to join her husband, and to be hacked and hewn with swords, and to 

be barbarously maimed and lamed, and left to die.  When Edwy the 

Fair (his people called him so, because he was so young and 

handsome) heard of her dreadful fate, he died of a broken heart; 

and so the pitiful story of the poor young wife and husband ends!  

Ah!  Better to be two cottagers in these better times, than king 

and queen of England in those bad days, though never so fair!



Then came the boy-king, EDGAR, called the Peaceful, fifteen years 

old.  Dunstan, being still the real king, drove all married priests 

out of the monasteries and abbeys, and replaced them by solitary 

monks like himself, of the rigid order called the Benedictines.  He 

made himself Archbishop of Canterbury, for his greater glory; and 

exercised such power over the neighbouring British princes, and so 

collected them about the King, that once, when the King held his 

court at Chester, and went on the river Dee to visit the monastery 

of St. John, the eight oars of his boat were pulled (as the people 

used to delight in relating in stories and songs) by eight crowned 

kings, and steered by the King of England.  As Edgar was very 

obedient to Dunstan and the monks, they took great pains to 

represent him as the best of kings.  But he was really profligate, 

debauched, and vicious.  He once forcibly carried off a young lady 

from the convent at Wilton; and Dunstan, pretending to be very much 

shocked, condemned him not to wear his crown upon his head for 

seven years - no great punishment, I dare say, as it can hardly 

have been a more comfortable ornament to wear, than a stewpan 

without a handle.  His marriage with his second wife, ELFRIDA, is 

one of the worst events of his reign.  Hearing of the beauty of 

this lady, he despatched his favourite courtier, ATHELWOLD, to her 

father's castle in Devonshire, to see if she were really as 

charming as fame reported.  Now, she was so exceedingly beautiful 

that Athelwold fell in love with her himself, and married her; but 

he told the King that she was only rich - not handsome.  The King, 

suspecting the truth when they came home, resolved to pay the 

newly-married couple a visit; and, suddenly, told Athelwold to 

prepare for his immediate coming.  Athelwold, terrified, confessed 

to his young wife what he had said and done, and implored her to 

disguise her beauty by some ugly dress or silly manner, that he 

might be safe from the King's anger.  She promised that she would; 

but she was a proud woman, who would far rather have been a queen 

than the wife of a courtier.  She dressed herself in her best 

dress, and adorned herself with her richest jewels; and when the 

King came, presently, he discovered the cheat.  So, he caused his 

false friend, Athelwold, to be murdered in a wood, and married his 

widow, this bad Elfrida.  Six or seven years afterwards, he died; 

and was buried, as if he had been all that the monks said he was, 

in the abbey of Glastonbury, which he - or Dunstan for him - had 

much enriched.



England, in one part of this reign, was so troubled by wolves, 

which, driven out of the open country, hid themselves in the 

mountains of Wales when they were not attacking travellers and 

animals, that the tribute payable by the Welsh people was forgiven 

them, on condition of their producing, every year, three hundred 

wolves' heads.  And the Welshmen were so sharp upon the wolves, to 

save their money, that in four years there was not a wolf left.



Then came the boy-king, EDWARD, called the Martyr, from the manner 

of his death.  Elfrida had a son, named ETHELRED, for whom she 

claimed the throne; but Dunstan did not choose to favour him, and 

he made Edward king.  The boy was hunting, one day, down in 

Dorsetshire, when he rode near to Corfe Castle, where Elfrida and 

Ethelred lived.  Wishing to see them kindly, he rode away from his 

attendants and galloped to the castle gate, where he arrived at 

twilight, and blew his hunting-horn.  'You are welcome, dear King,' 

said Elfrida, coming out, with her brightest smiles.  'Pray you 

dismount and enter.'  'Not so, dear madam,' said the King.  'My 

company will miss me, and fear that I have met with some harm.  

Please you to give me a cup of wine, that I may drink here, in the 

saddle, to you and to my little brother, and so ride away with the 

good speed I have made in riding here.'  Elfrida, going in to bring 

the wine, whispered an armed servant, one of her attendants, who 

stole out of the darkening gateway, and crept round behind the 

King's horse.  As the King raised the cup to his lips, saying, 

'Health!' to the wicked woman who was smiling on him, and to his 

innocent brother whose hand she held in hers, and who was only ten 

years old, this armed man made a spring and stabbed him in the 

back.  He dropped the cup and spurred his horse away; but, soon 

fainting with loss of blood, dropped from the saddle, and, in his 

fall, entangled one of his feet in the stirrup.  The frightened 

horse dashed on; trailing his rider's curls upon the ground; 

dragging his smooth young face through ruts, and stones, and 

briers, and fallen leaves, and mud; until the hunters, tracking the 

animal's course by the King's blood, caught his bridle, and 

released the disfigured body.



Then came the sixth and last of the boy-kings, ETHELRED, whom 

Elfrida, when he cried out at the sight of his murdered brother 

riding away from the castle gate, unmercifully beat with a torch 

which she snatched from one of the attendants.  The people so 

disliked this boy, on account of his cruel mother and the murder 

she had done to promote him, that Dunstan would not have had him 

for king, but would have made EDGITHA, the daughter of the dead 

King Edgar, and of the lady whom he stole out of the convent at 

Wilton, Queen of England, if she would have consented.  But she 

knew the stories of the youthful kings too well, and would not be 

persuaded from the convent where she lived in peace; so, Dunstan 

put Ethelred on the throne, having no one else to put there, and 

gave him the nickname of THE UNREADY - knowing that he wanted 

resolution and firmness.



At first, Elfrida possessed great influence over the young King, 

but, as he grew older and came of age, her influence declined.  The 

infamous woman, not having it in her power to do any more evil, 

then retired from court, and, according, to the fashion of the 

time, built churches and monasteries, to expiate her guilt.  As if 

a church, with a steeple reaching to the very stars, would have 

been any sign of true repentance for the blood of the poor boy, 

whose murdered form was trailed at his horse's heels!  As if she 

could have buried her wickedness beneath the senseless stones of 

the whole world, piled up one upon another, for the monks to live 

in!



About the ninth or tenth year of this reign, Dunstan died.  He was 

growing old then, but was as stern and artful as ever.  Two 

circumstances that happened in connexion with him, in this reign of 

Ethelred, made a great noise.  Once, he was present at a meeting of 

the Church, when the question was discussed whether priests should 

have permission to marry; and, as he sat with his head hung down, 

apparently thinking about it, a voice seemed to come out of a 

crucifix in the room, and warn the meeting to be of his opinion.  

This was some juggling of Dunstan's, and was probably his own voice 

disguised.  But he played off a worse juggle than that, soon 

afterwards; for, another meeting being held on the same subject, 

and he and his supporters being seated on one side of a great room, 

and their opponents on the other, he rose and said, 'To Christ 

himself, as judge, do I commit this cause!'  Immediately on these 

words being spoken, the floor where the opposite party sat gave 

way, and some were killed and many wounded.  You may be pretty sure 

that it had been weakened under Dunstan's direction, and that it 

fell at Dunstan's signal.  HIS part of the floor did not go down.  

No, no.  He was too good a workman for that.



When he died, the monks settled that he was a Saint, and called him 

Saint Dunstan ever afterwards.  They might just as well have 

settled that he was a coach-horse, and could just as easily have 

called him one.



Ethelred the Unready was glad enough, I dare say, to be rid of this 

holy saint; but, left to himself, he was a poor weak king, and his 

reign was a reign of defeat and shame.  The restless Danes, led by 

SWEYN, a son of the King of Denmark who had quarrelled with his 

father and had been banished from home, again came into England, 

and, year after year, attacked and despoiled large towns.  To coax 

these sea-kings away, the weak Ethelred paid them money; but, the 

more money he paid, the more money the Danes wanted.  At first, he 

gave them ten thousand pounds; on their next invasion, sixteen 

thousand pounds; on their next invasion, four and twenty thousand 

pounds:  to pay which large sums, the unfortunate English people 

were heavily taxed.  But, as the Danes still came back and wanted 

more, he thought it would be a good plan to marry into some 

powerful foreign family that would help him with soldiers.  So, in 

the year one thousand and two, he courted and married Emma, the 

sister of Richard Duke of Normandy; a lady who was called the 

Flower of Normandy.



And now, a terrible deed was done in England, the like of which was 

never done on English ground before or since.  On the thirteenth of 

November, in pursuance of secret instructions sent by the King over 

the whole country, the inhabitants of every town and city armed, 

and murdered all the Danes who were their neighbours.



Young and old, babies and soldiers, men and women, every Dane was 

killed.  No doubt there were among them many ferocious men who had 

done the English great wrong, and whose pride and insolence, in 

swaggering in the houses of the English and insulting their wives 

and daughters, had become unbearable; but no doubt there were also 

among them many peaceful Christian Danes who had married English 

women and become like English men.  They were all slain, even to 

GUNHILDA, the sister of the King of Denmark, married to an English 

lord; who was first obliged to see the murder of her husband and 

her child, and then was killed herself.



When the King of the sea-kings heard of this deed of blood, he 

swore that he would have a great revenge.  He raised an army, and a 

mightier fleet of ships than ever yet had sailed to England; and in 

all his army there was not a slave or an old man, but every soldier 

was a free man, and the son of a free man, and in the prime of 

life, and sworn to be revenged upon the English nation, for the 

massacre of that dread thirteenth of November, when his countrymen 

and countrywomen, and the little children whom they loved, were 

killed with fire and sword.  And so, the sea-kings came to England 

in many great ships, each bearing the flag of its own commander.  

Golden eagles, ravens, dragons, dolphins, beasts of prey, 

threatened England from the prows of those ships, as they came 

onward through the water; and were reflected in the shining shields 

that hung upon their sides.  The ship that bore the standard of the 

King of the sea-kings was carved and painted like a mighty serpent; 

and the King in his anger prayed that the Gods in whom he trusted 

might all desert him, if his serpent did not strike its fangs into 

England's heart.



And indeed it did.  For, the great army landing from the great 

fleet, near Exeter, went forward, laying England waste, and 

striking their lances in the earth as they advanced, or throwing 

them into rivers, in token of their making all the island theirs.  

In remembrance of the black November night when the Danes were 

murdered, wheresoever the invaders came, they made the Saxons 

prepare and spread for them great feasts; and when they had eaten 

those feasts, and had drunk a curse to England with wild 

rejoicings, they drew their swords, and killed their Saxon 

entertainers, and marched on.  For six long years they carried on 

this war:  burning the crops, farmhouses, barns, mills, granaries; 

killing the labourers in the fields; preventing the seed from being 

sown in the ground; causing famine and starvation; leaving only 

heaps of ruin and smoking ashes, where they had found rich towns.  

To crown this misery, English officers and men deserted, and even 

the favourites of Ethelred the Unready, becoming traitors, seized 

many of the English ships, turned pirates against their own 

country, and aided by a storm occasioned the loss of nearly the 

whole English navy.



There was but one man of note, at this miserable pass, who was true 

to his country and the feeble King.  He was a priest, and a brave 

one.  For twenty days, the Archbishop of Canterbury defended that 

city against its Danish besiegers; and when a traitor in the town 

threw the gates open and admitted them, he said, in chains, 'I will 

not buy my life with money that must be extorted from the suffering 

people.  Do with me what you please!'  Again and again, he steadily 

refused to purchase his release with gold wrung from the poor.



At last, the Danes being tired of this, and being assembled at a 

drunken merry-making, had him brought into the feasting-hall.



'Now, bishop,' they said, 'we want gold!'



He looked round on the crowd of angry faces; from the shaggy beards 

close to him, to the shaggy beards against the walls, where men 

were mounted on tables and forms to see him over the heads of 

others:  and he knew that his time was come.



'I have no gold,' he said.



'Get it, bishop!' they all thundered.



'That, I have often told you I will not,' said he.



They gathered closer round him, threatening, but he stood unmoved.  

Then, one man struck him; then, another; then a cursing soldier 

picked up from a heap in a corner of the hall, where fragments had 

been rudely thrown at dinner, a great ox-bone, and cast it at his 

face, from which the blood came spurting forth; then, others ran to 

the same heap, and knocked him down with other bones, and bruised 

and battered him; until one soldier whom he had baptised (willing, 

as I hope for the sake of that soldier's soul, to shorten the 

sufferings of the good man) struck him dead with his battle-axe.



If Ethelred had had the heart to emulate the courage of this noble 

archbishop, he might have done something yet.  But he paid the 

Danes forty-eight thousand pounds, instead, and gained so little by 

the cowardly act, that Sweyn soon afterwards came over to subdue 

all England.  So broken was the attachment of the English people, 

by this time, to their incapable King and their forlorn country 

which could not protect them, that they welcomed Sweyn on all 

sides, as a deliverer.  London faithfully stood out, as long as the 

King was within its walls; but, when he sneaked away, it also 

welcomed the Dane.  Then, all was over; and the King took refuge 

abroad with the Duke of Normandy, who had already given shelter to 

the King's wife, once the Flower of that country, and to her 

children.



Still, the English people, in spite of their sad sufferings, could 

not quite forget the great King Alfred and the Saxon race.  When 

Sweyn died suddenly, in little more than a month after he had been 

proclaimed King of England, they generously sent to Ethelred, to 

say that they would have him for their King again, 'if he would 

only govern them better than he had governed them before.'  The 

Unready, instead of coming himself, sent Edward, one of his sons, 

to make promises for him.  At last, he followed, and the English 

declared him King.  The Danes declared CANUTE, the son of Sweyn, 

King.  Thus, direful war began again, and lasted for three years, 

when the Unready died.  And I know of nothing better that he did, 

in all his reign of eight and thirty years.



Was Canute to be King now?  Not over the Saxons, they said; they 

must have EDMUND, one of the sons of the Unready, who was surnamed 

IRONSIDE, because of his strength and stature.  Edmund and Canute 

thereupon fell to, and fought five battles - O unhappy England, 

what a fighting-ground it was! - and then Ironside, who was a big 

man, proposed to Canute, who was a little man, that they two should 

fight it out in single combat.  If Canute had been the big man, he 

would probably have said yes, but, being the little man, he 

decidedly said no.  However, he declared that he was willing to 

divide the kingdom - to take all that lay north of Watling Street, 

as the old Roman military road from Dover to Chester was called, 

and to give Ironside all that lay south of it.  Most men being 

weary of so much bloodshed, this was done.  But Canute soon became 

sole King of England; for Ironside died suddenly within two months.  

Some think that he was killed, and killed by Canute's orders.  No 

one knows.

