





CHAPTER XXII - ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE SIXTH







PART THE FIRST





IT had been the wish of the late King, that while his infant son 

KING HENRY THE SIXTH, at this time only nine months old, was under 

age, the Duke of Gloucester should be appointed Regent.  The 

English Parliament, however, preferred to appoint a Council of 

Regency, with the Duke of Bedford at its head:  to be represented, 

in his absence only, by the Duke of Gloucester.  The Parliament 

would seem to have been wise in this, for Gloucester soon showed 

himself to be ambitious and troublesome, and, in the gratification 

of his own personal schemes, gave dangerous offence to the Duke of 

Burgundy, which was with difficulty adjusted.



As that duke declined the Regency of France, it was bestowed by the 

poor French King upon the Duke of Bedford.  But, the French King 

dying within two months, the Dauphin instantly asserted his claim 

to the French throne, and was actually crowned under the title of 

CHARLES THE SEVENTH.  The Duke of Bedford, to be a match for him, 

entered into a friendly league with the Dukes of Burgundy and 

Brittany, and gave them his two sisters in marriage.  War with 

France was immediately renewed, and the Perpetual Peace came to an 

untimely end.



In the first campaign, the English, aided by this alliance, were 

speedily successful.  As Scotland, however, had sent the French 

five thousand men, and might send more, or attack the North of 

England while England was busy with France, it was considered that 

it would be a good thing to offer the Scottish King, James, who had 

been so long imprisoned, his liberty, on his paying forty thousand 

pounds for his board and lodging during nineteen years, and 

engaging to forbid his subjects from serving under the flag of 

France.  It is pleasant to know, not only that the amiable captive 

at last regained his freedom upon these terms, but, that he married 

a noble English lady, with whom he had been long in love, and 

became an excellent King.  I am afraid we have met with some Kings 

in this history, and shall meet with some more, who would have been 

very much the better, and would have left the world much happier, 

if they had been imprisoned nineteen years too.



In the second campaign, the English gained a considerable victory 

at Verneuil, in a battle which was chiefly remarkable, otherwise, 

for their resorting to the odd expedient of tying their baggage-

horses together by the heads and tails, and jumbling them up with 

the baggage, so as to convert them into a sort of live 

fortification - which was found useful to the troops, but which I 

should think was not agreeable to the horses.  For three years 

afterwards very little was done, owing to both sides being too poor 

for war, which is a very expensive entertainment; but, a council 

was then held in Paris, in which it was decided to lay siege to the 

town of Orleans, which was a place of great importance to the 

Dauphin's cause.  An English army of ten thousand men was 

despatched on this service, under the command of the Earl of 

Salisbury, a general of fame.  He being unfortunately killed early 

in the siege, the Earl of Suffolk took his place; under whom 

(reinforced by SIR JOHN FALSTAFF, who brought up four hundred 

waggons laden with salt herrings and other provisions for the 

troops, and, beating off the French who tried to intercept him, 

came victorious out of a hot skirmish, which was afterwards called 

in jest the Battle of the Herrings) the town of Orleans was so 

completely hemmed in, that the besieged proposed to yield it up to 

their countryman the Duke of Burgundy.  The English general, 

however, replied that his English men had won it, so far, by their 

blood and valour, and that his English men must have it.  There 

seemed to be no hope for the town, or for the Dauphin, who was so 

dismayed that he even thought of flying to Scotland or to Spain - 

when a peasant girl rose up and changed the whole state of affairs.



The story of this peasant girl I have now to tell.





PART THE SECOND:  THE STORY OF JOAN OF ARC





IN a remote village among some wild hills in the province of 

Lorraine, there lived a countryman whose name was JACQUES D'ARC.  

He had a daughter, JOAN OF ARC, who was at this time in her 

twentieth year.  She had been a solitary girl from her childhood; 

she had often tended sheep and cattle for whole days where no human 

figure was seen or human voice heard; and she had often knelt, for 

hours together, in the gloomy, empty, little village chapel, 

looking up at the altar and at the dim lamp burning before it, 

until she fancied that she saw shadowy figures standing there, and 

even that she heard them speak to her.  The people in that part of 

France were very ignorant and superstitious, and they had many 

ghostly tales to tell about what they had dreamed, and what they 

saw among the lonely hills when the clouds and the mists were 

resting on them.  So, they easily believed that Joan saw strange 

sights, and they whispered among themselves that angels and spirits 

talked to her.



At last, Joan told her father that she had one day been surprised 

by a great unearthly light, and had afterwards heard a solemn 

voice, which said it was Saint Michael's voice, telling her that 

she was to go and help the Dauphin.  Soon after this (she said), 

Saint Catherine and Saint Margaret had appeared to her with 

sparkling crowns upon their heads, and had encouraged her to be 

virtuous and resolute.  These visions had returned sometimes; but 

the Voices very often; and the voices always said, 'Joan, thou art 

appointed by Heaven to go and help the Dauphin!'  She almost always 

heard them while the chapel bells were ringing.



There is no doubt, now, that Joan believed she saw and heard these 

things.  It is very well known that such delusions are a disease 

which is not by any means uncommon.  It is probable enough that 

there were figures of Saint Michael, and Saint Catherine, and Saint 

Margaret, in the little chapel (where they would be very likely to 

have shining crowns upon their heads), and that they first gave 

Joan the idea of those three personages.  She had long been a 

moping, fanciful girl, and, though she was a very good girl, I dare 

say she was a little vain, and wishful for notoriety.



Her father, something wiser than his neighbours, said, 'I tell 

thee, Joan, it is thy fancy.  Thou hadst better have a kind husband 

to take care of thee, girl, and work to employ thy mind!'  But Joan 

told him in reply, that she had taken a vow never to have a 

husband, and that she must go as Heaven directed her, to help the 

Dauphin.



It happened, unfortunately for her father's persuasions, and most 

unfortunately for the poor girl, too, that a party of the Dauphin's 

enemies found their way into the village while Joan's disorder was 

at this point, and burnt the chapel, and drove out the inhabitants.  

The cruelties she saw committed, touched Joan's heart and made her 

worse.  She said that the voices and the figures were now 

continually with her; that they told her she was the girl who, 

according to an old prophecy, was to deliver France; and she must 

go and help the Dauphin, and must remain with him until he should 

be crowned at Rheims:  and that she must travel a long way to a 

certain lord named BAUDRICOURT, who could and would, bring her into 

the Dauphin's presence.



As her father still said, 'I tell thee, Joan, it is thy fancy,' she 

set off to find out this lord, accompanied by an uncle, a poor 

village wheelwright and cart-maker, who believed in the reality of 

her visions.  They travelled a long way and went on and on, over a 

rough country, full of the Duke of Burgundy's men, and of all kinds 

of robbers and marauders, until they came to where this lord was.



When his servants told him that there was a poor peasant girl named 

Joan of Arc, accompanied by nobody but an old village wheelwright 

and cart-maker, who wished to see him because she was commanded to 

help the Dauphin and save France, Baudricourt burst out a-laughing, 

and bade them send the girl away.  But, he soon heard so much about 

her lingering in the town, and praying in the churches, and seeing 

visions, and doing harm to no one, that he sent for her, and 

questioned her.  As she said the same things after she had been 

well sprinkled with holy water as she had said before the 

sprinkling, Baudricourt began to think there might be something in 

it.  At all events, he thought it worth while to send her on to the 

town of Chinon, where the Dauphin was.  So, he bought her a horse, 

and a sword, and gave her two squires to conduct her.  As the 

Voices had told Joan that she was to wear a man's dress, now, she 

put one on, and girded her sword to her side, and bound spurs to 

her heels, and mounted her horse and rode away with her two 

squires.  As to her uncle the wheelwright, he stood staring at his 

niece in wonder until she was out of sight - as well he might - and 

then went home again.  The best place, too.



Joan and her two squires rode on and on, until they came to Chinon, 

where she was, after some doubt, admitted into the Dauphin's 

presence.  Picking him out immediately from all his court, she told 

him that she came commanded by Heaven to subdue his enemies and 

conduct him to his coronation at Rheims.  She also told him (or he 

pretended so afterwards, to make the greater impression upon his 

soldiers) a number of his secrets known only to himself, and, 

furthermore, she said there was an old, old sword in the cathedral 

of Saint Catherine at Fierbois, marked with five old crosses on the 

blade, which Saint Catherine had ordered her to wear.



Now, nobody knew anything about this old, old sword, but when the 

cathedral came to be examined - which was immediately done - there, 

sure enough, the sword was found!  The Dauphin then required a 

number of grave priests and bishops to give him their opinion 

whether the girl derived her power from good spirits or from evil 

spirits, which they held prodigiously long debates about, in the 

course of which several learned men fell fast asleep and snored 

loudly.  At last, when one gruff old gentleman had said to Joan, 

'What language do your Voices speak?' and when Joan had replied to 

the gruff old gentleman, 'A pleasanter language than yours,' they 

agreed that it was all correct, and that Joan of Arc was inspired 

from Heaven.  This wonderful circumstance put new heart into the 

Dauphin's soldiers when they heard of it, and dispirited the 

English army, who took Joan for a witch.



So Joan mounted horse again, and again rode on and on, until she 

came to Orleans.  But she rode now, as never peasant girl had 

ridden yet.  She rode upon a white war-horse, in a suit of 

glittering armour; with the old, old sword from the cathedral, 

newly burnished, in her belt; with a white flag carried before her, 

upon which were a picture of God, and the words JESUS MARIA.  In 

this splendid state, at the head of a great body of troops 

escorting provisions of all kinds for the starving inhabitants of 

Orleans, she appeared before that beleaguered city.



When the people on the walls beheld her, they cried out 'The Maid 

is come!  The Maid of the Prophecy is come to deliver us!'  And 

this, and the sight of the Maid fighting at the head of their men, 

made the French so bold, and made the English so fearful, that the 

English line of forts was soon broken, the troops and provisions 

were got into the town, and Orleans was saved.



Joan, henceforth called THE MAID OF ORLEANS, remained within the 

walls for a few days, and caused letters to be thrown over, 

ordering Lord Suffolk and his Englishmen to depart from before the 

town according to the will of Heaven.  As the English general very 

positively declined to believe that Joan knew anything about the 

will of Heaven (which did not mend the matter with his soldiers, 

for they stupidly said if she were not inspired she was a witch, 

and it was of no use to fight against a witch), she mounted her 

white war-horse again, and ordered her white banner to advance.



The besiegers held the bridge, and some strong towers upon the 

bridge; and here the Maid of Orleans attacked them.  The fight was 

fourteen hours long.  She planted a scaling ladder with her own 

hands, and mounted a tower wall, but was struck by an English arrow 

in the neck, and fell into the trench.  She was carried away and 

the arrow was taken out, during which operation she screamed and 

cried with the pain, as any other girl might have done; but 

presently she said that the Voices were speaking to her and 

soothing her to rest.  After a while, she got up, and was again 

foremost in the fight.  When the English who had seen her fall and 

supposed her dead, saw this, they were troubled with the strangest 

fears, and some of them cried out that they beheld Saint Michael on 

a white horse (probably Joan herself) fighting for the French.  

They lost the bridge, and lost the towers, and next day set their 

chain of forts on fire, and left the place.



But as Lord Suffolk himself retired no farther than the town of 

Jargeau, which was only a few miles off, the Maid of Orleans 

besieged him there, and he was taken prisoner.  As the white banner 

scaled the wall, she was struck upon the head with a stone, and was 

again tumbled down into the ditch; but, she only cried all the 

more, as she lay there, 'On, on, my countrymen!  And fear nothing, 

for the Lord hath delivered them into our hands!'  After this new 

success of the Maid's, several other fortresses and places which 

had previously held out against the Dauphin were delivered up 

without a battle; and at Patay she defeated the remainder of the 

English army, and set up her victorious white banner on a field 

where twelve hundred Englishmen lay dead.



She now urged the Dauphin (who always kept out of the way when 

there was any fighting) to proceed to Rheims, as the first part of 

her mission was accomplished; and to complete the whole by being 

crowned there.  The Dauphin was in no particular hurry to do this, 

as Rheims was a long way off, and the English and the Duke of 

Burgundy were still strong in the country through which the road 

lay.  However, they set forth, with ten thousand men, and again the 

Maid of Orleans rode on and on, upon her white war-horse, and in 

her shining armour.  Whenever they came to a town which yielded 

readily, the soldiers believed in her; but, whenever they came to a 

town which gave them any trouble, they began to murmur that she was 

an impostor.  The latter was particularly the case at Troyes, which 

finally yielded, however, through the persuasion of one Richard, a 

friar of the place.  Friar Richard was in the old doubt about the 

Maid of Orleans, until he had sprinkled her well with holy water, 

and had also well sprinkled the threshold of the gate by which she 

came into the city.  Finding that it made no change in her or the 

gate, he said, as the other grave old gentlemen had said, that it 

was all right, and became her great ally.



So, at last, by dint of riding on and on, the Maid of Orleans, and 

the Dauphin, and the ten thousand sometimes believing and sometimes 

unbelieving men, came to Rheims.  And in the great cathedral of 

Rheims, the Dauphin actually was crowned Charles the Seventh in a 

great assembly of the people.  Then, the Maid, who with her white 

banner stood beside the King in that hour of his triumph, kneeled 

down upon the pavement at his feet, and said, with tears, that what 

she had been inspired to do, was done, and that the only recompense 

she asked for, was, that she should now have leave to go back to 

her distant home, and her sturdily incredulous father, and her 

first simple escort the village wheelwright and cart-maker.  But 

the King said 'No!' and made her and her family as noble as a King 

could, and settled upon her the income of a Count.



Ah! happy had it been for the Maid of Orleans, if she had resumed 

her rustic dress that day, and had gone home to the little chapel 

and the wild hills, and had forgotten all these things, and had 

been a good man's wife, and had heard no stranger voices than the 

voices of little children!



It was not to be, and she continued helping the King (she did a 

world for him, in alliance with Friar Richard), and trying to 

improve the lives of the coarse soldiers, and leading a religious, 

an unselfish, and a modest life, herself, beyond any doubt.  Still, 

many times she prayed the King to let her go home; and once she 

even took off her bright armour and hung it up in a church, meaning 

never to wear it more.  But, the King always won her back again - 

while she was of any use to him - and so she went on and on and on, 

to her doom.



When the Duke of Bedford, who was a very able man, began to be 

active for England, and, by bringing the war back into France and 

by holding the Duke of Burgundy to his faith, to distress and 

disturb Charles very much, Charles sometimes asked the Maid of 

Orleans what the Voices said about it?  But, the Voices had become 

(very like ordinary voices in perplexed times) contradictory and 

confused, so that now they said one thing, and now said another, 

and the Maid lost credit every day.  Charles marched on Paris, 

which was opposed to him, and attacked the suburb of Saint Honore.  

In this fight, being again struck down into the ditch, she was 

abandoned by the whole army.  She lay unaided among a heap of dead, 

and crawled out how she could.  Then, some of her believers went 

over to an opposition Maid, Catherine of La Rochelle, who said she 

was inspired to tell where there were treasures of buried money - 

though she never did - and then Joan accidentally broke the old, 

old sword, and others said that her power was broken with it.  

Finally, at the siege of Compiägne, held by the Duke of Burgundy, 

where she did valiant service, she was basely left alone in a 

retreat, though facing about and fighting to the last; and an 

archer pulled her off her horse.



O the uproar that was made, and the thanksgivings that were sung, 

about the capture of this one poor country-girl!  O the way in 

which she was demanded to be tried for sorcery and heresy, and 

anything else you like, by the Inquisitor-General of France, and by 

this great man, and by that great man, until it is wearisome to 

think of! She was bought at last by the Bishop of Beauvais for ten 

thousand francs, and was shut up in her narrow prison:  plain Joan 

of Arc again, and Maid of Orleans no more.



I should never have done if I were to tell you how they had Joan 

out to examine her, and cross-examine her, and re-examine her, and 

worry her into saying anything and everything; and how all sorts of 

scholars and doctors bestowed their utmost tediousness upon her.  

Sixteen times she was brought out and shut up again, and worried, 

and entrapped, and argued with, until she was heart-sick of the 

dreary business.  On the last occasion of this kind she was brought 

into a burial-place at Rouen, dismally decorated with a scaffold, 

and a stake and faggots, and the executioner, and a pulpit with a 

friar therein, and an awful sermon ready.  It is very affecting to 

know that even at that pass the poor girl honoured the mean vermin 

of a King, who had so used her for his purposes and so abandoned 

her; and, that while she had been regardless of reproaches heaped 

upon herself, she spoke out courageously for him.



It was natural in one so young to hold to life.  To save her life, 

she signed a declaration prepared for her - signed it with a cross, 

for she couldn't write - that all her visions and Voices had come 

from the Devil.  Upon her recanting the past, and protesting that 

she would never wear a man's dress in future, she was condemned to 

imprisonment for life, 'on the bread of sorrow and the water of 

affliction.'



But, on the bread of sorrow and the water of affliction, the 

visions and the Voices soon returned.  It was quite natural that 

they should do so, for that kind of disease is much aggravated by 

fasting, loneliness, and anxiety of mind.  It was not only got out 

of Joan that she considered herself inspired again, but, she was 

taken in a man's dress, which had been left - to entrap her - in 

her prison, and which she put on, in her solitude; perhaps, in 

remembrance of her past glories, perhaps, because the imaginary 

Voices told her.  For this relapse into the sorcery and heresy and 

anything else you like, she was sentenced to be burnt to death.  

And, in the market-place of Rouen, in the hideous dress which the 

monks had invented for such spectacles; with priests and bishops 

sitting in a gallery looking on, though some had the Christian 

grace to go away, unable to endure the infamous scene; this 

shrieking girl - last seen amidst the smoke and fire, holding a 

crucifix between her hands; last heard, calling upon Christ - was 

burnt to ashes.  They threw her ashes into the river Seine; but 

they will rise against her murderers on the last day.



From the moment of her capture, neither the French King nor one 

single man in all his court raised a finger to save her.  It is no 

defence of them that they may have never really believed in her, or 

that they may have won her victories by their skill and bravery.  

The more they pretended to believe in her, the more they had caused 

her to believe in herself; and she had ever been true to them, ever 

brave, ever nobly devoted.  But, it is no wonder, that they, who 

were in all things false to themselves, false to one another, false 

to their country, false to Heaven, false to Earth, should be 

monsters of ingratitude and treachery to a helpless peasant girl.



In the picturesque old town of Rouen, where weeds and grass grow 

high on the cathedral towers, and the venerable Norman streets are 

still warm in the blessed sunlight though the monkish fires that 

once gleamed horribly upon them have long grown cold, there is a 

statue of Joan of Arc, in the scene of her last agony, the square 

to which she has given its present name.  I know some statues of 

modern times - even in the World's metropolis, I think - which 

commemorate less constancy, less earnestness, smaller claims upon 

the world's attention, and much greater impostors.





PART THE THIRD





BAD deeds seldom prosper, happily for mankind; and the English 

cause gained no advantage from the cruel death of Joan of Arc.  For 

a long time, the war went heavily on.  The Duke of Bedford died; 

the alliance with the Duke of Burgundy was broken; and Lord Talbot 

became a great general on the English side in France.  But, two of 

the consequences of wars are, Famine - because the people cannot 

peacefully cultivate the ground - and Pestilence, which comes of 

want, misery, and suffering.  Both these horrors broke out in both 

countries, and lasted for two wretched years.  Then, the war went 

on again, and came by slow degrees to be so badly conducted by the 

English government, that, within twenty years from the execution of 

the Maid of Orleans, of all the great French conquests, the town of 

Calais alone remained in English hands.



While these victories and defeats were taking place in the course 

of time, many strange things happened at home.  The young King, as 

he grew up, proved to be very unlike his great father, and showed 

himself a miserable puny creature.  There was no harm in him - he 

had a great aversion to shedding blood:  which was something - but, 

he was a weak, silly, helpless young man, and a mere shuttlecock to 

the great lordly battledores about the Court.



Of these battledores, Cardinal Beaufort, a relation of the King, 

and the Duke of Gloucester, were at first the most powerful.  The 

Duke of Gloucester had a wife, who was nonsensically accused of 

practising witchcraft to cause the King's death and lead to her 

husband's coming to the throne, he being the next heir.  She was 

charged with having, by the help of a ridiculous old woman named 

Margery (who was called a witch), made a little waxen doll in the 

King's likeness, and put it before a slow fire that it might 

gradually melt away.  It was supposed, in such cases, that the 

death of the person whom the doll was made to represent, was sure 

to happen.  Whether the duchess was as ignorant as the rest of 

them, and really did make such a doll with such an intention, I 

don't know; but, you and I know very well that she might have made 

a thousand dolls, if she had been stupid enough, and might have 

melted them all, without hurting the King or anybody else.  

However, she was tried for it, and so was old Margery, and so was 

one of the duke's chaplains, who was charged with having assisted 

them.  Both he and Margery were put to death, and the duchess, 

after being taken on foot and bearing a lighted candle, three times 

round the City, as a penance, was imprisoned for life.  The duke, 

himself, took all this pretty quietly, and made as little stir 

about the matter as if he were rather glad to be rid of the 

duchess.



But, he was not destined to keep himself out of trouble long.  The 

royal shuttlecock being three-and-twenty, the battledores were very 

anxious to get him married.  The Duke of Gloucester wanted him to 

marry a daughter of the Count of Armagnac; but, the Cardinal and 

the Earl of Suffolk were all for MARGARET, the daughter of the King 

of Sicily, who they knew was a resolute, ambitious woman and would 

govern the King as she chose.  To make friends with this lady, the 

Earl of Suffolk, who went over to arrange the match, consented to 

accept her for the King's wife without any fortune, and even to 

give up the two most valuable possessions England then had in 

France.  So, the marriage was arranged, on terms very advantageous 

to the lady; and Lord Suffolk brought her to England, and she was 

married at Westminster.  On what pretence this queen and her party 

charged the Duke of Gloucester with high treason within a couple of 

years, it is impossible to make out, the matter is so confused; 

but, they pretended that the King's life was in danger, and they 

took the duke prisoner.  A fortnight afterwards, he was found dead 

in bed (they said), and his body was shown to the people, and Lord 

Suffolk came in for the best part of his estates.  You know by this 

time how strangely liable state prisoners were to sudden death.



If Cardinal Beaufort had any hand in this matter, it did him no 

good, for he died within six weeks; thinking it very hard and 

curious - at eighty years old! - that he could not live to be Pope.



This was the time when England had completed her loss of all her 

great French conquests.  The people charged the loss principally 

upon the Earl of Suffolk, now a duke, who had made those easy terms 

about the Royal Marriage, and who, they believed, had even been 

bought by France.  So he was impeached as a traitor, on a great 

number of charges, but chiefly on accusations of having aided the 

French King, and of designing to make his own son King of England.  

The Commons and the people being violent against him, the King was 

made (by his friends) to interpose to save him, by banishing him 

for five years, and proroguing the Parliament.  The duke had much 

ado to escape from a London mob, two thousand strong, who lay in 

wait for him in St. Giles's fields; but, he got down to his own 

estates in Suffolk, and sailed away from Ipswich.  Sailing across 

the Channel, he sent into Calais to know if he might land there; 

but, they kept his boat and men in the harbour, until an English 

ship, carrying a hundred and fifty men and called the Nicholas of 

the Tower, came alongside his little vessel, and ordered him on 

board.  'Welcome, traitor, as men say,' was the captain's grim and 

not very respectful salutation.  He was kept on board, a prisoner, 

for eight-and-forty hours, and then a small boat appeared rowing 

toward the ship.  As this boat came nearer, it was seen to have in 

it a block, a rusty sword, and an executioner in a black mask.  The 

duke was handed down into it, and there his head was cut off with 

six strokes of the rusty sword.  Then, the little boat rowed away 

to Dover beach, where the body was cast out, and left until the 

duchess claimed it.  By whom, high in authority, this murder was 

committed, has never appeared.  No one was ever punished for it.



There now arose in Kent an Irishman, who gave himself the name of 

Mortimer, but whose real name was JACK CADE.  Jack, in imitation of 

Wat Tyler, though he was a very different and inferior sort of man, 

addressed the Kentish men upon their wrongs, occasioned by the bad 

government of England, among so many battledores and such a poor 

shuttlecock; and the Kentish men rose up to the number of twenty 

thousand.  Their place of assembly was Blackheath, where, headed by 

Jack, they put forth two papers, which they called 'The Complaint 

of the Commons of Kent,' and 'The Requests of the Captain of the 

Great Assembly in Kent.'  They then retired to Sevenoaks.  The 

royal army coming up with them here, they beat it and killed their 

general.  Then, Jack dressed himself in the dead general's armour, 

and led his men to London.



Jack passed into the City from Southwark, over the bridge, and 

entered it in triumph, giving the strictest orders to his men not 

to plunder.  Having made a show of his forces there, while the 

citizens looked on quietly, he went back into Southwark in good 

order, and passed the night.  Next day, he came back again, having 

got hold in the meantime of Lord Say, an unpopular nobleman.  Says 

Jack to the Lord Mayor and judges:  'Will you be so good as to make 

a tribunal in Guildhall, and try me this nobleman?'  The court 

being hastily made, he was found guilty, and Jack and his men cut 

his head off on Cornhill.  They also cut off the head of his son-

in-law, and then went back in good order to Southwark again.



But, although the citizens could bear the beheading of an unpopular 

lord, they could not bear to have their houses pillaged.  And it 

did so happen that Jack, after dinner - perhaps he had drunk a 

little too much - began to plunder the house where he lodged; upon 

which, of course, his men began to imitate him.  Wherefore, the 

Londoners took counsel with Lord Scales, who had a thousand 

soldiers in the Tower; and defended London Bridge, and kept Jack 

and his people out.  This advantage gained, it was resolved by 

divers great men to divide Jack's army in the old way, by making a 

great many promises on behalf of the state, that were never 

intended to be performed.  This DID divide them; some of Jack's men 

saying that they ought to take the conditions which were offered, 

and others saying that they ought not, for they were only a snare; 

some going home at once; others staying where they were; and all 

doubting and quarrelling among themselves.



Jack, who was in two minds about fighting or accepting a pardon, 

and who indeed did both, saw at last that there was nothing to 

expect from his men, and that it was very likely some of them would 

deliver him up and get a reward of a thousand marks, which was 

offered for his apprehension.  So, after they had travelled and 

quarrelled all the way from Southwark to Blackheath, and from 

Blackheath to Rochester, he mounted a good horse and galloped away 

into Sussex.  But, there galloped after him, on a better horse, one 

Alexander Iden, who came up with him, had a hard fight with him, 

and killed him.  Jack's head was set aloft on London Bridge, with 

the face looking towards Blackheath, where he had raised his flag; 

and Alexander Iden got the thousand marks.



It is supposed by some, that the Duke of York, who had been removed 

from a high post abroad through the Queen's influence, and sent out 

of the way, to govern Ireland, was at the bottom of this rising of 

Jack and his men, because he wanted to trouble the government.  He 

claimed (though not yet publicly) to have a better right to the 

throne than Henry of Lancaster, as one of the family of the Earl of 

March, whom Henry the Fourth had set aside.  Touching this claim, 

which, being through female relationship, was not according to the 

usual descent, it is enough to say that Henry the Fourth was the 

free choice of the people and the Parliament, and that his family 

had now reigned undisputed for sixty years.  The memory of Henry 

the Fifth was so famous, and the English people loved it so much, 

that the Duke of York's claim would, perhaps, never have been 

thought of (it would have been so hopeless) but for the unfortunate 

circumstance of the present King's being by this time quite an 

idiot, and the country very ill governed.  These two circumstances 

gave the Duke of York a power he could not otherwise have had.



Whether the Duke knew anything of Jack Cade, or not, he came over 

from Ireland while Jack's head was on London Bridge; being secretly 

advised that the Queen was setting up his enemy, the Duke of 

Somerset, against him.  He went to Westminster, at the head of four 

thousand men, and on his knees before the King, represented to him 

the bad state of the country, and petitioned him to summon a 

Parliament to consider it.  This the King promised.  When the 

Parliament was summoned, the Duke of York accused the Duke of 

Somerset, and the Duke of Somerset accused the Duke of York; and, 

both in and out of Parliament, the followers of each party were 

full of violence and hatred towards the other.  At length the Duke 

of York put himself at the head of a large force of his tenants, 

and, in arms, demanded the reformation of the Government.  Being 

shut out of London, he encamped at Dartford, and the royal army 

encamped at Blackheath.  According as either side triumphed, the 

Duke of York was arrested, or the Duke of Somerset was arrested.  

The trouble ended, for the moment, in the Duke of York renewing his 

oath of allegiance, and going in peace to one of his own castles.



Half a year afterwards the Queen gave birth to a son, who was very 

ill received by the people, and not believed to be the son of the 

King.  It shows the Duke of York to have been a moderate man, 

unwilling to involve England in new troubles, that he did not take 

advantage of the general discontent at this time, but really acted 

for the public good.  He was made a member of the cabinet, and the 

King being now so much worse that he could not be carried about and 

shown to the people with any decency, the duke was made Lord 

Protector of the kingdom, until the King should recover, or the 

Prince should come of age.  At the same time the Duke of Somerset 

was committed to the Tower.  So, now the Duke of Somerset was down, 

and the Duke of York was up.  By the end of the year, however, the 

King recovered his memory and some spark of sense; upon which the 

Queen used her power - which recovered with him - to get the 

Protector disgraced, and her favourite released.  So now the Duke 

of York was down, and the Duke of Somerset was up.



These ducal ups and downs gradually separated the whole nation into 

the two parties of York and Lancaster, and led to those terrible 

civil wars long known as the Wars of the Red and White Roses, 

because the red rose was the badge of the House of Lancaster, and 

the white rose was the badge of the House of York.



The Duke of York, joined by some other powerful noblemen of the 

White Rose party, and leading a small army, met the King with 

another small army at St. Alban's, and demanded that the Duke of 

Somerset should be given up.  The poor King, being made to say in 

answer that he would sooner die, was instantly attacked.  The Duke 

of Somerset was killed, and the King himself was wounded in the 

neck, and took refuge in the house of a poor tanner.  Whereupon, 

the Duke of York went to him, led him with great submission to the 

Abbey, and said he was very sorry for what had happened.  Having 

now the King in his possession, he got a Parliament summoned and 

himself once more made Protector, but, only for a few months; for, 

on the King getting a little better again, the Queen and her party 

got him into their possession, and disgraced the Duke once more.  

So, now the Duke of York was down again.



Some of the best men in power, seeing the danger of these constant 

changes, tried even then to prevent the Red and the White Rose 

Wars.  They brought about a great council in London between the two 

parties.  The White Roses assembled in Blackfriars, the Red Roses 

in Whitefriars; and some good priests communicated between them, 

and made the proceedings known at evening to the King and the 

judges.  They ended in a peaceful agreement that there should be no 

more quarrelling; and there was a great royal procession to St. 

Paul's, in which the Queen walked arm-in-arm with her old enemy, 

the Duke of York, to show the people how comfortable they all were.  

This state of peace lasted half a year, when a dispute between the 

Earl of Warwick (one of the Duke's powerful friends) and some of 

the King's servants at Court, led to an attack upon that Earl - who 

was a White Rose - and to a sudden breaking out of all old 

animosities.  So, here were greater ups and downs than ever.



There were even greater ups and downs than these, soon after.  

After various battles, the Duke of York fled to Ireland, and his 

son the Earl of March to Calais, with their friends the Earls of 

Salisbury and Warwick; and a Parliament was held declaring them all 

traitors.  Little the worse for this, the Earl of Warwick presently 

came back, landed in Kent, was joined by the Archbishop of 

Canterbury and other powerful noblemen and gentlemen, engaged the 

King's forces at Northampton, signally defeated them, and took the 

King himself prisoner, who was found in his tent.  Warwick would 

have been glad, I dare say, to have taken the Queen and Prince too, 

but they escaped into Wales and thence into Scotland.



The King was carried by the victorious force straight to London, 

and made to call a new Parliament, which immediately declared that 

the Duke of York and those other noblemen were not traitors, but 

excellent subjects.  Then, back comes the Duke from Ireland at the 

head of five hundred horsemen, rides from London to Westminster, 

and enters the House of Lords.  There, he laid his hand upon the 

cloth of gold which covered the empty throne, as if he had half a 

mind to sit down in it - but he did not.  On the Archbishop of 

Canterbury, asking him if he would visit the King, who was in his 

palace close by, he replied, 'I know no one in this country, my 

lord, who ought not to visit ME.'  None of the lords present spoke 

a single word; so, the duke went out as he had come in, established 

himself royally in the King's palace, and, six days afterwards, 

sent in to the Lords a formal statement of his claim to the throne.  

The lords went to the King on this momentous subject, and after a 

great deal of discussion, in which the judges and the other law 

officers were afraid to give an opinion on either side, the 

question was compromised.  It was agreed that the present King 

should retain the crown for his life, and that it should then pass 

to the Duke of York and his heirs.



But, the resolute Queen, determined on asserting her son's right, 

would hear of no such thing.  She came from Scotland to the north 

of England, where several powerful lords armed in her cause.  The 

Duke of York, for his part, set off with some five thousand men, a 

little time before Christmas Day, one thousand four hundred and 

sixty, to give her battle.  He lodged at Sandal Castle, near 

Wakefield, and the Red Roses defied him to come out on Wakefield 

Green, and fight them then and there.  His generals said, he had 

best wait until his gallant son, the Earl of March, came up with 

his power; but, he was determined to accept the challenge.  He did 

so, in an evil hour.  He was hotly pressed on all sides, two 

thousand of his men lay dead on Wakefield Green, and he himself was 

taken prisoner.  They set him down in mock state on an ant-hill, 

and twisted grass about his head, and pretended to pay court to him 

on their knees, saying, 'O King, without a kingdom, and Prince 

without a people, we hope your gracious Majesty is very well and 

happy!'  They did worse than this; they cut his head off, and 

handed it on a pole to the Queen, who laughed with delight when she 

saw it (you recollect their walking so religiously and comfortably 

to St. Paul's!), and had it fixed, with a paper crown upon its 

head, on the walls of York.  The Earl of Salisbury lost his head, 

too; and the Duke of York's second son, a handsome boy who was 

flying with his tutor over Wakefield Bridge, was stabbed in the 

heart by a murderous, lord - Lord Clifford by name - whose father 

had been killed by the White Roses in the fight at St. Alban's.  

There was awful sacrifice of life in this battle, for no quarter 

was given, and the Queen was wild for revenge.  When men 

unnaturally fight against their own countrymen, they are always 

observed to be more unnaturally cruel and filled with rage than 

they are against any other enemy.



But, Lord Clifford had stabbed the second son of the Duke of York - 

not the first.  The eldest son, Edward Earl of March, was at 

Gloucester; and, vowing vengeance for the death of his father, his 

brother, and their faithful friends, he began to march against the 

Queen.  He had to turn and fight a great body of Welsh and Irish 

first, who worried his advance.  These he defeated in a great fight 

at Mortimer's Cross, near Hereford, where he beheaded a number of 

the Red Roses taken in battle, in retaliation for the beheading of 

the White Roses at Wakefield.  The Queen had the next turn of 

beheading.  Having moved towards London, and falling in, between 

St. Alban's and Barnet, with the Earl of Warwick and the Duke of 

Norfolk, White Roses both, who were there with an army to oppose 

her, and had got the King with them; she defeated them with great 

loss, and struck off the heads of two prisoners of note, who were 

in the King's tent with him, and to whom the King had promised his 

protection.  Her triumph, however, was very short.  She had no 

treasure, and her army subsisted by plunder.  This caused them to 

be hated and dreaded by the people, and particularly by the London 

people, who were wealthy.  As soon as the Londoners heard that 

Edward, Earl of March, united with the Earl of Warwick, was 

advancing towards the city, they refused to send the Queen 

supplies, and made a great rejoicing.



The Queen and her men retreated with all speed, and Edward and 

Warwick came on, greeted with loud acclamations on every side.  The 

courage, beauty, and virtues of young Edward could not be 

sufficiently praised by the whole people.  He rode into London like 

a conqueror, and met with an enthusiastic welcome.  A few days 

afterwards, Lord Falconbridge and the Bishop of Exeter assembled 

the citizens in St. John's Field, Clerkenwell, and asked them if 

they would have Henry of Lancaster for their King?  To this they 

all roared, 'No, no, no!' and 'King Edward!  King Edward!'  Then, 

said those noblemen, would they love and serve young Edward?  To 

this they all cried, 'Yes, yes!' and threw up their caps and 

clapped their hands, and cheered tremendously.



Therefore, it was declared that by joining the Queen and not 

protecting those two prisoners of note, Henry of Lancaster had 

forfeited the crown; and Edward of York was proclaimed King.  He 

made a great speech to the applauding people at Westminster, and 

sat down as sovereign of England on that throne, on the golden 

covering of which his father - worthy of a better fate than the 

bloody axe which cut the thread of so many lives in England, 

through so many years - had laid his hand.

