





CHAPTER XXXII - ENGLAND UNDER JAMES THE FIRST







'OUR cousin of Scotland' was ugly, awkward, and shuffling both in 

mind and person.  His tongue was much too large for his mouth, his 

legs were much too weak for his body, and his dull goggle-eyes 

stared and rolled like an idiot's.  He was cunning, covetous, 

wasteful, idle, drunken, greedy, dirty, cowardly, a great swearer, 

and the most conceited man on earth.  His figure - what is commonly 

called rickety from his birth - presented a most ridiculous 

appearance, dressed in thick padded clothes, as a safeguard against 

being stabbed (of which he lived in continual fear), of a grass-

green colour from head to foot, with a hunting-horn dangling at his 

side instead of a sword, and his hat and feather sticking over one 

eye, or hanging on the back of his head, as he happened to toss it 

on.  He used to loll on the necks of his favourite courtiers, and 

slobber their faces, and kiss and pinch their cheeks; and the 

greatest favourite he ever had, used to sign himself in his letters 

to his royal master, His Majesty's 'dog and slave,' and used to 

address his majesty as 'his Sowship.'  His majesty was the worst 

rider ever seen, and thought himself the best.  He was one of the 

most impertinent talkers (in the broadest Scotch) ever heard, and 

boasted of being unanswerable in all manner of argument.  He wrote 

some of the most wearisome treatises ever read - among others, a 

book upon witchcraft, in which he was a devout believer - and 

thought himself a prodigy of authorship.  He thought, and wrote, 

and said, that a king had a right to make and unmake what laws he 

pleased, and ought to be accountable to nobody on earth.  This is 

the plain, true character of the personage whom the greatest men 

about the court praised and flattered to that degree, that I doubt 

if there be anything much more shameful in the annals of human 

nature.



He came to the English throne with great ease.  The miseries of a 

disputed succession had been felt so long, and so dreadfully, that 

he was proclaimed within a few hours of Elizabeth's death, and was 

accepted by the nation, even without being asked to give any pledge 

that he would govern well, or that he would redress crying 

grievances.  He took a month to come from Edinburgh to London; and, 

by way of exercising his new power, hanged a pickpocket on the 

journey without any trial, and knighted everybody he could lay hold 

of.  He made two hundred knights before he got to his palace in 

London, and seven hundred before he had been in it three months.  

He also shovelled sixty-two new peers into the House of Lords - and 

there was a pretty large sprinkling of Scotchmen among them, you 

may believe.



His Sowship's prime Minister, CECIL (for I cannot do better than 

call his majesty what his favourite called him), was the enemy of 

Sir Walter Raleigh, and also of Sir Walter's political friend, LORD 

COBHAM; and his Sowship's first trouble was a plot originated by 

these two, and entered into by some others, with the old object of 

seizing the King and keeping him in imprisonment until he should 

change his ministers.  There were Catholic priests in the plot, and 

there were Puritan noblemen too; for, although the Catholics and 

Puritans were strongly opposed to each other, they united at this 

time against his Sowship, because they knew that he had a design 

against both, after pretending to be friendly to each; this design 

being to have only one high and convenient form of the Protestant 

religion, which everybody should be bound to belong to, whether 

they liked it or not.  This plot was mixed up with another, which 

may or may not have had some reference to placing on the throne, at 

some time, the LADY ARABELLA STUART; whose misfortune it was, to be 

the daughter of the younger brother of his Sowship's father, but 

who was quite innocent of any part in the scheme.  Sir Walter 

Raleigh was accused on the confession of Lord Cobham - a miserable 

creature, who said one thing at one time, and another thing at 

another time, and could be relied upon in nothing.  The trial of 

Sir Walter Raleigh lasted from eight in the morning until nearly 

midnight; he defended himself with such eloquence, genius, and 

spirit against all accusations, and against the insults of COKE, 

the Attorney-General - who, according to the custom of the time, 

foully abused him - that those who went there detesting the 

prisoner, came away admiring him, and declaring that anything so 

wonderful and so captivating was never heard.  He was found guilty, 

nevertheless, and sentenced to death.  Execution was deferred, and 

he was taken to the Tower.  The two Catholic priests, less 

fortunate, were executed with the usual atrocity; and Lord Cobham 

and two others were pardoned on the scaffold.  His Sowship thought 

it wonderfully knowing in him to surprise the people by pardoning 

these three at the very block; but, blundering, and bungling, as 

usual, he had very nearly overreached himself.  For, the messenger 

on horseback who brought the pardon, came so late, that he was 

pushed to the outside of the crowd, and was obliged to shout and 

roar out what he came for.  The miserable Cobham did not gain much 

by being spared that day.  He lived, both as a prisoner and a 

beggar, utterly despised, and miserably poor, for thirteen years, 

and then died in an old outhouse belonging to one of his former 

servants.



This plot got rid of, and Sir Walter Raleigh safely shut up in the 

Tower, his Sowship held a great dispute with the Puritans on their 

presenting a petition to him, and had it all his own way - not so 

very wonderful, as he would talk continually, and would not hear 

anybody else - and filled the Bishops with admiration.  It was 

comfortably settled that there was to be only one form of religion, 

and that all men were to think exactly alike.  But, although this 

was arranged two centuries and a half ago, and although the 

arrangement was supported by much fining and imprisonment, I do not 

find that it is quite successful, even yet.



His Sowship, having that uncommonly high opinion of himself as a 

king, had a very low opinion of Parliament as a power that 

audaciously wanted to control him.  When he called his first 

Parliament after he had been king a year, he accordingly thought he 

would take pretty high ground with them, and told them that he 

commanded them 'as an absolute king.'  The Parliament thought those 

strong words, and saw the necessity of upholding their authority.  

His Sowship had three children:  Prince Henry, Prince Charles, and 

the Princess Elizabeth.  It would have been well for one of these, 

and we shall too soon see which, if he had learnt a little wisdom 

concerning Parliaments from his father's obstinacy.



Now, the people still labouring under their old dread of the 

Catholic religion, this Parliament revived and strengthened the 

severe laws against it.  And this so angered ROBERT CATESBY, a 

restless Catholic gentleman of an old family, that he formed one of 

the most desperate and terrible designs ever conceived in the mind 

of man; no less a scheme than the Gunpowder Plot.



His object was, when the King, lords, and commons, should be 

assembled at the next opening of Parliament, to blow them up, one 

and all, with a great mine of gunpowder.  The first person to whom 

he confided this horrible idea was THOMAS WINTER, a Worcestershire 

gentleman who had served in the army abroad, and had been secretly 

employed in Catholic projects.  While Winter was yet undecided, and 

when he had gone over to the Netherlands, to learn from the Spanish 

Ambassador there whether there was any hope of Catholics being 

relieved through the intercession of the King of Spain with his 

Sowship, he found at Ostend a tall, dark, daring man, whom he had 

known when they were both soldiers abroad, and whose name was GUIDO 

- or GUY - FAWKES.  Resolved to join the plot, he proposed it to 

this man, knowing him to be the man for any desperate deed, and 

they two came back to England together.  Here, they admitted two 

other conspirators; THOMAS PERCY, related to the Earl of 

Northumberland, and JOHN WRIGHT, his brother-in-law.  All these met 

together in a solitary house in the open fields which were then 

near Clement's Inn, now a closely blocked-up part of London; and 

when they had all taken a great oath of secrecy, Catesby told the 

rest what his plan was.  They then went up-stairs into a garret, 

and received the Sacrament from FATHER GERARD, a Jesuit, who is 

said not to have known actually of the Gunpowder Plot, but who, I 

think, must have had his suspicions that there was something 

desperate afoot.



Percy was a Gentleman Pensioner, and as he had occasional duties to 

perform about the Court, then kept at Whitehall, there would be 

nothing suspicious in his living at Westminster.  So, having looked 

well about him, and having found a house to let, the back of which 

joined the Parliament House, he hired it of a person named FERRIS, 

for the purpose of undermining the wall.  Having got possession of 

this house, the conspirators hired another on the Lambeth side of 

the Thames, which they used as a storehouse for wood, gunpowder, 

and other combustible matters.  These were to be removed at night 

(and afterwards were removed), bit by bit, to the house at 

Westminster; and, that there might be some trusty person to keep 

watch over the Lambeth stores, they admitted another conspirator, 

by name ROBERT KAY, a very poor Catholic gentleman.



All these arrangements had been made some months, and it was a 

dark, wintry, December night, when the conspirators, who had been 

in the meantime dispersed to avoid observation, met in the house at 

Westminster, and began to dig.  They had laid in a good stock of 

eatables, to avoid going in and out, and they dug and dug with 

great ardour.  But, the wall being tremendously thick, and the work 

very severe, they took into their plot CHRISTOPHER WRIGHT, a 

younger brother of John Wright, that they might have a new pair of 

hands to help.  And Christopher Wright fell to like a fresh man, 

and they dug and dug by night and by day, and Fawkes stood sentinel 

all the time.  And if any man's heart seemed to fail him at all, 

Fawkes said, 'Gentlemen, we have abundance of powder and shot here, 

and there is no fear of our being taken alive, even if discovered.'  

The same Fawkes, who, in the capacity of sentinel, was always 

prowling about, soon picked up the intelligence that the King had 

prorogued the Parliament again, from the seventh of February, the 

day first fixed upon, until the third of October.  When the 

conspirators knew this, they agreed to separate until after the 

Christmas holidays, and to take no notice of each other in the 

meanwhile, and never to write letters to one another on any 

account.  So, the house in Westminster was shut up again, and I 

suppose the neighbours thought that those strange-looking men who 

lived there so gloomily, and went out so seldom, were gone away to 

have a merry Christmas somewhere.



It was the beginning of February, sixteen hundred and five, when 

Catesby met his fellow-conspirators again at this Westminster 

house.  He had now admitted three more; JOHN GRANT, a Warwickshire 

gentleman of a melancholy temper, who lived in a doleful house near 

Stratford-upon-Avon, with a frowning wall all round it, and a deep 

moat; ROBERT WINTER, eldest brother of Thomas; and Catesby's own 

servant, THOMAS BATES, who, Catesby thought, had had some suspicion 

of what his master was about.  These three had all suffered more or 

less for their religion in Elizabeth's time.  And now, they all 

began to dig again, and they dug and dug by night and by day.



They found it dismal work alone there, underground, with such a 

fearful secret on their minds, and so many murders before them.  

They were filled with wild fancies.  Sometimes, they thought they 

heard a great bell tolling, deep down in the earth under the 

Parliament House; sometimes, they thought they heard low voices 

muttering about the Gunpowder Plot; once in the morning, they 

really did hear a great rumbling noise over their heads, as they 

dug and sweated in their mine.  Every man stopped and looked aghast 

at his neighbour, wondering what had happened, when that bold 

prowler, Fawkes, who had been out to look, came in and told them 

that it was only a dealer in coals who had occupied a cellar under 

the Parliament House, removing his stock in trade to some other 

place.  Upon this, the conspirators, who with all their digging and 

digging had not yet dug through the tremendously thick wall, 

changed their plan; hired that cellar, which was directly under the 

House of Lords; put six-and-thirty barrels of gunpowder in it, and 

covered them over with fagots and coals.  Then they all dispersed 

again till September, when the following new conspirators were 

admitted; SIR EDWARD BAYNHAM, of Gloucestershire; SIR EVERARD 

DIGBY, of Rutlandshire; AMBROSE ROOKWOOD, of Suffolk; FRANCIS 

TRESHAM, of Northamptonshire.  Most of these were rich, and were to 

assist the plot, some with money and some with horses on which the 

conspirators were to ride through the country and rouse the 

Catholics after the Parliament should be blown into air.



Parliament being again prorogued from the third of October to the 

fifth of November, and the conspirators being uneasy lest their 

design should have been found out, Thomas Winter said he would go 

up into the House of Lords on the day of the prorogation, and see 

how matters looked.  Nothing could be better.  The unconscious 

Commissioners were walking about and talking to one another, just 

over the six-and-thirty barrels of gunpowder.  He came back and 

told the rest so, and they went on with their preparations.  They 

hired a ship, and kept it ready in the Thames, in which Fawkes was 

to sail for Flanders after firing with a slow match the train that 

was to explode the powder.  A number of Catholic gentlemen not in 

the secret, were invited, on pretence of a hunting party, to meet 

Sir Everard Digby at Dunchurch on the fatal day, that they might be 

ready to act together.  And now all was ready.



But, now, the great wickedness and danger which had been all along 

at the bottom of this wicked plot, began to show itself.  As the 

fifth of November drew near, most of the conspirators, remembering 

that they had friends and relations who would be in the House of 

Lords that day, felt some natural relenting, and a wish to warn 

them to keep away.  They were not much comforted by Catesby's 

declaring that in such a cause he would blow up his own son.  LORD 

MOUNTEAGLE, Tresham's brother-in-law, was certain to be in the 

house; and when Tresham found that he could not prevail upon the 

rest to devise any means of sparing their friends, he wrote a 

mysterious letter to this lord and left it at his lodging in the 

dusk, urging him to keep away from the opening of Parliament, 

'since God and man had concurred to punish the wickedness of the 

times.'  It contained the words 'that the Parliament should receive 

a terrible blow, and yet should not see who hurt them.'  And it 

added, 'the danger is past, as soon as you have burnt the letter.'



The ministers and courtiers made out that his Sowship, by a direct 

miracle from Heaven, found out what this letter meant.  The truth 

is, that they were not long (as few men would be) in finding out 

for themselves; and it was decided to let the conspirators alone, 

until the very day before the opening of Parliament.  That the 

conspirators had their fears, is certain; for, Tresham himself said 

before them all, that they were every one dead men; and, although 

even he did not take flight, there is reason to suppose that he had 

warned other persons besides Lord Mounteagle.  However, they were 

all firm; and Fawkes, who was a man of iron, went down every day 

and night to keep watch in the cellar as usual.  He was there about 

two in the afternoon of the fourth, when the Lord Chamberlain and 

Lord Mounteagle threw open the door and looked in.  'Who are you, 

friend?' said they.  'Why,' said Fawkes, 'I am Mr. Percy's servant, 

and am looking after his store of fuel here.'  'Your master has 

laid in a pretty good store,' they returned, and shut the door, and 

went away.  Fawkes, upon this, posted off to the other conspirators 

to tell them all was quiet, and went back and shut himself up in 

the dark, black cellar again, where he heard the bell go twelve 

o'clock and usher in the fifth of November.  About two hours 

afterwards, he slowly opened the door, and came out to look about 

him, in his old prowling way.  He was instantly seized and bound, 

by a party of soldiers under SIR THOMAS KNEVETT.  He had a watch 

upon him, some touchwood, some tinder, some slow matches; and there 

was a dark lantern with a candle in it, lighted, behind the door.  

He had his boots and spurs on - to ride to the ship, I suppose - 

and it was well for the soldiers that they took him so suddenly.  

If they had left him but a moment's time to light a match, he 

certainly would have tossed it in among the powder, and blown up 

himself and them.



They took him to the King's bed-chamber first of all, and there the 

King (causing him to be held very tight, and keeping a good way 

off), asked him how he could have the heart to intend to destroy so 

many innocent people?  'Because,' said Guy Fawkes, 'desperate 

diseases need desperate remedies.'  To a little Scotch favourite, 

with a face like a terrier, who asked him (with no particular 

wisdom) why he had collected so much gunpowder, he replied, because 

he had meant to blow Scotchmen back to Scotland, and it would take 

a deal of powder to do that.  Next day he was carried to the Tower, 

but would make no confession.  Even after being horribly tortured, 

he confessed nothing that the Government did not already know; 

though he must have been in a fearful state - as his signature, 

still preserved, in contrast with his natural hand-writing before 

he was put upon the dreadful rack, most frightfully shows.  Bates, 

a very different man, soon said the Jesuits had had to do with the 

plot, and probably, under the torture, would as readily have said 

anything.  Tresham, taken and put in the Tower too, made 

confessions and unmade them, and died of an illness that was heavy 

upon him.  Rookwood, who had stationed relays of his own horses all 

the way to Dunchurch, did not mount to escape until the middle of 

the day, when the news of the plot was all over London.  On the 

road, he came up with the two Wrights, Catesby, and Percy; and they 

all galloped together into Northamptonshire.  Thence to Dunchurch, 

where they found the proposed party assembled.  Finding, however, 

that there had been a plot, and that it had been discovered, the 

party disappeared in the course of the night, and left them alone 

with Sir Everard Digby.  Away they all rode again, through 

Warwickshire and Worcestershire, to a house called Holbeach, on the 

borders of Staffordshire.  They tried to raise the Catholics on 

their way, but were indignantly driven off by them.  All this time 

they were hotly pursued by the sheriff of Worcester, and a fast 

increasing concourse of riders.  At last, resolving to defend 

themselves at Holbeach, they shut themselves up in the house, and 

put some wet powder before the fire to dry.  But it blew up, and 

Catesby was singed and blackened, and almost killed, and some of 

the others were sadly hurt.  Still, knowing that they must die, 

they resolved to die there, and with only their swords in their 

hands appeared at the windows to be shot at by the sheriff and his 

assistants.  Catesby said to Thomas Winter, after Thomas had been 

hit in the right arm which dropped powerless by his side, 'Stand by 

me, Tom, and we will die together!' - which they did, being shot 

through the body by two bullets from one gun.  John Wright, and 

Christopher Wright, and Percy, were also shot.  Rookwood and Digby 

were taken:  the former with a broken arm and a wound in his body 

too.



It was the fifteenth of January, before the trial of Guy Fawkes, 

and such of the other conspirators as were left alive, came on.  

They were all found guilty, all hanged, drawn, and quartered:  

some, in St. Paul's Churchyard, on the top of Ludgate-hill; some, 

before the Parliament House.  A Jesuit priest, named HENRY GARNET, 

to whom the dreadful design was said to have been communicated, was 

taken and tried; and two of his servants, as well as a poor priest 

who was taken with him, were tortured without mercy.  He himself 

was not tortured, but was surrounded in the Tower by tamperers and 

traitors, and so was made unfairly to convict himself out of his 

own mouth.  He said, upon his trial, that he had done all he could 

to prevent the deed, and that he could not make public what had 

been told him in confession - though I am afraid he knew of the 

plot in other ways.  He was found guilty and executed, after a 

manful defence, and the Catholic Church made a saint of him; some 

rich and powerful persons, who had had nothing to do with the 

project, were fined and imprisoned for it by the Star Chamber; the 

Catholics, in general, who had recoiled with horror from the idea 

of the infernal contrivance, were unjustly put under more severe 

laws than before; and this was the end of the Gunpowder Plot.





SECOND PART





His Sowship would pretty willingly, I think, have blown the House 

of Commons into the air himself; for, his dread and jealousy of it 

knew no bounds all through his reign.  When he was hard pressed for 

money he was obliged to order it to meet, as he could get no money 

without it; and when it asked him first to abolish some of the 

monopolies in necessaries of life which were a great grievance to 

the people, and to redress other public wrongs, he flew into a rage 

and got rid of it again.  At one time he wanted it to consent to 

the Union of England with Scotland, and quarrelled about that.  At 

another time it wanted him to put down a most infamous Church 

abuse, called the High Commission Court, and he quarrelled with it 

about that.  At another time it entreated him not to be quite so 

fond of his archbishops and bishops who made speeches in his praise 

too awful to be related, but to have some little consideration for 

the poor Puritan clergy who were persecuted for preaching in their 

own way, and not according to the archbishops and bishops; and they 

quarrelled about that.  In short, what with hating the House of 

Commons, and pretending not to hate it; and what with now sending 

some of its members who opposed him, to Newgate or to the Tower, 

and now telling the rest that they must not presume to make 

speeches about the public affairs which could not possibly concern 

them; and what with cajoling, and bullying, and fighting, and being 

frightened; the House of Commons was the plague of his Sowship's 

existence.  It was pretty firm, however, in maintaining its rights, 

and insisting that the Parliament should make the laws, and not the 

King by his own single proclamations (which he tried hard to do); 

and his Sowship was so often distressed for money, in consequence, 

that he sold every sort of title and public office as if they were 

merchandise, and even invented a new dignity called a Baronetcy, 

which anybody could buy for a thousand pounds.



These disputes with his Parliaments, and his hunting, and his 

drinking, and his lying in bed - for he was a great sluggard - 

occupied his Sowship pretty well.  The rest of his time he chiefly 

passed in hugging and slobbering his favourites.  The first of 

these was SIR PHILIP HERBERT, who had no knowledge whatever, except 

of dogs, and horses, and hunting, but whom he soon made EARL OF 

MONTGOMERY.  The next, and a much more famous one, was ROBERT CARR, 

or KER (for it is not certain which was his right name), who came 

from the Border country, and whom he soon made VISCOUNT ROCHESTER, 

and afterwards, EARL OF SOMERSET.  The way in which his Sowship 

doted on this handsome young man, is even more odious to think of, 

than the way in which the really great men of England condescended 

to bow down before him.  The favourite's great friend was a certain 

SIR THOMAS OVERBURY, who wrote his love-letters for him, and 

assisted him in the duties of his many high places, which his own 

ignorance prevented him from discharging.  But this same Sir Thomas 

having just manhood enough to dissuade the favourite from a wicked 

marriage with the beautiful Countess of Essex, who was to get a 

divorce from her husband for the purpose, the said Countess, in her 

rage, got Sir Thomas put into the Tower, and there poisoned him.  

Then the favourite and this bad woman were publicly married by the 

King's pet bishop, with as much to-do and rejoicing, as if he had 

been the best man, and she the best woman, upon the face of the 

earth.



But, after a longer sunshine than might have been expected - of 

seven years or so, that is to say - another handsome young man 

started up and eclipsed the EARL OF SOMERSET.  This was GEORGE 

VILLIERS, the youngest son of a Leicestershire gentleman:  who came 

to Court with all the Paris fashions on him, and could dance as 

well as the best mountebank that ever was seen.  He soon danced 

himself into the good graces of his Sowship, and danced the other 

favourite out of favour.  Then, it was all at once discovered that 

the Earl and Countess of Somerset had not deserved all those great 

promotions and mighty rejoicings, and they were separately tried 

for the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, and for other crimes.  But, 

the King was so afraid of his late favourite's publicly telling 

some disgraceful things he knew of him - which he darkly threatened 

to do - that he was even examined with two men standing, one on 

either side of him, each with a cloak in his hand, ready to throw 

it over his head and stop his mouth if he should break out with 

what he had it in his power to tell.  So, a very lame affair was 

purposely made of the trial, and his punishment was an allowance of 

four thousand pounds a year in retirement, while the Countess was 

pardoned, and allowed to pass into retirement too.  They hated one 

another by this time, and lived to revile and torment each other 

some years.



While these events were in progress, and while his Sowship was 

making such an exhibition of himself, from day to day and from year 

to year, as is not often seen in any sty, three remarkable deaths 

took place in England.  The first was that of the Minister, Robert 

Cecil, Earl of Salisbury, who was past sixty, and had never been 

strong, being deformed from his birth.  He said at last that he had 

no wish to live; and no Minister need have had, with his experience 

of the meanness and wickedness of those disgraceful times.  The 

second was that of the Lady Arabella Stuart, who alarmed his 

Sowship mightily, by privately marrying WILLIAM SEYMOUR, son of 

LORD BEAUCHAMP, who was a descendant of King Henry the Seventh, and 

who, his Sowship thought, might consequently increase and 

strengthen any claim she might one day set up to the throne.  She 

was separated from her husband (who was put in the Tower) and 

thrust into a boat to be confined at Durham.  She escaped in a 

man's dress to get away in a French ship from Gravesend to France, 

but unhappily missed her husband, who had escaped too, and was soon 

taken.  She went raving mad in the miserable Tower, and died there 

after four years.  The last, and the most important of these three 

deaths, was that of Prince Henry, the heir to the throne, in the 

nineteenth year of his age.  He was a promising young prince, and 

greatly liked; a quiet, well-conducted youth, of whom two very good 

things are known:  first, that his father was jealous of him; 

secondly, that he was the friend of Sir Walter Raleigh, languishing 

through all those years in the Tower, and often said that no man 

but his father would keep such a bird in such a cage.  On the 

occasion of the preparations for the marriage of his sister the 

Princess Elizabeth with a foreign prince (and an unhappy marriage 

it turned out), he came from Richmond, where he had been very ill, 

to greet his new brother-in-law, at the palace at Whitehall.  There 

he played a great game at tennis, in his shirt, though it was very 

cold weather, and was seized with an alarming illness, and died 

within a fortnight of a putrid fever.  For this young prince Sir 

Walter Raleigh wrote, in his prison in the Tower, the beginning of 

a History of the World:  a wonderful instance how little his 

Sowship could do to confine a great man's mind, however long he 

might imprison his body.



And this mention of Sir Walter Raleigh, who had many faults, but 

who never showed so many merits as in trouble and adversity, may 

bring me at once to the end of his sad story.  After an 

imprisonment in the Tower of twelve long years, he proposed to 

resume those old sea voyages of his, and to go to South America in 

search of gold.  His Sowship, divided between his wish to be on 

good terms with the Spaniards through whose territory Sir Walter 

must pass (he had long had an idea of marrying Prince Henry to a 

Spanish Princess), and his avaricious eagerness to get hold of the 

gold, did not know what to do.  But, in the end, he set Sir Walter 

free, taking securities for his return; and Sir Walter fitted out 

an expedition at his own coast and, on the twenty-eighth of March, 

one thousand six hundred and seventeen, sailed away in command of 

one of its ships, which he ominously called the Destiny.  The 

expedition failed; the common men, not finding the gold they had 

expected, mutinied; a quarrel broke out between Sir Walter and the 

Spaniards, who hated him for old successes of his against them; and 

he took and burnt a little town called SAINT THOMAS.  For this he 

was denounced to his Sowship by the Spanish Ambassador as a pirate; 

and returning almost broken-hearted, with his hopes and fortunes 

shattered, his company of friends dispersed, and his brave son (who 

had been one of them) killed, he was taken - through the treachery 

of SIR LEWIS STUKELY, his near relation, a scoundrel and a Vice-

Admiral - and was once again immured in his prison-home of so many 

years.



His Sowship being mightily disappointed in not getting any gold, 

Sir Walter Raleigh was tried as unfairly, and with as many lies and 

evasions as the judges and law officers and every other authority 

in Church and State habitually practised under such a King.  After 

a great deal of prevarication on all parts but his own, it was 

declared that he must die under his former sentence, now fifteen 

years old.  So, on the twenty-eighth of October, one thousand six 

hundred and eighteen, he was shut up in the Gate House at 

Westminster to pass his late night on earth, and there he took 

leave of his good and faithful lady who was worthy to have lived in 

better days.  At eight o'clock next morning, after a cheerful 

breakfast, and a pipe, and a cup of good wine, he was taken to Old 

Palace Yard in Westminster, where the scaffold was set up, and 

where so many people of high degree were assembled to see him die, 

that it was a matter of some difficulty to get him through the 

crowd.  He behaved most nobly, but if anything lay heavy on his 

mind, it was that Earl of Essex, whose head he had seen roll off; 

and he solemnly said that he had had no hand in bringing him to the 

block, and that he had shed tears for him when he died.  As the 

morning was very cold, the Sheriff said, would he come down to a 

fire for a little space, and warm himself?  But Sir Walter thanked 

him, and said no, he would rather it were done at once, for he was 

ill of fever and ague, and in another quarter of an hour his 

shaking fit would come upon him if he were still alive, and his 

enemies might then suppose that he trembled for fear.  With that, 

he kneeled and made a very beautiful and Christian prayer.  Before 

he laid his head upon the block he felt the edge of the axe, and 

said, with a smile upon his face, that it was a sharp medicine, but 

would cure the worst disease.  When he was bent down ready for 

death, he said to the executioner, finding that he hesitated, 'What 

dost thou fear?  Strike, man!'  So, the axe came down and struck 

his head off, in the sixty-sixth year of his age.



The new favourite got on fast.  He was made a viscount, he was made 

Duke of Buckingham, he was made a marquis, he was made Master of 

the Horse, he was made Lord High Admiral - and the Chief Commander 

of the gallant English forces that had dispersed the Spanish 

Armada, was displaced to make room for him.  He had the whole 

kingdom at his disposal, and his mother sold all the profits and 

honours of the State, as if she had kept a shop.  He blazed all 

over with diamonds and other precious stones, from his hatband and 

his earrings to his shoes.  Yet he was an ignorant presumptuous, 

swaggering compound of knave and fool, with nothing but his beauty 

and his dancing to recommend him.  This is the gentleman who called 

himself his Majesty's dog and slave, and called his Majesty Your 

Sowship.  His Sowship called him STEENIE; it is supposed, because 

that was a nickname for Stephen, and because St. Stephen was 

generally represented in pictures as a handsome saint.



His Sowship was driven sometimes to his wits'-end by his trimming 

between the general dislike of the Catholic religion at home, and 

his desire to wheedle and flatter it abroad, as his only means of 

getting a rich princess for his son's wife:  a part of whose 

fortune he might cram into his greasy pockets.  Prince Charles - or 

as his Sowship called him, Baby Charles - being now PRINCE OF 

WALES, the old project of a marriage with the Spanish King's 

daughter had been revived for him; and as she could not marry a 

Protestant without leave from the Pope, his Sowship himself 

secretly and meanly wrote to his Infallibility, asking for it.  The 

negotiation for this Spanish marriage takes up a larger space in 

great books, than you can imagine, but the upshot of it all is, 

that when it had been held off by the Spanish Court for a long 

time, Baby Charles and Steenie set off in disguise as Mr. Thomas 

Smith and Mr. John Smith, to see the Spanish Princess; that Baby 

Charles pretended to be desperately in love with her, and jumped 

off walls to look at her, and made a considerable fool of himself 

in a good many ways; that she was called Princess of Wales and that 

the whole Spanish Court believed Baby Charles to be all but dying 

for her sake, as he expressly told them he was; that Baby Charles 

and Steenie came back to England, and were received with as much 

rapture as if they had been a blessing to it; that Baby Charles had 

actually fallen in love with HENRIETTA MARIA, the French King's 

sister, whom he had seen in Paris; that he thought it a wonderfully 

fine and princely thing to have deceived the Spaniards, all 

through; and that he openly said, with a chuckle, as soon as he was 

safe and sound at home again, that the Spaniards were great fools 

to have believed him.



Like most dishonest men, the Prince and the favourite complained 

that the people whom they had deluded were dishonest.  They made 

such misrepresentations of the treachery of the Spaniards in this 

business of the Spanish match, that the English nation became eager 

for a war with them.  Although the gravest Spaniards laughed at the 

idea of his Sowship in a warlike attitude, the Parliament granted 

money for the beginning of hostilities, and the treaties with Spain 

were publicly declared to be at an end.  The Spanish ambassador in 

London - probably with the help of the fallen favourite, the Earl 

of Somerset - being unable to obtain speech with his Sowship, 

slipped a paper into his hand, declaring that he was a prisoner in 

his own house, and was entirely governed by Buckingham and his 

creatures.  The first effect of this letter was that his Sowship 

began to cry and whine, and took Baby Charles away from Steenie, 

and went down to Windsor, gabbling all sorts of nonsense.  The end 

of it was that his Sowship hugged his dog and slave, and said he 

was quite satisfied.



He had given the Prince and the favourite almost unlimited power to 

settle anything with the Pope as to the Spanish marriage; and he 

now, with a view to the French one, signed a treaty that all Roman 

Catholics in England should exercise their religion freely, and 

should never be required to take any oath contrary thereto.  In 

return for this, and for other concessions much less to be 

defended, Henrietta Maria was to become the Prince's wife, and was 

to bring him a fortune of eight hundred thousand crowns.



His Sowship's eyes were getting red with eagerly looking for the 

money, when the end of a gluttonous life came upon him; and, after 

a fortnight's illness, on Sunday the twenty-seventh of March, one 

thousand six hundred and twenty-five, he died.  He had reigned 

twenty-two years, and was fifty-nine years old.  I know of nothing 

more abominable in history than the adulation that was lavished on 

this King, and the vice and corruption that such a barefaced habit 

of lying produced in his court.  It is much to be doubted whether 

one man of honour, and not utterly self-disgraced, kept his place 

near James the First.  Lord Bacon, that able and wise philosopher, 

as the First Judge in the Kingdom in this reign, became a public 

spectacle of dishonesty and corruption; and in his base flattery of 

his Sowship, and in his crawling servility to his dog and slave, 

disgraced himself even more.  But, a creature like his Sowship set 

upon a throne is like the Plague, and everybody receives infection 

from him.

