d try to compose herself with a book.

As she had no dressing-gown with her she put on her long fur coat

over her night-gown, threw some logs on the fire, and lay down.

She didn't hear the slightest noise of any sort till she heard me

shut the door gently.  Quietness of movement was one of Therese's

accomplishments, and the harassed heiress of the Allegre millions

naturally thought it was her sister coming again to renew the

scene.  Her heart sank within her.  In the end she became a little

frightened at the long silence, and raised her eyes.  She didn't

believe them for a long time.  She concluded that I was a vision.

In fact, the first word which I heard her utter was a low, awed

"No," which, though I understood its meaning, chilled my blood like

an evil omen.



It was then that I spoke.  "Yes," I said, "it's me that you see,"

and made a step forward.  She didn't start; only her other hand

flew to the edges of the fur coat, gripping them together over her

breast.  Observing this gesture I sat down in the nearest chair.

The book she had been reading slipped with a thump on the floor.



"How is it possible that you should be here?" she said, still in a

doubting voice.



"I am really here," I said.  "Would you like to touch my hand?"



She didn't move at all; her fingers still clutched the fur coat.



"What has happened?"



"It's a long story, but you may take it from me that all is over.

The tie between us is broken.  I don't know that it was ever very

close.  It was an external thing.  The true misfortune is that I

have ever seen you."



This last phrase was provoked by an exclamation of sympathy on her

part.  She raised herself on her elbow and looked at me intently.

"All over," she murmured.



"Yes, we had to wreck the little vessel.  It was awful.  I feel

like a murderer.  But she had to be killed."



"Why?"



"Because I loved her too much.  Don't you know that love and death

go very close together?"



"I could feel almost happy that it is all over, if you hadn't had

to lose your love.  Oh, amigo George, it was a safe love for you."



"Yes," I said.  "It was a faithful little vessel.  She would have

saved us all from any plain danger.  But this was a betrayal.  It

was - never mind.  All that's past.  The question is what will the

next one be."



"Why should it be that?"



"I don't know.  Life seems but a series of betrayals.  There are so

many kinds of them.  This was a betrayed plan, but one can betray

confidence, and hope and - desire, and the most sacred . . ."



"But what are you doing here?" she interrupted.



"Oh, yes!  The eternal why.  Till a few hours ago I didn't know

what I was here for.  And what are you here for?" I asked point

blank and with a bitterness she disregarded.  She even answered my

question quite readily with many words out of which I could make

very little.  I only learned that for at least five mixed reasons,

none of which impressed me profoundly, Dona Rita had started at a

moment's notice from Paris with nothing but a dressing-bag, and

permitting Rose to go and visit her aged parents for two days, and

then follow her mistress.  That girl of late had looked so

perturbed and worried that the sensitive Rita, fearing that she was

tired of her place, proposed to settle a sum of money on her which

would have enabled her to devote herself entirely to her aged

parents.  And did I know what that extraordinary girl said?  She

had said:  "Don't let Madame think that I would be too proud to

accept anything whatever from her; but I can't even dream of

leaving Madame.  I believe Madame has no friends.  Not one."  So

instead of a large sum of money Dona Rita gave the girl a kiss and

as she had been worried by several people who wanteeir of the King of France.  The Pope, who pretended 

that no one could rightfully wear the crown of England without his 

gracious permission, was strongly opposed to Elizabeth, who had not 

asked for the said gracious permission.  And as Mary Queen of Scots 

would have inherited the English crown in right of her birth, 

supposing the English Parliament not to have altered the 

succession, the Pope himself, and most of the discontented who were 

followers of his, maintained that Mary was the rightful Queen of 

England, and Elizabeth the wrongful Queen.  Mary being so closely 

connected with France, and France being jealous of England, there 

was far greater danger in this than there would have been if she 

had had no alliance with that great power.  And when her young 

husband, on the death of his father, became FRANCIS THE SECOND, 

King of France, the matter grew very serious.  For, the young 

couple styled themselves King and Queen of England, and the Pope 

was disposed to help them by doing all the mischief he could.



Now, the reformed religion, under the guidance of a stern and 

powerful preacher, named JOHN KNOX, and other such men, had been 

making fierce progress in Scotland.  It was still a half savage 

country, where there was a great deal of murdering and rioting 

continually going on; and the Reformers, instead of reforming those 

evils as they should have done, went to work in the ferocious old 

Scottish spirit, laying churches and chapels waste, pulling down 

pictures and altars, and knocking about the Grey Friars, and the 

Black Friars, and the White Friars, and the friars of all sorts of 

colours, in all directions.  This obdurate and harsh spirit of the 

Scottish Reformers (the Scotch have always been rather a sullen and 

frowning people in religious matters) put up the blood of the 

Romish French court, and caused France to send troops over to 

Scotland, with the hope of setting the friars of all sorts of 

colours on their legs again; of conquering that country first, and 

England afterwards; and so crushing the Reformation all to pieces.  

The Scottish Reformers, who had formed a great league which they 

called The Congregation of the Lord, secretly represented to 

Elizabeth that, if the reformed religion got the worst of it with 

them, it would be likely to get the worst of it in England too; and 

thus, Elizabeth, though she had a high notion of the rights of 

Kings and Queens to do anything they liked, sent an army to 

Scotland to support the Reformers, who were in arms against their 

sovereign.  All these proceedings led to a treaty of peace at 

Edinburgh, under which the French consented to depart from the 

kingdom.  By a separate treaty, Mary and her young husband engaged 

to renounce their assumed title of King and Queen of England.  But 

this treaty they never fulfilled.



It happened, soon after matters had got to this state, that the 

young French King died, leaving Mary a young widow.  She was then 

invited by her Scottish subjects to return home and reign over 

them; and as she was not now happy where she was, she, after a 

little time, complied.



Elizabeth had been Queen three years, when Mary Queen of Scots 

embarked at Calais for her own rough, quarrelling country.  As she 

came out of the harbour, a vessel was lost before her eyes, and she 

said, 'O! good God! what an omen this is for such a voyage!'  She 

was very fond of France, and sat on the deck, looking back at it 

and weeping, until it was quite dark.  When she went to bed, she 

directed to be called at daybreak, if the French coast were still 

visible, that she might behold it for the last time.  As it proved 

to be a clear morning, this was done, and she again wept for the 

country she was leaving, and said many times, ' Farewell, France!  

Farewell, France!  I shall never see thee again!'  All this was 

long remembered afterwards, as sorrowful and interesting in a fair 

young princess of nineteen.  Indeed, I am afraid it gradually came, 

together with her other distresses, to surround her with greater 

sympathy than she deserved.



When she came to Scotland, and took up her abode at the palace of 

Holyrood in Edinburgh, she found herself among uncouth strangers 

and wild uncomfortable customs very different from her experiences 

in the court of France.  The very people who were disposed to love 

her, made her head ache when she was tired out by her voyage, with 

a serenade of discordant music - a fearful concert of bagpipes, I 

suppose - and brought her and her train home to her palace on 

miserable little Scotch horses that appeared to be half starved.  

Among the people who were not disposed to love her, she found the 

powerful leaders of the Reformed Church, who were bitter upon her 

amusements, however innocent, and denounced music and dancing as 

works of the devil.  John Knox himself often lectured her, 

violently and angrily, and did much to make her life unhappy.  All 

these reasons confirmed her old attachment to the Romish religion, 

and caused her, there is no doubt, most imprudently and dangerously 

both for herself and for England too, to give a solemn pledge to 

the heads of the Romish Church that if she ever succeeded to the 

English crown, she would set up that religion again.  In reading 

her unhappy history, you must always remember this; and also that 

during her whole life she was constantly put forward against the 

Queen, in some form or other, by the Romish party.



That Elizabeth, on the other hand, was not inclined to like her, is 

pretty certain.  Elizabeth was very vain and jealous, and had an 

extraordinary dislike to people being married.  She treated Lady 

Catherine Grey, sister of the beheaded Lady Jane, with such 

shameful severity, for no other reason than her being secretly 

married, that she died and her husband was ruined; so, when a 

second marriage for Mary began to be talked about, probably 

Elizabeth disliked her more.  Not that Elizabeth wanted suitors of 

her own, for they started up from Spain, Austria, Sweden, and 

England.  Her English lover at this time, and one whom she much 

favoured too, was LORD ROBERT DUDLEY, Earl of Leicester - himself 

secretly married to AMY ROBSART, the daughter of an English 

gentleman, whom he was strongly suspected of causing to be 

murdered, down at his country seat, Cumnor Hall in Berkshire, that 

he might be free to marry the Queen.  Upon this story, the great 

writer, SIR WALTER SCOTT, has founded one of his best romances.  

But if Elizabeth knew how to lead her handsome favourite on, for 

her own vanity and pleasure, she knew how to stop him for her own 

pride; and his love, and all the other proposals, came to nothing.  

The Queen always declared in good set speeches, that she would 

never be married at all, but would live and die a Maiden Queen.  It 

was a very pleasant and meritorious declaration, I suppose; but it 

has been puffed and trumpeted so much, that I am rather tired of it 

myself.



Divers princes proposed to marry Mary, but the English court had 

reasons for being jealous of them all, and even proposed as a 

matter of policy that she should marry that very Earl of Leicester 

who had aspired to be the husband of Elizabeth.  At last, LORD 

DARNLEY, son of the Earl of Lennox, and himself descended from the 

Royal Family of Scotland, went over with Elizabeth's consent to try 

his fortune at Holyrood.  He was a tall simpleton; and could dance 

and play the guitar; but I know of nothing else he could do, unless 

it were to get very drunk, and eat gluttonously, and make a 

contemptible spectacle of himself in many mean and vain ways.  

However, he gained Mary's heart, not disdaining in the pursuit of 

his object to ally himself with one of her secretaries, DAVID 

RIZZIO, who had great influence with her.  He soon married the 

Queen.  This marriage does not say much for her, but what followed 

will presently say less.



Mary's brother, the EARL OF MURRAY, and head of the Protestant 

party in Scotland, had opposed this marriage, partly on religious 

grounds, and partly perhaps from personal dislike of the very 

contemptible bridegroom.  When it had taken place, through Mary's 

gaining over to it the more powerful of the lords about her, she 

banished Murray for his pains; and, when he and some other nobles 

rose in arms to support the reformed religion, she herself, within 

a month of her wedding day, rode against them in armour with loaded 

pistols in her saddle.  Driven out of Scotland, they presented 

themselves before Elizabeth - who called them traitors in public, 

and assisted them in private, according to her crafty nature.



Mary had been married but a little while, when she began to hate 

her husband, who, in his turn, began to hate that David Rizzio, 

with whom he had leagued to gain her favour, and whom he now 

believed to be her lover.  He hated Rizzio to that extent, that he 

made a compact with LORD RUTHVEN and three other lords to get rid 

of him by murder.  This wicked agreement they made in solemn 

secrecy upon the first of March, fifteen hundred and sixty-six, and 

on the night of Saturday the ninth, the conspirators were brought 

by Darnley up a private staircase, dark and steep, into a range of 

rooms where they knew that Mary was sitting at supper with her 

sister, Lady Argyle, and this doomed man.  When they went into the 

room, Darnley took the Queen round the waist, and Lord Ruthven, who 

had risen from a bed of sickness to do this murder, came in, gaunt 

and ghastly, leaning on two men.  Rizzio ran behind the Queen for 

shelter and protection.  'Let him come out of the room,' said 

Ruthven.  'He shall not leave the room,' replied the Queen; 'I read 

his danger in your face, and it is my will that he remain here.'  

They then set upon him, struggled with him, overturned the table, 

dragged him out, and killed him with fifty-six stabs.  When the 

Queen heard that he was dead, she said, 'No more tears.  I will 

think now of revenge!'



Within a day or two, she gained her husband over, and prevailed on 

the tall idiot to abandon the conspirators and fly with her to 

Dunbar.  There, he issued a proclamation, audaciously and falsely 

denying that he had any knowledge of the late bloody business; and 

there they were joined by the EARL BOTHWELL and some other nobles.  

With their help, they raised eight thousand men; returned to 

Edinburgh, and drove the assassins into England.  Mary soon 

afterwards gave birth to a son - still thinking of revenge.



That she should have had a greater scorn for her husband after his 

late cowardice and treachery than she had had before, was natural 

enough.  There is little doubt that she now began to love Bothwell 

instead, and to plan with him means of getting rid of Darnley.  

Bothwell had such power over her that he induced her even to pardon 

the assassins of Rizzio.  The arrangements for the Christening of 

the young Prince were entrusted to him, and he was one of the most 

important people at the ceremony, where the child was named JAMES:  

Elizabeth being his godmother, though not present on the occasion.  

A week afterwards, Darnley, who had left Mary and gone to his 

father's house at Glasgow, being taken ill with the small-pox, she 

sent her own physician to attend him.  But there is reason to 

apprehend that this was merely a show and a pretence, and that she 

knew what was doing, when Bothwell within another month proposed to 

one of the late conspirators against Rizzio, to murder Darnley, 

'for that it was the Queen's mind that he should be taken away.'  

It is certain that on that very day she wrote to her ambassador in 

France, complaining of him, and yet went immediately to Glasgow, 

feigning to be very anxious about him, and to love him very much.  

If she wanted to get him in her power, she succeeded to her heart's 

content; for she induced him to go back with her to Edinburgh, and 

to occupy, instead of the palace, a lone house outside the city 

called the Kirk of Field.  Here, he lived for about a week.  One 

Sunday night, she remained with him until ten o'clock, and then 

left him, to go to Holyrood to be present at an entertainment given 

in celebration of the marriage of one of her favourite servants.  

At two o'clock in the morning the city was shaken by a great 

explosion, and the Kirk of Field was blown to atoms.



Darnley's body was found next day lying under a tree at some 

distance.  How it came there, undisfigured and unscorched by 

gunpowder, and how this crime came to be so clumsily and strangely 

committed, it is impossible to discover.  The deceitful character 

of Mary, and the deceitful character of Elizabeth, have rendered 

almost every part of their joint history uncertain and obscure.  

But, I fear that Mary was unquestionably a party to her husband's 

murder, and that this was the revenge she had threatened.  The 

Scotch people universally believed it.  Voices cried out in the 

streets of Edinburgh in the dead of the night, for justice on the 

murderess.  Placards were posted by unknown hands in the public 

places denouncing Bothwell as the murderer, and the Queen as his 

accomplice; and, when he afterwards married her (though himself 

already married), previously making a show of taking her prisoner 

by force, the indignation of the people knew no bounds.  The women 

particularly are described as having been quite frantic against the 

Queen, and to have hooted and cried after her in the streets with 

terrific vehemence.



Such guilty unions seldom prosper.  This husband and wife had lived 

together but a month, when they were separated for ever by the 

successes of a band of Scotch nobles who associated against them 

for the protection of the young Prince:  whom Bothwell had vainly 

endeavoured to lay hold of, and whom he would certainly have 

murdered, if the EARL OF MAR, in whose hands the boy was, had not 

been firmly and honourably faithful to his trust.  Before this 

angry power, Bothwell fled abroad, where he died, a prisoner and 

mad, nine miserable years afterwards.  Mary being found by the 

associated lords to deceive them at every turn, was sent a prisoner 

to Lochleven Castle; which, as it stood in the midst of a lake, 

could only be approached by boat.  Here, one LORD LINDSAY, who was 

so much of a brute that the nobles would have done better if they 

had chosen a mere gentleman for their messenger, made her sign her 

abdication, and appoint Murray, Regent of Scotland.  Here, too, 

Murray saw her in a sorrowing and humbled state.



She had better have remained in the castle of Lochleven, dull 

prison as it was, with the rippling of the lake against it, and the 

moving shadows of the water on the room walls; but she could not 

rest there, and more than once tried to escape.  The first time she 

had nearly succeeded, dressed in the clothes of her own washer-

woman, but, putting up her hand to prevent one of the boatmen from 

lifting her veil, the men suspected her, seeing how white it was, 

and rowed her back again.  A short time afterwards, her fascinating 

manners enlisted in her cause a boy in the Castle, called the 

little DOUGLAS, who, while the family were at supper, stole the 

keys of the great gate, went softly out with the Queen, locked the 

gate on the outside, and rowed her away across the lake, sinking 

the keys as they went along.  On the opposite shore she was met by 

another Douglas, and some few lords; and, so accompanied, rode away 

on horseback to Hamilton, where they raised three thousand men.  

Here, she issued a proclamation declaring that the abdication she 

had signed in her prison was illegal, and requiring the Regent to 

yield to his lawful Queen.  Being a steady soldier, and in no way 

discomposed although he was without an army, Murray pretended to 

treat with her, until he had collected a force about half equal to 

her own, and then he gave her battle.  In one quarter of an hour he 

cut down all her hopes.  She had another weary ride on horse-back 

of sixty long Scotch miles, and took shelter at Dundrennan Abbey, 

whence she fled for safety to Elizabeth's dominions.



Mary Queen of Scots came to England - to her own ruin, the trouble 

of the kingdom, and the misery and death of many - in the year one 

thousand five hundred and sixty-eight.  How she left it and the 

world, nineteen years afterwards, we have now to see.





SECOND PART





WHEN Mary Queen of Scots arrived in England, without money and even 

without any other clothes than those she wore, she wrote to 

Elizabeth, representing herself as an innocent and injured piece of 

Royalty, and entreating her assistance to oblige her Scottish 

subjects to take her back again and obey her.  But, as her 

character was already known in England to be a very different one 

from what she made it out to be, she was told in answer that she 

must first clear herself.  Made uneasy by this condition, Mary, 

rather than stay in England, would have gone to Spain, or to 

France, or would even have gone back to Scotland.  But, as her 

doing either would have been likely to trouble England afresh, it 

was decided that she should be detained here.  She first came to 

Carlisle, and, after that, was moved about from castle to castle, 

as was considered necessary; but England she never left again.



After trying very hard to get rid of the necessity of clearing 

herself, Mary, advised by LORD HERRIES, her best friend in England, 

agreed to answer the charges against her, if the Scottish noblemen 

who made them would attend to maintain them before such English 

noblemen as Elizabeth might appoint for that purpose.  Accordingly, 

such an assembly, under the name of a conference, met, first at 

York, and afterwards at Hampton Court.  In its presence Lord 

Lennox, Darnley's father, openly charged Mary with the murder of 

his son; and whatever Mary's friends may now say or write in her 

behalf, there is no doubt that, when her brother Murray produced 

against her a casket containing certain guilty letters and verses 

which he stated to have passed between her and Bothwell, she 

withdrew from the inquiry.  Consequently, it is to be supposed that 

she was then considered guilty by those who had the best 

opportunities of judging of the truth, and that the feeling which 

afterwards arose in her behalf was a very generous but not a very 

reasonable one.



However, the DUKE OF NORFOLK, an honourable but rather weak 

nobleman, partly because Mary was captivating, partly because he 

was ambitious, partly because he was over-persuaded by artful 

plotters against Elizabeth, conceived a strong idea that he would 

like to marry the Queen of Scots - though he was a little 

frightened, too, by the letters in the casket.  This idea being 

secretly encouraged by some of the noblemen of Elizabeth's court, 

and even by the favourite Earl of Leicester (because it was 

objected to by other favourites who were his rivals), Mary 

expressed her approval of it, and the King of France and the King 

of Spain are supposed to have done the same.  It was not so quietly 

planned, though, but that it came to Elizabeth's ears, who warned 

the Duke 'to be careful what sort of pillow he was going to lay his 

head upon.'  He made a humble reply at the time; but turned sulky 

soon afterwards, and, being considered dangerous, was sent to the 

Tower.



Thus, from the moment of Mary's coming to England she began to be 

the centre of plots and miseries.



A rise of the Catholics in the north was the next of these, and it 

was only checked by many executions and much bloodshed.  It was 

followed by a great conspiracy of the Pope and some of the Catholic 

sovereigns of Europe to depose Elizabeth, place Mary on the throne, 

and restore the unreformed religion.  It is almost impossible to 

doubt that Mary knew and approved of this; and the Pope himself was 

so hot in the matter that he issued a bull, in which he openly 

called Elizabeth the 'pretended Queen' of England, excommunicated 

her, and excommunicated all her subjects who should continue to 

obey her.  A copy of this miserable paper got into London, and was 

found one morning publicly posted on the Bishop of London's gate.  

A great hue and cry being raised, another copy was found in the 

chamber of a student of Lincoln's Inn, who confessed, being put 

upon the rack, that he had received it from one JOHN FELTON, a rich 

gentleman who lived across the Thames, near Southwark.  This John 

Felton, being put upon the rack too, confessed that he had posted 

the placard on the Bishop's gate.  For this offence he was, within 

four days, taken to St. Paul's Churchyard, and there hanged and 

quartered.  As to the Pope's bull, the people by the reformation 

having thrown off the Pope, did not care much, you may suppose, for 

the Pope's throwing off them.  It was a mere dirty piece of paper, 

and not half so powerful as a street ballad.



On the very day when Felton was brought to his trial, the poor Duke 

of Norfolk was released.  It would have been well for him if he had 

kept away from the Tower evermore, and from the snares that had 

taken him there.  But, even while he was in that dismal place he 

corresponded with Mary, and as soon as he was out of it, he began 

to plot again.  Being discovered in correspondence with the Pope, 

with a view to a rising in England which should force Elizabeth to 

consent to his marriage with Mary and to repeal the laws against 

the Catholics, he was re-committed to the Tower and brought to 

trial.  He was found guilty by the unanimous verdict of the Lords 

who tried him, and was sentenced to the block.



It is very difficult to make out, at this distance of time, and 

between opposite accounts, whether Elizabeth really was a humane 

woman, or desired to appear so, or was fearful of shedding the 

blood of people of great name who were popular in the country.  

Twice she commanded and countermanded the execution of this Duke, 

and it did not take place until five months after his trial.  The 

scaffold was erected on Tower Hill, and there he died like a brave 

man.  He refused to have his eyes bandaged, saying that he was not 

at all afraid of death; and he admitted the justice of his 

sentence, and was much regretted by the people.



Although Mary had shrunk at the most important time from disproving 

her guilt, she was very careful never to do anything that would 

admit it.  All such proposals as were made to her by Elizabeth for 

her release, required that admission in some form or other, and 

therefore came to nothing.  Moreover, both women being artful and 

treacherous, and neither ever trusting the other, it was not likely 

that they could ever make an agreement.  So, the Parliament, 

aggravated by what the Pope had done, made new and strong laws 

against the spreading of the Catholic religion in England, and 

declared it treason in any one to say that the Queen and her 

successors were not the lawful sovereigns of England.  It would 

have done more than this, but for Elizabeth's moderation.



Since the Reformation, there had come to be three great sects of 

religious people - or people who called themselves so - in England; 

that is to say, those who belonged to the Reformed Church, those 

who belonged to the Unreformed Church, and those who were called 

the Puritans, because they said that they wanted to have everything 

very pure and plain in all the Church service.  These last were for 

the most part an uncomfortable people, who thought it highly 

meritorious to dress in a hideous manner, talk through their noses, 

and oppose all harmless enjoyments.  But they were powerful too, 

and very much in earnest, and they were one and all the determined 

enemies of the Queen of Scots.  The Protestant feeling in England 

was further strengthened by the tremendous cruelties to which 

Protestants were exposed in France and in the Netherlands.  Scores 

of thousands of them were put to death in those countries with 

every cruelty that can be imagined, and at last, in the autumn of 

the year one thousand five hundred and seventy-two, one of the 

greatest barbarities ever committed in the world took place at 

Paris.



It is called in history, THE MASSACRE OF SAINT BARTHOLOMEW, because 

it took place on Saint Bartholomew's Eve.  The day fell on Saturday 

the twenty-third of August.  On that day all the great leaders of 

the Protestants (who were there called HUGUENOTS) were assembled 

together, for the purpose, as was represented to them, of doing 

honour to the marriage of their chief, the young King of Navarre, 

with the sister of CHARLES THE NINTH:  a miserable young King who 

then occupied the French throne.  This dull creature was made to 

believe by his mother and other fierce Catholics about him that the 

Huguenots meant to take his life; and he was persuaded to give 

secret orders that, on the tolling of a great bell, they should be 

fallen upon by an overpowering force of armed men, and slaughtered 

wherever they could be found.  When the appointed hour was close at 

hand, the stupid wretch, trembling from head to foot, was taken 

into a balcony by his mother to see the atrocious work begun.  The 

moment the bell tolled, the murderers broke forth.  During all that 

night and the two next days, they broke into the houses, fired the 

houses, shot and stabbed the Protestants, men, women, and children, 

and flung their bodies into the streets.  They were shot at in the 

streets as they passed along, and their blood ran down the gutters.  

Upwards of ten thousand Protestants were killed in Paris alone; in 

all France four or five times that number.  To return thanks to 

Heaven for these diabolical murders, the Pope and his train 

actually went in public procession at Rome, and as if this were not 

shame enough for them, they had a medal struck to commemorate the 

event.  But, however comfortable the wholesale murders were to 

these high authorities, they had not that soothing effect upon the 

doll-King.  I am happy to state that he never knew a moment's peace 

afterwards; that he was continually crying out that he saw the 

Huguenots covered with blood and wounds falling dead before him; 

and that he died within a year, shrieking and yelling and raving to 

that degree, that if all the Popes who had ever lived had been 

rolled into one, they would not have afforded His guilty Majesty 

the slightest consolation.



When the terrible news of the massacre arrived in England, it made 

a powerful impression indeed upon the people.  If they began to run 

a little wild against the Catholics at about this time, this 

fearful reason for it, coming so soon after the days of bloody 

Queen Mary, must be remembered in their excuse.  The Court was not 

quite so honest as the people - but perhaps it sometimes is not.  

It received the French ambassador, with all the lords and ladies 

dressed in deep mourning, and keeping a profound silence.  

Nevertheless, a proposal of marriage which he had made to Elizabeth 

only two days before the eve of Saint Bartholomew, on behalf of the 

Duke of Alen‡on, the French King's brother, a boy of seventeen, 

still went on; while on the other hand, in her usual crafty way, 

the Queen secretly supplied the Huguenots with money and weapons.



I must say that for a Queen who made all those fine speeches, of 

which I have confessed myself to be rather tired, about living and 

dying a Maiden Queen, Elizabeth was 'going' to be married pretty 

often.  Besides always having some English favourite or other whom 

she by turns encouraged and swore at and knocked about - for the 

maiden Queen was very free with her fists - she held this French 

Duke off and on through several years.  When he at last came over 

to England, the marriage articles were actually drawn up, and it 

was settled that the wedding should take place in six weeks.  The 

Queen was then so bent upon it, that she prosecuted a poor Puritan 

named STUBBS, and a poor bookseller named PAGE, for writing and 

publishing a pamphlet against it.  Their right hands were chopped 

off for this crime; and poor Stubbs - more loyal than I should have 

been myself under the circumstances - immediately pulled off his 

hat with his left hand, and cried, 'God save the Queen!'  Stubbs 

was cruelly treated; for the marriage never took place after all, 

though the Queen pledged herself to the Duke with a ring from her 

own finger.  He went away, no better than he came, when the 

courtship had lasted some ten years altogether; and he died a 

couple of years afterwards, mourned by Elizabeth, who appears to 

have been really fond of him.  It is not much to her credit, for he 

was a bad enough member of a bad family.



To return to the Catholics.  There arose two orders of priests, who 

were very busy in England, and who were much dreaded.  These were 

the JESUITS (who were everywhere in all sorts of disguises), and 

the SEMINARY PRIESTS.  The people had a great horror of the first, 

because they were known to have taught that murder was lawful if it 

were done with an object of which they approved; and they had a 

great horror of the second, because they came to teach the old 

religion, and to be the successors of 'Queen Mary's priests,' as 

those yet lingering in England were called, when they should die 

out.  The severest laws were made against them, and were most 

unmercifully executed.  Those who sheltered them in their houses 

often suffered heavily for what was an act of humanity; and the 

rack, that cruel torture which tore men's limbs asunder, was 

constantly kept going.  What these unhappy men confessed, or what 

was ever confessed by any one under that agony, must always be 

received with great doubt, as it is certain that people have 

frequently owned to the most absurd and impossible crimes to escape 

such dreadful suffering.  But I cannot doubt it to have been proved 

by papers, that there were many plots, both among the Jesuits, and 

with France, and with Scotland, and with Spain, for the destruction 

of Queen Elizabeth, for the placing of Mary on the throne, and for 

the revival of the old religion.



If the English people were too ready to believe in plots, there 

were, as I have said, good reasons for it.  When the massacre of 

Saint Bartholomew was yet fresh in their recollection, a great 

Protestant Dutch hero, the PRINCE OF ORANGE, was shot by an 

assassin, who confessed that he had been kept and trained for the 

purpose in a college of Jesuits.  The Dutch, in this surprise and 

distress, offered to make Elizabeth their sovereign, but she 

declined the honour, and sent them a small army instead, under the 

command of the Earl of Leicester, who, although a capital Court 

favourite, was not much of a general.  He did so little in Holland, 

that his campaign there would probably have been forgotten, but for 

its occasioning the death of one of the best writers, the best 

knights, and the best gentlemen, of that or any age.  This was SIR 

PHILIP SIDNEY, who was wounded by a musket ball in the thigh as he 

mounted a fresh horse, after having had his own killed under him.  

He had to ride back wounded, a long distance, and was very faint 

with fatigue and loss of blood, when some water, for which he had 

eagerly asked, was handed to him.  But he was so good and gentle 

even then, that seeing a poor badly wounded common soldier lying on 

the ground, looking at the water with longing eyes, he said, 'Thy 

necessity is greater than mine,' and gave it up to him.  This 

touching action of a noble heart is perhaps as well known as any 

incident in history - is as famous far and wide as the blood-

stained Tower of London, with its axe, and block, and murders out 

of number.  So delightful is an act of true humanity, and so glad 

are mankind to remember it.



At home, intelligence of plots began to thicken every day.  I 

suppose the people never did live under such continual terrors as 

those by which they were possessed now, of Catholic risings, and 

burnings, and poisonings, and I don't know what.  Still, we must 

always remember that they lived near and close to awful realities 

of that kind, and that with their experience it was not difficult 

to believe in any enormity.  The government had the same fear, and 

did not take the best means of discovering the truth - for, besides 

torturing the suspected, it employed paid spies, who will always 

lie for their own profit.  It even made some of the conspiracies it 

brought to light, by sending false letters to disaffected people, 

inviting them to join in pretended plots, which they too readily 

did.



But, one great real plot was at length discovered, and it ended the 

career of Mary, Queen of Scots.  A seminary priest named BALLARD, 

and a Spanish soldier named SAVAGE, set on and encouraged by 

certain French priests, imparted a design to one ANTONY BABINGTON - 

a gentleman of fortune in Derbyshire, who had been for some time a 

secret agent of Mary's - for murdering the Queen.  Babington then 

confided the scheme to some other Catholic gentlemen who were his 

friends, and they joined in it heartily.  They were vain, weak-

headed young men, ridiculously confident, and preposterously proud 

of their plan; for they got a gimcrack painting made, of the six 

choice spirits who were to murder Elizabeth, with Babington in an 

attitude for the centre figure.  Two of their number, however, one 

of whom was a priest, kept Elizabeth's wisest minister, SIR FRANCIS 

WALSINGHAM, acquainted with the whole project from the first.  The 

conspirators were completely deceived to the final point, when 

Babington gave Savage, because he was shabby, a ring from his 

finger, and some money from his purse, wherewith to buy himself new 

clothes in which to kill the Queen.  Walsingham, having then full 

evidence against the whole band, and two letters of Mary's besides, 

resolved to seize them.  Suspecting something wrong, they stole out 

of the city, one by one, and hid themselves in St. John's Wood, and 

other places which really were hiding places then; but they were 

all taken, and all executed.  When they were seized, a gentleman 

was sent from Court to inform Mary of the fact, and of her being 

involved in the discovery.  Her friends have complained that she 

was kept in very hard and severe custody.  It does not appear very 

likely, for she was going out a hunting that very morning.



Queen Elizabeth had been warned long ago, by one in France who had 

good information of what was secretly doing, that in holding Mary 

alive, she held 'the wolf who would devour her.'  The Bishop of 

London had, more lately, given the Queen's favourite minister the 

advice in writing, 'forthwith to cut off the Scottish Queen's 

head.'  The question now was, what to do with her?  The Earl of 

Leicester wrote a little note home from Holland, recommending that 

she should be quietly poisoned; that noble favourite having 

accustomed his mind, it is possible, to remedies of that nature.  

His black advice, however, was disregarded, and she was brought to 

trial at Fotheringay Castle in Northamptonshire, before a tribunal 

of forty, composed of both religions.  There, and in the Star 

Chamber at Westminster, the trial lasted a fortnight.  She defended 

herself with great ability, but could only deny the confessions 

that had been made by Babington and others; could only call her own 

letters, produced against her by her own secretaries, forgeries; 

and, in short, could only deny everything.  She was found guilty, 

and declared to have incurred the penalty of death.  The Parliament 

met, approved the sentence, and prayed the Queen to have it 

executed.  The Queen replied that she requested them to consider 

whether no means could be found of saving Mary's life without 

endangering her own.  The Parliament rejoined, No; and the citizens 

illuminated their houses and lighted bonfires, in token of their 

joy that all these plots and troubles were to be ended by the death 

of the Queen of Scots.



She, feeling sure that her time was now come, wrote a letter to the 

Queen of England, making three entreaties; first, that she might be 

buried in France; secondly, that she might not be executed in 

secret, but before her servants and some others; thirdly, that 

after her death, her servants should not be molested, but should be 

suffered to go home with the legacies she left them.  It was an 

affecting letter, and Elizabeth shed tears over it, but sent no 

answer.  Then came a special ambassador from France, and another 

from Scotland, to intercede for Mary's life; and then the nation 

began to clamour, more and more, for her death.



What the real feelings or intentions of Elizabeth were, can never 

be known now; but I strongly suspect her of only wishing one thing 

more than Mary's death, and that was to keep free of the blame of 

it.  On the first of February, one thousand five hundred and 

eighty-seven, Lord Burleigh having drawn out the warrant for the 

execution, the Queen sent to the secretary DAVISON to bring it to 

her, that she might sign it:  which she did.  Next day, when 

Davison told her it was sealed, she angrily asked him why such 

haste was necessary?  Next day but one, she joked about it, and 

swore a little.  Again, next day but one, she seemed to complain 

that it was not yet done, but still she would not be plain with 

those about her.  So, on the seventh, the Earls of Kent and 

Shrewsbury, with the Sheriff of Northamptonshire, came with the 

warrant to Fotheringay, to tell the Queen of Scots to prepare for 

death.



When those messengers of ill omen were gone, Mary made a frugal 

supper, drank to her servants, read over her will, went to bed, 

slept for some hours, and then arose and passed the remainder of 

the night saying prayers.  In the morning she dressed herself in 

her best clothes; and, at eight o'clock when the sheriff came for 

her to her chapel, took leave of her servants who were there 

assembled praying with her, and went down-stairs, carrying a Bible 

in one hand and a crucifix in the other.  Two of her women and four 

of her men were allowed to be present in the hall; where a low 

scaffold, only two feet from the ground, was erected and covered 

with black; and where the executioner from the Tower, and his 

assistant, stood, dressed in black velvet.  The hall was full of 

people.  While the sentence was being read she sat upon a stool; 

and, when it was finished, she again denied her guilt, as she had 

done before.  The Earl of Kent and the Dean of Peterborough, in 

their Protestant zeal, made some very unnecessary speeches to her; 

to which she replied that she died in the Catholic religion, and 

they need not trouble themselves about that matter.  When her head 

and neck were uncovered by the executioners, she said that she had 

not been used to be undressed by such hands, or before so much 

company.  Finally, one of her women fastened a cloth over her face, 

and she laid her neck upon the block, and repeated more than once 

in Latin, 'Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit!'  Some say 

her head was struck off in two blows, some say in three.  However 

that be, when it was held up, streaming with blood, the real hair 

beneath the false hair she had long worn was seen to be as grey as 

that of a woman of seventy, though she was at that time only in her 

forty-sixth year.  All her beauty was gone.



But she was beautiful enough to her little dog, who cowered under 

her dress, frightened, when she went upon the scaffold, and who lay 

down beside her headless body when all her earthly sorrows were 

over.





THIRD PART





ON its being formally made known to Elizabeth that the sentence had 

been executed on the Queen of Scots, she showed the utmost grief 

and rage, drove her favourites from her with violent indignation, 

and sent Davison to the Tower; from which place he was only 

released in the end by paying an immense fine which completely 

ruined him.  Elizabeth not only over-acted her part in making these 

pretences, but most basely reduced to poverty one of her faithful 

servants for no other fault than obeying her commands.



James, King of Scotland, Mary's son, made a show likewise of being 

very angry on the occasion; but he was a pensioner of England to 

the amount of five thousand pounds a year, and he had known very 

little of his mother, and he possibly regarded her as the murderer 

of his father, and he soon took it quietly.



Philip, King of Spain, however, threatened to do greater things 

than ever had been done yet, to set up the Catholic religion and 

punish Protestant England.  Elizabeth, hearing that he and the 

Prince of Parma were making great preparations for this purpose, in 

order to be beforehand with them sent out ADMIRAL DRAKE (a famous 

navigator, who had sailed about the world, and had already brought 

great plunder from Spain) to the port of Cadiz, where he burnt a 

hundred vessels full of stores.  This great loss obliged the 

Spaniards to put off the invasion for a year; but it was none the 

less formidable for that, amounting to one hundred and thirty 

ships, nineteen thousand soldiers, eight thousand sailors, two 

thousand slaves, and between two and three thousand great guns.  

England was not idle in making ready to resist this great force.  

All the men between sixteen years old and sixty, were trained and 

drilled; the national fleet of ships (in number only thirty-four at 

first) was enlarged by public contributions and by private ships, 

fitted out by noblemen; the city of London, of its own accord, 

furnished double the number of ships and men that it was required 

to provide; and, if ever the national spirit was up in England, it 

was up all through the country to resist the Spaniards.  Some of 

the Queen's advisers were for seizing the principal English 

Catholics, and putting them to death; but the Queen - who, to her 

honour, used to say, that she would never believe any ill of her 

subjects, which a parent would not believe of her own children - 

rejected the advice, and only confined a few of those who were the 

most suspected, in the fens in Lincolnshire.  The great body of 

Catholics deserved this confidence; for they behaved most loyally, 

nobly, and bravely.



So, with all England firing up like one strong, angry man, and with 

both sides of the Thames fortified, and with the soldiers under 

arms, and with the sailors in their ships, the country waited for 

the coming of the proud Spanish fleet, which was called THE 

INVINCIBLE ARMADA.  The Queen herself, riding in armour on a white 

horse, and the Earl of Essex and the Earl of Leicester holding her 

bridal rein, made a brave speech to the troops at Tilbury Fort 

opposite Gravesend, which was received with such enthusiasm as is 

seldom known.  Then came the Spanish Armada into the English 

Channel, sailing along in the form of a half moon, of such great 

size that it was seven miles broad.  But the English were quickly 

upon it, and woe then to all the Spanish ships that dropped a 

little out of the half moon, for the English took them instantly!  

And it soon appeared that the great Armada was anything but 

invincible, for on a summer night, bold Drake sent eight blazing 

fire-ships right into the midst of it.  In terrible consternation 

the Spaniards tried to get out to sea, and so became dispersed; the 

English pursued them at a great advantage; a storm came on, and 

drove the Spaniards among rocks and shoals; and the swift end of 

the Invincible fleet was, that it lost thirty great ships and ten 

thousand men, and, defeated and disgraced, sailed home again.  

Being afraid to go by the English Channel, it sailed all round 

Scotland and Ireland; some of the ships getting cast away on the 

latter coast in bad weather, the Irish, who were a kind of savages, 

plundered those vessels and killed their crews.  So ended this 

great attempt to invade and conquer England.  And I think it will 

be a long time before any other invincible fleet coming to England 

with the same object, will fare much better than the Spanish 

Armada.



Though the Spanish king had had this bitter taste of English 

bravery, he was so little the wiser for it, as still to entertain 

his old designs, and even to conceive the absurd idea of placing 

his daughter on the English throne.  But the Earl of Essex, SIR 

WALTER RALEIGH, SIR THOMAS HOWARD, and some other distinguished 

leaders, put to sea from Plymouth, entered the port of Cadiz once 

more, obtained a complete victory over the shipping assembled 

there, and got possession of the town.  In obedience to the Queen's 

express instructions, they behaved with great humanity; and the 

principal loss of the Spaniards was a vast sum of money which they 

had to pay for ransom.  This was one of many gallant achievements 

on the sea, effected in this reign.  Sir Walter Raleigh himself, 

after marrying a maid of honour and giving offence to the Maiden 

Queen thereby, had already sailed to South America in search of 

gold.



The Earl of Leicester was now dead, and so was Sir Thomas 

Walsingham, whom Lord Burleigh was soon to follow.  The principal 

favourite was the EARL OF ESSEX, a spirited and handsome man, a 

favourite with the people too as well as with the Queen, and 

possessed of many admirable qualities.  It was much debated at 

Court whether there should be peace with Spain or no, and he was 

very urgent for war.  He also tried hard to have his own way in the 

appointment of a deputy to govern in Ireland.  One day, while this 

question was in dispute, he hastily took offence, and turned his 

back upon the Queen; as a gentle reminder of which impropriety, the 

Queen gave him a tremendous box on the ear, and told him to go to 

the devil.  He went home instead, and did not reappear at Court for 

half a year or so, when he and the Queen were reconciled, though 

never (as some suppose) thoroughly.



From this time the fate of the Earl of Essex and that of the Queen 

seemed to be blended together.  The Irish were still perpetually 

quarrelling and fighting among themselves, and he went over to 

Ireland as Lord Lieutenant, to the great joy of his enemies (Sir 

Walter Raleigh among the rest), who were glad to have so dangerous 

a rival far off.  Not being by any means successful there, and 

knowing that his enemies would take advantage of that circumstance 

to injure him with the Queen, he came home again, though against 

her orders.  The Queen being taken by surprise when he appeared 

before her, gave him her hand to kiss, and he was overjoyed - 

though it was not a very lovely hand by this time - but in the 

course of the same day she ordered him to confine himself to his 

room, and two or three days afterwards had him taken into custody.  

With the same sort of caprice - and as capricious an old woman she 

now was, as ever wore a crown or a head either - she sent him broth 

from her own table on his falling ill from anxiety, and cried about 

him.



He was a man who could find comfort and occupation in his books, 

and he did so for a time; not the least happy time, I dare say, of 

his life.  But it happened unfortunately for him, that he held a 

monopoly in sweet wines:  which means that nobody could sell them 

without purchasing his permission.  This right, which was only for 

a term, expiring, he applied to have it renewed.  The Queen 

refused, with the rather strong observation - but she DID make 

strong observations - that an unruly beast must be stinted in his 

food.  Upon this, the angry Earl, who had been already deprived of 

many offices, thought himself in danger of complete ruin, and 

turned against the Queen, whom he called a vain old woman who had 

grown as crooked in her mind as she had in her figure.  These 

uncomplimentary expressions the ladies of the Court immediately 

snapped up and carried to the Queen, whom they did not put in a 

better tempter, you may believe.  The same Court ladies, when they 

had beautiful dark hair of their own, used to wear false red hair, 

to be like the Queen.  So they were not very high-spirited ladies, 

however high in rank.



The worst object of the Earl of Essex, and some friends of his who 

used to meet at LORD SOUTHAMPTON'S house, was to obtain possession 

of the Queen, and oblige her by force to dismiss her ministers and 

change her favourites.  On Saturday the seventh of February, one 

thousand six hundred and one, the council suspecting this, summoned 

the Earl to come before them.  He, pretending to be ill, declined; 

it was then settled among his friends, that as the next day would 

be Sunday, when many of the citizens usually assembled at the Cross 

by St. Paul's Cathedral, he should make one bold effort to induce 

them to rise and follow him to the Palace.



So, on the Sunday morning, he and a small body of adherents started 

out of his house - Essex House by the Strand, with steps to the 

river - having first shut up in it, as prisoners, some members of 

the council who came to examine him - and hurried into the City 

with the Earl at their head crying out 'For the Queen!  For the 

Queen!  A plot is laid for my life!'  No one heeded them, however, 

and when they came to St. Paul's there were no citizens there.  In 

the meantime the prisoners at Essex House had been released by one 

of the Earl's own friends; he had been promptly proclaimed a 

traitor in the City itself; and the streets were barricaded with 

carts and guarded by soldiers.  The Earl got back to his house by 

water, with difficulty, and after an attempt to defend his house 

against the troops and cannon by which it was soon surrounded, gave 

himself up that night.  He was brought to trial on the nineteenth, 

and found guilty; on the twenty-fifth, he was executed on Tower 

Hill, where he died, at thirty-four years old, both courageously 

and penitently.  His step-father suffered with him.  His enemy, Sir 

Walter Raleigh, stood near the scaffold all the time - but not so 

near it as we shall see him stand, before we finish his history.



In this case, as in the cases of the Duke of Norfolk and Mary Queen 

of Scots, the Queen had commanded, and countermanded, and again 

commanded, the execution.  It is probable that the death of her 

young and gallant favourite in the prime of his good qualities, was 

never off her mind afterwards, but she held out, the same vain, 

obstinate and capricious woman, for another year.  Then she danced 

before her Court on a state occasion - and cut, I should think, a 

mighty ridiculous figure, doing so in an immense ruff, stomacher 

and wig, at seventy years old.  For another year still, she held 

out, but, without any more dancing, and as a moody, sorrowful, 

broken creature.  At last, on the tenth of March, one thousand six 

hundred and three, having been ill of a very bad cold, and made 

worse by the death of the Countess of Nottingham who was her 

intimate friend, she fell into a stupor and was supposed to be 

dead.  She recovered her consciousness, however, and then nothing 

would induce her to go to bed; for she said that she knew that if 

she did, she should never get up again.  There she lay for ten 

days, on cushions on the floor, without any food, until the Lord 

Admiral got her into bed at last, partly by persuasions and partly 

by main force.  When they asked her who should succeed her, she 

replied that her seat had been the seat of Kings, and that she 

would have for her successor, 'No rascal's son, but a King's.'  

Upon this, the lords present stared at one another, and took the 

liberty of asking whom she meant; to which she replied, 'Whom 

should I mean, but our cousin of Scotland!'  This was on the 

twenty-third of March.  They asked her once again that day, after 

she was speechless, whether she was still in the same mind?  She 

struggled up in bed, and joined her hands over her head in the form 

of a crown, as the only reply she could make.  At three o'clock 

next morning, she very quietly died, in the forty-fifth year of her 

reign.



That reign had been a glorious one, and is made for ever memorable 

by the distinguished men who flourished in it.  Apart from the 

great voyagers, statesmen, and scholars, whom it produced, the 

names of BACON, SPENSER, and SHAKESPEARE, will always be remembered 

with pride and veneration by the civilised world, and will always 

impart (though with no great reason, perhaps) some portion of their 

lustre to the name of Elizabeth herself.  It was a great reign for 

discovery, for commerce, and for English enterprise and spirit in 

general.  It was a great reign for the Protestant religion and for 

the Reformation which made England free.  The Queen was very 

popular, and in her progresses, or journeys about her dominions, 

was everywhere received with the liveliest joy.  I think the truth 

is, that she was not half so good as she has been made out, and not 

half so bad as she has been made out.  She had her fine qualities, 

but she was coarse, capricious, and treacherous, and had all the 

faults of an excessively vain young woman long after she was an old 

one.  On the whole, she had a great deal too much of her father in 

her, to please me.



Many improvements and luxuries were introduced in the course of 

these five-and-forty years in the general manner of living; but 

cock-fighting, bull-baiting, and bear-baiting, were still the 

national amusements; and a coach was so rarely seen, and was such 

an ugly and cumbersome affair when it was seen, that even the Queen 

herself, on many high occasions, rode on horseback on a pillion 

behind the Lord Chancellor.

