





CHAPTER XI - ENGLAND UNDER MATILDA AND STEPHEN







THE King was no sooner dead than all the plans and schemes he had 

laboured at so long, and lied so much for, crumbled away like a 

hollow heap of sand.  STEPHEN, whom he had never mistrusted or 

suspected, started up to claim the throne.



Stephen was the son of ADELA, the Conqueror's daughter, married to 

the Count of Blois.  To Stephen, and to his brother HENRY, the late 

King had been liberal; making Henry Bishop of Winchester, and 

finding a good marriage for Stephen, and much enriching him.  This 

did not prevent Stephen from hastily producing a false witness, a 

servant of the late King, to swear that the King had named him for 

his heir upon his death-bed.  On this evidence the Archbishop of 

Canterbury crowned him.  The new King, so suddenly made, lost not a 

moment in seizing the Royal treasure, and hiring foreign soldiers 

with some of it to protect his throne.



If the dead King had even done as the false witness said, he would 

have had small right to will away the English people, like so many 

sheep or oxen, without their consent.  But he had, in fact, 

bequeathed all his territory to Matilda; who, supported by ROBERT, 

Earl of Gloucester, soon began to dispute the crown.  Some of the 

powerful barons and priests took her side; some took Stephen's; all 

fortified their castles; and again the miserable English people 

were involved in war, from which they could never derive advantage 

whosoever was victorious, and in which all parties plundered, 

tortured, starved, and ruined them.



Five years had passed since the death of Henry the First - and 

during those five years there had been two terrible invasions by 

the people of Scotland under their King, David, who was at last 

defeated with all his army - when Matilda, attended by her brother 

Robert and a large force, appeared in England to maintain her 

claim.  A battle was fought between her troops and King Stephen's 

at Lincoln; in which the King himself was taken prisoner, after 

bravely fighting until his battle-axe and sword were broken, and 

was carried into strict confinement at Gloucester.  Matilda then 

submitted herself to the Priests, and the Priests crowned her Queen 

of England.



She did not long enjoy this dignity.  The people of London had a 

great affection for Stephen; many of the Barons considered it 

degrading to be ruled by a woman; and the Queen's temper was so 

haughty that she made innumerable enemies.  The people of London 

revolted; and, in alliance with the troops of Stephen, besieged her 

at Winchester, where they took her brother Robert prisoner, whom, 

as her best soldier and chief general, she was glad to exchange for 

Stephen himself, who thus regained his liberty.  Then, the long war 

went on afresh.  Once, she was pressed so hard in the Castle of 

Oxford, in the winter weather when the snow lay thick upon the 

ground, that her only chance of escape was to dress herself all in 

white, and, accompanied by no more than three faithful Knights, 

dressed in like manner that their figures might not be seen from 

Stephen's camp as they passed over the snow, to steal away on foot, 

cross the frozen Thames, walk a long distance, and at last gallop 

away on horseback.  All this she did, but to no great purpose then; 

for her brother dying while the struggle was yet going on, she at 

last withdrew to Normandy.



In two or three years after her withdrawal her cause appeared in 

England, afresh, in the person of her son Henry, young Plantagenet, 

who, at only eighteen years of age, was very powerful:  not only on 

account of his mother having resigned all Normandy to him, but also 

from his having married ELEANOR, the divorced wife of the French 

King, a bad woman, who had great possessions in France.  Louis, the 

French King, not relishing this arrangement, helped EUSTACE, King 

Stephen's son, to invade Normandy:  but Henry drove their united 

forces out of that country, and then returned here, to assist his 

partisans, whom the King was then besieging at Wallingford upon the 

Thames.  Here, for two days, divided only by the river, the two 

armies lay encamped opposite to one another - on the eve, as it 

seemed to all men, of another desperate fight, when the EARL OF 

ARUNDEL took heart and said 'that it was not reasonable to prolong 

the unspeakable miseries of two kingdoms to minister to the 

ambition of two princes.'



Many other noblemen repeating and supporting this when it was once 

uttered, Stephen and young Plantagenet went down, each to his own 

bank of the river, and held a conversation across it, in which they 

arranged a truce; very much to the dissatisfaction of Eustace, who 

swaggered away with some followers, and laid violent hands on the 

Abbey of St. Edmund's-Bury, where he presently died mad.  The truce 

led to a solemn council at Winchester, in which it was agreed that 

Stephen should retain the crown, on condition of his declaring 

Henry his successor; that WILLIAM, another son of the King's, 

should inherit his father's rightful possessions; and that all the 

Crown lands which Stephen had given away should be recalled, and 

all the Castles he had permitted to be built demolished.  Thus 

terminated the bitter war, which had now lasted fifteen years, and 

had again laid England waste.  In the next year STEPHEN died, after 

a troubled reign of nineteen years.



Although King Stephen was, for the time in which he lived, a humane 

and moderate man, with many excellent qualities; and although 

nothing worse is known of him than his usurpation of the Crown, 

which he probably excused to himself by the consideration that King 

Henry the First was a usurper too - which was no excuse at all; the 

people of England suffered more in these dread nineteen years, than 

at any former period even of their suffering history.  In the 

division of the nobility between the two rival claimants of the 

Crown, and in the growth of what is called the Feudal System (which 

made the peasants the born vassals and mere slaves of the Barons), 

every Noble had his strong Castle, where he reigned the cruel king 

of all the neighbouring people.  Accordingly, he perpetrated 

whatever cruelties he chose.  And never were worse cruelties 

committed upon earth than in wretched England in those nineteen 

years.



The writers who were living then describe them fearfully.  They say 

that the castles were filled with devils rather than with men; that 

the peasants, men and women, were put into dungeons for their gold 

and silver, were tortured with fire and smoke, were hung up by the 

thumbs, were hung up by the heels with great weights to their 

heads, were torn with jagged irons, killed with hunger, broken to 

death in narrow chests filled with sharp-pointed stones, murdered 

in countless fiendish ways.  In England there was no corn, no meat, 

no cheese, no butter, there were no tilled lands, no harvests.  

Ashes of burnt towns, and dreary wastes, were all that the 

traveller, fearful of the robbers who prowled abroad at all hours, 

would see in a long day's journey; and from sunrise until night, he 

would not come upon a home.



The clergy sometimes suffered, and heavily too, from pillage, but 

many of them had castles of their own, and fought in helmet and 

armour like the barons, and drew lots with other fighting men for 

their share of booty.  The Pope (or Bishop of Rome), on King 

Stephen's resisting his ambition, laid England under an Interdict 

at one period of this reign; which means that he allowed no service 

to be performed in the churches, no couples to be married, no bells 

to be rung, no dead bodies to be buried.  Any man having the power 

to refuse these things, no matter whether he were called a Pope or 

a Poulterer, would, of course, have the power of afflicting numbers 

of innocent people.  That nothing might be wanting to the miseries 

of King Stephen's time, the Pope threw in this contribution to the 

public store - not very like the widow's contribution, as I think, 

when Our Saviour sat in Jerusalem over-against the Treasury, 'and 

she threw in two mites, which make a farthing.'

