






CHAPTER XX - ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE FOURTH, CALLED BOLINGBROKE







DURING the last reign, the preaching of Wickliffe against the pride 

and cunning of the Pope and all his men, had made a great noise in 

England.  Whether the new King wished to be in favour with the 

priests, or whether he hoped, by pretending to be very religious, 

to cheat Heaven itself into the belief that he was not a usurper, I 

don't know.  Both suppositions are likely enough.  It is certain 

that he began his reign by making a strong show against the 

followers of Wickliffe, who were called Lollards, or heretics - 

although his father, John of Gaunt, had been of that way of 

thinking, as he himself had been more than suspected of being.  It 

is no less certain that he first established in England the 

detestable and atrocious custom, brought from abroad, of burning 

those people as a punishment for their opinions.  It was the 

importation into England of one of the practices of what was called 

the Holy Inquisition:  which was the most UNholy and the most 

infamous tribunal that ever disgraced mankind, and made men more 

like demons than followers of Our Saviour.



No real right to the crown, as you know, was in this King.  Edward 

Mortimer, the young Earl of March - who was only eight or nine 

years old, and who was descended from the Duke of Clarence, the 

elder brother of Henry's father - was, by succession, the real heir 

to the throne.  However, the King got his son declared Prince of 

Wales; and, obtaining possession of the young Earl of March and his 

little brother, kept them in confinement (but not severely) in 

Windsor Castle.  He then required the Parliament to decide what was 

to be done with the deposed King, who was quiet enough, and who 

only said that he hoped his cousin Henry would be 'a good lord' to 

him.  The Parliament replied that they would recommend his being 

kept in some secret place where the people could not resort, and 

where his friends could not be admitted to see him.  Henry 

accordingly passed this sentence upon him, and it now began to be 

pretty clear to the nation that Richard the Second would not live 

very long.



It was a noisy Parliament, as it was an unprincipled one, and the 

Lords quarrelled so violently among themselves as to which of them 

had been loyal and which disloyal, and which consistent and which 

inconsistent, that forty gauntlets are said to have been thrown 

upon the floor at one time as challenges to as many battles:  the 

truth being that they were all false and base together, and had 

been, at one time with the old King, and at another time with the 

new one, and seldom true for any length of time to any one.  They 

soon began to plot again.  A conspiracy was formed to invite the 

King to a tournament at Oxford, and then to take him by surprise 

and kill him.  This murderous enterprise, which was agreed upon at 

secret meetings in the house of the Abbot of Westminster, was 

betrayed by the Earl of Rutland - one of the conspirators.  The 

King, instead of going to the tournament or staying at Windsor 

(where the conspirators suddenly went, on finding themselves 

discovered, with the hope of seizing him), retired to London, 

proclaimed them all traitors, and advanced upon them with a great 

force.  They retired into the west of England, proclaiming Richard 

King; but, the people rose against them, and they were all slain.  

Their treason hastened the death of the deposed monarch.  Whether 

he was killed by hired assassins, or whether he was starved to 

death, or whether he refused food on hearing of his brothers being 

killed (who were in that plot), is very doubtful.  He met his death 

somehow; and his body was publicly shown at St. Paul's Cathedral 

with only the lower part of the face uncovered.  I can scarcely 

doubt that he was killed by the King's orders.



The French wife of the miserable Richard was now only ten years 

old; and, when her father, Charles of France, heard of her 

misfortunes and of her lonely condition in England, he went mad:  

as he had several times done before, during the last five or six 

years.  The French Dukes of Burgundy and Bourbon took up the poor 

girl's cause, without caring much about it, but on the chance of 

getting something out of England.  The people of Bordeaux, who had 

a sort of superstitious attachment to the memory of Richard, 

because he was born there, swore by the Lord that he had been the 

best man in all his kingdom - which was going rather far - and 

promised to do great things against the English.  Nevertheless, 

when they came to consider that they, and the whole people of 

France, were ruined by their own nobles, and that the English rule 

was much the better of the two, they cooled down again; and the two 

dukes, although they were very great men, could do nothing without 

them.  Then, began negotiations between France and England for the 

sending home to Paris of the poor little Queen with all her jewels 

and her fortune of two hundred thousand francs in gold.  The King 

was quite willing to restore the young lady, and even the jewels; 

but he said he really could not part with the money.  So, at last 

she was safely deposited at Paris without her fortune, and then the 

Duke of Burgundy (who was cousin to the French King) began to 

quarrel with the Duke of Orleans (who was brother to the French 

King) about the whole matter; and those two dukes made France even 

more wretched than ever.



As the idea of conquering Scotland was still popular at home, the 

King marched to the river Tyne and demanded homage of the King of 

that country.  This being refused, he advanced to Edinburgh, but 

did little there; for, his army being in want of provisions, and 

the Scotch being very careful to hold him in check without giving 

battle, he was obliged to retire.  It is to his immortal honour 

that in this sally he burnt no villages and slaughtered no people, 

but was particularly careful that his army should be merciful and 

harmless.  It was a great example in those ruthless times.



A war among the border people of England and Scotland went on for 

twelve months, and then the Earl of Northumberland, the nobleman 

who had helped Henry to the crown, began to rebel against him - 

probably because nothing that Henry could do for him would satisfy 

his extravagant expectations.  There was a certain Welsh gentleman, 

named OWEN GLENDOWER, who had been a student in one of the Inns of 

Court, and had afterwards been in the service of the late King, 

whose Welsh property was taken from him by a powerful lord related 

to the present King, who was his neighbour.  Appealing for redress, 

and getting none, he took up arms, was made an outlaw, and declared 

himself sovereign of Wales.  He pretended to be a magician; and not 

only were the Welsh people stupid enough to believe him, but, even 

Henry believed him too; for, making three expeditions into Wales, 

and being three times driven back by the wildness of the country, 

the bad weather, and the skill of Glendower, he thought he was 

defeated by the Welshman's magic arts.  However, he took Lord Grey 

and Sir Edmund Mortimer, prisoners, and allowed the relatives of 

Lord Grey to ransom him, but would not extend such favour to Sir 

Edmund Mortimer.  Now, Henry Percy, called HOTSPUR, son of the Earl 

of Northumberland, who was married to Mortimer's sister, is 

supposed to have taken offence at this; and, therefore, in 

conjunction with his father and some others, to have joined Owen 

Glendower, and risen against Henry.  It is by no means clear that 

this was the real cause of the conspiracy; but perhaps it was made 

the pretext.  It was formed, and was very powerful; including 

SCROOP, Archbishop of York, and the EARL OF DOUGLAS, a powerful and 

brave Scottish nobleman.  The King was prompt and active, and the 

two armies met at Shrewsbury.



There were about fourteen thousand men in each.  The old Earl of 

Northumberland being sick, the rebel forces were led by his son.  

The King wore plain armour to deceive the enemy; and four noblemen, 

with the same object, wore the royal arms.  The rebel charge was so 

furious, that every one of those gentlemen was killed, the royal 

standard was beaten down, and the young Prince of Wales was 

severely wounded in the face.  But he was one of the bravest and 

best soldiers that ever lived, and he fought so well, and the 

King's troops were so encouraged by his bold example, that they 

rallied immediately, and cut the enemy's forces all to pieces.  

Hotspur was killed by an arrow in the brain, and the rout was so 

complete that the whole rebellion was struck down by this one blow.  

The Earl of Northumberland surrendered himself soon after hearing 

of the death of his son, and received a pardon for all his 

offences.



There were some lingerings of rebellion yet:  Owen Glendower being 

retired to Wales, and a preposterous story being spread among the 

ignorant people that King Richard was still alive.  How they could 

have believed such nonsense it is difficult to imagine; but they 

certainly did suppose that the Court fool of the late King, who was 

something like him, was he, himself; so that it seemed as if, after 

giving so much trouble to the country in his life, he was still to 

trouble it after his death.  This was not the worst.  The young 

Earl of March and his brother were stolen out of Windsor Castle.  

Being retaken, and being found to have been spirited away by one 

Lady Spencer, she accused her own brother, that Earl of Rutland who 

was in the former conspiracy and was now Duke of York, of being in 

the plot.  For this he was ruined in fortune, though not put to 

death; and then another plot arose among the old Earl of 

Northumberland, some other lords, and that same Scroop, Archbishop 

of York, who was with the rebels before.  These conspirators caused 

a writing to be posted on the church doors, accusing the King of a 

variety of crimes; but, the King being eager and vigilant to oppose 

them, they were all taken, and the Archbishop was executed.  This 

was the first time that a great churchman had been slain by the law 

in England; but the King was resolved that it should be done, and 

done it was.



The next most remarkable event of this time was the seizure, by 

Henry, of the heir to the Scottish throne - James, a boy of nine 

years old.  He had been put aboard-ship by his father, the Scottish 

King Robert, to save him from the designs of his uncle, when, on 

his way to France, he was accidentally taken by some English 

cruisers.  He remained a prisoner in England for nineteen years, 

and became in his prison a student and a famous poet.



With the exception of occasional troubles with the Welsh and with 

the French, the rest of King Henry's reign was quiet enough.  But, 

the King was far from happy, and probably was troubled in his 

conscience by knowing that he had usurped the crown, and had 

occasioned the death of his miserable cousin.  The Prince of Wales, 

though brave and generous, is said to have been wild and 

dissipated, and even to have drawn his sword on GASCOIGNE, the 

Chief Justice of the King's Bench, because he was firm in dealing 

impartially with one of his dissolute companions.  Upon this the 

Chief Justice is said to have ordered him immediately to prison; 

the Prince of Wales is said to have submitted with a good grace; 

and the King is said to have exclaimed, 'Happy is the monarch who 

has so just a judge, and a son so willing to obey the laws.'  This 

is all very doubtful, and so is another story (of which Shakespeare 

has made beautiful use), that the Prince once took the crown out of 

his father's chamber as he was sleeping, and tried it on his own 

head.



The King's health sank more and more, and he became subject to 

violent eruptions on the face and to bad epileptic fits, and his 

spirits sank every day.  At last, as he was praying before the 

shrine of St. Edward at Westminster Abbey, he was seized with a 

terrible fit, and was carried into the Abbot's chamber, where he 

presently died.  It had been foretold that he would die at 

Jerusalem, which certainly is not, and never was, Westminster.  

But, as the Abbot's room had long been called the Jerusalem 

chamber, people said it was all the same thing, and were quite 

satisfied with the prediction.



The King died on the 20th of March, 1413, in the forty-seventh year 

of his age, and the fourteenth of his reign.  He was buried in 

Canterbury Cathedral.  He had been twice married, and had, by his 

first wife, a family of four sons and two daughters.  Considering 

his duplicity before he came to the throne, his unjust seizure of 

it, and above all, his making that monstrous law for the burning of 

what the priests called heretics, he was a reasonably good king, as 

kings went.

