





CHAPTER XIV - ENGLAND UNDER KING JOHN, CALLED LACKLAND







AT two-and-thirty years of age, JOHN became King of England.  His 

pretty little nephew ARTHUR had the best claim to the throne; but 

John seized the treasure, and made fine promises to the nobility, 

and got himself crowned at Westminster within a few weeks after his 

brother Richard's death.  I doubt whether the crown could possibly 

have been put upon the head of a meaner coward, or a more 

detestable villain, if England had been searched from end to end to 

find him out.



The French King, Philip, refused to acknowledge the right of John 

to his new dignity, and declared in favour of Arthur.  You must not 

suppose that he had any generosity of feeling for the fatherless 

boy; it merely suited his ambitious schemes to oppose the King of 

England.  So John and the French King went to war about Arthur.



He was a handsome boy, at that time only twelve years old.  He was 

not born when his father, Geoffrey, had his brains trampled out at 

the tournament; and, besides the misfortune of never having known a 

father's guidance and protection, he had the additional misfortune 

to have a foolish mother (CONSTANCE by name), lately married to her 

third husband.  She took Arthur, upon John's accession, to the 

French King, who pretended to be very much his friend, and who made 

him a Knight, and promised him his daughter in marriage; but, who 

cared so little about him in reality, that finding it his interest 

to make peace with King John for a time, he did so without the 

least consideration for the poor little Prince, and heartlessly 

sacrificed all his interests.



Young Arthur, for two years afterwards, lived quietly; and in the 

course of that time his mother died.  But, the French King then 

finding it his interest to quarrel with King John again, again made 

Arthur his pretence, and invited the orphan boy to court.  'You 

know your rights, Prince,' said the French King, 'and you would 

like to be a King.  Is it not so?'  'Truly,' said Prince Arthur, 'I 

should greatly like to be a King!'  'Then,' said Philip, 'you shall 

have two hundred gentlemen who are Knights of mine, and with them 

you shall go to win back the provinces belonging to you, of which 

your uncle, the usurping King of England, has taken possession.  I 

myself, meanwhile, will head a force against him in Normandy.'  

Poor Arthur was so flattered and so grateful that he signed a 

treaty with the crafty French King, agreeing to consider him his 

superior Lord, and that the French King should keep for himself 

whatever he could take from King John.



Now, King John was so bad in all ways, and King Philip was so 

perfidious, that Arthur, between the two, might as well have been a 

lamb between a fox and a wolf.  But, being so young, he was ardent 

and flushed with hope; and, when the people of Brittany (which was 

his inheritance) sent him five hundred more knights and five 

thousand foot soldiers, he believed his fortune was made.  The 

people of Brittany had been fond of him from his birth, and had 

requested that he might be called Arthur, in remembrance of that 

dimly-famous English Arthur, of whom I told you early in this book, 

whom they believed to have been the brave friend and companion of 

an old King of their own.  They had tales among them about a 

prophet called MERLIN (of the same old time), who had foretold that 

their own King should be restored to them after hundreds of years; 

and they believed that the prophecy would be fulfilled in Arthur; 

that the time would come when he would rule them with a crown of 

Brittany upon his head; and when neither King of France nor King of 

England would have any power over them.  When Arthur found himself 

riding in a glittering suit of armour on a richly caparisoned 

horse, at the head of his train of knights and soldiers, he began 

to believe this too, and to consider old Merlin a very superior 

prophet.



He did not know - how could he, being so innocent and 

inexperienced? - that his little army was a mere nothing against 

the power of the King of England.  The French King knew it; but the 

poor boy's fate was little to him, so that the King of England was 

worried and distressed.  Therefore, King Philip went his way into 

Normandy and Prince Arthur went his way towards Mirebeau, a French 

town near Poictiers, both very well pleased.



Prince Arthur went to attack the town of Mirebeau, because his 

grandmother Eleanor, who has so often made her appearance in this 

history (and who had always been his mother's enemy), was living 

there, and because his Knights said, 'Prince, if you can take her 

prisoner, you will be able to bring the King your uncle to terms!'  

But she was not to be easily taken.  She was old enough by this 

time - eighty - but she was as full of stratagem as she was full of 

years and wickedness.  Receiving intelligence of young Arthur's 

approach, she shut herself up in a high tower, and encouraged her 

soldiers to defend it like men.  Prince Arthur with his little army 

besieged the high tower.  King John, hearing how matters stood, 

came up to the rescue, with HIS army.  So here was a strange 

family-party!  The boy-Prince besieging his grandmother, and his 

uncle besieging him!



This position of affairs did not last long.  One summer night King 

John, by treachery, got his men into the town, surprised Prince 

Arthur's force, took two hundred of his knights, and seized the 

Prince himself in his bed.  The Knights were put in heavy irons, 

and driven away in open carts drawn by bullocks, to various 

dungeons where they were most inhumanly treated, and where some of 

them were starved to death.  Prince Arthur was sent to the castle 

of Falaise.



One day, while he was in prison at that castle, mournfully thinking 

it strange that one so young should be in so much trouble, and 

looking out of the small window in the deep dark wall, at the 

summer sky and the birds, the door was softly opened, and he saw 

his uncle the King standing in the shadow of the archway, looking 

very grim.



'Arthur,' said the King, with his wicked eyes more on the stone 

floor than on his nephew, 'will you not trust to the gentleness, 

the friendship, and the truthfulness of your loving uncle?'



'I will tell my loving uncle that,' replied the boy, 'when he does 

me right.  Let him restore to me my kingdom of England, and then 

come to me and ask the question.'



The King looked at him and went out.  'Keep that boy close 

prisoner,' said he to the warden of the castle.



Then, the King took secret counsel with the worst of his nobles how 

the Prince was to be got rid of.  Some said, 'Put out his eyes and 

keep him in prison, as Robort of Normandy was kept.'  Others said, 

'Have him stabbed.'  Others, 'Have him hanged.'  Others, 'Have him 

poisoned.'



King John, feeling that in any case, whatever was done afterwards, 

it would be a satisfaction to his mind to have those handsome eyes 

burnt out that had looked at him so proudly while his own royal 

eyes were blinking at the stone floor, sent certain ruffians to 

Falaise to blind the boy with red-hot irons.  But Arthur so 

pathetically entreated them, and shed such piteous tears, and so 

appealed to HUBERT DE BOURG (or BURGH), the warden of the castle, 

who had a love for him, and was an honourable, tender man, that 

Hubert could not bear it.  To his eternal honour he prevented the 

torture from being performed, and, at his own risk, sent the 

savages away.



The chafed and disappointed King bethought himself of the stabbing 

suggestion next, and, with his shuffling manner and his cruel face, 

proposed it to one William de Bray.  'I am a gentleman and not an 

executioner,' said William de Bray, and left the presence with 

disdain.



But it was not difficult for a King to hire a murderer in those 

days.  King John found one for his money, and sent him down to the 

castle of Falaise.  'On what errand dost thou come?' said Hubert to 

this fellow.  'To despatch young Arthur,' he returned.  'Go back to 

him who sent thee,' answered Hubert, 'and say that I will do it!'



King John very well knowing that Hubert would never do it, but that 

he courageously sent this reply to save the Prince or gain time, 

despatched messengers to convey the young prisoner to the castle of 

Rouen.



Arthur was soon forced from the good Hubert - of whom he had never 

stood in greater need than then - carried away by night, and lodged 

in his new prison:  where, through his grated window, he could hear 

the deep waters of the river Seine, rippling against the stone wall 

below.



One dark night, as he lay sleeping, dreaming perhaps of rescue by 

those unfortunate gentlemen who were obscurely suffering and dying 

in his cause, he was roused, and bidden by his jailer to come down 

the staircase to the foot of the tower.  He hurriedly dressed 

himself and obeyed.  When they came to the bottom of the winding 

stairs, and the night air from the river blew upon their faces, the 

jailer trod upon his torch and put it out.  Then, Arthur, in the 

darkness, was hurriedly drawn into a solitary boat.  And in that 

boat, he found his uncle and one other man.



He knelt to them, and prayed them not to murder him.  Deaf to his 

entreaties, they stabbed him and sunk his body in the river with 

heavy stones.  When the spring-morning broke, the tower-door was 

closed, the boat was gone, the river sparkled on its way, and never 

more was any trace of the poor boy beheld by mortal eyes.



The news of this atrocious murder being spread in England, awakened 

a hatred of the King (already odious for his many vices, and for 

his having stolen away and married a noble lady while his own wife 

was living) that never slept again through his whole reign.  In 

Brittany, the indignation was intense.  Arthur's own sister ELEANOR 

was in the power of John and shut up in a convent at Bristol, but 

his half-sister ALICE was in Brittany.  The people chose her, and 

the murdered prince's father-in-law, the last husband of Constance, 

to represent them; and carried their fiery complaints to King 

Philip.  King Philip summoned King John (as the holder of territory 

in France) to come before him and defend himself.  King John 

refusing to appear, King Philip declared him false, perjured, and 

guilty; and again made war.  In a little time, by conquering the 

greater part of his French territory, King Philip deprived him of 

one-third of his dominions.  And, through all the fighting that 

took place, King John was always found, either to be eating and 

drinking, like a gluttonous fool, when the danger was at a 

distance, or to be running away, like a beaten cur, when it was 

near.



You might suppose that when he was losing his dominions at this 

rate, and when his own nobles cared so little for him or his cause 

that they plainly refused to follow his banner out of England, he 

had enemies enough.  But he made another enemy of the Pope, which 

he did in this way.



The Archbishop of Canterbury dying, and the junior monks of that 

place wishing to get the start of the senior monks in the 

appointment of his successor, met together at midnight, secretly 

elected a certain REGINALD, and sent him off to Rome to get the 

Pope's approval.  The senior monks and the King soon finding this 

out, and being very angry about it, the junior monks gave way, and 

all the monks together elected the Bishop of Norwich, who was the 

King's favourite.  The Pope, hearing the whole story, declared that 

neither election would do for him, and that HE elected STEPHEN 

LANGTON.  The monks submitting to the Pope, the King turned them 

all out bodily, and banished them as traitors.  The Pope sent three 

bishops to the King, to threaten him with an Interdict.  The King 

told the bishops that if any Interdict were laid upon his kingdom, 

he would tear out the eyes and cut off the noses of all the monks 

he could lay hold of, and send them over to Rome in that 

undecorated state as a present for their master.  The bishops, 

nevertheless, soon published the Interdict, and fled.



After it had lasted a year, the Pope proceeded to his next step; 

which was Excommunication.  King John was declared excommunicated, 

with all the usual ceremonies.  The King was so incensed at this, 

and was made so desperate by the disaffection of his Barons and the 

hatred of his people, that it is said he even privately sent 

ambassadors to the Turks in Spain, offering to renounce his 

religion and hold his kingdom of them if they would help him.  It 

is related that the ambassadors were admitted to the presence of 

the Turkish Emir through long lines of Moorish guards, and that 

they found the Emir with his eyes seriously fixed on the pages of a 

large book, from which he never once looked up.  That they gave him 

a letter from the King containing his proposals, and were gravely 

dismissed.  That presently the Emir sent for one of them, and 

conjured him, by his faith in his religion, to say what kind of man 

the King of England truly was?  That the ambassador, thus pressed, 

replied that the King of England was a false tyrant, against whom 

his own subjects would soon rise.  And that this was quite enough 

for the Emir.



Money being, in his position, the next best thing to men, King John 

spared no means of getting it.  He set on foot another oppressing 

and torturing of the unhappy Jews (which was quite in his way), and 

invented a new punishment for one wealthy Jew of Bristol.  Until 

such time as that Jew should produce a certain large sum of money, 

the King sentenced him to be imprisoned, and, every day, to have 

one tooth violently wrenched out of his head - beginning with the 

double teeth.  For seven days, the oppressed man bore the daily 

pain and lost the daily tooth; but, on the eighth, he paid the 

money.  With the treasure raised in such ways, the King made an 

expedition into Ireland, where some English nobles had revolted.  

It was one of the very few places from which he did not run away; 

because no resistance was shown.  He made another expedition into 

Wales - whence he DID run away in the end:  but not before he had 

got from the Welsh people, as hostages, twenty-seven young men of 

the best families; every one of whom he caused to be slain in the 

following year.



To Interdict and Excommunication, the Pope now added his last 

sentence; Deposition.  He proclaimed John no longer King, absolved 

all his subjects from their allegiance, and sent Stephen Langton 

and others to the King of France to tell him that, if he would 

invade England, he should be forgiven all his sins - at least, 

should be forgiven them by the Pope, if that would do.



As there was nothing that King Philip desired more than to invade 

England, he collected a great army at Rouen, and a fleet of 

seventeen hundred ships to bring them over.  But the English 

people, however bitterly they hated the King, were not a people to 

suffer invasion quietly.  They flocked to Dover, where the English 

standard was, in such great numbers to enrol themselves as 

defenders of their native land, that there were not provisions for 

them, and the King could only select and retain sixty thousand.  

But, at this crisis, the Pope, who had his own reasons for 

objecting to either King John or King Philip being too powerful, 

interfered.  He entrusted a legate, whose name was PANDOLF, with 

the easy task of frightening King John.  He sent him to the English 

Camp, from France, to terrify him with exaggerations of King 

Philip's power, and his own weakness in the discontent of the 

English Barons and people.  Pandolf discharged his commission so 

well, that King John, in a wretched panic, consented to acknowledge 

Stephen Langton; to resign his kingdom 'to God, Saint Peter, and 

Saint Paul' - which meant the Pope; and to hold it, ever 

afterwards, by the Pope's leave, on payment of an annual sum of 

money.  To this shameful contract he publicly bound himself in the 

church of the Knights Templars at Dover:  where he laid at the 

legate's feet a part of the tribute, which the legate haughtily 

trampled upon.  But they DO say, that this was merely a genteel 

flourish, and that he was afterwards seen to pick it up and pocket 

it.



There was an unfortunate prophet, the name of Peter, who had 

greatly increased King John's terrors by predicting that he would 

be unknighted (which the King supposed to signify that he would 

die) before the Feast of the Ascension should be past.  That was 

the day after this humiliation.  When the next morning came, and 

the King, who had been trembling all night, found himself alive and 

safe, he ordered the prophet - and his son too - to be dragged 

through the streets at the tails of horses, and then hanged, for 

having frightened him.



As King John had now submitted, the Pope, to King Philip's great 

astonishment, took him under his protection, and informed King 

Philip that he found he could not give him leave to invade England.  

The angry Philip resolved to do it without his leave but he gained 

nothing and lost much; for, the English, commanded by the Earl of 

Salisbury, went over, in five hundred ships, to the French coast, 

before the French fleet had sailed away from it, and utterly 

defeated the whole.



The Pope then took off his three sentences, one after another, and 

empowered Stephen Langton publicly to receive King John into the 

favour of the Church again, and to ask him to dinner.  The King, 

who hated Langton with all his might and main - and with reason 

too, for he was a great and a good man, with whom such a King could 

have no sympathy - pretended to cry and to be VERY grateful.  There 

was a little difficulty about settling how much the King should pay 

as a recompense to the clergy for the losses he had caused them; 

but, the end of it was, that the superior clergy got a good deal, 

and the inferior clergy got little or nothing - which has also 

happened since King John's time, I believe.



When all these matters were arranged, the King in his triumph 

became more fierce, and false, and insolent to all around him than 

he had ever been.  An alliance of sovereigns against King Philip, 

gave him an opportunity of landing an army in France; with which he 

even took a town!  But, on the French King's gaining a great 

victory, he ran away, of course, and made a truce for five years.



And now the time approached when he was to be still further 

humbled, and made to feel, if he could feel anything, what a 

wretched creature he was.  Of all men in the world, Stephen Langton 

seemed raised up by Heaven to oppose and subdue him.  When he 

ruthlessly burnt and destroyed the property of his own subjects, 

because their Lords, the Barons, would not serve him abroad, 

Stephen Langton fearlessly reproved and threatened him.  When he 

swore to restore the laws of King Edward, or the laws of King Henry 

the First, Stephen Langton knew his falsehood, and pursued him 

through all his evasions.  When the Barons met at the abbey of 

Saint Edmund's-Bury, to consider their wrongs and the King's 

oppressions, Stephen Langton roused them by his fervid words to 

demand a solemn charter of rights and liberties from their perjured 

master, and to swear, one by one, on the High Altar, that they 

would have it, or would wage war against him to the death.  When 

the King hid himself in London from the Barons, and was at last 

obliged to receive them, they told him roundly they would not 

believe him unless Stephen Langton became a surety that he would 

keep his word.  When he took the Cross to invest himself with some 

interest, and belong to something that was received with favour, 

Stephen Langton was still immovable.  When he appealed to the Pope, 

and the Pope wrote to Stephen Langton in behalf of his new 

favourite, Stephen Langton was deaf, even to the Pope himself, and 

saw before him nothing but the welfare of England and the crimes of 

the English King.



At Easter-time, the Barons assembled at Stamford, in Lincolnshire, 

in proud array, and, marching near to Oxford where the King was, 

delivered into the hands of Stephen Langton and two others, a list 

of grievances.  'And these,' they said, 'he must redress, or we 

will do it for ourselves!'  When Stephen Langton told the King as 

much, and read the list to him, he went half mad with rage.  But 

that did him no more good than his afterwards trying to pacify the 

Barons with lies.  They called themselves and their followers, 'The 

army of God and the Holy Church.'  Marching through the country, 

with the people thronging to them everywhere (except at 

Northampton, where they failed in an attack upon the castle), they 

at last triumphantly set up their banner in London itself, whither 

the whole land, tired of the tyrant, seemed to flock to join them.  

Seven knights alone, of all the knights in England, remained with 

the King; who, reduced to this strait, at last sent the Earl of 

Pembroke to the Barons to say that he approved of everything, and 

would meet them to sign their charter when they would.  'Then,' 

said the Barons, 'let the day be the fifteenth of June, and the 

place, Runny-Mead.'



On Monday, the fifteenth of June, one thousand two hundred and 

fourteen, the King came from Windsor Castle, and the Barons came 

from the town of Staines, and they met on Runny-Mead, which is 

still a pleasant meadow by the Thames, where rushes grow in the 

clear water of the winding river, and its banks are green with 

grass and trees.  On the side of the Barons, came the General of 

their army, ROBERT FITZ-WALTER, and a great concourse of the 

nobility of England.  With the King, came, in all, some four-and-

twenty persons of any note, most of whom despised him, and were 

merely his advisers in form.  On that great day, and in that great 

company, the King signed MAGNA CHARTA - the great charter of 

England - by which he pledged himself to maintain the Church in its 

rights; to relieve the Barons of oppressive obligations as vassals 

of the Crown - of which the Barons, in their turn, pledged 

themselves to relieve THEIR vassals, the people; to respect the 

liberties of London and all other cities and boroughs; to protect 

foreign merchants who came to England; to imprison no man without a 

fair trial; and to sell, delay, or deny justice to none.  As the 

Barons knew his falsehood well, they further required, as their 

securities, that he should send out of his kingdom all his foreign 

troops; that for two months they should hold possession of the city 

of London, and Stephen Langton of the Tower; and that five-and-

twenty of their body, chosen by themselves, should be a lawful 

committee to watch the keeping of the charter, and to make war upon 

him if he broke it.



All this he was obliged to yield.  He signed the charter with a 

smile, and, if he could have looked agreeable, would have done so, 

as he departed from the splendid assembly.  When he got home to 

Windsor Castle, he was quite a madman in his helpless fury.  And he 

broke the charter immediately afterwards.



He sent abroad for foreign soldiers, and sent to the Pope for help, 

and plotted to take London by surprise, while the Barons should be 

holding a great tournament at Stamford, which they had agreed to 

hold there as a celebration of the charter.  The Barons, however, 

found him out and put it off.  Then, when the Barons desired to see 

him and tax him with his treachery, he made numbers of appointments 

with them, and kept none, and shifted from place to place, and was 

constantly sneaking and skulking about.  At last he appeared at 

Dover, to join his foreign soldiers, of whom numbers came into his 

pay; and with them he besieged and took Rochester Castle, which was 

occupied by knights and soldiers of the Barons.  He would have 

hanged them every one; but the leader of the foreign soldiers, 

fearful of what the English people might afterwards do to him, 

interfered to save the knights; therefore the King was fain to 

satisfy his vengeance with the death of all the common men.  Then, 

he sent the Earl of Salisbury, with one portion of his army, to 

ravage the eastern part of his own dominions, while he carried fire 

and slaughter into the northern part; torturing, plundering, 

killing, and inflicting every possible cruelty upon the people; 

and, every morning, setting a worthy example to his men by setting 

fire, with his own monster-hands, to the house where he had slept 

last night.  Nor was this all; for the Pope, coming to the aid of 

his precious friend, laid the kingdom under an Interdict again, 

because the people took part with the Barons.  It did not much 

matter, for the people had grown so used to it now, that they had 

begun to think nothing about it.  It occurred to them - perhaps to 

Stephen Langton too - that they could keep their churches open, and 

ring their bells, without the Pope's permission as well as with it.  

So, they tried the experiment - and found that it succeeded 

perfectly.



It being now impossible to bear the country, as a wilderness of 

cruelty, or longer to hold any terms with such a forsworn outlaw of 

a King, the Barons sent to Louis, son of the French monarch, to 

offer him the English crown.  Caring as little for the Pope's 

excommunication of him if he accepted the offer, as it is possible 

his father may have cared for the Pope's forgiveness of his sins, 

he landed at Sandwich (King John immediately running away from 

Dover, where he happened to be), and went on to London.  The 

Scottish King, with whom many of the Northern English Lords had 

taken refuge; numbers of the foreign soldiers, numbers of the 

Barons, and numbers of the people went over to him every day; - 

King John, the while, continually running away in all directions.



The career of Louis was checked however, by the suspicions of the 

Barons, founded on the dying declaration of a French Lord, that 

when the kingdom was conquered he was sworn to banish them as 

traitors, and to give their estates to some of his own Nobles.  

Rather than suffer this, some of the Barons hesitated:  others even 

went over to King John.



It seemed to be the turning-point of King John's fortunes, for, in 

his savage and murderous course, he had now taken some towns and 

met with some successes.  But, happily for England and humanity, 

his death was near.  Crossing a dangerous quicksand, called the 

Wash, not very far from Wisbeach, the tide came up and nearly 

drowned his army.  He and his soldiers escaped; but, looking back 

from the shore when he was safe, he saw the roaring water sweep 

down in a torrent, overturn the waggons, horses, and men, that 

carried his treasure, and engulf them in a raging whirlpool from 

which nothing could be delivered.



Cursing, and swearing, and gnawing his fingers, he went on to 

Swinestead Abbey, where the monks set before him quantities of 

pears, and peaches, and new cider - some say poison too, but there 

is very little reason to suppose so - of which he ate and drank in 

an immoderate and beastly way.  All night he lay ill of a burning 

fever, and haunted with horrible fears.  Next day, they put him in 

a horse-litter, and carried him to Sleaford Castle, where he passed 

another night of pain and horror.  Next day, they carried him, with 

greater difficulty than on the day before, to the castle of Newark 

upon Trent; and there, on the eighteenth of October, in the forty-

ninth year of his age, and the seventeenth of his vile reign, was 

an end of this miserable brute.

