





CHAPTER X - ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE FIRST, CALLED FINE-SCHOLAR







FINE-SCHOLAR, on hearing of the Red King's death, hurried to 

Winchester with as much speed as Rufus himself had made, to seize 

the Royal treasure.  But the keeper of the treasure who had been 

one of the hunting-party in the Forest, made haste to Winchester 

too, and, arriving there at about the same time, refused to yield 

it up.  Upon this, Fine-Scholar drew his sword, and threatened to 

kill the treasurer; who might have paid for his fidelity with his 

life, but that he knew longer resistance to be useless when he 

found the Prince supported by a company of powerful barons, who 

declared they were determined to make him King.  The treasurer, 

therefore, gave up the money and jewels of the Crown:  and on the 

third day after the death of the Red King, being a Sunday, Fine-

Scholar stood before the high altar in Westminster Abbey, and made 

a solemn declaration that he would resign the Church property which 

his brother had seized; that he would do no wrong to the nobles; 

and that he would restore to the people the laws of Edward the 

Confessor, with all the improvements of William the Conqueror.  So 

began the reign of KING HENRY THE FIRST.



The people were attached to their new King, both because he had 

known distresses, and because he was an Englishman by birth and not 

a Norman.  To strengthen this last hold upon them, the King wished 

to marry an English lady; and could think of no other wife than 

MAUD THE GOOD, the daughter of the King of Scotland.  Although this 

good Princess did not love the King, she was so affected by the 

representations the nobles made to her of the great charity it 

would be in her to unite the Norman and Saxon races, and prevent 

hatred and bloodshed between them for the future, that she 

consented to become his wife.  After some disputing among the 

priests, who said that as she had been in a convent in her youth, 

and had worn the veil of a nun, she could not lawfully be married - 

against which the Princess stated that her aunt, with whom she had 

lived in her youth, had indeed sometimes thrown a piece of black 

stuff over her, but for no other reason than because the nun's veil 

was the only dress the conquering Normans respected in girl or 

woman, and not because she had taken the vows of a nun, which she 

never had - she was declared free to marry, and was made King 

Henry's Queen.  A good Queen she was; beautiful, kind-hearted, and 

worthy of a better husband than the King.



For he was a cunning and unscrupulous man, though firm and clever.  

He cared very little for his word, and took any means to gain his 

ends.  All this is shown in his treatment of his brother Robert - 

Robert, who had suffered him to be refreshed with water, and who 

had sent him the wine from his own table, when he was shut up, with 

the crows flying below him, parched with thirst, in the castle on 

the top of St. Michael's Mount, where his Red brother would have 

let him die.



Before the King began to deal with Robert, he removed and disgraced 

all the favourites of the late King; who were for the most part 

base characters, much detested by the people.  Flambard, or 

Firebrand, whom the late King had made Bishop of Durham, of all 

things in the world, Henry imprisoned in the Tower; but Firebrand 

was a great joker and a jolly companion, and made himself so 

popular with his guards that they pretended to know nothing about a 

long rope that was sent into his prison at the bottom of a deep 

flagon of wine.  The guards took the wine, and Firebrand took the 

rope; with which, when they were fast asleep, he let himself down 

from a window in the night, and so got cleverly aboard ship and 

away to Normandy.



Now Robert, when his brother Fine-Scholar came to the throne, was 

still absent in the Holy Land.  Henry pretended that Robert had 

been made Sovereign of that country; and he had been away so long, 

that the ignorant people believed it.  But, behold, when Henry had 

been some time King of England, Robert came home to Normandy; 

having leisurely returned from Jerusalem through Italy, in which 

beautiful country he had enjoyed himself very much, and had married 

a lady as beautiful as itself!  In Normandy, he found Firebrand 

waiting to urge him to assert his claim to the English crown, and 

declare war against King Henry.  This, after great loss of time in 

feasting and dancing with his beautiful Italian wife among his 

Norman friends, he at last did.



The English in general were on King Henry's side, though many of 

the Normans were on Robert's.  But the English sailors deserted the 

King, and took a great part of the English fleet over to Normandy; 

so that Robert came to invade this country in no foreign vessels, 

but in English ships.  The virtuous Anselm, however, whom Henry had 

invited back from abroad, and made Archbishop of Canterbury, was 

steadfast in the King's cause; and it was so well supported that 

the two armies, instead of fighting, made a peace.  Poor Robert, 

who trusted anybody and everybody, readily trusted his brother, the 

King; and agreed to go home and receive a pension from England, on 

condition that all his followers were fully pardoned.  This the 

King very faithfully promised, but Robert was no sooner gone than 

he began to punish them.



Among them was the Earl of Shrewsbury, who, on being summoned by 

the King to answer to five-and-forty accusations, rode away to one 

of his strong castles, shut himself up therein, called around him 

his tenants and vassals, and fought for his liberty, but was 

defeated and banished.  Robert, with all his faults, was so true to 

his word, that when he first heard of this nobleman having risen 

against his brother, he laid waste the Earl of Shrewsbury's estates 

in Normandy, to show the King that he would favour no breach of 

their treaty.  Finding, on better information, afterwards, that the 

Earl's only crime was having been his friend, he came over to 

England, in his old thoughtless, warm-hearted way, to intercede 

with the King, and remind him of the solemn promise to pardon all 

his followers.



This confidence might have put the false King to the blush, but it 

did not.  Pretending to be very friendly, he so surrounded his 

brother with spies and traps, that Robert, who was quite in his 

power, had nothing for it but to renounce his pension and escape 

while he could.  Getting home to Normandy, and understanding the 

King better now, he naturally allied himself with his old friend 

the Earl of Shrewsbury, who had still thirty castles in that 

country.  This was exactly what Henry wanted.  He immediately 

declared that Robert had broken the treaty, and next year invaded 

Normandy.



He pretended that he came to deliver the Normans, at their own 

request, from his brother's misrule.  There is reason to fear that 

his misrule was bad enough; for his beautiful wife had died, 

leaving him with an infant son, and his court was again so 

careless, dissipated, and ill-regulated, that it was said he 

sometimes lay in bed of a day for want of clothes to put on - his 

attendants having stolen all his dresses.  But he headed his army 

like a brave prince and a gallant soldier, though he had the 

misfortune to be taken prisoner by King Henry, with four hundred of 

his Knights.  Among them was poor harmless Edgar Atheling, who 

loved Robert well.  Edgar was not important enough to be severe 

with.  The King afterwards gave him a small pension, which he lived 

upon and died upon, in peace, among the quiet woods and fields of 

England.



And Robert - poor, kind, generous, wasteful, heedless Robert, with 

so many faults, and yet with virtues that might have made a better 

and a happier man - what was the end of him?  If the King had had 

the magnanimity to say with a kind air, 'Brother, tell me, before 

these noblemen, that from this time you will be my faithful 

follower and friend, and never raise your hand against me or my 

forces more!' he might have trusted Robert to the death.  But the 

King was not a magnanimous man.  He sentenced his brother to be 

confined for life in one of the Royal Castles.  In the beginning of 

his imprisonment, he was allowed to ride out, guarded; but he one 

day broke away from his guard and galloped of.  He had the evil 

fortune to ride into a swamp, where his horse stuck fast and he was 

taken.  When the King heard of it he ordered him to be blinded, 

which was done by putting a red-hot metal basin on his eyes.



And so, in darkness and in prison, many years, he thought of all 

his past life, of the time he had wasted, of the treasure he had 

squandered, of the opportunities he had lost, of the youth he had 

thrown away, of the talents he had neglected.  Sometimes, on fine 

autumn mornings, he would sit and think of the old hunting parties 

in the free Forest, where he had been the foremost and the gayest.  

Sometimes, in the still nights, he would wake, and mourn for the 

many nights that had stolen past him at the gaming-table; 

sometimes, would seem to hear, upon the melancholy wind, the old 

songs of the minstrels; sometimes, would dream, in his blindness, 

of the light and glitter of the Norman Court.  Many and many a 

time, he groped back, in his fancy, to Jerusalem, where he had 

fought so well; or, at the head of his brave companions, bowed his 

feathered helmet to the shouts of welcome greeting him in Italy, 

and seemed again to walk among the sunny vineyards, or on the shore 

of the blue sea, with his lovely wife.  And then, thinking of her 

grave, and of his fatherless boy, he would stretch out his solitary 

arms and weep.



At length, one day, there lay in prison, dead, with cruel and 

disfiguring scars upon his eyelids, bandaged from his jailer's 

sight, but on which the eternal Heavens looked down, a worn old man 

of eighty.  He had once been Robert of Normandy.  Pity him!



At the time when Robert of Normandy was taken prisoner by his 

brother, Robert's little son was only five years old.  This child 

was taken, too, and carried before the King, sobbing and crying; 

for, young as he was, he knew he had good reason to be afraid of 

his Royal uncle.  The King was not much accustomed to pity those 

who were in his power, but his cold heart seemed for the moment to 

soften towards the boy.  He was observed to make a great effort, as 

if to prevent himself from being cruel, and ordered the child to be 

taken away; whereupon a certain Baron, who had married a daughter 

of Duke Robert's (by name, Helie of Saint Saen), took charge of 

him, tenderly.  The King's gentleness did not last long.  Before 

two years were over, he sent messengers to this lord's Castle to 

seize the child and bring him away.  The Baron was not there at the 

time, but his servants were faithful, and carried the boy off in 

his sleep and hid him.  When the Baron came home, and was told what 

the King had done, he took the child abroad, and, leading him by 

the hand, went from King to King and from Court to Court, relating 

how the child had a claim to the throne of England, and how his 

uncle the King, knowing that he had that claim, would have murdered 

him, perhaps, but for his escape.



The youth and innocence of the pretty little WILLIAM FITZ-ROBERT 

(for that was his name) made him many friends at that time.  When 

he became a young man, the King of France, uniting with the French 

Counts of Anjou and Flanders, supported his cause against the King 

of England, and took many of the King's towns and castles in 

Normandy.  But, King Henry, artful and cunning always, bribed some 

of William's friends with money, some with promises, some with 

power.  He bought off the Count of Anjou, by promising to marry his 

eldest son, also named WILLIAM, to the Count's daughter; and indeed 

the whole trust of this King's life was in such bargains, and he 

believed (as many another King has done since, and as one King did 

in France a very little time ago) that every man's truth and honour 

can be bought at some price.  For all this, he was so afraid of 

William Fitz-Robert and his friends, that, for a long time, he 

believed his life to be in danger; and never lay down to sleep, 

even in his palace surrounded by his guards, without having a sword 

and buckler at his bedside.



To strengthen his power, the King with great ceremony betrothed his 

eldest daughter MATILDA, then a child only eight years old, to be 

the wife of Henry the Fifth, the Emperor of Germany.  To raise her 

marriage-portion, he taxed the English people in a most oppressive 

manner; then treated them to a great procession, to restore their 

good humour; and sent Matilda away, in fine state, with the German 

ambassadors, to be educated in the country of her future husband.



And now his Queen, Maud the Good, unhappily died.  It was a sad 

thought for that gentle lady, that the only hope with which she had 

married a man whom she had never loved - the hope of reconciling 

the Norman and English races - had failed.  At the very time of her 

death, Normandy and all France was in arms against England; for, so 

soon as his last danger was over, King Henry had been false to all 

the French powers he had promised, bribed, and bought, and they had 

naturally united against him.  After some fighting, however, in 

which few suffered but the unhappy common people (who always 

suffered, whatsoever was the matter), he began to promise, bribe, 

and buy again; and by those means, and by the help of the Pope, who 

exerted himself to save more bloodshed, and by solemnly declaring, 

over and over again, that he really was in earnest this time, and 

would keep his word, the King made peace.



One of the first consequences of this peace was, that the King went 

over to Normandy with his son Prince William and a great retinue, 

to have the Prince acknowledged as his successor by the Norman 

Nobles, and to contract the promised marriage (this was one of the 

many promises the King had broken) between him and the daughter of 

the Count of Anjou.  Both these things were triumphantly done, with 

great show and rejoicing; and on the twenty-fifth of November, in 

the year one thousand one hundred and twenty, the whole retinue 

prepared to embark at the Port of Barfleur, for the voyage home.



On that day, and at that place, there came to the King, Fitz-

Stephen, a sea-captain, and said:



'My liege, my father served your father all his life, upon the sea.  

He steered the ship with the golden boy upon the prow, in which 

your father sailed to conquer England.  I beseech you to grant me 

the same office.  I have a fair vessel in the harbour here, called 

The White Ship, manned by fifty sailors of renown.  I pray you, 

Sire, to let your servant have the honour of steering you in The 

White Ship to England!'



'I am sorry, friend,' replied the King, 'that my vessel is already 

chosen, and that I cannot (therefore) sail with the son of the man 

who served my father.  But the Prince and all his company shall go 

along with you, in the fair White Ship, manned by the fifty sailors 

of renown.'



An hour or two afterwards, the King set sail in the vessel he had 

chosen, accompanied by other vessels, and, sailing all night with a 

fair and gentle wind, arrived upon the coast of England in the 

morning.  While it was yet night, the people in some of those ships 

heard a faint wild cry come over the sea, and wondered what it was.



Now, the Prince was a dissolute, debauched young man of eighteen, 

who bore no love to the English, and had declared that when he came 

to the throne he would yoke them to the plough like oxen.  He went 

aboard The White Ship, with one hundred and forty youthful Nobles 

like himself, among whom were eighteen noble ladies of the highest 

rank.  All this gay company, with their servants and the fifty 

sailors, made three hundred souls aboard the fair White Ship.



'Give three casks of wine, Fitz-Stephen,' said the Prince, 'to the 

fifty sailors of renown!  My father the King has sailed out of the 

harbour.  What time is there to make merry here, and yet reach 

England with the rest?'



'Prince!' said Fitz-Stephen, 'before morning, my fifty and The 

White Ship shall overtake the swiftest vessel in attendance on your 

father the King, if we sail at midnight!'



Then the Prince commanded to make merry; and the sailors drank out 

the three casks of wine; and the Prince and all the noble company 

danced in the moonlight on the deck of The White Ship.



When, at last, she shot out of the harbour of Barfleur, there was 

not a sober seaman on board.  But the sails were all set, and the 

oars all going merrily.  Fitz-Stephen had the helm.  The gay young 

nobles and the beautiful ladies, wrapped in mantles of various 

bright colours to protect them from the cold, talked, laughed, and 

sang.  The Prince encouraged the fifty sailors to row harder yet, 

for the honour of The White Ship.



Crash!  A terrific cry broke from three hundred hearts.  It was the 

cry the people in the distant vessels of the King heard faintly on 

the water.  The White Ship had struck upon a rock - was filling - 

going down!



Fitz-Stephen hurried the Prince into a boat, with some few Nobles.  

'Push off,' he whispered; 'and row to land.  It is not far, and the 

sea is smooth.  The rest of us must die.'



But, as they rowed away, fast, from the sinking ship, the Prince 

heard the voice of his sister MARIE, the Countess of Perche, 

calling for help.  He never in his life had been so good as he was 

then.  He cried in an agony, 'Row back at any risk!  I cannot bear 

to leave her!'



They rowed back.  As the Prince held out his arms to catch his 

sister, such numbers leaped in, that the boat was overset.  And in 

the same instant The White Ship went down.



Only two men floated.  They both clung to the main yard of the 

ship, which had broken from the mast, and now supported them.  One 

asked the other who he was?  He said, 'I am a nobleman, GODFREY by 

name, the son of GILBERT DE L'AIGLE.  And you?' said he.  'I am 

BEROLD, a poor butcher of Rouen,' was the answer.  Then, they said 

together, 'Lord be merciful to us both!' and tried to encourage one 

another, as they drifted in the cold benumbing sea on that 

unfortunate November night.



By-and-by, another man came swimming towards them, whom they knew, 

when he pushed aside his long wet hair, to be Fitz-Stephen.  'Where 

is the Prince?' said he.  'Gone! Gone!' the two cried together.  

'Neither he, nor his brother, nor his sister, nor the King's niece, 

nor her brother, nor any one of all the brave three hundred, noble 

or commoner, except we three, has risen above the water!'  Fitz-

Stephen, with a ghastly face, cried, 'Woe! woe, to me!' and sunk to 

the bottom.



The other two clung to the yard for some hours.  At length the 

young noble said faintly, 'I am exhausted, and chilled with the 

cold, and can hold no longer.  Farewell, good friend!  God preserve 

you!'  So, he dropped and sunk; and of all the brilliant crowd, the 

poor Butcher of Rouen alone was saved.  In the morning, some 

fishermen saw him floating in his sheep-skin coat, and got him into 

their boat - the sole relater of the dismal tale.



For three days, no one dared to carry the intelligence to the King.  

At length, they sent into his presence a little boy, who, weeping 

bitterly, and kneeling at his feet, told him that The White Ship 

was lost with all on board.  The King fell to the ground like a 

dead man, and never, never afterwards, was seen to smile.



But he plotted again, and promised again, and bribed and bought 

again, in his old deceitful way.  Having no son to succeed him, 

after all his pains ('The Prince will never yoke us to the plough, 

now!' said the English people), he took a second wife - ADELAIS or 

ALICE, a duke's daughter, and the Pope's niece.  Having no more 

children, however, he proposed to the Barons to swear that they 

would recognise as his successor, his daughter Matilda, whom, as 

she was now a widow, he married to the eldest son of the Count of 

Anjou, GEOFFREY, surnamed PLANTAGENET, from a custom he had of 

wearing a sprig of flowering broom (called Genˆt in French) in his 

cap for a feather.  As one false man usually makes many, and as a 

false King, in particular, is pretty certain to make a false Court, 

the Barons took the oath about the succession of Matilda (and her 

children after her), twice over, without in the least intending to 

keep it.  The King was now relieved from any remaining fears of 

William Fitz-Robert, by his death in the Monastery of St. Omer, in 

France, at twenty-six years old, of a pike-wound in the hand.  And 

as Matilda gave birth to three sons, he thought the succession to 

the throne secure.



He spent most of the latter part of his life, which was troubled by 

family quarrels, in Normandy, to be near Matilda.  When he had 

reigned upward of thirty-five years, and was sixty-seven years old, 

he died of an indigestion and fever, brought on by eating, when he 

was far from well, of a fish called Lamprey, against which he had 

often been cautioned by his physicians.  His remains were brought 

over to Reading Abbey to be buried.



You may perhaps hear the cunning and promise-breaking of King Henry 

the First, called 'policy' by some people, and 'diplomacy' by 

others.  Neither of these fine words will in the least mean that it 

was true; and nothing that is not true can possibly be good.



His greatest merit, that I know of, was his love of learning - I 

should have given him greater credit even for that, if it had been 

strong enough to induce him to spare the eyes of a certain poet he 

once took prisoner, who was a knight besides.  But he ordered the 

poet's eyes to be torn from his head, because he had laughed at him 

in his verses; and the poet, in the pain of that torture, dashed 

out his own brains against his prison wall.  King Henry the First 

was avaricious, revengeful, and so false, that I suppose a man 

never lived whose word was less to be relied upon.

