





CHAPTER XXXVII







I HAVE now arrived at the close of my little history.  The events 

which succeeded the famous Revolution of one thousand six hundred 

and eighty-eight, would neither be easily related nor easily 

understood in such a book as this.



William and Mary reigned together, five years.  After the death of 

his good wife, William occupied the throne, alone, for seven years 

longer.  During his reign, on the sixteenth of September, one 

thousand seven hundred and one, the poor weak creature who had once 

been James the Second of England, died in France.  In the meantime 

he had done his utmost (which was not much) to cause William to be 

assassinated, and to regain his lost dominions.  James's son was 

declared, by the French King, the rightful King of England; and was 

called in France THE CHEVALIER SAINT GEORGE, and in England THE 

PRETENDER.  Some infatuated people in England, and particularly in 

Scotland, took up the Pretender's cause from time to time - as if 

the country had not had Stuarts enough! - and many lives were 

sacrificed, and much misery was occasioned.  King William died on 

Sunday, the seventh of March, one thousand seven hundred and two, 

of the consequences of an accident occasioned by his horse 

stumbling with him.  He was always a brave, patriotic Prince, and a 

man of remarkable abilities.  His manner was cold, and he made but 

few friends; but he had truly loved his queen.  When he was dead, a 

lock of her hair, in a ring, was found tied with a black ribbon 

round his left arm.



He was succeeded by the PRINCESS ANNE, a popular Queen, who reigned 

twelve years.  In her reign, in the month of May, one thousand 

seven hundred and seven, the Union between England and Scotland was 

effected, and the two countries were incorporated under the name of 

GREAT BRITAIN.  Then, from the year one thousand seven hundred and 

fourteen to the year one thousand, eight hundred and thirty, 

reigned the four GEORGES.



It was in the reign of George the Second, one thousand seven 

hundred and forty-five, that the Pretender did his last mischief, 

and made his last appearance.  Being an old man by that time, he 

and the Jacobites - as his friends were called - put forward his 

son, CHARLES EDWARD, known as the young Chevalier.  The Highlanders 

of Scotland, an extremely troublesome and wrong-headed race on the 

subject of the Stuarts, espoused his cause, and he joined them, and 

there was a Scottish rebellion to make him king, in which many 

gallant and devoted gentlemen lost their lives.  It was a hard 

matter for Charles Edward to escape abroad again, with a high price 

on his head; but the Scottish people were extraordinarily faithful 

to him, and, after undergoing many romantic adventures, not unlike 

those of Charles the Second, he escaped to France.  A number of 

charming stories and delightful songs arose out of the Jacobite 

feelings, and belong to the Jacobite times.  Otherwise I think the 

Stuarts were a public nuisance altogether.



It was in the reign of George the Third that England lost North 

America, by persisting in taxing her without her own consent.  That 

immense country, made independent under WASHINGTON, and left to 

itself, became the United States; one of the greatest nations of 

the earth.  In these times in which I write, it is honourably 

remarkable for protecting its subjects, wherever they may travel, 

with a dignity and a determination which is a model for England.  

Between you and me, England has rather lost ground in this respect 

since the days of Oliver Cromwell.



The Union of Great Britain with Ireland - which had been getting on 

very ill by itself - took place in the reign of George the Third, 

on the second of July, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-eight.



WILLIAM THE FOURTH succeeded George the Fourth, in the year one 

thousand eight hundred and thirty, and reigned seven years.  QUEEN 

VICTORIA, his niece, the only child of the Duke of Kent, the fourth 

son of George the Third, came to the throne on the twentieth of 

June, one thousand eight hundred and thirty-seven.  She was married 

to PRINCE ALBERT of Saxe Gotha on the tenth of February, one 

thousand eight hundred and forty.  She is very good, and much 

beloved.  So I end, like the crier, with



GOD SAVE THE QUEEN!











End 