





CHAPTER XV - ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE THIRD, CALLED, OF WINCHESTER







IF any of the English Barons remembered the murdered Arthur's 

sister, Eleanor the fair maid of Brittany, shut up in her convent 

at Bristol, none among them spoke of her now, or maintained her 

right to the Crown.  The dead Usurper's eldest boy, HENRY by name, 

was taken by the Earl of Pembroke, the Marshal of England, to the 

city of Gloucester, and there crowned in great haste when he was 

only ten years old.  As the Crown itself had been lost with the 

King's treasure in the raging water, and as there was no time to 

make another, they put a circle of plain gold upon his head 

instead.  'We have been the enemies of this child's father,' said 

Lord Pembroke, a good and true gentleman, to the few Lords who were 

present, 'and he merited our ill-will; but the child himself is 

innocent, and his youth demands our friendship and protection.'  

Those Lords felt tenderly towards the little boy, remembering their 

own young children; and they bowed their heads, and said, 'Long 

live King Henry the Third!'



Next, a great council met at Bristol, revised Magna Charta, and 

made Lord Pembroke Regent or Protector of England, as the King was 

too young to reign alone.  The next thing to be done, was to get 

rid of Prince Louis of France, and to win over those English Barons 

who were still ranged under his banner.  He was strong in many 

parts of England, and in London itself; and he held, among other 

places, a certain Castle called the Castle of Mount Sorel, in 

Leicestershire.  To this fortress, after some skirmishing and 

truce-making, Lord Pembroke laid siege.  Louis despatched an army 

of six hundred knights and twenty thousand soldiers to relieve it.  

Lord Pembroke, who was not strong enough for such a force, retired 

with all his men.  The army of the French Prince, which had marched 

there with fire and plunder, marched away with fire and plunder, 

and came, in a boastful swaggering manner, to Lincoln.  The town 

submitted; but the Castle in the town, held by a brave widow lady, 

named NICHOLA DE CAMVILLE (whose property it was), made such a 

sturdy resistance, that the French Count in command of the army of 

the French Prince found it necessary to besiege this Castle.  While 

he was thus engaged, word was brought to him that Lord Pembroke, 

with four hundred knights, two hundred and fifty men with cross-

bows, and a stout force both of horse and foot, was marching 

towards him.  'What care I?' said the French Count.  'The 

Englishman is not so mad as to attack me and my great army in a 

walled town!'  But the Englishman did it for all that, and did it - 

not so madly but so wisely, that he decoyed the great army into the 

narrow, ill-paved lanes and byways of Lincoln, where its horse-

soldiers could not ride in any strong body; and there he made such 

havoc with them, that the whole force surrendered themselves 

prisoners, except the Count; who said that he would never yield to 

any English traitor alive, and accordingly got killed.  The end of 

this victory, which the English called, for a joke, the Fair of 

Lincoln, was the usual one in those times - the common men were 

slain without any mercy, and the knights and gentlemen paid ransom 

and went home.



The wife of Louis, the fair BLANCHE OF CASTILE, dutifully equipped 

a fleet of eighty good ships, and sent it over from France to her 

husband's aid.  An English fleet of forty ships, some good and some 

bad, gallantly met them near the mouth of the Thames, and took or 

sunk sixty-five in one fight.  This great loss put an end to the 

French Prince's hopes.  A treaty was made at Lambeth, in virtue of 

which the English Barons who had remained attached to his cause 

returned to their allegiance, and it was engaged on both sides that 

the Prince and all his troops should retire peacefully to France.  

It was time to go; for war had made him so poor that he was obliged 

to borrow money from the citizens of London to pay his expenses 

home.



Lord Pembroke afterwards applied himself to governing the country 

justly, and to healing the quarrels and disturbances that had 

arisen among men in the days of the bad King John.  He caused Magna 

Charta to be still more improved, and so amended the Forest Laws 

that a Peasant was no longer put to death for killing a stag in a 

Royal Forest, but was only imprisoned.  It would have been well for 

England if it could have had so good a Protector many years longer, 

but that was not to be.  Within three years after the young King's 

Coronation, Lord Pembroke died; and you may see his tomb, at this 

day, in the old Temple Church in London.



The Protectorship was now divided.  PETER DE ROCHES, whom King John 

had made Bishop of Winchester, was entrusted with the care of the 

person of the young sovereign; and the exercise of the Royal 

authority was confided to EARL HUBERT DE BURGH.  These two 

personages had from the first no liking for each other, and soon 

became enemies.  When the young King was declared of age, Peter de 

Roches, finding that Hubert increased in power and favour, retired 

discontentedly, and went abroad.  For nearly ten years afterwards 

Hubert had full sway alone.



But ten years is a long time to hold the favour of a King.  This 

King, too, as he grew up, showed a strong resemblance to his 

father, in feebleness, inconsistency, and irresolution.  The best 

that can be said of him is that he was not cruel.  De Roches coming 

home again, after ten years, and being a novelty, the King began to 

favour him and to look coldly on Hubert.  Wanting money besides, 

and having made Hubert rich, he began to dislike Hubert.  At last 

he was made to believe, or pretended to believe, that Hubert had 

misappropriated some of the Royal treasure; and ordered him to 

furnish an account of all he had done in his administration.  

Besides which, the foolish charge was brought against Hubert that 

he had made himself the King's favourite by magic.  Hubert very 

well knowing that he could never defend himself against such 

nonsense, and that his old enemy must be determined on his ruin, 

instead of answering the charges fled to Merton Abbey.  Then the 

King, in a violent passion, sent for the Mayor of London, and said 

to the Mayor, 'Take twenty thousand citizens, and drag me Hubert de 

Burgh out of that abbey, and bring him here.'  The Mayor posted off 

to do it, but the Archbishop of Dublin (who was a friend of 

Hubert's) warning the King that an abbey was a sacred place, and 

that if he committed any violence there, he must answer for it to 

the Church, the King changed his mind and called the Mayor back, 

and declared that Hubert should have four months to prepare his 

defence, and should be safe and free during that time.



Hubert, who relied upon the King's word, though I think he was old 

enough to have known better, came out of Merton Abbey upon these 

conditions, and journeyed away to see his wife:  a Scottish 

Princess who was then at St. Edmund's-Bury.



Almost as soon as he had departed from the Sanctuary, his enemies 

persuaded the weak King to send out one SIR GODFREY DE CRANCUMB, 

who commanded three hundred vagabonds called the Black Band, with 

orders to seize him.  They came up with him at a little town in 

Essex, called Brentwood, when he was in bed.  He leaped out of bed, 

got out of the house, fled to the church, ran up to the altar, and 

laid his hand upon the cross.  Sir Godfrey and the Black Band, 

caring neither for church, altar, nor cross, dragged him forth to 

the church door, with their drawn swords flashing round his head, 

and sent for a Smith to rivet a set of chains upon him.  When the 

Smith (I wish I knew his name!) was brought, all dark and swarthy 

with the smoke of his forge, and panting with the speed he had 

made; and the Black Band, falling aside to show him the Prisoner, 

cried with a loud uproar, 'Make the fetters heavy! make them 

strong!' the Smith dropped upon his knee - but not to the Black 

Band - and said, 'This is the brave Earl Hubert de Burgh, who 

fought at Dover Castle, and destroyed the French fleet, and has 

done his country much good service.  You may kill me, if you like, 

but I will never make a chain for Earl Hubert de Burgh!'



The Black Band never blushed, or they might have blushed at this.  

They knocked the Smith about from one to another, and swore at him, 

and tied the Earl on horseback, undressed as he was, and carried 

him off to the Tower of London.  The Bishops, however, were so 

indignant at the violation of the Sanctuary of the Church, that the 

frightened King soon ordered the Black Band to take him back again; 

at the same time commanding the Sheriff of Essex to prevent his 

escaping out of Brentwood Church.  Well! the Sheriff dug a deep 

trench all round the church, and erected a high fence, and watched 

the church night and day; the Black Band and their Captain watched 

it too, like three hundred and one black wolves.  For thirty-nine 

days, Hubert de Burgh remained within.  At length, upon the 

fortieth day, cold and hunger were too much for him, and he gave 

himself up to the Black Band, who carried him off, for the second 

time, to the Tower.  When his trial came on, he refused to plead; 

but at last it was arranged that he should give up all the royal 

lands which had been bestowed upon him, and should be kept at the 

Castle of Devizes, in what was called 'free prison,' in charge of 

four knights appointed by four lords.  There, he remained almost a 

year, until, learning that a follower of his old enemy the Bishop 

was made Keeper of the Castle, and fearing that he might be killed 

by treachery, he climbed the ramparts one dark night, dropped from 

the top of the high Castle wall into the moat, and coming safely to 

the ground, took refuge in another church.  From this place he was 

delivered by a party of horse despatched to his help by some 

nobles, who were by this time in revolt against the King, and 

assembled in Wales.  He was finally pardoned and restored to his 

estates, but he lived privately, and never more aspired to a high 

post in the realm, or to a high place in the King's favour.  And 

thus end - more happily than the stories of many favourites of 

Kings - the adventures of Earl Hubert de Burgh.



The nobles, who had risen in revolt, were stirred up to rebellion 

by the overbearing conduct of the Bishop of Winchester, who, 

finding that the King secretly hated the Great Charter which had 

been forced from his father, did his utmost to confirm him in that 

dislike, and in the preference he showed to foreigners over the 

English.  Of this, and of his even publicly declaring that the 

Barons of England were inferior to those of France, the English 

Lords complained with such bitterness, that the King, finding them 

well supported by the clergy, became frightened for his throne, and 

sent away the Bishop and all his foreign associates.  On his 

marriage, however, with ELEANOR, a French lady, the daughter of the 

Count of Provence, he openly favoured the foreigners again; and so 

many of his wife's relations came over, and made such an immense 

family-party at court, and got so many good things, and pocketed so 

much money, and were so high with the English whose money they 

pocketed, that the bolder English Barons murmured openly about a 

clause there was in the Great Charter, which provided for the 

banishment of unreasonable favourites.  But, the foreigners only 

laughed disdainfully, and said, 'What are your English laws to us?'



King Philip of France had died, and had been succeeded by Prince 

Louis, who had also died after a short reign of three years, and 

had been succeeded by his son of the same name - so moderate and 

just a man that he was not the least in the world like a King, as 

Kings went.  ISABELLA, King Henry's mother, wished very much (for a 

certain spite she had) that England should make war against this 

King; and, as King Henry was a mere puppet in anybody's hands who 

knew how to manage his feebleness, she easily carried her point 

with him.  But, the Parliament were determined to give him no money 

for such a war.  So, to defy the Parliament, he packed up thirty 

large casks of silver - I don't know how he got so much; I dare say 

he screwed it out of the miserable Jews - and put them aboard ship, 

and went away himself to carry war into France:  accompanied by his 

mother and his brother Richard, Earl of Cornwall, who was rich and 

clever.  But he only got well beaten, and came home.



The good-humour of the Parliament was not restored by this.  They 

reproached the King with wasting the public money to make greedy 

foreigners rich, and were so stern with him, and so determined not 

to let him have more of it to waste if they could help it, that he 

was at his wit's end for some, and tried so shamelessly to get all 

he could from his subjects, by excuses or by force, that the people 

used to say the King was the sturdiest beggar in England.  He took 

the Cross, thinking to get some money by that means; but, as it was 

very well known that he never meant to go on a crusade, he got 

none.  In all this contention, the Londoners were particularly keen 

against the King, and the King hated them warmly in return.  Hating 

or loving, however, made no difference; he continued in the same 

condition for nine or ten years, when at last the Barons said that 

if he would solemnly confirm their liberties afresh, the Parliament 

would vote him a large sum.



As he readily consented, there was a great meeting held in 

Westminster Hall, one pleasant day in May, when all the clergy, 

dressed in their robes and holding every one of them a burning 

candle in his hand, stood up (the Barons being also there) while 

the Archbishop of Canterbury read the sentence of excommunication 

against any man, and all men, who should henceforth, in any way, 

infringe the Great Charter of the Kingdom.  When he had done, they 

all put out their burning candles with a curse upon the soul of any 

one, and every one, who should merit that sentence.  The King 

concluded with an oath to keep the Charter, 'As I am a man, as I am 

a Christian, as I am a Knight, as I am a King!'



It was easy to make oaths, and easy to break them; and the King did 

both, as his father had done before him.  He took to his old 

courses again when he was supplied with money, and soon cured of 

their weakness the few who had ever really trusted him.  When his 

money was gone, and he was once more borrowing and begging 

everywhere with a meanness worthy of his nature, he got into a 

difficulty with the Pope respecting the Crown of Sicily, which the 

Pope said he had a right to give away, and which he offered to King 

Henry for his second son, PRINCE EDMUND.  But, if you or I give 

away what we have not got, and what belongs to somebody else, it is 

likely that the person to whom we give it, will have some trouble 

in taking it.  It was exactly so in this case.  It was necessary to 

conquer the Sicilian Crown before it could be put upon young 

Edmund's head.  It could not be conquered without money.  The Pope 

ordered the clergy to raise money.  The clergy, however, were not 

so obedient to him as usual; they had been disputing with him for 

some time about his unjust preference of Italian Priests in 

England; and they had begun to doubt whether the King's chaplain, 

whom he allowed to be paid for preaching in seven hundred churches, 

could possibly be, even by the Pope's favour, in seven hundred 

places at once.  'The Pope and the King together,' said the Bishop 

of London, 'may take the mitre off my head; but, if they do, they 

will find that I shall put on a soldier's helmet.  I pay nothing.'  

The Bishop of Worcester was as bold as the Bishop of London, and 

would pay nothing either.  Such sums as the more timid or more 

helpless of the clergy did raise were squandered away, without 

doing any good to the King, or bringing the Sicilian Crown an inch 

nearer to Prince Edmund's head.  The end of the business was, that 

the Pope gave the Crown to the brother of the King of France (who 

conquered it for himself), and sent the King of England in, a bill 

of one hundred thousand pounds for the expenses of not having won 

it.



The King was now so much distressed that we might almost pity him, 

if it were possible to pity a King so shabby and ridiculous.  His 

clever brother, Richard, had bought the title of King of the Romans 

from the German people, and was no longer near him, to help him 

with advice.  The clergy, resisting the very Pope, were in alliance 

with the Barons.  The Barons were headed by SIMON DE MONTFORT, Earl 

of Leicester, married to King Henry's sister, and, though a 

foreigner himself, the most popular man in England against the 

foreign favourites.  When the King next met his Parliament, the 

Barons, led by this Earl, came before him, armed from head to foot, 

and cased in armour.  When the Parliament again assembled, in a 

month's time, at Oxford, this Earl was at their head, and the King 

was obliged to consent, on oath, to what was called a Committee of 

Government:  consisting of twenty-four members:  twelve chosen by 

the Barons, and twelve chosen by himself.



But, at a good time for him, his brother Richard came back.  

Richard's first act (the Barons would not admit him into England on 

other terms) was to swear to be faithful to the Committee of 

Government - which he immediately began to oppose with all his 

might.  Then, the Barons began to quarrel among themselves; 

especially the proud Earl of Gloucester with the Earl of Leicester, 

who went abroad in disgust.  Then, the people began to be 

dissatisfied with the Barons, because they did not do enough for 

them.  The King's chances seemed so good again at length, that he 

took heart enough - or caught it from his brother - to tell the 

Committee of Government that he abolished them - as to his oath, 

never mind that, the Pope said! - and to seize all the money in the 

Mint, and to shut himself up in the Tower of London.  Here he was 

joined by his eldest son, Prince Edward; and, from the Tower, he 

made public a letter of the Pope's to the world in general, 

informing all men that he had been an excellent and just King for 

five-and-forty years.



As everybody knew he had been nothing of the sort, nobody cared 

much for this document.  It so chanced that the proud Earl of 

Gloucester dying, was succeeded by his son; and that his son, 

instead of being the enemy of the Earl of Leicester, was (for the 

time) his friend.  It fell out, therefore, that these two Earls 

joined their forces, took several of the Royal Castles in the 

country, and advanced as hard as they could on London.  The London 

people, always opposed to the King, declared for them with great 

joy.  The King himself remained shut up, not at all gloriously, in 

the Tower.  Prince Edward made the best of his way to Windsor 

Castle.  His mother, the Queen, attempted to follow him by water; 

but, the people seeing her barge rowing up the river, and hating 

her with all their hearts, ran to London Bridge, got together a 

quantity of stones and mud, and pelted the barge as it came 

through, crying furiously, 'Drown the Witch!  Drown her!'  They 

were so near doing it, that the Mayor took the old lady under his 

protection, and shut her up in St. Paul's until the danger was 

past.



It would require a great deal of writing on my part, and a great 

deal of reading on yours, to follow the King through his disputes 

with the Barons, and to follow the Barons through their disputes 

with one another - so I will make short work of it for both of us, 

and only relate the chief events that arose out of these quarrels.  

The good King of France was asked to decide between them.  He gave 

it as his opinion that the King must maintain the Great Charter, 

and that the Barons must give up the Committee of Government, and 

all the rest that had been done by the Parliament at Oxford:  which 

the Royalists, or King's party, scornfully called the Mad 

Parliament.  The Barons declared that these were not fair terms, 

and they would not accept them.  Then they caused the great bell of 

St. Paul's to be tolled, for the purpose of rousing up the London 

people, who armed themselves at the dismal sound and formed quite 

an army in the streets.  I am sorry to say, however, that instead 

of falling upon the King's party with whom their quarrel was, they 

fell upon the miserable Jews, and killed at least five hundred of 

them.  They pretended that some of these Jews were on the King's 

side, and that they kept hidden in their houses, for the 

destruction of the people, a certain terrible composition called 

Greek Fire, which could not be put out with water, but only burnt 

the fiercer for it.  What they really did keep in their houses was 

money; and this their cruel enemies wanted, and this their cruel 

enemies took, like robbers and murderers.



The Earl of Leicester put himself at the head of these Londoners 

and other forces, and followed the King to Lewes in Sussex, where 

he lay encamped with his army.  Before giving the King's forces 

battle here, the Earl addressed his soldiers, and said that King 

Henry the Third had broken so many oaths, that he had become the 

enemy of God, and therefore they would wear white crosses on their 

breasts, as if they were arrayed, not against a fellow-Christian, 

but against a Turk.  White-crossed accordingly, they rushed into 

the fight.  They would have lost the day - the King having on his 

side all the foreigners in England:  and, from Scotland, JOHN 

COMYN, JOHN BALIOL, and ROBERT BRUCE, with all their men - but for 

the impatience of PRINCE EDWARD, who, in his hot desire to have 

vengeance on the people of London, threw the whole of his father's 

army into confusion.  He was taken Prisoner; so was the King; so 

was the King's brother the King of the Romans; and five thousand 

Englishmen were left dead upon the bloody grass.



For this success, the Pope excommunicated the Earl of Leicester:  

which neither the Earl nor the people cared at all about.  The 

people loved him and supported him, and he became the real King; 

having all the power of the government in his own hands, though he 

was outwardly respectful to King Henry the Third, whom he took with 

him wherever he went, like a poor old limp court-card.  He summoned 

a Parliament (in the year one thousand two hundred and sixty-five) 

which was the first Parliament in England that the people had any 

real share in electing; and he grew more and more in favour with 

the people every day, and they stood by him in whatever he did.



Many of the other Barons, and particularly the Earl of Gloucester, 

who had become by this time as proud as his father, grew jealous of 

this powerful and popular Earl, who was proud too, and began to 

conspire against him.  Since the battle of Lewes, Prince Edward had 

been kept as a hostage, and, though he was otherwise treated like a 

Prince, had never been allowed to go out without attendants 

appointed by the Earl of Leicester, who watched him.  The 

conspiring Lords found means to propose to him, in secret, that 

they should assist him to escape, and should make him their leader; 

to which he very heartily consented.



So, on a day that was agreed upon, he said to his attendants after 

dinner (being then at Hereford), 'I should like to ride on 

horseback, this fine afternoon, a little way into the country.'  As 

they, too, thought it would be very pleasant to have a canter in 

the sunshine, they all rode out of the town together in a gay 

little troop.  When they came to a fine level piece of turf, the 

Prince fell to comparing their horses one with another, and 

offering bets that one was faster than another; and the attendants, 

suspecting no harm, rode galloping matches until their horses were 

quite tired.  The Prince rode no matches himself, but looked on 

from his saddle, and staked his money.  Thus they passed the whole 

merry afternoon.  Now, the sun was setting, and they were all going 

slowly up a hill, the Prince's horse very fresh and all the other 

horses very weary, when a strange rider mounted on a grey steed 

appeared at the top of the hill, and waved his hat.  'What does the 

fellow mean?' said the attendants one to another.  The Prince 

answered on the instant by setting spurs to his horse, dashing away 

at his utmost speed, joining the man, riding into the midst of a 

little crowd of horsemen who were then seen waiting under some 

trees, and who closed around him; and so he departed in a cloud of 

dust, leaving the road empty of all but the baffled attendants, who 

sat looking at one another, while their horses drooped their ears 

and panted.



The Prince joined the Earl of Gloucester at Ludlow.  The Earl of 

Leicester, with a part of the army and the stupid old King, was at 

Hereford.  One of the Earl of Leicester's sons, Simon de Montfort, 

with another part of the army, was in Sussex.  To prevent these two 

parts from uniting was the Prince's first object.  He attacked 

Simon de Montfort by night, defeated him, seized his banners and 

treasure, and forced him into Kenilworth Castle in Warwickshire, 

which belonged to his family.



His father, the Earl of Leicester, in the meanwhile, not knowing 

what had happened, marched out of Hereford, with his part of the 

army and the King, to meet him.  He came, on a bright morning in 

August, to Evesham, which is watered by the pleasant river Avon.  

Looking rather anxiously across the prospect towards Kenilworth, he 

saw his own banners advancing; and his face brightened with joy.  

But, it clouded darkly when he presently perceived that the banners 

were captured, and in the enemy's hands; and he said, 'It is over.  

The Lord have mercy on our souls, for our bodies are Prince 

Edward's!'



He fought like a true Knight, nevertheless.  When his horse was 

killed under him, he fought on foot.  It was a fierce battle, and 

the dead lay in heaps everywhere.  The old King, stuck up in a suit 

of armour on a big war-horse, which didn't mind him at all, and 

which carried him into all sorts of places where he didn't want to 

go, got into everybody's way, and very nearly got knocked on the 

head by one of his son's men.  But he managed to pipe out, 'I am 

Harry of Winchester!' and the Prince, who heard him, seized his 

bridle, and took him out of peril.  The Earl of Leicester still 

fought bravely, until his best son Henry was killed, and the bodies 

of his best friends choked his path; and then he fell, still 

fighting, sword in hand.  They mangled his body, and sent it as a 

present to a noble lady - but a very unpleasant lady, I should 

think - who was the wife of his worst enemy.  They could not mangle 

his memory in the minds of the faithful people, though.  Many years 

afterwards, they loved him more than ever, and regarded him as a 

Saint, and always spoke of him as 'Sir Simon the Righteous.'



And even though he was dead, the cause for which he had fought 

still lived, and was strong, and forced itself upon the King in the 

very hour of victory.  Henry found himself obliged to respect the 

Great Charter, however much he hated it, and to make laws similar 

to the laws of the Great Earl of Leicester, and to be moderate and 

forgiving towards the people at last - even towards the people of 

London, who had so long opposed him.  There were more risings 

before all this was done, but they were set at rest by these means, 

and Prince Edward did his best in all things to restore peace.  One 

Sir Adam de Gourdon was the last dissatisfied knight in arms; but, 

the Prince vanquished him in single combat, in a wood, and nobly 

gave him his life, and became his friend, instead of slaying him.  

Sir Adam was not ungrateful.  He ever afterwards remained devoted 

to his generous conqueror.



When the troubles of the Kingdom were thus calmed, Prince Edward 

and his cousin Henry took the Cross, and went away to the Holy 

Land, with many English Lords and Knights.  Four years afterwards 

the King of the Romans died, and, next year (one thousand two 

hundred and seventy-two), his brother the weak King of England 

died.  He was sixty-eight years old then, and had reigned fifty-six 

years.  He was as much of a King in death, as he had ever been in 

life.  He was the mere pale shadow of a King at all times.

