





CHAPTER XXVIII - ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE EIGHTH







PART THE SECOND





THE Pope was thrown into a very angry state of mind when he heard 

of the King's marriage, and fumed exceedingly.  Many of the English 

monks and friars, seeing that their order was in danger, did the 

same; some even declaimed against the King in church before his 

face, and were not to be stopped until he himself roared out 

'Silence!'  The King, not much the worse for this, took it pretty 

quietly; and was very glad when his Queen gave birth to a daughter, 

who was christened ELIZABETH, and declared Princess of Wales as her 

sister Mary had already been.



One of the most atrocious features of this reign was that Henry the 

Eighth was always trimming between the reformed religion and the 

unreformed one; so that the more he quarrelled with the Pope, the 

more of his own subjects he roasted alive for not holding the 

Pope's opinions.  Thus, an unfortunate student named John Frith, 

and a poor simple tailor named Andrew Hewet who loved him very 

much, and said that whatever John Frith believed HE believed, were 

burnt in Smithfield - to show what a capital Christian the King 

was.



But, these were speedily followed by two much greater victims, Sir 

Thomas More, and John Fisher, the Bishop of Rochester.  The latter, 

who was a good and amiable old man, had committed no greater 

offence than believing in Elizabeth Barton, called the Maid of Kent 

- another of those ridiculous women who pretended to be inspired, 

and to make all sorts of heavenly revelations, though they indeed 

uttered nothing but evil nonsense.  For this offence - as it was 

pretended, but really for denying the King to be the supreme Head 

of the Church - he got into trouble, and was put in prison; but, 

even then, he might have been suffered to die naturally (short work 

having been made of executing the Kentish Maid and her principal 

followers), but that the Pope, to spite the King, resolved to make 

him a cardinal.  Upon that the King made a ferocious joke to the 

effect that the Pope might send Fisher a red hat - which is the way 

they make a cardinal - but he should have no head on which to wear 

it; and he was tried with all unfairness and injustice, and 

sentenced to death.  He died like a noble and virtuous old man, and 

left a worthy name behind him.  The King supposed, I dare say, that 

Sir Thomas More would be frightened by this example; but, as he was 

not to be easily terrified, and, thoroughly believing in the Pope, 

had made up his mind that the King was not the rightful Head of the 

Church, he positively refused to say that he was.  For this crime 

he too was tried and sentenced, after having been in prison a whole 

year.  When he was doomed to death, and came away from his trial 

with the edge of the executioner's axe turned towards him - as was 

always done in those times when a state prisoner came to that 

hopeless pass - he bore it quite serenely, and gave his blessing to 

his son, who pressed through the crowd in Westminster Hall and 

kneeled down to receive it.  But, when he got to the Tower Wharf on 

his way back to his prison, and his favourite daughter, MARGARET 

ROPER, a very good woman, rushed through the guards again and 

again, to kiss him and to weep upon his neck, he was overcome at 

last.  He soon recovered, and never more showed any feeling but 

cheerfulness and courage.  When he was going up the steps of the 

scaffold to his death, he said jokingly to the Lieutenant of the 

Tower, observing that they were weak and shook beneath his tread, 

'I pray you, master Lieutenant, see me safe up; and, for my coming 

down, I can shift for myself.'  Also he said to the executioner, 

after he had laid his head upon the block, 'Let me put my beard out 

of the way; for that, at least, has never committed any treason.'  

Then his head was struck off at a blow.  These two executions were 

worthy of King Henry the Eighth.  Sir Thomas More was one of the 

most virtuous men in his dominions, and the Bishop was one of his 

oldest and truest friends.  But to be a friend of that fellow was 

almost as dangerous as to be his wife.



When the news of these two murders got to Rome, the Pope raged 

against the murderer more than ever Pope raged since the world 

began, and prepared a Bull, ordering his subjects to take arms 

against him and dethrone him.  The King took all possible 

precautions to keep that document out of his dominions, and set to 

work in return to suppress a great number of the English 

monasteries and abbeys.



This destruction was begun by a body of commissioners, of whom 

Cromwell (whom the King had taken into great favour) was the head; 

and was carried on through some few years to its entire completion.  

There is no doubt that many of these religious establishments were 

religious in nothing but in name, and were crammed with lazy, 

indolent, and sensual monks.  There is no doubt that they imposed 

upon the people in every possible way; that they had images moved 

by wires, which they pretended were miraculously moved by Heaven; 

that they had among them a whole tun measure full of teeth, all 

purporting to have come out of the head of one saint, who must 

indeed have been a very extraordinary person with that enormous 

allowance of grinders; that they had bits of coal which they said 

had fried Saint Lawrence, and bits of toe-nails which they said 

belonged to other famous saints; penknives, and boots, and girdles, 

which they said belonged to others; and that all these bits of 

rubbish were called Relics, and adored by the ignorant people.  

But, on the other hand, there is no doubt either, that the King's 

officers and men punished the good monks with the bad; did great 

injustice; demolished many beautiful things and many valuable 

libraries; destroyed numbers of paintings, stained glass windows, 

fine pavements, and carvings; and that the whole court were 

ravenously greedy and rapacious for the division of this great 

spoil among them.  The King seems to have grown almost mad in the 

ardour of this pursuit; for he declared Thomas a Becket a traitor, 

though he had been dead so many years, and had his body dug up out 

of his grave.  He must have been as miraculous as the monks 

pretended, if they had told the truth, for he was found with one 

head on his shoulders, and they had shown another as his undoubted 

and genuine head ever since his death; it had brought them vast 

sums of money, too.  The gold and jewels on his shrine filled two 

great chests, and eight men tottered as they carried them away.  

How rich the monasteries were you may infer from the fact that, 

when they were all suppressed, one hundred and thirty thousand 

pounds a year - in those days an immense sum - came to the Crown.



These things were not done without causing great discontent among 

the people.  The monks had been good landlords and hospitable 

entertainers of all travellers, and had been accustomed to give 

away a great deal of corn, and fruit, and meat, and other things.  

In those days it was difficult to change goods into money, in 

consequence of the roads being very few and very bad, and the 

carts, and waggons of the worst description; and they must either 

have given away some of the good things they possessed in enormous 

quantities, or have suffered them to spoil and moulder.  So, many 

of the people missed what it was more agreeable to get idly than to 

work for; and the monks who were driven out of their homes and 

wandered about encouraged their discontent; and there were, 

consequently, great risings in Lincolnshire and Yorkshire.  These 

were put down by terrific executions, from which the monks 

themselves did not escape, and the King went on grunting and 

growling in his own fat way, like a Royal pig.



I have told all this story of the religious houses at one time, to 

make it plainer, and to get back to the King's domestic affairs.



The unfortunate Queen Catherine was by this time dead; and the King 

was by this time as tired of his second Queen as he had been of his 

first.  As he had fallen in love with Anne when she was in the 

service of Catherine, so he now fell in love with another lady in 

the service of Anne.  See how wicked deeds are punished, and how 

bitterly and self-reproachfully the Queen must now have thought of 

her own rise to the throne!  The new fancy was a LADY JANE SEYMOUR; 

and the King no sooner set his mind on her, than he resolved to 

have Anne Boleyn's head.  So, he brought a number of charges 

against Anne, accusing her of dreadful crimes which she had never 

committed, and implicating in them her own brother and certain 

gentlemen in her service:  among whom one Norris, and Mark Smeaton 

a musician, are best remembered.  As the lords and councillors were 

as afraid of the King and as subservient to him as the meanest 

peasant in England was, they brought in Anne Boleyn guilty, and the 

other unfortunate persons accused with her, guilty too.  Those 

gentlemen died like men, with the exception of Smeaton, who had 

been tempted by the King into telling lies, which he called 

confessions, and who had expected to be pardoned; but who, I am 

very glad to say, was not.  There was then only the Queen to 

dispose of.  She had been surrounded in the Tower with women spies; 

had been monstrously persecuted and foully slandered; and had 

received no justice.  But her spirit rose with her afflictions; 

and, after having in vain tried to soften the King by writing an 

affecting letter to him which still exists, 'from her doleful 

prison in the Tower,' she resigned herself to death.  She said to 

those about her, very cheerfully, that she had heard say the 

executioner was a good one, and that she had a little neck (she 

laughed and clasped it with her hands as she said that), and would 

soon be out of her pain.  And she WAS soon out of her pain, poor 

creature, on the Green inside the Tower, and her body was flung 

into an old box and put away in the ground under the chapel.



There is a story that the King sat in his palace listening very 

anxiously for the sound of the cannon which was to announce this 

new murder; and that, when he heard it come booming on the air, he 

rose up in great spirits and ordered out his dogs to go a-hunting.  

He was bad enough to do it; but whether he did it or not, it is 

certain that he married Jane Seymour the very next day.



I have not much pleasure in recording that she lived just long 

enough to give birth to a son who was christened EDWARD, and then 

to die of a fever:  for, I cannot but think that any woman who 

married such a ruffian, and knew what innocent blood was on his 

hands, deserved the axe that would assuredly have fallen on the 

neck of Jane Seymour, if she had lived much longer.



Cranmer had done what he could to save some of the Church property 

for purposes of religion and education; but, the great families had 

been so hungry to get hold of it, that very little could be rescued 

for such objects.  Even MILES COVERDALE, who did the people the 

inestimable service of translating the Bible into English (which 

the unreformed religion never permitted to be done), was left in 

poverty while the great families clutched the Church lands and 

money.  The people had been told that when the Crown came into 

possession of these funds, it would not be necessary to tax them; 

but they were taxed afresh directly afterwards.  It was fortunate 

for them, indeed, that so many nobles were so greedy for this 

wealth; since, if it had remained with the Crown, there might have 

been no end to tyranny for hundreds of years.  One of the most 

active writers on the Church's side against the King was a member 

of his own family - a sort of distant cousin, REGINALD POLE by name 

- who attacked him in the most violent manner (though he received a 

pension from him all the time), and fought for the Church with his 

pen, day and night.  As he was beyond the King's reach - being in 

Italy - the King politely invited him over to discuss the subject; 

but he, knowing better than to come, and wisely staying where he 

was, the King's rage fell upon his brother Lord Montague, the 

Marquis of Exeter, and some other gentlemen:  who were tried for 

high treason in corresponding with him and aiding him - which they 

probably did - and were all executed.  The Pope made Reginald Pole 

a cardinal; but, so much against his will, that it is thought he 

even aspired in his own mind to the vacant throne of England, and 

had hopes of marrying the Princess Mary.  His being made a high 

priest, however, put an end to all that.  His mother, the venerable 

Countess of Salisbury - who was, unfortunately for herself, within 

the tyrant's reach - was the last of his relatives on whom his 

wrath fell.  When she was told to lay her grey head upon the block, 

she answered the executioner, 'No!  My head never committed 

treason, and if you want it, you shall seize it.'  So, she ran 

round and round the scaffold with the executioner striking at her, 

and her grey hair bedabbled with blood; and even when they held her 

down upon the block she moved her head about to the last, resolved 

to be no party to her own barbarous murder.  All this the people 

bore, as they had borne everything else.



Indeed they bore much more; for the slow fires of Smithfield were 

continually burning, and people were constantly being roasted to 

death - still to show what a good Christian the King was.  He 

defied the Pope and his Bull, which was now issued, and had come 

into England; but he burned innumerable people whose only offence 

was that they differed from the Pope's religious opinions.  There 

was a wretched man named LAMBERT, among others, who was tried for 

this before the King, and with whom six bishops argued one after 

another.  When he was quite exhausted (as well he might be, after 

six bishops), he threw himself on the King's mercy; but the King 

blustered out that he had no mercy for heretics.  So, HE too fed 

the fire.



All this the people bore, and more than all this yet.  The national 

spirit seems to have been banished from the kingdom at this time.  

The very people who were executed for treason, the very wives and 

friends of the 'bluff' King, spoke of him on the scaffold as a good 

prince, and a gentle prince - just as serfs in similar 

circumstances have been known to do, under the Sultan and Bashaws 

of the East, or under the fierce old tyrants of Russia, who poured 

boiling and freezing water on them alternately, until they died.  

The Parliament were as bad as the rest, and gave the King whatever 

he wanted; among other vile accommodations, they gave him new 

powers of murdering, at his will and pleasure, any one whom he 

might choose to call a traitor.  But the worst measure they passed 

was an Act of Six Articles, commonly called at the time 'the whip 

with six strings;' which punished offences against the Pope's 

opinions, without mercy, and enforced the very worst parts of the 

monkish religion.  Cranmer would have modified it, if he could; 

but, being overborne by the Romish party, had not the power.  As 

one of the articles declared that priests should not marry, and as 

he was married himself, he sent his wife and children into Germany, 

and began to tremble at his danger; none the less because he was, 

and had long been, the King's friend.  This whip of six strings was 

made under the King's own eye.  It should never be forgotten of him 

how cruelly he supported the worst of the Popish doctrines when 

there was nothing to be got by opposing them.



This amiable monarch now thought of taking another wife.  He 

proposed to the French King to have some of the ladies of the 

French Court exhibited before him, that he might make his Royal 

choice; but the French King answered that he would rather not have 

his ladies trotted out to be shown like horses at a fair.  He 

proposed to the Dowager Duchess of Milan, who replied that she 

might have thought of such a match if she had had two heads; but, 

that only owning one, she must beg to keep it safe.  At last 

Cromwell represented that there was a Protestant Princess in 

Germany - those who held the reformed religion were called 

Protestants, because their leaders had Protested against the abuses 

and impositions of the unreformed Church - named ANNE OF CLEVES, 

who was beautiful, and would answer the purpose admirably.  The 

King said was she a large woman, because he must have a fat wife?  

'O yes,' said Cromwell; 'she was very large, just the thing.'  On 

hearing this the King sent over his famous painter, Hans Holbein, 

to take her portrait.  Hans made her out to be so good-looking that 

the King was satisfied, and the marriage was arranged.  But, 

whether anybody had paid Hans to touch up the picture; or whether 

Hans, like one or two other painters, flattered a princess in the 

ordinary way of business, I cannot say:  all I know is, that when 

Anne came over and the King went to Rochester to meet her, and 

first saw her without her seeing him, he swore she was 'a great 

Flanders mare,' and said he would never marry her.  Being obliged 

to do it now matters had gone so far, he would not give her the 

presents he had prepared, and would never notice her.  He never 

forgave Cromwell his part in the affair.  His downfall dates from 

that time.



It was quickened by his enemies, in the interests of the unreformed 

religion, putting in the King's way, at a state dinner, a niece of 

the Duke of Norfolk, CATHERINE HOWARD, a young lady of fascinating 

manners, though small in stature and not particularly beautiful.  

Falling in love with her on the spot, the King soon divorced Anne 

of Cleves after making her the subject of much brutal talk, on 

pretence that she had been previously betrothed to some one else - 

which would never do for one of his dignity - and married 

Catherine.  It is probable that on his wedding day, of all days in 

the year, he sent his faithful Cromwell to the scaffold, and had 

his head struck off.  He further celebrated the occasion by burning 

at one time, and causing to be drawn to the fire on the same 

hurdles, some Protestant prisoners for denying the Pope's 

doctrines, and some Roman Catholic prisoners for denying his own 

supremacy.  Still the people bore it, and not a gentleman in 

England raised his hand.



But, by a just retribution, it soon came out that Catherine Howard, 

before her marriage, had been really guilty of such crimes as the 

King had falsely attributed to his second wife Anne Boleyn; so, 

again the dreadful axe made the King a widower, and this Queen 

passed away as so many in that reign had passed away before her.  

As an appropriate pursuit under the circumstances, Henry then 

applied himself to superintending the composition of a religious 

book called 'A necessary doctrine for any Christian Man.'  He must 

have been a little confused in his mind, I think, at about this 

period; for he was so false to himself as to be true to some one:  

that some one being Cranmer, whom the Duke of Norfolk and others of 

his enemies tried to ruin; but to whom the King was steadfast, and 

to whom he one night gave his ring, charging him when he should 

find himself, next day, accused of treason, to show it to the 

council board.  This Cranmer did to the confusion of his enemies.  

I suppose the King thought he might want him a little longer.



He married yet once more.  Yes, strange to say, he found in England 

another woman who would become his wife, and she was CATHERINE 

PARR, widow of Lord Latimer.  She leaned towards the reformed 

religion; and it is some comfort to know, that she tormented the 

King considerably by arguing a variety of doctrinal points with him 

on all possible occasions.  She had very nearly done this to her 

own destruction.  After one of these conversations the King in a 

very black mood actually instructed GARDINER, one of his Bishops 

who favoured the Popish opinions, to draw a bill of accusation 

against her, which would have inevitably brought her to the 

scaffold where her predecessors had died, but that one of her 

friends picked up the paper of instructions which had been dropped 

in the palace, and gave her timely notice.  She fell ill with 

terror; but managed the King so well when he came to entrap her 

into further statements - by saying that she had only spoken on 

such points to divert his mind and to get some information from his 

extraordinary wisdom - that he gave her a kiss and called her his 

sweetheart.  And, when the Chancellor came next day actually to 

take her to the Tower, the King sent him about his business, and 

honoured him with the epithets of a beast, a knave, and a fool.  So 

near was Catherine Parr to the block, and so narrow was her escape!



There was war with Scotland in this reign, and a short clumsy war 

with France for favouring Scotland; but, the events at home were so 

dreadful, and leave such an enduring stain on the country, that I 

need say no more of what happened abroad.



A few more horrors, and this reign is over.  There was a lady, ANNE 

ASKEW, in Lincolnshire, who inclined to the Protestant opinions, 

and whose husband being a fierce Catholic, turned her out of his 

house.  She came to London, and was considered as offending against 

the six articles, and was taken to the Tower, and put upon the rack 

- probably because it was hoped that she might, in her agony, 

criminate some obnoxious persons; if falsely, so much the better.  

She was tortured without uttering a cry, until the Lieutenant of 

the Tower would suffer his men to torture her no more; and then two 

priests who were present actually pulled off their robes, and 

turned the wheels of the rack with their own hands, so rending and 

twisting and breaking her that she was afterwards carried to the 

fire in a chair.  She was burned with three others, a gentleman, a 

clergyman, and a tailor; and so the world went on.



Either the King became afraid of the power of the Duke of Norfolk, 

and his son the Earl of Surrey, or they gave him some offence, but 

he resolved to pull THEM down, to follow all the rest who were 

gone.  The son was tried first - of course for nothing - and 

defended himself bravely; but of course he was found guilty, and of 

course he was executed.  Then his father was laid hold of, and left 

for death too.



But the King himself was left for death by a Greater King, and the 

earth was to be rid of him at last.  He was now a swollen, hideous 

spectacle, with a great hole in his leg, and so odious to every 

sense that it was dreadful to approach him.  When he was found to 

be dying, Cranmer was sent for from his palace at Croydon, and came 

with all speed, but found him speechless.  Happily, in that hour he 

perished.  He was in the fifty-sixth year of his age, and the 

thirty-eighth of his reign.



Henry the Eighth has been favoured by some Protestant writers, 

because the Reformation was achieved in his time.  But the mighty 

merit of it lies with other men and not with him; and it can be 

rendered none the worse by this monster's crimes, and none the 

better by any defence of them.  The plain truth is, that he was a 

most intolerable ruffian, a disgrace to human nature, and a blot of 

blood and grease upon the History of England.

