




  THE CITY OF MANY-COLUMNED IRAM AND ABDULLAH SON OF ABI KILABAH



  IT is related that Abdullah bin Abi Kilabah went forth in quest of a

she-camel which had strayed from him, and as he was wandering in the

deserts of Al-Yaman and the district of Saba, behold, he came a

great city girt by a vast castle around which were palaces and

pavilions that rose high into middle air. He made for the place

thinking to find there folk of whom he might ask concerning his

she-camel. But when he reached it, he found it desolate, without a

living soul in it. So (quoth he) I alighted and, hobbling my

dromedary, and composing my mind, entered into the city.

  Now when I came to the castle, I found it had two vast gates

(never in the world was seen their like for size and height) inlaid

with all manner jewels and jacinths, white and red, yellow and

green. Beholding this, I marveled with great marvel and thought the

case mighty wondrous. Then, entering the citadel in a flutter of

fear and dazed with surprise and affright, I found it long and wide,

about equaling Al-Medinah in point of size. And therein were lofty

palaces laid out in pavilions all built of gold and silver and

inlaid with many colored jewels and jacinths and chrysolites and

pearls. And the door leaves in the pavilions were like those of the

castle for beauty, and their floors were strewn with great pearls

and balls, no smaller than hazelnuts, of musk and ambergris and

saffron.

  Now when I came within the heart of the city and saw therein no

created beings of the Sons of Adam, I was near swooning and dying

for fear. Moreover, I looked down from the great roofs of the pavilion

chambers and their balconies and saw rivers running under them, and in

the main streets were fruit-laden trees and tall palms, and the manner

of their building was one brick of gold and one of silver. So I said

to myself, "Doubtless this is the Paradise promised for the world to

come." Then I loaded me with the jewels of its gravel and the musk

of its dust as much as I could carry, and returned to my own

country, where I told the folk what I had seen.

  After a time the news reached Mu'awiyah, son of Abu Sufyan, who

was then Caliph in Al-Hijaz, so he wrote to his lieutenant in San'a of

Al-Yaman to send for the teffer of the story and question him of the

truth of the case. Accordingly the lieutenant summoned me and

questioned me of my adventure and of all appertaining to it, and I

told him what I had seen, whereupon he dispatched me to Mu'awiyah,

before whom I, repeated the story of the strange sights, but he

would not credit it. So I brought out to him some of the pearls and

balls of musk and ambergris and saffron, in which latter there was

still some sweet savor, but the pearls were grown yellow and had

lost pearly color.

  Now Mu'awiyah wondered at this and, sending for Ka'ab al-Ahbar, said

to him, "O Ka'ab, I have sent for thee to ascertain the truth of a

certain matter and hope that thou wilt be able to certify me thereof."

Asked Ka'ab, "What is it, O Commander of the Faithful?" and

Mu'awiyah answered, "Wottest thou of any city founded by man which

is builded of gold and silver, the pillars whereof are of chrysolite

and rubies and its gravel pearls and bans of musk and ambergris and

saffron?" He replied, "Yes, O Commander of the Faithful, this is 'Iram

with pillars decked and dight, the like of which was never made in the

lands,' and the builder was Shaddad son of Ad the Greater." Quoth

the Caliph, 'Tell us something of its history," and Ka'ab said:

  "Ad the Greater had two sons, Shadid and Shaddad, who when their

father died ruled conjointly in his stead, and there was no King of

the Kings of the earth but was subject to them. After awhile Shadid

died and his brother Shaddad reigned over the earth alone. Now he

was fond of reading in antique books, and happening upon the

description of the world to come and of Paradise, with its pavilions

and pileries and trees and fruits and so forth, his soul move him to

build the like thereof in this world, after the fashion aforesaid. Now

under his hand were a hundred thousand kings, each ruling over a

hundred thousand chiefs, commanding each a hundred thousand

warriors, so he called these all before him and said to them: 'I

find in ancient books and annals a description of Paradise as it is to

be in the next world, and I desire to build me its like in this world.

Go ye forth therefore to the goodliest tract on earth and the most

spacious, and build me there a city of gold and silver, whose gravel

shall be chrysolite and rubies and pearls, and for support of its

vaults make pillars of jasper. Fill it with palaces, whereon ye

shall set galleries and balconies, and plant its lanes and

thoroughfares with all manner trees bearing yellow-ripe fruits, and

make rivers to run through it in channels of gold and silver.'

  "Whereat said one and all, 'How are we able to do this thing thou

hast commanded, and whence shall we get the chrysolites and rubies and

pearls whereof thou speakest?' Quoth he, 'What! Weet ye not that the

kings of the world are subject to me and under my hand and that none

therein dare gainsay my word?' Answered they, 'Yes, we know that.'

Whereupon the King rejoined, 'Fare ye then to the mines of chrysolites

and rubies and pearls and gold and silver and collect their produce

and gather together all of value that is in the world, and spare no

pains and leave naught. And take also for me such of these things as

be in men's hands and let nothing escape you. Be diligent and beware

of disobedience.' And thereupon he wrote letters to all the kings of

the world and bade them gather together whatso of these things was

in their subjects' hands, and get them to the mines of precious stones

and metals, and bring forth all that was therein, even from the

abysses of the seas.

  "This they accomplished in the space of twenty years, for the number

of rulers then reigning over the earth was three hundred and sixty

kings. And Shaddad presently assembled from all lands and countries

architects and engineers and men of art and laborers and

handicraftsmen, who dispersed over the world and explored all the

wastes and wolds and tracts and holds. At last they came to an

uninhabited spot, a vast and fair open plain clear of sand hills and

mountains, with founts flushing and rivers rushing, and they said,

'This is the manner of place the King commanded us to seek and ordered

us to find.' So they busied themselves in building the city even as

bade them Shaddad, King of the whole earth in its length and

breadth, leading the fountains in channels and laying the

foundations after the prescribed fashion. Moreover, all the kings of

earth's several reigns sent thither jewels and precious stones and

pearls large and small and carnelian and refined gold and virgin

silver upon camels by land, and in great ships over the waters, and

there came to the builders' hands of all these materials so great a

quantity as may neither be told nor counted nor conceived.

  "So they labored at the work three hundred years, and when they

had brought it to end, they went to King Shaddad and acquainted him

therewith. Then said he: 'Depart and make thereon an impregnable

castle, rising and towering high in air, and build around it a

thousand pavilions, each upon a thousand columns of chrysolite and

ruby and vaulted with gold, that in each pavilion a wazir may

dwell.' So they returned forthwith and did this in other twenty years,

after which they again presented themselves before King Shaddad and

informed him of the accomplishment of his will. Then he commanded

his wazirs, who were a thousand in number, and his chief officers

and such of his troops and others as he put trust in, to prepare for

departure and removal to Many-columned Iram, in the suite and at the

stirrup of Shaddad, son of Ad, King of the world, and he bade also

such as he would of his women and his harem and of his handmaids and

eunuchs make them ready for the journey.

  "They spent twenty years in preparing for departure, at the end of

which time Shaddad set out with his host, rejoicing in the

attainment of his desire till there remained but one day's journey

between him and Iram of the Pillars. Then Allah sent down on him and

on the stubborn unbelievers with him a mighty rushing sound from the

Heavens of His power, which destroyed them all with its vehement

clamor, and neither Shaddad nor any of his company set eyes on the

city. Moreover, Allah blotted out the road which led to the city,

and it stands in its stead unchanged until the Resurrection Day and

the Hour of Judgment."

  So Mu'awiyah wondered greatly at Ka'ab al-Ahbar's story, and said to

him, "Hath any mortal ever made his way to that city?" He replied,

"Yes, one of the companions of Mohammed (on whom be blessing and

peace!) reached it, doubtless and for sure after the same fashion as

this man here seated." And (quoth Al-Sha'abi) it is related, on the

authority of learned men of Himyar in Al-Yaman that Shaddad, when

destroyed with all his host by the sound, was succeeded in his

kingship by his son Shaddad the Less, whom he left viceregent in

Hazramaut and Saba when he and his marched upon Many-columned Iram.

Now as soon as he heard of his father's death on the road, he caused

his body to be brought back from the desert to Hazramaut and bade them

hew him out a tomb in a cave, where he laid the body on a throne of

gold and threw over the corpse threescore and ten robes of cloth of

gold, purfled with precious stones. Lastly at his sire's head he set

up a tablet of gold whereon were graven these verses:



        Take warning O proud,

        And in length o' life vain!

        I'm Shaddad son of Ad,

        Of the forts castellain,

        Lord of pillars and power,

        Lord of tried might and main,

        Whom all earth sons obeyed

        For my mischief and bane,

        And who held East and West

        In mine awfulest reign.

        He preached me salvation

        Whom God did assain,

        But we crossed him and asked,

        "Can no refuge be ta'en?"

        When a Cry on us cried

        From th' horizon plain,

        And we fell on the field

        Like the harvested grain,

        And the Fixt Day await

        We, in earth's bosom lain!



  Al-Sa'alibi also relateth: It chanced that two men once entered this

cave and found steps at its upper end, so they descended and came to

an underground chamber, a hundred cubits long by forty wide and a

hundred high. In the midst stood a throne of gold, whereon lay a man

of huge bulk, filling the whole length and breadth of the throne. He

was covered with jewels and raiment gold-and-silver wrought, and at

his head was a tablet of gold bearing an inscription. So they took the

tablet and carried it off, together with as many bars of gold and

silver and so forth as they could bear away.

  And men also relate the tale of

                THE SWEEP AND THE NOBLE LADY



  DURING the season of the Meccan pilgrimage, whilst the people were

making circuit about the Holy House and the place of compassing was

crowded, behold, a man laid hold of the covering of the Ka'aba and

cried out from the bottom of his heart, saying, "I beseech thee, O

Allah, that she may once again be wroth with her husband and that I

may know her!" A company of the pilgrims heard him and seized him

and carried him to the Emir of the pilgrims, after a sufficiency of

blows, and, said they, "O Emir, we found this fellow in the Holy

Places, saying thus and thus." So the Emir commanded to hang him,

but he cried, "O Emir, I conjure thee, by the virtue of the Apostle

(whom Allah bless and preserve!), hear my story and then do with me as

thou wilt." Quoth the Emir, "Tell thy tale forthright."

  "Know then, O Emir," quoth the man, "that I am a sweep who works

in the sheep slaughterhouses and carries off the blood and the offal

to the rubbish heaps outside the gates. And it came to pass as I

went along one day with my ass loaded, I saw the people running away

and one of them said to me, 'Enter this alley, lest haply they slay

thee.' Quoth I, 'What aileth the folk running away?' and one of the

eunuchs who were passing said to me, 'This is the harem of one of

the notables, and her eunuchs drive the people out of her way and beat

them all, without respect to persons.' So I turned aside with the

donkey and stood still awaiting the dispersal of the crowd, and I

saw a number of eunuchs with staves in their hands, followed by nigh

thirty women slaves, and amongst them a lady as she were a willow wand

or a thirsty gazelle, perfect in beauty and grace and amorous languor,

and all were attending upon her.

  "Now when she came to the mouth of the passage where I stood, she

turned right and left and calling one of the castratos, whispered in

his ear, and behold, he came up to me and laid hold of me, whilst

another eunuch took my ass and made off with it. And when the

spectators fled, the first eunuch bound me with a rope and dragged

me after him, till I knew not what to do, and the people followed us

and cried out, saying: 'This is not allowed of Allah! What hath this

poor scavenger done that he should be bound with ropes?' and praying

the eunuchs, 'Have pity on him and let him go, so Allah have pity on

you!' And I the while said in my mind: 'Doubtless the eunuchry

seized me because their mistress smelt the stink of the offal and it

sickened her. Belike she is with child or ailing, but there is no

Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!"

  "So I continued walking on behind them till they stopped at the door

of a great house, and, entering before me, brought me into a big

hall- I know not how I shall describe its magnificence- furnished with

the finest furniture. And the women also entered the hall, and I bound

and held by the eunuch and saying to myself, 'Doubtless they will

torture me here till I die and none know of my death.' However,

after a while they carried me into a neat bathroom leading out of

the hall, and as I sat there, behold, in came three slave girls, who

seated themselves round me and said to me, 'Strip off thy rags and

tatters.' So I pulled off my threadbare clothes and one of them fell

a-rubbing my legs and feet whilst another scrubbed my head and a third

shampooed my body. When they had made an end of washing me, they

brought me a parcel of clothes and said to me, 'Put these on,' and I

answered, 'By Allah, I know not how!' So they came up to me and

dressed me, laughing together at me the while. After which they

brought casting bottles full of rose-water, and sprinkled me

therewith.

  "Then I went out with them into another saloon- by Allah, I know

not how to praise its splendor for the wealth of paintings and

furniture therein- and entering it, I saw a person seated on a couch

of Indian rattan with ivory feet, and before her a number of damsels.

When she saw me, she rose to me and called me, so I went up to her and

she seated me by her side. Then she bade her slave girls bring food,

and they brought all manner of rich meats, such as I never saw in

all my life. I do not even know the names of the dishes, much less

their nature. So I ate my fill, and when the dishes had been taken

away and we had washed our hands, she called for fruits, which came

without stay or delay, and ordered me eat of them. And when we had

ended eating she bade one of the waiting women bring the wine

furniture. So they set on flagons of divers kinds of wine and burned

perfumes in all the censers, what while a damsel like the moon rose

and served us with wine to the sound of the smitten strings. And I

drank, and the lady drank, till we were swized with wine and the whole

time I doubted not but that all this was an illusion of sleep.

  "Presently, she signed to one of the damsels to spread us a bed in

such a place, which being done, she rose and took me by the hand and

led me thither, and lay down and I lay with her till the morning,

and as often as I pressed her to my breast I smelt the delicious

fragrance of musk and other perfumes that exaled from her, and could

not think otherwise but that I was in Paradise, or in the vain

phantasies of a dream. Now when it was day, she asked me where I

lodged and I told her, 'In such a place,' whereupon she gave me

leave to depart, handing to me a kerchief worked with gold and

silver and containing somewhat tied in it, and took leave of me,

saying, 'Go to the bath with this.' I rejoiced and said to myself, 'If

there be but five coppers here, it will buy me this day my morning

meal.'

  "Then I left her, as though I were leaving Paradise, and returned to

my poor crib, where I opened the kerchief and found in it fifty

miskals of gold. So I buried them in the ground and, buying two

farthings' worth of bread and "kitchen," seated me at the door and

broke my fast. After which I sat pondering my case, and continued so

doing till the time of afternoon prayer, when lo! a slave girl

accosted me saying, 'My mistress calleth for thee.' I followed her

to the house aforesaid and, after asking permission, she carried me

into the lady, before whom I kissed the ground, and she commanded me

to sit and called for meat and wine as on the previous day. After

which I again lay with her all night. On the morrow, she gave me a

second kerchief, with other fifty dinars therein, and I took it and,

going home, buried this also. In such pleasant condition I continued

eight days running, going in to her at the hour of afternoon prayer

and leaving her at daybreak, but on the eighth night, as I lay with

her, behold, one of her slave girls came running in and said to me,

'Arise, go up into yonder closet.'

  "So I rose and went into the closet, which was over the gate, and

presently I heard a great clamor and tramp of horse, and, looking

out of the window which gave on the street in front of the house, I

saw a young man as he were the rising moon on the night of fullness

come riding up attended by a number of servants and soldiers who

were about him on foot. He alighted at the door and entering the

saloon, found the lady seated on the couch. So he kissed the ground

between her hands, then came up to her and kissed her hands, but she

would not speak to him. However, he continued patiently to humble

himself, and soothe her and speak her fair, till he made his peace

with her, and they lay together that night. Now when her husband had

made his peace with the young lady, he lay with her that night, and

next morning the soldiers came for him and he mounted and rode away,

whereupon she drew near to me and said, 'Sawest thou yonder man?' I

answered, 'Yes,' and she said, 'He is my husband, and I will tell thee

what befell me with him.'

  "It came to pass one, day that we were sitting, he and I, in the

garden within the house, and behold, he rose from my side and was

absent a long while, till I grew tired of waiting and said to

myself, 'Most like, he is in the privy.' So I arose and went to the

watercloset, but not finding him there, went down to the kitchen,

where I saw a slave girl, and when I enquired for him, she showed

him to me lying with one of the cookmaids. Hereupon I swore a great

oath that I assuredly would do adultery with the foulest and filthiest

man in Baghdad, and the day the eunuch laid hands on thee, I had

been four days going round about the city in quest of one who should

answer to this description, but found none fouler nor filthier than

thy good self. So I took thee and there passed between us that which

Allah foreordained to us, and now I am quit of my oath.'

  "Then she added, 'If, however, my husband return yet a pin to the

cookmaid and lie with her, I will restore thee to thy lost place in my

favors.' Now when I heard these words from her lips, what while she

pierced my heart with the shafts of her glances, my tears streamed

forth till my eyelids were chafed sore with weeping. Then she made

them give me other fifty dinars (making in all four hundred gold

pieces I had of her) and bade me depart. So I went out from her and

came hither, that I might pray Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) to

make her husband return to the cookmaid, that haply I might be again

admitted to her favors."

  When the Emir of the pilgrims heard the man's story, he set him free

and said to the bystanders, "Allah upon you, pray for him, for

indeed he is excusable."
