






TWENTY YEARS AT HULL-HOUSE






BY JANE ADDAMS



HULL-HOUSE, CHICAGO






TO

THE MEMORY OF

MY FATHER









PREFACE












PREFACE





Every preface is, I imagine, written after the book has been

completed and now that I have finished this volume I will state

several difficulties which may put the reader upon his guard

unless he too postpones the preface to the very last.



Many times during the writing of these reminiscences, I have

become convinced that the task was undertaken all too soon.

One's fiftieth year is indeed an impressive milestone at which

one may well pause to take an accounting, but the people with

whom I have so long journeyed have become so intimate a part of

my lot that they cannot be written of either in praise or blame;

the public movements and causes with which I am still identified

have become so endeared, some of them through their very

struggles and failures, that it is difficult to discuss them.



It has also been hard to determine what incidents and experiences

should be selected for recital, and I have found that I might

give an accurate report of each isolated event and yet give a

totally misleading impression of the whole, solely by the

selection of the incidents.  For these reasons and many others I

have found it difficult to make a [Page viii]  faithful record of

the years since the autumn of 1889 when without any preconceived

social theories or economic views, I came to live in an

industrial district of Chicago.



If the reader should inquire why the book was ever undertaken in

the face of so many difficulties, in reply I could instance two

purposes, only one of which in the language of organized charity,

is "worthy." Because Settlements have multiplied so easily in the

United States I hoped that a simple statement of an earlier

effort, including the stress and storm, might be of value in

their interpretation and possibly clear them of a certain charge

of superficiality.  The unworthy motive was a desire to start a

"backfire," as it were, to extinquish two biographies of myself,

one of which had been submitted to me in outline, that made life

in a Settlement all too smooth and charming.



The earlier chapters present influences and personal motives with

a detail which will be quite unpardonable if they fail to make

clear the personality upon whom various social and industrial

movements in Chicago reacted during a period of twenty years.  No

effort is made in the recital to separate my own history from

that of Hull-House during the years in which I was "launched deep

into the stormy intercourse of human life" for, so far as a mind

is pliant under the pressure of events and experiences, it

becomes hard to detach it.



It has unfortunately been necessary to abandon [Page ix]  the

chronological order in favor of the topical, for during the early

years at Hull-House, time seemed to afford a mere framework for

certain lines of activity and I have found in writing this book,

that after these activities have been recorded, I can scarcely

recall the scaffolding.



More than a third of the material in the book has appeared in The

American Magazine, one chapter of it in McClure's Magazine, and

earlier statements of the Settlement motive, published years ago,

have been utilized in chronological order because it seemed

impossible to reproduce their enthusiasm.



It is a matter of gratification to me that the book is

illustrated from drawings made by Miss Norah Hamilton of

Hull-House, and the cover designed by another resident, Mr. Frank

Hazenplug.  I am indebted for the making of the index and for

many other services to Miss Clara Landsberg, also of Hull-House.



If the conclusions of the whole matter are similar to those I have

already published at intervals during the twenty years at

Hull-House, I can only make the defense that each of the earlier

books was an attempt to set forth a thesis supported by

experience, whereas this volume endeavors to trace the experiences

through which various conclusions were forced upon me.
