





CHAPTER VI



TO LABOUR AND TO WAIT



We have reached the `beginning of the end,'

Ajax!'' said the Harvester, as the peacock

ceased screaming and came to seek food from

his hand.  ``We have seen the Girl.  Now we must

locate her and convince her that Medicine Woods is her

happy home.  I feel quite equal to the latter proposition,

Ajax, but how the nation to find her sticks me. 

I can't make a search so open that she will know and

resent it.  She must have all the consideration ever

paid the most refined woman, but she also has got to

be found, and that speedily.  When I remember that

look on her face, as if horrors were snatching at her

skirts, it takes all the grit out of me.  I feel weak as a

sapling.  And she needs all my strength.  I've simply

got to brace up.  I'll work a while and then perhaps

I can think.''



So the Harvester began the evening routine.  He

thought he did not want anything to eat, but when he

opened the cupboard and smelled the food he learned

that he was a hungry man and he cooked and ate a

good supper.  He put away everything carefully, for

even the kitchen was dainty and fresh and he wanted to

keep it so for her.  When he finished he went into the

living-room, stood before the fireplace, and studied the

collection of half-finished candlesticks grouped upon it. 

He picked up several and examined them closely, but

realized that he could not bind himself to the exactions

of carving that evening.  He took a key from his pocket

and unlocked her door.  Every day he had been going

there to improve upon his work for her, and he loved the

room, the outlook from its windows; he was very proud

of the furniture he had made.  There was no paper-

thin covering on her chairs, bed, and dressing table. 

The tops, seats, and posts were solid wood, worth hundreds

of dollars for veneer.



To-night he folded his arms and stood on the sill

hesitating.  While she was a dream, he had loved to

linger in her room.  Now that she was reality, he paused. 

In one golden May day the place had become sacred. 

Since he had seen the Girl that room was so hers that

he was hesitating about entering because of this fact. 

It was as if the tall, slender form stood before the chest

of drawers or sat at the dressing table and he did not

dare enter unless he were welcome.  Softly he closed

the door and went away.  He wandered to the dry-

house and turned the bark and roots on the trays, but

the air stifled him and he hurried out.  He tried to work

in the packing room, but walls smothered him and again

he sought the open.



He espied a bundle of osier-bound, moss-covered ferns

that he had found in the woods, and brought the shovel

to transplant them; but the work worried him, and he

hurried through with it.  Then he looked for something

else to do and saw an ax.  He caught it up and with

lusty strokes began swinging it.  When he had chopped

wood until he was very tired he went to bed.  Sleep

came to the strong, young frame and he awoke in the

morning refreshed and hopeful.



He wondered why he had bothered Doctor Carey. 

The Harvester felt able that morning to find his Dream

Girl without assistance before the day was over.  It

was merely a matter of going to the city and locating

a woman.  Yesterday, it had been a question of whether

she really existed.  To-day, he knew.  Yesterday, it

had meant a search possibly as wide as earth to find her. 

To-day, it was narrowed to only one location so small,

compared with Chicago, that the Harvester felt he could

sift its population with his fingers, and pick her from

others at his first attempt.  If she were visiting there

probably she would rest during the night, and be on the

streets to-day.



When he remembered her face he doubted it.  He

decided to spend part of the time on the business streets

and the remainder in the residence portions of the city. 

Because it was uncertain when he would return, everything

was fed a double portion, and Betsy was left

at a livery stable with instructions to care for her until

he came.  He did not know where the search would

lead him.  For several hours he slowly walked the

business district and then ranged farther, but not a

sight of her.  He never had known that Onabasha was

so large.  On its crowded streets he did not feel that he

could sift the population through his fingers, nor could

he open doors and search houses without an excuse.



Some small boys passed him eating bananas, and the

Harvester looked at his watch and was amazed to find

that the day had advanced until two o'clock in the

afternoon.  He was tired and hungry.  He went into

a restaurant and ordered lunch; as he waited a girl

serving tables smiled at him.  Any other time the

Harvester would have returned at least a pleasant

look, and gone his way.  To-day he scowled at her, and

ate in hurried discomfort.  On the streets again, he had

no idea where to go and so he went to the hospital.



``I expected you early this morning,'' was the greeting

of Doctor Carey.  ``Where have you been and what

have you done?''



``Nothing,'' said the Harvester.  ``I was so sure she

would be on the streets I just watched, but I didn't

see her.''



``We will go to the depot,'' said the doctor.  ``The

first thing is to keep her from leaving town.''



They arranged with the ticket agents, expressmen,

telegraphers, and, as they left, the Harvester stopped

and tipped the train caller, offering further reward worth

while if he would find the Girl.



``Now we will go to the police station,'' said the doctor.



``I'll see the chief and have him issue a general order to

his men to watch for her, but if I were you I'd select

a half dozen in the down town district, and give them a

little tip with a big promise!''



``Good Lord!  How I hate this,'' groaned the Harvester.



``Want to find her by yourself?'' questioned his friend.



``Yes,'' said the Harvester, ``I do!  And I would, if

it hadn't been for her ghastly face.  That drives me to

resort to any measures.  The probabilities are that she

is lying sick somewhere, and if her comfort depends on

the purse that dressed her, she will suffer.  Doc, do you

know how awful this is?''



``I know that you've got a great imagination.  If the

woods make all men as sensitive as you are, those who

have business to transact should stay out of them. 

Take a common-sense view.  Look at this as I do.  If

she was strong enough to travel in a day coach from

Chicago; she can't be so very ill to-day.  Leaving life

by the inch isn't that easy.  She will be alive this time

next year, whether you find her or not.  The chances

are that her stress was mental anyway, and trouble

almost never overcomes any one.''



``You, a doctor and say that!''



``Oh, I mean instantaneously----in a day!  Of course

if it grinds away for years!  But youth doesn't allow it

to do that.  It throws it off, and grows hopeful and happy

again.  She won't die; put that out of your mind.  If

I were you I would go home now and go straight on with

my work, trusting to.  the machinery you have set in

motion.  I know most of the men with whom we have

talked.  They will locate her in a week or less.  It's

their business.  It isn't yours.  It's your job to be ready

for her, and have enough ahead to support her when

they find her.  Try to realize that there are now a dozen

men on hunt for her, and trust them.  Go back to your

work, and I will come full speed in the motor when the

first man sights her.  That ought to satisfy you.  I've

told all of them to call me at the hospital, and I will tell

my assistant what to do in case a call comes while I

am away.  Straighten your face!  Go back to Medicine

Woods and harvest your crops, and before you know it

she will be located.  Then you can put on your Sunday

clothes and show yourself, and see if you can make her

take notice.''



``Idiot!'' exclaimed the Harvester, but he started home. 

When he arrived he attended to his work and then sat

down to think.



``Doc is right,'' was his ultimate conclusion.  ``She

can't leave the city, she can't move around in it, she

can't go anywhere, without being seen.  There's one

more point:  I must tell Carey to post all the doctors

to report if they have such a call.  That's all I can

think of.  I'll go to-night, and then I'll look over the

ginseng for parasites, and to-morrow I'll dive into the

late spring growth and work until I haven't time to think. 

I've let cranesbill get a week past me now, and it can't

be dispensed with.''



So the following morning, when the Harvester had

completed his work at the cabin and barn and breakfasted,

he took a mattock and a big hempen bag, and followed

the path to the top of the hill.  As it ran along the lake

bank he descended on the other side to several acres of

cleared land, where he raised corn for his stock, potatoes,

and coarser garden truck, for which there was not

space in the smaller enclosure close the cabin.  Around

the edges of these fields, and where one of them sloped

toward the lake, he began grubbing a variety of grass

having tall stems already over a foot in height at half

growth.  From each stem waved four or five leaves of

six or eight inches length and the top showed forming

clusters of tiny spikelets.



``I am none too early for you,'' he muttered to himself

as he ran the mattock through the rich earth, lifting

the long, tough, jointed root stalks of pale yellow, from

every section of which broke sprays of fine rootlets. 

``None too early for you, and as you are worth only

seven cents a pound, you couldn't be considered a `get-

rich-quick' expedient, so I'll only stop long enough with

you to gather what I think my customers will order,

and amass a fortune a little later picking mullein flowers

at seventy-five cents a pound.  What a crop I've got

coming!''



The Harvester glanced ahead, where in the cleared soil

of the bank grew large plants with leaves like yellow-green

felt and tall bloom stems rising.  Close them flourished

other species requiring dry sandy soil, that gradually

changed as it approached the water until it became

covered with rank abundance of short, wiry grass, half

the blades of which appeared red.  Numerous everywhere

he could see the grayish-white leaves of Parnassus

grass.  As the season advanced it would lift heart-

shaped velvet higher, and before fall the stretch of emerald

would be starred with white-faced, green-striped flowers.



``Not a prettier sight on earth,'' commented the

Harvester, ``than just swale wire grass in September

making a fine, thick background to set off those delicate

starry flowers on their slender stems.  I must remember

to bring her to see that.''




His eyes followed the growth to the water.  As the

grass drew closer moisture it changed to the rank, sweet,

swamp variety, then came bulrushes, cat-tails, water

smartweed, docks, and in the water blue flag lifted

folded buds; at its feet arose yellow lily leaves and farther

out spread the white.  As the light struck the surface

the Harvester imagined he could see the little green

buds several inches below.  Above all arose wild rice

he had planted for the birds.  The red wings swayed on

the willows and tilted on every stem that would bear

their weight, singing their melodious half-chanted notes,

``O-ka-lee!''



Beneath them the ducks gobbled, splashed, and chattered;

grebe and coot voices could be distinguished;

king rails at times flashed into sight and out again;

marsh wrens scolded and chattered; occasionally a kingfisher

darted around the lake shore, rolling his rattling

cry and flashing his azure coat and gleaming white

collar.  On a hollow tree in the woods a yellow

hammer proved why he was named, because he carpentered

industriously to enlarge the entrance to the home he

was excavating in a dead tree; and sailing over the

lake and above the woods in grace scarcely surpassed

by any, a lonesome turkey buzzard awaited his mate's

decision as to which hollow log was most suitable for

their home.



The Harvester stuffed the grass roots in the bag until

it would hold no more and stood erect to wipe his face,

for the sun was growing warm.  As he drew his handkerchief

across his brow, the south wind struck him with

enough intensity to attract attention.  Instantly the

Harvester removed his hat, rolled it up, and put it into

his pocket.  He stood an instant delighting in the wind

and then spoke.



``Allow me to express my most fervent thanks for

your kindness,'' he said.  ``I thought probably you

would take that message, since it couldn't mean much

to you, and it meant all the world to me.  I thought

you would carry it, but, I confess, I scarcely expected

the answer so soon.  The only thing that could make me

more grateful to you would be to know exactly where

she is: but you must understand that it's like a peep

into Heaven to have her existence narrowed to one

place.  I'm bound to be able to say inside a few days,

she lives at number----I don't know yet, on street----

I'll find out soon, in the closest city, Onabasha.  And

I know why you brought her, South Wind.  If ever a

girl's cheeks need fanning with your breezes, and painting

with sun kisses, I wouldn't mind, since this is strictly

private, adding a few of mine; if ever any one needed

flowers, birds, fresh air, water, and rest!  Good Lord,

South Wind, did you ever reach her before you carried

that message?  I think not!  But Onabasha isn't so

large.  You and the sun should get your innings there. 

I do hope she is not trying to work!  I can attend to

that; and so there will be more time when she is found,

I'd better hustle now.''



He picked up the bag and returned to the dry-house,

where he carefully washed the roots and spread them

on the trays.  Then he took the same bag and mattock

and going through the woods in the opposite direction

he came to a heavy growth in a cleared space of high

ground.  The bloom heads were forming and the plant

was half matured.  The Harvester dug a cylindrical,

tapering root, wrinkling lengthwise, wiped it clean,

broke and tasted it.  He made a wry face.  He stood

examining the white wood with its brown-red bark and,

deciding that it was in prime condition, be began digging

the plants.  It was common wayside ``Bouncing Bet,''

but the Harvester called it ``soapwort.''  He took every

other plant in his way across the bed, and when he

digged a heavy load he carried it home, stripped the

leaves, and spread them on trays, while the roots he

topped, washed, and put to dry also.  Then he whistled

for Belshazzar and went to lunch.



As he passed down the road to the cabin his face was

a study of conflicting emotions, and his eyes had a far

away appearance of deep thought.  Every tree of his

stretch of forest was rustling fresh leaves to shelter him;

dogwood, wild crab, and hawthorn offered their flowers;

earth held up her tribute in painted trillium faces, spring

beauties, and violets, blue, white, and yellow.  Mosses,

ferns, and lichen decorated the path; all the birds

greeted him in friendship, and sang their purest melodies. 

The sky was blue, the sun bright, the air perfumed

for him; Belshazzar, always true to his name, protected

every footstep; Ajax, the shimmering green and gold

wonder, came up the hill to meet him; the white doves

circled above his head.  Stumbling half blindly, the

Harvester passed unheeding among them, and went

into the cabin.  When he came out he stood a long

time in deep study, but at last he returned to the

woods.



``Perhaps they will have found her before night,'' he

said.  ``I'll harvest the cranesbill yet, because it's growing

late for it, and then I'll see how they are coming on. 

Maybe they'd know her if they met her, and maybe

they wouldn't.  She may wear different clothing, and

freshen up after her trip.  She might have been car sick,

as Doc suggested, and appear very different when she

feels better.''



He skirted the woods around the northeast end and

stopped at a big bed of exquisite growth.  Tall, wiry

stems sprang upward almost two feet in height; leaves

six inches across were cut in ragged lobes almost to the

base, and here and there, enough to colour the entire

bed a delicate rose or sometimes a violet purple, the

first flowers were unfolding.  The Harvester lifted a

root and tasted it.



``No doubt about you being astringent,'' he muttered. 

``You have enough tannin in you to pucker a mushroom. 

By the way, those big, corn-cobby fellows should spring

up with the next warm rain, and the hotels and restaurants

always pay high prices.  I must gather a few

bushels.''



He looked over the bed of beautiful wild alum and

hesitated.



``I vow I hate to touch you,'' he said.  ``You are a

picture right now, and in a week you will be a miracle. 

It seems a shame to tear up a plant for its roots, just at

flowering time, and I can't avoid breaking down half I

don't take, getting the ones I do.  I wish you were not

so pretty!  You are one of the colours I love most. 

You remind me of red-bud, blazing star, and all those

exquisite magenta shades that poets, painters, and the

Almighty who made them love so much they hesitate

about using them lavishly.  You are so delicate and

graceful and so modest.  I wish she could see you! 

I got to stop this or I won't be able to lift a root.  I

never would if the ten cents a pound I'll get out of it

were the only consideration.''



The Harvester gripped the mattock and advanced

to the bed.  ``What I must be thinking is that you are

indispensable to the sick folks.  The steady demand for

you proves your value, and of course, humanity comes

first, after all.  If I remain in the woods alone much

longer I'll get to the place where I'm not so sure that

it does.  Seems as if animals, birds, flowers, trees, and

insects as well, have their right to life also.  But it's

for me to remember the sick folks!  If I thought the

Girl would get some of it now, I could overturn the bed

with a stout heart.  If any one ever needed a tonic, I

think she does.  Maybe some of this will reach her.  If

it does, I hope it will make her cheeks just the lovely

pink of the bloom.  Oh Lord!  If only she hadn't

appeared so sick and frightened!  What is there in all

this world of sunshine to make a girl glance around her

like that?  I wish I knew!  Maybe they will have

found her by night.''



The Harvester began work on the bed, but he knelt

and among the damp leaves from the spongy black

earth he lifted the roots with his fingers and carefully

straightened and pressed down the plants he did not

take.  This required more time than usual, but his

heart was so sore he could not be rough with anything,

most of all a flower.  So he harvested the wild alum

by hand, and heaped large stacks of roots around the

edges of the bed.  Often he paused as he worked and

on his knees stared through the forest as if he hoped

perhaps she would realize his longing for her, and come

to him in the wood as she had across the water. 

Over and over he repeated, ``Perhaps they will find

her by night!'' and that so intensified the meaning

that once he said it aloud.  His face clouded and grew

dark.



``Dealish nice business!'' he said.  ``I am here in the

woods digging flower roots, and a gang of men in the

city are searching for the girl I love.  If ever a job seemed

peculiarly a man's own, it appears this would be.  What

business has any other man spying after my woman? 

Why am I not down there doing my own work, as I

always have done it?  Who's more likely to find her

than I am?  It seems as if there would be an instinct

that would lead me straight to her, if I'd go.  And you

can wager I'll go fast enough.''



The Harvester appeared as if he would start that

instant, but with lips closely shut he finally forced

himself to go on with his work.  When he had rifled the bed,

and uprooted all he cared to take during one season,

he carried the roots to the lake shore below the curing

house, and spread them on a platform he had built. 

He stepped into his boat and began dashing pails of water

over them and using a brush.  As he worked he washed

away the woody scars of last year's growth, and the tiny

buds appearing for the coming season.



Belshazzar sat on the opposite bank and watched

the operation; and Ajax came down and, flying to a

dead stump, erected and slowly waved his train to attract

the sober-faced man who paid no heed.  He left the

roots to drain while he prepared supper, then placed

them on the trays, now filled to overflowing, and was

glad he had finished.  He could not cure anything else

at present if he wanted to.  He was as far advanced as

he had been at the same time the previous year.  Then

he dressed neatly and locking the Girl's room, and leaving

Belshazzar to protect it, he went to Onabasha.



``Bravo!'' cried Doctor Carey as the Harvester

entered his office.  ``You are heroic to wait all day for

news.  How much stuff have you gathered?''



``Three crops.  How many missing women have you

located?''



The doctor laughed.  There was no sign of a smile

on the face of the Harvester.



``You didn't really expect her to come to light the

first day?  That would be too easy!  We can't find her

in a minute.''



``It will be no surprise to me if you can't find her at

all.  I am not expecting another man to do what I don't

myself.''



``You are not hunting her.  You are harvesting the

woods.  The men you employ are to find her.''



``Maybe I am, and maybe I am not,'' said the Harvester

slowly.  ``To me it appears to be a poor stick of a man

who coolly proceeds with money making, and trusts to

men who haven't even seen her to search for the girl

he loves.  I think a few hours of this is about all my

patience will endure.''



``What are you going to do?''



``I don't know,'' said the Harvester.  ``But you can

bank on one thing sure----I'm going to do something! 

I've had my fill of this.  Thank you for all you've done,

and all you are going to do.  My head is not clear enough

yet to decide anything with any sense, but maybe I'll

hit on something soon.  I'm for the streets for a while.''



``Better go home and go to bed.  You seem very

tired.''



``I am,'' said the Harvester.  ``The only way to

endure this is to work myself down.  I'm all right, and

I'll be careful, but I rather think I'll find her myself.''



``Better go on with your work as we planned.''



``I'll think about it,'' said the Harvester as he went

out.



Until he was too tired to walk farther he slowly paced

the streets of the city, and then followed the home road

through the valley and up the hill to Medicine Woods. 

When he came to Singing Water, Belshazzar heard his

steps on the bridge, and came bounding to meet him.  The

Harvester stretched himself on a seat and turned his

face to the sky.  It was a deep, dark-blue bowl, closely

set with stars, and a bright moon shed a soft May radiance

on the young earth.  The lake was flooded with light,

and the big trees of the forest crowning the hill were

silver coroneted.  The unfolding leaves had hidden the

new cabin from the bridge, but the driveway shone white,

and already the upspringing bushes hedged it in.  Insects

were humming lazily in the perfumed night air,

and across the lake a courting whip-poor-will was

explaining to his sweetheart just how much and why he

loved her.  A few bats were wavering in air hunting

insects, and occasionally an owl or a nighthawk crossed

the lake.  Killdeer were glorying in the moonlight and

night flight, and cried in pure, clear notes as they sailed

over the water.  The Harvester was tired and filled

with unrest as he stretched on the bridge, but the longer

he lay the more the enfolding voices comforted him. 

All of them were waiting and working out their lives

to the legitimate end; there was nothing else for him to

do.  He need not follow instinct or profit by chance. 

He was a man; he could plan and reason.



The air grew balmy and some big, soft clouds swept

across the moon.  The Harvester felt the dampness

of rising dew, and went to the cabin.  He looked at

it long in the moonlight and told himself that he could

see how much the plants, vines, and ferns had grown

since the previous night.  Without making a light, he

threw himself on the bed in the outdoor room, and lay

looking through the screening at the lake and sky.  He

was working his brain to think of some manner in which

to start a search for the Dream Girl that would have

some probability of success to recommend it, but he

could settle on no feasible plan.  At last he fell asleep,

and in the night soft rain wet his face.  He pulled an

oilcloth sheet over the bed, and lay breathing deeply of

the damp, perfumed air as he again slept.  In the morning

brilliant sunshine awoke him and he arose to find the

earth steaming.



``If ever there was a perfect mushroom day!'' he said

to Belshazzar.  ``We must hurry and feed the stock and

ourselves and gather some.  They mean real money.''

