





CHAPTER XX



THE MAN IN THE BACKGROUND



Then the Harvester returned to Medicine Woods

to fight his battle alone.  At first the pain

seemed unendurable, but work always had

been his panacea, it was his salvation now.  He went

through the cabin, folding bedding and storing it in

closets, rolling rugs sprinkled with powdered alum,

packing cushions, and taking window seats from the

light.



``Our sleeping room and the kitchen will serve for us,

Bel,'' he said.  ``We will put all these other things away

carefully, so they will be as good as new when the Girl

comes home.''



The evening of the second day he was called to the

telephone.



``There is a telegram for you,'' said a voice.  ``A

message from Philadelphia.  It reads:  `Arrived safely. 

Thank you for making me come.  Dear old people.  Will

write soon.  With love, Ruth.'



``Have you got it?''



``No,'' lied the Harvester, grinning rapturously.  ``Repeat

it again slowly, and give me time after each sentence

to write it.  Now!  Go on!''



He carried the message to the back steps and sat

reading it again and again.



``I supposed I'd have to wait at least four days,'' he

said to Ajax as the bird circled before him.  ``This is

from the Girl, old man, and she is not forgetting us to

begin with, anyway.  She is there all safe, she sees that

they need her, they are lovable old people, she is going to

write us all about it soon, and she loves us all she knows

how to love any one.  That should be enough to keep us

sane and sensible until her letter comes.  There is no use

to borrow trouble, so we will say everything in the world

is right with us, and be as happy as we can on that until

we find something we cannot avoid worrying over.  In

the meantime, we will have faith to believe that we

have suffered our share, and the end will be happy for

all of us.  I am mighty glad the Girl has a home, and

the right kind of people to care for her.  Now, when she

comes back to me, I needn't feel that she was forced,

whether she wanted to or not, because she had nowhere

to go.  This will let me out with a clean conscience,

and that is the only thing on earth that allows a man to

live in peace with himself.  Now I'll go finish everything

else, and then I'll begin the ginseng harvest.''



So the Harvester hitched Betsy and with Belshazzar

at his feet he drove through the woods to the sarsaparilla

beds.  He noticed the beautiful lobed leaves,

at which the rabbits had been nibbling, and the heads

of lustrous purple-black berries as he began digging the

roots that he sold for stimulants.



``I might have needed a dose of you now myself,''

the Harvester addressed a heap of uprooted plants,

``if the electric wires hadn't brought me a better.  Great

invention that!  Never before realized it fully!  I

thought to-day would be black as night, but that message

changes the complexion of affairs mightily.  So

I'll dig you for people who really are in need of something

to brace them up.''



After the sarsaparilla was on the trays, he attacked

the beds of Indian hemp, with its long graceful pods,

and took his usual supply.  Then he worked diligently

on the warm hillside over the dandelion.  When these

were finished he brought half a dozen young men from

the city and drilled them on handling ginseng.  He was

warm, dirty, and tired when he came from the beds the

evening of the fourth day.  He finished his work at the

barn, prepared and ate his supper, slipped into clean

clothing, and walked to the country road where it crossed

the lane.  There he opened his mail box.  The letter he

expected with the Philadelphia postmark was inside.  He

carried it to the bridge, and sitting in her favourite place,

with the lake breeze threading his hair, opened his

first letter from the Girl.



``My dear Friend, Lover, Husband,'' it began.



The Harvester turned the sheets face down across his

knee, laid his hand on them, and stared meditatively at

the lake.  `` `Friend,' '' he commented.  ``Well, that's

all right!  I am her friend, as well as I know how to be. 

`Lover.'  I come in there, full force.  I did my level

best on that score, though I can't boast myself a howling

success; a man can't do more than he knows, and if I

had been familiar with all the wiles of expert, professional

love-makers, they wouldn't have availed me in the Girl's

condition.  I had a mighty peculiar case to handle in

her, and not a particle of training.  But if she says

`Lover,' I must have made some kind of a showing on the

job.  `Husband.' ''  A slow flush crept up the brawny

neck and tinged the bronzed face.  ``That's a good

word,'' said the Harvester, ``and it must mean a wonderful

thing----to some men.  `Who bides his time.'  Well,

I'm `biding,' and if my time ever comes to be my Dream

Girl's husband, I'll wager all I'm worth on one thing.  I'll

study the job from every point of the compass, and

I'll see what showing I can make on being the kind

of a husband that a woman clings to and loves at

eighty.''



Taking a deep breath the Harvester lifted the letter,

and laying one hand on Belshazzar's head, he proceeded

----``I might as well admit in the beginning that I cried

most of the way here.  Some of it was because I was

nervous and dreaded the people I would meet, and more

on account of what I felt toward them, but most of it

was because I did not want to leave you.  I have been

spoiled dreadfully!  You have taught me so to depend

on you----and for once I feel that I really can claim

to have been an apt pupil----that it was like having

the heart torn out of me to come.  I want you to know

this, because it will teach you that I have a little bit

of appreciation of how good you are to me, and to all the

world as well.  I am glad that I almost cried myself

sick over leaving you.  I wish now I just had stood up

in the car, and roared like a burned baby.



``But all the tears I shed in fear of grandfather and

grandmother were wasted.  They are a couple of dear

old people, and it would have been a crime to allow

them to suffer more than they must of necessity.  It all

seems so different when they talk; and when I see the

home, luxuries, and friends my mother had, it appears

utterly incomprehensible that she dared leave them

for a stranger.  Probably the reason she did was

because she was grandfather's daughter.  He is gentle

and tender some of the time, but when anything irritates

him, and something does every few minutes, he breaks

loose, and such another explosion you never heard. 

It does not mean a thing, and it seems to lower his

tension enough to keep him from bursting with palpitation

of the heart or something, but it is a strain for

others.  At first it frightened me dreadfully.  Grandmother

is so tiny and frail, so white in her big bed, and

when he is the very worst, and she only smiles at him,

why I know he does not mean it at all.  But, David,

I hope you never will get an idea that this would be

a pleasant way for you to act, because it would not,

and I never would have the courage to offer you the

love I have come to find if you slammed a cane and

yelled, `demnation,' at me.  Grandmother says she

does not mind at all, but I wonder if she did not acquire

the habit of lying in bed because it is easier to endure in

a prostrate position.



``The house is so big I get lost, and I do not know yet

which are servants and which friends; and there is a

steady stream of seamstresses and milliners making things

for me.  Grandmother and father both think I will be

quite passable in appearance when I am what they call

`modishly dressed.'  I think grandmother will forget

herself some day and leave her bed before she knows

it, in her eagerness to see how something appears.  I

could not begin to tell you about all the lovely things to

wear, for every occasion under the sun, and they say

these are only temporary, until some can be made

especially for me.



``They divide the time in sections, and there is an hour

to drive, I am to have a horse and ride later, and a time

to shop, so long to visit grandmother, and set hours to

sleep, dress, to be fitted, taken to see things, music lessons,

and a dancing teacher.  I think a longer day will have

to be provided.



``I do not care anything about dancing.  I know

what would make me dance nicely enough for anything,

but I am going to try the music, and see if I can learn

just a few little songs and some old melodies for evening,

when the work is done, the fire burns low, and you

are resting on the rug.  There is enough room for a

piano between your door and the south wall and that

corner seems vacant anyway.  You would like it, David,

I know, if I could play and sing just enough to put you

to sleep nicely.  It is in the back of my head that I will

try to do every single thing, just as they want me to,

and that will make them happy, but never forget that

the instant I feel in my soul that your kiss is right on

my lips, I am coming to you by lightning express; and I

told them so the first thing, and that I only came because

you made me.



``They did not raise an objection, but I am not so dull

that I cannot see they are trying to bind me to them from

the very first with chains too strong to break.  We had

just one little clash.  Grandfather was mightily pleased

over what you told Mr. Kennedy about my never having

been your wife, and that I was really free.  There

seems to be a man, the son of his partner, whom grandfather

dearly loves, and he wants me to be friends with

his friend.  One can see at once what he is planning,

because he said he was going to introduce me as Miss

Jameson.  I told him that would be creating a false

impression, because I was a married woman; but he only laughed

at me and went straight to doing it.



``Of course, I know why, but he is so terribly set I

cannot stop him, so I shall have to tell people myself

that I am a staid, old married lady.  After all, I suppose

I might as well let him go, if it pleases him.  I shall

know how to protect myself and any one else, from any

mistakes concerning me; and in my heart I know what

I know, and what I cannot make you believe, but I

will some day.



``I suspect you're harvesting the ginseng now.  The

roar and rush of the city seem strange, as if I never had

heard it before, and I feel so crowded.  I scarcely can

sleep at night for the clamour of the cars, cabs, and

throbbing life.  Grandfather will not hear a word,

and he just sputters and says `demnation' when I try to

tell him about you; but grandmother will listen, and I

talk to her of you and Medicine Woods by the hour. 

She says she thinks you must be a wonderfully nice person. 

I haven't dared tell her yet the thing that will win

her.  She is so little and frail, and she has heart trouble

so badly; but some day I shall tell her all about Chicago

that I can, and then of Uncle Henry, and then about you

and the oak, and that will make her love you as I do. 

There are so many things to do; they have sent for me

three times.  I shall tell them they must put you on the

schedule, and give me so much time to write or I will

upset the whole programme.



``I think you will like to know that Mr. Kennedy told

grandfather all you said to him about my illness, for

almost as soon as I came he brought a very wonderful

man to my room, and he asked many questions and

I told him all about it, and what I had been doing.  He

made out a list of things to eat and exercises.  I am

being taken care of just as you did, so I will go on growing

well and strong.  The trouble is they are too good to

me.  I would just love to shuffle my feet in dead leaves,

and lie on the grass this morning.  I never got my swim

in the lake.  I will have to save that until next summer. 

He also told grandfather what you said about Uncle 

Henry, and I think he was pleased that you tried to

find him as soon as you knew.  He let me see the letter

Uncle Henry wrote, and it was a vile thing----just

such as he would write.  It asked how much he would be

willing to pay for information concerning his heir.  I told

grandfather all about it, and I saw the answer he wrote. 

I told him some things to say, and one of them was that

the honesty of a man without a price prevented the necessity

of anything being paid to find me.  The other was

that you located my people yourself, and at once sent me

to them against my wishes.  I was determined he should

know that.  So Uncle Henry missed his revenge on you. 

He evidently thought he not only would hurt you by

breaking up your home and separating us, but also he

would get a reward for his work.  He wrote some untrue

things about you, and I wish he hadn't, for grandfather

can think of enough himself.  But I will soon

change that.  Please, please take good care of all my

things, my flowers and vines, and most of all tell

Belshazzar to protect you with his life.  And you be very

good to my dear, dear lover.  I will write again soon,

Ruth.''



When the Harvester had studied the letter until he

could repeat it backward, he went to the cabin and answered

it.  Then he sent subscriptions for two of Philadelphia's

big dailies, and harvested ginseng from dawn

until black darkness.  Never was such a crop grown in

America.  The beds had been made in the original home

of the plant, so that it throve under perfectly natural

conditions in the forest, but here and there branches had

been thinned above, and nature helped by science below. 

This resulted in thick, pulpy roots of astonishing size

and weight.  As the Harvester lifted them he bent the

tops and buried part of the seed for another crop.  For

weeks he worked over the bed.  Then the last load went

down the hill to the dry-house and the helpers were paid. 

Next the fall work was finished.  Fuel and food were

stored for winter, while the cold crept from the lake,

swept down the hill and surrounded the cabin.



The Harvester finished long days in the dry-house and

store-room, and after supper he sat by the fire reading

over the Girl's letters, carving on her candlesticks, or

in the work room, bending above the boards he was

shaving and polishing for a gift he had planned for her

Christmas.  The Careys had him in their home for

Thanksgiving.  He told them all about sending the Girl

away himself, read them some of her letters, and they

talked with perfect confidence of how soon she would

come home.  The Harvester tried to think confidently,

but as the days went by the letters became fewer, always

with the excuse that there was no time to write, but

with loving assurance that she was thinking of him and

would do better soon.



However they came often enough that he had something

new to tell his friends so that they did not suspect

that waiting was a trial to him.  A few days after Thanksgiving

the gift that he had planned was finished.  It was

a big, burl-maple box, designed after the hope chests

that he saw advertised in magazines.  The wood was

rare, cut in heavy slabs, polished inside and out, dove-

tailed corners with ornate brass bindings, hinges and lock,

and hand-carved feet.  On the inside of the lid cut on a

brass plate was the inscription, ``Ruth Langston, Christmas

of Nineteen Hundred and Ten.  David.''



Then he began packing the chest.  He put in the

finished candlesticks and a box of candleberry dips he

had made of delightfully spiced wax, coloured pale

green.  He ordered the doll weeks before from the largest

store in Onabasha, and the dealer brought on several

that he might make a selection.  He chose a large baby

doll almost life size, and sent it to the dress-making

department to be completely and exquisitely clothed.  Long

before the day he was picking kernels to glaze from nuts,

drying corn to pop, and planning candies to be made of

maple sugar.  When he figured it was time to start the,

box, he worked carefully, filling spaces with chestnut

and hazel burs, and finishing the tops of boxes with

gaudy red and yellow leaves he had kept in their original

brightness by packing them in sand.  He put in scarlet

berries of mountain ash and long twining sprays of yellow

and red bitter-sweet berries, for her room.  Then he carefully

covered the chest with cloth, packed it in an outside

box, and sent it to the Girl by express.  As he came

from the train shed, where he had helped with loading,

he met Henry Jameson.  Instantly the long arm of the

Harvester shot out, and in a grip that could not be

broken he caught the man by the back of the neck and

proceeded to dangle him.  As he did so he roared with

laughter.



``Dear Uncle Henry!'' he cried.  ``How did you feel

when you got your letter from Philadelphia?  Wasn't it a

crime that an honest man, which same refers to me, beat

you?  Didn't you gnash your teeth when you learned

that instead of separating me from my wife I had found

her people and sent her to them myself?  Didn't it rend

your soul to miss your little revenge and fail to get

the good, fat reward you confidently expected?  Ho! 

Ho!  Thus are lofty souls downcast.  I pity you, Henry

Jameson, but not so much that I won't break your

back if you meddle in my affairs again, and I am taking

this opportunity to tell you so.  Here you go out of my

life, for if you appear in it once more I will finish you like

a copperhead.  Understand?''



With a last shake the Harvester dropped him, and went

into the express office, where several men had watched

the proceedings.



``Been dipping in your affairs, has he?'' asked the

expressman.



``Trying it,'' laughed the Harvester.



``Well he is just moving to Idaho, and you probably

won't be bothered with him any more.''



``Good news!'' said the Harvester.  He felt much

relieved as he went back to Betsy and drove to Medicine

Woods.



The Careys had invited him, but he chose to spend

Christmas alone.  He had finished breakfast when the

telephone bell rang, and the expressman told him there

was a package for him from Philadelphia.  The Harvester

mounted Betsy and rode to the city at once. 

The package was so very small he slipped it into his

pocket, and went to the doctor's to say Merry Christmas! 

To Mrs. Carey he gave a pretty lavender silk

dress, and to the doctor a new watch chain.  Then

he went to the hospital, where he left with Molly a set

of china dishes from the Girl, and a fur-lined great coat,

his gift to Doctor Harmon.  He rode home and stabled

Betsy, giving her an extra quart of oats, and going into

the house he sat by the kitchen fire and opened the

package.



In a nest of cotton lay a tissue-wrapped velvet box, and

inside that, in a leather pocket case, an ivory miniature of

the Girl by an artist who knew how to reproduce life.  It

was an exquisite picture, and a face of wonderful beauty. 

He looked at it for a long time, and then called Belshazzar

and carried it out to show Ajax.  Then he put it

into his breast pocket squarely over his heart, but he

wore the case shiny the first day taking it out.  Before

noon he went to the mail box and found a long letter from

the Girl, full of life, health, happiness, and with steady

assurances of love for him, but there was no mention made

of coming home.



She seemed engrossed in the music lessons, riding,

dancing, pretty clothing, splendid balls, receptions, and

parties of all kinds.  The Harvester answered it with

his heart full of love for her, and then waited.  It was

a long week before the reply came, and then it was short

on account of so many things that must be done, but she

insisted that she was well, happy, and having a fine time. 

After that the letters became less frequent and shorter. 

At times there would be stretches of almost two weeks

with not a line, and then only short notes to explain that

she was too busy to write.



Through the dreary, cold days of January and

February the Harvester invented work in the store-room, in

the workshop, at the candlesticks, sat long over great

books, and spent hours in the little laboratory preparing

and compounding drugs.  In the evenings he carved and

read.  First of all he scanned the society columns of

the papers he was taking, and almost every day he found

the name of Miss Ruth Jameson, often a paragraph describing

her dress and her beauty of face and charm of

manner; and constantly the name of Mr. Herbert Kennedy

appeared as her escort.  At first the Harvester

ignored this, and said to himself that he was glad she could

have enjoyable times and congenial friends, and he was. 

But as the letters became fewer, paper paragraphs more

frequent, and approaching spring worked its old insanity

in the blood, gradually an ache crept into his heart again,

and there were days when he could not work it out.



Every letter she wrote he answered just as warmly as he

felt that he dared, but when they were so long coming

and his heart was overflowing, he picked up a pen one

night and wrote what he felt.  He told her all about the

ice-bound lake, the lonely crows in the big woods, the

sap suckers' cry, and the gay cardinals' whistle.  He told

her about the cocoons dangling on bushes or rocking on

twigs that he was cutting for her.  He warned her that

spring was coming, and soon she would begin to miss

wonders for her pencil.  Then he told her about the

silent cabin, the empty rooms, and a lonely man.  He

begged her not to forget the kiss she had gone to find

for him.  He poured out his heart unrestrainedly, and

then folded the letter, sealed and addressed it to her, in

care of the fire fairies, and pitched it into the ashes of

the living-room fire place.  But expression made him

feel better.



There was another longer wait for the next letter, but

he had written her so many in the meantime that a

little heap of them had accumulated as he passed through

the living-room on his way to bed.  He had supposed she

would be gone until after Christmas when she left, but

he never had thought of harvesting sassafras and opening

the sugar camp alone.  In those days his face appeared

weary, and white hairs came again on his temples.  Carey

met him on the street and told him that he was going

to the National Convention of Surgeons at New York

in March, and wanted him to go along and present his

new medicine for consideration.



``All right,'' said the Harvester instantly, ``I will

go.''



He went and interviewed Mrs. Carey, and then visited

the doctor's tailor, and a shoe store, and bought everything

required to put him in condition for travelling in

good style, and for the banquet he would be asked to

attend.  Then he got Mrs. Carey to coach him on spoons

and forks, and declared he was ready.  When the doctor

saw that the Harvester really would go, he sat down and

wrote the president of the association, telling him in

brief outline of Medicine Woods and the man who had

achieved a wonderful work there, and of the compounding

of the new remedy.



As he expected, return mail brought an invitation for

the Harvester to address the association and describe his

work and methods and present his medicine.  The

doctor went out in the car over sloppy roads with that

letter, and located the Harvester in the sugar camp. 

He explained the situation and to his surprise found his

man intensely interested.  He asked many questions

as to the length of time, and amount of detail required

in a proper paper, and the doctor told him.



``But if you want to make a clean sweep, David,'' he

said, ``write your paper simply, and practise until it

comes easy before you speak.''



That night the Harvester left work long enough to

get a notebook, and by the light of the camp fire, and in

company with the owls and coons, he wrote his outline. 

One division described his geographical location, another

traced his ancestry and education in wood lore.  One

was a tribute to the mother who moulded his character

and ground into him stability for his work.  The remainder

described his methods in growing drugs, drying

and packing them, and the end was a presentation for

their examination of the remedy that had given life

where a great surgeon had conceded death.  Then he

began amplification.



When the sugar making was over the Harvester

commenced his regular spring work, but his mind was so

busy over his paper that he did not have much time to

realize just how badly his heart was beginning to ache. 

Neither did he consign so many letters to the fire fairies,

for now he was writing of the best way to dry hydrastis

and preserve ginseng seed.  The day before time to start

he drove to Onabasha to try on his clothing and have Mrs.

Carey see if he had been right in his selections.



While he was gone, Granny Moreland, wearing a clean

calico dress and carrying a juicy apple pie, came to the

stretch of flooded marsh land, and finding the path under

water, followed the road and crossing a field reached

the levee and came to the bridge of Singing Water where

it entered the lake.  She rested a few minutes there,

and then went to the cabin shining between bare branches. 

She opened the front door, entered, and stood staring

around her.



``Why things is all tore up here,'' she said.  ``Now

ain't that sensible of David to put everything away and

save it nice and careful until his woman gets back.  Seems

as if she's good and plenty long coming; seems as if her

folks needs her mighty bad, or she's having a better time

than the boy is or something.''



She set the pie on the table, went through the cabin

and up the hill a little distance, calling the Harvester. 

When she passed the barn she missed Betsy and the

wagon, and then she knew he was in town.  She returned

to the living-room and sat looking at the pie as she

rested.



``I'd best put you on the kitchen table,'' she mused. 

``Likely he will see you there first and eat you while you

are fresh.  I'd hate mortal bad for him to overlook you,

and let you get stale, after all the care I've took with

your crust, and all the sugar, cinnamon, and butter that's

under your lid.  You're a mighty nice pie, and you ort

to be et hot.  Now why under the sun is all them clean

letters pitched in the fireplace?''



Granny knelt and selecting one, she blew off the ashes,

wiped it with her apron and read:  ``To Ruth, in care of

the fire fairies.''



``What the Sam Hill is the idiot writin' his woman like

that for?'' cried Granny, bristling instantly.  ``And

why is he puttin' pages and pages of good reading like

this must have in it in care of the fire fairies?  Too

much alone, I guess!  He's going wrong in his head. 

Nobody at themselves would do sech a fool trick as this. 

I believe I had better do something.  Of course I had! 

These is writ to Ruth; she ort to have them.  Wish't

I knowed how she gets her mail, I'd send her some. 

Mebby three!  I'd send a fat and a lean, and a middlin'

so's that she'd have a sample of all the kinds they is. 

It's no way to write letters and pitch them in the ashes. 

It means the poor boy is honin' to say things he dassent

and so he's writin' them out and never sendin' them

at all.  What's the little huzzy gone so long for,

anyway?  I'll fix her!''



Granny selected three letters, blew away the ashes,

and tucked the envelopes inside her dress.



``If I only knowed how to get at her,'' she muttered. 

She stared at the pie.  ``I guess you got to go back,''

she said, ``and be et by me.  Like as not I'll stall myself,

for I got one a-ready.  But if David has got these fool

things counted and misses any, and then finds that pie

here, he'll s'picion me.  Yes, I got to take you back, and

hurry my stumps at that.''



Granny arose with the pie, cast a lingering and

covetous glance at the fireplace, stooped and took another

letter, and then started down the drive.  Just as she

reached the bridge she looked ahead and saw the Harvester

coming up the levee.  Instantly she shot the pie

over the railing and with a groan watched it strike the

water and disappear.



``Lord of love!'' she gasped, sinking to the seat, ``that

was one of grandmother's willer plates that I promised

Ruth.  'Tain't likely I'll ever see hide ner hair of it again. 

But they wa'ant no place to put it, and I dassent let

him know I'd been up to the cabin.  Mebby I can fetch

a boy some day and hire him to dive for it.  How

long can a plate be in water and not get spiled anyway? 

Now what'll I do?  My head's all in a whirl!  I'll

bet my bosom is a sticking out with his letters 'til he'll

notice and take them from me.''



She gripped her hands across her chest and sat staring

at the Harvester as he stopped on the bridge, and seeing

her attitude and distressed face, he sprang from the wagon.



``Why Granny, are you sick?'' he cried anxiously.



``Yes!'' gasped Granny Moreland.  ``Yes, David, I

am!  I'm a miserable woman.  I never was in sech a

shape in all my days.''



``Let me help you to the cabin, and I'll see what I

can do for you,'' offered the Harvester.



``No.  This is jest out of your reach,'' said the old

lady.  ``I want----I want to see Doctor Carey bad.''



``Are you strong enough to ride in or shall I bring him?''



``I can go!  I can go as well as not, David, if you'll

take me.''



``Let me run Betsy to the barn and get the Girl's

phaeton.  The wagon is too rough for you.  Are the

pains in your chest dreadful?''



``I don't know how to describe them,'' said Granny

with perfect truth.



The Harvester leaped into the wagon and caught up

the lines.  As he disappeared around the curve of the

driveway Granny snatched the letters from her dress

front and thrust them deep into one of her stockings.



``Now, drat you!'' she cried.  ``Stick out all you please. 

Nobody will see you there.''



In a few minutes the Harvester helped her into the

carriage and drove rapidly toward the city.



``You needn't strain your critter,'' said Granny.  ``It's

not so bad as that, David.''



``Is your chest any better?''



``A sight better,'' said Granny.  ``Shakin' up a little

'pears to do me good.''



``You never should have tried to walk.  Suppose I

hadn't been here.  And you came the long way, too! 

I'll have a telephone run to your house so you can call

me after this.''



Granny sat very straight suddenly.



``My! wouldn't that get away with some of my foxy

neighbours,'' she said.  ``Me to have a 'phone like they

do, an' be conversin' at all hours of the day with my

son's folks and everybody.  I'd be tickled to pieces,

David.''



``Then I'll never dare do it,'' said the Harvester,

``because I can't keep house without you.''



``Where's your own woman?'' promptly inquired

Granny.



``She can't leave her people.  Her grandmother is

sick.''



``Grandmother your foot!'' cried the old woman. 

``I've been hearing that song and dance from the neighbours,

but you got to fool younger people than me on

it, David.  When did any grandmother ever part a

pair of youngsters jest married, for months at a clip? 

I'd like to cast my eyes on that grandmother.  She's

a new breed!  I was as good a mother as 'twas in my skin

to be, and I'd like to see a child of mine do it for me; and

as for my grandchildren, it hustles some of them to

re-cog-nize me passing on the big road, 'specially if

it's Peter's girl with a town beau.''



The Harvester laughed.  The old lady leaned toward

him with a mist in her eyes and a quaver in her voice,

and asked softly, ``Got ary friend that could help you,

David?''



The man looked straight ahead in silence.



``Bamfoozle all the rest of them as much as you please,

lad, but I stand to you in the place of your ma, and so

I ast you plainly----got ary friend that could help?''



``I can think of no way in which any one possibly

could help me, dear,'' said the Harvester gently.  ``It

is a matter I can't explain, but I know of nothing that

any one could do.''



``You mean you're tight-mouthed!  You COULD tell

me just like you would your ma, if she was up and comin';

but you can't quite put me in her place, and spit it out

plain.  Now mebby I can help you!  Is it her fault or

yourn?''



``Mine!  Mine entirely!''



``Hum!  What a fool question!  I might a knowed it! 

I never saw a lovinger, sweeter girl in these parts.  I

jest worship the ground she treads on; and you, lad

you hain't had a heart in your body sence first you saw

her face.  If I had the stren'th, I'd haul you out of this

keeridge and I'd hammer you meller, David Langston. 

What in the name of sense have you gone and done to

the purty, lovin' child?''



The Harvester's face flushed, but a line around his

mouth whitened.



``Loosen up!'' commanded Granny.  ``I got some rights

in this case that mebby you don't remember.  You asked

me to help you get ready for her, and I done what you

wanted.  You invited me to visit her, and I jest loved

her sweet, purty ways.  You wanted me to shet up my

house and come over for weeks to help take keer of her,

and I done it gladly, for her pain and your sufferin' cut

me as if 'twas my livin' flesh and blood; so you can't

shet me out now.  I'm in with you and her to the end. 

What a blame fool thing have you gone and done to drive

away for months a girl that fair worshipped you?''



``That's exactly the trouble, Granny,'' said the

Harvester.  ``She didn't!  She merely respected and was

grateful to me, and she loved me as a friend; but I never

was any nearer her husband than I am yours.''



``I've always knowed they was a screw loose

somewhere,'' commented Granny.  ``And so you've sent

her off to her worldly folks in a big, wicked city to get

weaned away from you complete?''



``I sent her to let her see if absence would teach her

anything.  I had months with her here, and I lay awake

at nights thinking up new plans to win her.  I worked

for her love as I never worked for bread, but I couldn't

make it.  So I let her go to see if separation would teach

her anything.''



``Mercy me!  Why you crazy critter!  The child did

love you!  She loved you 'nough an' plenty!  She loved

you faithful and true!  You was jest the light of her eyes. 

I don't see how a girl could think more of a man.  What

in the name of sense are you expecting months of separation 

to teach her, but to forget you, and mebby turn

her to some one else?''



``I hoped it would teach her what I call love, means,''

explained the Harvester.



``Why you dratted popinjay!  If ever in all my born

days I wanted to take a man and jest lit'rally mop up

the airth with him, it's right here and now.  `Absence

teach her what you call love.'  Idiot!  That's your job!''



``But, Granny, I couldn't!''



``Wouldn't, you mean, no doubt!  I hain't no manner

of a notion in my head but that child, depending on you,

and grateful as she was, and tender and loving, and all

sech as that I hain't a doubt but she come to you

plain and told you she loved you with all her heart. 

What more could you ast?''



``That she understand what love means before I can

accept what she offers.''



``You puddin' head!  You blunderbuss!'' cried Granny. 

``Understand what you mean by love.  If you're going

to bar a woman from being a wife 'til she knows what

you mean by love, you'll stop about nine tenths of the

weddings in the world, and t'other tenth will be women

that no decent-minded man would jine with.''



``Granny, are you sure?''



``Well livin' through it, and up'ard of seventy years

with other women, ort to teach me something.  The

Girl offered you all any man needs to ast or git.  Her

foundations was laid in faith and trust.  Her affections

was caught by every loving, tender, thoughtful thing

you did for her; and everybody knows you did a-plenty,

David.  I never see sech a master hand at courtin' as

you be.  You had her lovin' you all any good woman

knows how to love a man.  All you needed to a-done was

to take her in your arms, and make her your wife, and

she'd 'a' waked up to what you meant by love.''



``But suppose she never awakened?''



``Aw, bosh!  S'pose water won't wet!  S'pose fire

won't burn!  S'pose the sun won't shine!  That's the

law of nature, man!  If you think I hain't got no sense

at all I jest dare you to ask Doctor Carey.  'Twouldn't

take him long to comb the kinks out of you.''



``I don't think you have left any, Granny,'' said the

Harvester.  ``I see what you mean, and in all probability

you are right, but I can't send for the Girl.''



``Name o' goodness why?''



``Because I sent her away against her will, and now she

is remaining so long that there is every probability she

prefers the life she is living and the friends she has made

there, to Medicine Woods and to me.  The only thing

I can do now is to await her decision.''



``Oh, good Lord!'' groaned Granny.  ``You make me

sick enough to kill.  Touch up your nag and hustle me to

Doc.  You can't get me there quick enough to suit me.''



At the hospital she faced Doctor Carey.  ``I think

likely some of my innards has got to be cut out and

mended,'' she said.  ``I'll jest take a few minutes of your

time to examination me, and see what you can do.''



In the private office she held the letters toward the

doctor.  ``They hain't no manner of sickness ailin' me,

Doc.  The boy out there is in deep water, and I knowed

how much you thought of him, and I hoped you'd give

me a lift.  I went over to his place this mornin' to take

him a pie, and I found his settin' room fireplace heapin'

with letters he'd writ to Ruth about things his heart was

jest so bustin' full of it eased him to write them down,

and then he hadn't the horse sense and trust in her

jedgment to send them on to her.  I picked two fats,

a lean, and a middlin' for samples, and I thought I'd

send them some way, and I struck for home with them

an' he ketched me plumb on the bridge.  I had to throw

my pie overboard, willer plate and all, and as God is my

witness, I was so flustered the boy had good reason to

think I was sick a-plenty; and soon as he noticed it,

I thought of you spang off, and I knowed you'd know her

whereabouts, and I made him fetch me to you.  On the

way I jest dragged it from him that he'd sent her away

his fool self, because she didn't sense what he meant by

love, and she wa'ant beholden to him same degree and

manner he was to her.  Great day, Doc!  Did you ever

hear a piece of foolishness to come up with that?  I

told him to ast you!  I told him you'd tell him that no

clean, sweet-minded girl ever had known nor ever would

know what love means to a man 'til he marries her and

teaches her.  Ain't it so, Doc?''



``It certainly is.''



``Then will you grind it into him, clean to the marrer,

and will you send these letters on to Ruthie?''



``Most certainly I will,'' said the doctor emphatically. 

Granny opened the door and walked out



``I'm so relieved, David,'' she said.  ``He thinks they

won't be no manner o' need to knife me.  Likely he can

fix up a few pills and send them out by mail so's that I'll

be as good as new again.  Now we must get right out

of here and not take valuable time.  What do I owe

you, Doc?''



``Not a cent,'' said Doctor Carey.  ``Thank you very

much for coming to me.  You'll soon be all right

again.''



``I was some worried.  Much obliged I am sure.  Come

on!''



``One minute,'' said the doctor.  ``David, I am making

up a list of friends to whom I am going to send

programmes of the medical meeting, and I thought your

wife might like to see you among the speakers, and

your subject.  What is her address?''



A slow red flushed the Harvester's cheeks.  He opened

his lips and hesitated.  At last he said, ``I think perhaps

her people prefer that she receive mail under her

maiden name while with them.  Miss Ruth Jameson, care

of Alexander Herron, 5770 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia,

will reach her.''



The doctor wrote the address, as if it were the most

usual thing in the world, and asked the Harvester if

he was ready to make the trip east.



``I think we had best start to-night,'' he said.  ``We

want a day to grow accustomed to our clothes and new

surroundings before we run up squarely against serious

business.''



``I will be ready,'' promised the Harvester.



He took Granny home, set his house in order, installed

the man he was leaving in charge, touched a match to

the heap in the fireplace, and donning the new travelling

suit, he went to Doctor Carey's.



Mrs. Carey added a few touches, warned him to remember

about the forks and spoons, and not to forget

to shave often, and saw them off.  At the station Carey

said to him, ``You know, David, we can change at Wayne

and go through Buffalo, or we can take the Pittsburg

and go and come through Philadelphia.''



``I am contemplating a trip to Philadelphia,'' said the

Harvester, ``but I believe I will not be ready for, say a

month yet.  I have a theory and it dies hard.  If it

does not work out the coming month, I will go, perhaps,

but not now.  Let us see how many kinds of a fool I

make of myself in New York before I attempt the

Quakers.''



Almost to the city, the doctor smiled at the Harvester.



``David, where did you get your infernal assurance?''

he asked.



``In the woods,'' answered the Harvester placidly. 

``In doing clean work.  With my fingers in the muck,

and life literally teeming and boiling in sound and action,

around, above, and beneath me, a right estimate of my

place and province in life comes naturally in daily

handling stores on which humanity depends, I go even

deeper than you surgeons and physicians.  You are

powerless unless I reinforce your work with drugs on

which you can rely.  I do clean, honest work.  I know

its proper place and value to the world.  That is why I

called what I have to say, `The Man in the Background.' 

There is no reason why I should shiver and shrink at

meeting and explaining my work to my fellows.  Every

man has his vocation, and some of you in the limelight

would cut a sorry figure if the man in the background

should fail you at the critical moment.  Don't worry

about me, Doc.  I am all serene.  You won't find I

possess either nerves or fear.  `Be sure you are right, and

then go ahead,' is my law.''



``Well I'll be confounded!'' said the doctor.



In a large hall, peopled with thousands of medical men,

the name of the Harvester was called the following day

and his subject was announced.  He arose in his place

and began to talk.



``Take the platform,'' came in a roar from a hundred

throats.



The Harvester hesitated.



``You must, David,'' whispered Carey.



The Harvester made his way forward and was guided

through a side door, and a second later calmly walked

down the big stage to the front, and stood at ease looking

over his audience, as if to gauge its size and the pitch

to which he should raise his voice.  His lean frame loomed

every inch of his six feet, his broad shoulders were square,

his clean shaven face alert and afire.  He wore a spring

suit of light gray of good quality and cut, and he was

perfect as to details.



``This scarcely seems compatible with my subject,'' he

remarked casually.  ``I certainly appear very much in

the foreground just at present, but perhaps that is quite

as well.  It may be time that I assert myself.  I doubt if

there is a man among you who has not handled my products

more or less; you may enjoy learning where and how

they are prepared, and understanding the manner in

which my work merges with yours.  I think perhaps

the first thing is to paint you as good a word picture as

I can of my geographical location.''



Then the Harvester named latitude and longitude

and degrees of temperature.  He described the lake,

the marsh, the wooded hill, the swale, and open sunny

fields.  He spoke of water, soil, shade, and geographical

conditions.  ``Here I was born,'' he said, ``on land owned

by my father and grandfather before me, and previous

to them, by the Indians.  My male ancestors, so far as I

can trace them, were men of the woods, hunters, trappers,

herb gatherers.  My mother was from the country, educated

for a teacher.  She had the most inexorable will

power of any woman I ever have known.  From my father

I inherited my love for muck on my boots, resin in my

nostrils, the long trail, the camp fire, forest sounds and

silences in my soul.  From my mother I learned to

read good books, to study subjects that puzzled me,

to tell the truth, to keep my soul and body clean, and

to pursue with courage the thing to which I set my

hand.



``There was not money enough to educate me as she

would; together we learned to find it in the forest.  In

early days we sold ferns and wild flowers to city people,

harvested the sap of the maples in spring, and the nut

crop of the fall.  Later, as we wanted more, we trapped

for skins, and collected herbs for the drug stores.  This

opened to me a field I was peculiarly fitted to enter.  I

knew woodcraft instinctively, I had the location of every

herb, root, bark, and seed that will endure my climate;

I had the determination to stick to my job, the right

books to assist me, and my mother's invincible will

power to uphold me where I wavered.



``As I look into your faces, men, I am struck with the

astounding thought that some woman bore the cold

sweat and pain of labour to give life to each of you. 

I hope few of you prolonged that agony as I did.  It

was in the heart of my mother to make me physically

clean, and to that end she sent me daily into the lake,

so long as it was not ice covered, and put me at exercises

intended to bring full strength to every sinew and

fibre of my body.  It was in her heart to make me morally

clean, so she took me to nature and drilled me in its

forces and its methods of reproducing life according

to the law.  Her work was good to a point that all

men will recognize.  From there on, for a few years,

she held me, not because I was man enough to stand, but

because she was woman enough to support me.  Without 

her no doubt I would have broken the oath I took; with

her I won the victory and reached years of manhood

and self-control as she would have had me.  The struggle

wore her out at half a lifetime, but as a tribute to her

memory I cannot face a body of men having your

opportunities without telling you that what was possible

to her and to me is possible to all mothers and men. 

If she is above and hears me perhaps it will recompense

some of her shortened years if she knows I am pleading

with you, as men having the greatest influence of any

living, to tell and to teach the young that a clean life

is possible to them.  The next time any of you are

called upon to address a body of men tell them to learn

for themselves and to teach their sons, and to hold them

at the critical hour, even by sweat and blood, to a clean

life; for in this way only can feeble-minded homes,

almshouses, and the scarlet woman be abolished.  In this

way only can men arise to full physical and mental force,

and become the fathers of a race to whom the struggle

for clean manhood will not be the battle it is with us.



``By the distorted faces, by the misshapen bodies,

by marks of degeneracy, recognizable to your practised

eyes everywhere on the streets, by the agony of the

mother who bore you, and later wept over you, I conjure

you men to live up to your high and holy privilege, and

tell all men that they can be clean, if they will.  This

in memory of the mother who shortened her days to make

me a moral man.  And if any among you is the craven

to plead immorality as a safeguard to health, I ask,

what about the health of the women you sacrifice to

shield your precious bodies, and I offer my own as the

best possible refutation of that cowardly lie.  I never

have been ill a moment in all my life, and strength never

has failed me for work to which I set my hand.



``The rapidly decreasing supply of drugs and the

adulterated importations early taught me that the

day was coming when it would be an absolute necessity

to raise our home supplies.  So, while yet in my teens,

I began collecting from the fields and woods for miles

around such medicinal stuff as grew in my father's

fields, marsh, and woods, and planting more wherever I

found anything growing naturally in its prime.  I merely

enlarged nature's beds and preserved their natural

condition.  As the plants spread and the harvest increased,

I built a dry-house on scientific principles, a large store-

room, and later a laboratory in which I have been learning

to prepare some of my crude material for the market,

combining ideas of my own in remedies, and at last

producing one your president just has indicated that I come

to submit to you as a final resort in certain conditions.



``My operations now have spread to close six hundred

acres of almost solid medicinal growth, including a

little lake, around the shores of which flourish a quadruple

setting of water-loving herbs.''



Occasionally he shifted his position or easily walked

across the platform and faced his audience from a different

direction.  His voice was strong, deep, and rang clearly

and earnestly.  His audience sat on the front edge of

their chairs, and listened to something new, with mouths

half agape.  A few times Carey turned from the speaker

to face the audience.  He agonized in his heart that it

was a closed session, and that his wife was not there to

hear, and that the Girl was missing it.



By the bent backs and flying fingers of the reporters

at their table in front he could see that to-morrow the

world would read the Harvester's speech; and if it were

true that the little mother had shortened her days to

produce him, she had done earth a service for which many

generations would call her blessed.  For the doctor could

look ahead, and he knew that this man would not escape. 

The call for him and his unimpeachable truth would come

from everywhere, and his utterances would carry as far

as newspapers and magazines were circulated.  The

good he would do would be past estimation.



The Harvester continued.  He was describing the most

delicate and difficult of herbs to secure.  He was telling

how they could be raised, prepared, kept, and compounded. 

He was discussing diseases that did not readily

yield to treatment, pointing out what drugs were

customarily employed and offering, if any of them had such

cases, and would send to him, to forward samples of

unadulterated stuff sufficient for a test comparison with

what they were using.  He was walking serenely and

surely into the heart of every man before him.



Just at the point where it was the psychological time

to close, he stopped and stood a long instant facing them,

and then he asked softly, ``Did any man among you ever

see the woman to whom he had given a strong man's

first passion of love, slowly dying before him?''



One breathless instant he waited and then continued,

``Gentlemen, I recently saw this in my own case.  For

days it was coming, so at night I shut myself in my

laboratory, and from the very essence of the purest of

my self-compounded drugs I distilled a stimulant into

which I put a touch of heart remedy, a brace for weakening

nerves, a vitalization of sluggish blood.  As I worked,

I thought in that thought which embodied the essence

of prayer, and when my day and my hour came, and a

man who has been the president of your honourable

body, and is known to all of you, said it was death, I

took this combination that I now present to you, and

with the help of the Almighty and a woman above the

price of rubies, I kept breath in the girl I love, and to-day

she is at full tide of womanhood.  As a thank offering,

the formula is yours.  Test it as you will.  Use it if you

find it good.  Gentlemen, I thank you!''



Carey sank in his chair and watched the Harvester

cross the stage.  As he disappeared the tumult began,

and it lasted until the president arose and brought him

back to make another bow, and then they rioted until

they wore themselves out.  In an immaculate dress

suit the Harvester sat that night on the right of the gray-

haired president and responded to the toast, ``The

Harvester of the Woods.''  Then the reporters carried

him away to be photographed, and to show him the gay

sights of New York.



In the train the next day, steadily speeding west, he

said to Doctor Carey:  ``I feel as the old woman of Mother

Goose who said, `Lawk-a-mercy on us, can this be really

I?' ''



``You just bet it is!'' cried the doctor.  ``And you

have cut out work for yourself in good shape.''



``What do you mean?''



``I mean that this is a beginning.  You will be called

upon to speak again and again.''



``The point is, do you honestly think I helped any?''



``You did inestimable good.  It only can help men to

hear plain truth that is personal experience.  As for that

dope of yours, it will come closer raising the dead than

anything I ever saw.  Next case I see slipping, after

I've done my best, I'm going to try it out for myself.''



``All right!  'Phone me and I'll bring some fresh and

help you.''



At Buffalo the doctor left the car and bought a paper. 

As he had expected the portrait and speech of the Harvester

were featured.  The reporters had been gracious. 

They had done all that was just to a great event,

and allowed themselves some latitude.  He immediately

mailed the paper to the Girl, and at Cleveland bought

another for himself.  When he showed it to the Harvester,

as he glanced at it he observed, ``Do I appear

like that?''  Then he went on talking with a man he

had met who interested him.

