





The Harvester



by Gene Stratton Porter









              THIS PORTION 

     OF THE LIFE OF A MAN OF TO-DAY

IS OFFERED IN THE HOPE THAT IN CLEANLINESS, 

   POETIC TEMPERMENT, AND MENTAL FORCE, 

          A LIKENESS WILL BE SEEN

                  TO

           HENRY DAVID THOREAU








CHAPTER I



BELSHAZZAR'S DECISION



``Bel, come here!''

The Harvester sat in the hollow worn in the

hewed log stoop by the feet of his father and

mother and his own sturdier tread, and rested his head

against the casing of the cabin door when he gave the

command.  The tip of the dog's nose touched the gravel

between his paws as he crouched flat on earth, with

beautiful eyes steadily watching the master, but he did

not move a muscle.



``Bel, come here!''



Twinkles flashed in the eyes of the man when he

repeated the order, while his voice grew more imperative as

he stretched a lean, wiry hand toward the dog.  The

animal's eyes gleamed and his sensitive nose quivered, yet

he lay quietly.



``Belshazzar, kommen Sie hier!''



The body of the dog arose on straightened legs and his

muzzle dropped in the outstretched palm.  A wind

slightly perfumed with the odour of melting snow and

unsheathing buds swept the lake beside them, and lifted

a waving tangle of light hair on the brow of the man, while

a level ray of the setting sun flashed across the water and

illumined the graven, sensitive face, now alive with keen

interest in the game being played.



``Bel, dost remember the day?'' inquired the Harvester.



The eager attitude and anxious eyes of the dog betrayed

that he did not, but was waiting with every sense alert

for a familiar word that would tell him what was

expected.



``Surely you heard the killdeers crying in the night,''

prompted the man.  ``I called your attention when the

ecstasy of the first bluebird waked the dawn.  All day

you have seen the gold-yellow and blood-red osiers, the

sap-wet maples and spring tracing announcements of her

arrival on the sunny side of the levee.''



The dog found no clew, but he recognized tones he

loved in the suave, easy voice, and his tail beat his sides

in vigorous approval.  The man nodded gravely.



``Ah, so!  Then you realize this day to be the most

important of all the coming year to me; this hour a solemn

one that influences my whole after life.  It is time for

your annual decision on my fate for a twelve-month.

Are you sure you are fully alive to the gravity of the

situation, Bel?''



The dog felt himself safe in answering a rising inflection

ending in his name uttered in that tone, and wagged

eager assent.



``Well then,'' said the man, ``which shall it be?  Do I

leave home for the noise and grime of the city, open an

office and enter the money-making scramble?''



Every word was strange to the dog, almost breathlessly

waiting for a familiar syllable.  The man gazed

steadily into the animal's eyes.  After a long pause he

continued:



``Or do I remain at home to harvest the golden seal,

mullein, and ginseng, not to mention an occasional hour

with the black bass or tramps for partridge and cotton-

tails?''



The dog recognized each word of that.  Before the

voice ceased, his sleek sides were quivering, his nostrils

twitching, his tail lashing, and at the pause he leaped up

and thrust his nose against the face of the man.  The

Harvester leaned back laughing in deep, full-chested

tones; then he patted the dog's head with one hand and

renewed his grip with the other.



``Good old Bel!'' he cried exultantly.  ``Six years you

have decided for me, and right----every time!  We are of

the woods, Bel, born and reared here as our fathers before

us.  What would we of the camp fire, the long trail, the

earthy search, we harvesters of herbs the famous chemists

require, what would we do in a city?  And when the sap

is rising, the bass splashing, and the wild geese honking

in the night!  We never could endure it, Bel.



``When we delivered that hemlock at the hospital

to-day, did you hear that young doctor talking about his

`lid'?  Well up there is ours, old fellow!  Just sky and clouds

overhead for us, forest wind in our faces, wild perfume in

our nostrils, muck on our feet, that's the life for us.  Our

blood was tainted to begin with, and we've lived here so

long it is now a passion in our hearts.  If ever you sentence

us to life in the city, you'll finish both of us, that's

what you'll do!  But you won't, will you?  You realize

what God made us for and what He made for us, don't

you, Bel?''



As he lovingly patted the dog's head the man talked and

the animal trembled with delight.  Then the voice of the

Harvester changed and dropped to tones of gravest

import.



``Now how about that other matter, Bel?  You always

decide that too.  The time has come again.  Steady now! 

This is far more important than the other.  Just to be

wiped out, Bel, pouf!  That isn't anything and it concerns

no one save ourselves.  But to bring misery into

our lives and live with it daily, that would be a

condition to rend the soul.  So careful, Bel!  Cautious

now!''



The voice of the man dropped to a whisper as he asked

the question.



``What about the girl business?''



Trembling with eagerness to do the thing that would

bring more caressing, bewildered by unfamiliar words

and tones, the dog hesitated.



``Do I go on as I have ever since mother left me,

rustling for grub, living in untrammelled freedom?  Do

I go on as before, Bel?''



The Harvester paused and waited the answer, with

anxiety in his eyes as he searched the beast face.  He

had talked to that dog, as most men commune with their

souls, for so long and played the game in such intense

earnest that he felt the results final with him.  The

animal was immovable now, lost again, his anxious eyes

watching the face of the master, his eager ears waiting

for words he recognized.  After a long time the man

continued slowly and hesitantly, as if fearing the outcome. 

He did not realize that there was sufficient anxiety in his

voice to change its tones.



``Or do I go courting this year?  Do I rig up in

uncomfortable store-clothes, and parade before the country and

city girls and try to persuade the one I can get,

probably----not the one I would want----to marry me, and

come here and spoil all our good times?  Do we want

a woman around scolding if we are away from home,

whining because she is lonesome, fretting for luxuries

we cannot afford to give her?  Are you going to let us in

for a scrape like that, Bel?''



The bewildered dog could bear the unusual scene no

longer.  Taking the rising inflection, that sounded more

familiar, for a cue, and his name for a certainty, he

sprang forward, his tail waving as his nose touched the

face of the Harvester.  Then he shot across the driveway

and lay in the spice thicket, half the ribs of one

side aching, as he howled from the lowest depths of

dog misery.



``You ungrateful cur!'' cried the Harvester.  ``What

has come over you?  Six years I have trusted you, and

the answer has been right, every time!  Confound your

picture!  Sentence me to tackle the girl proposition!  I

see myself!  Do you know what it would mean?  For

the first thing you'd be chained, while I pranced over the

country like a half-broken colt, trying to attract some

girl.  I'd have to waste time I need for my work and

spend money that draws good interest while we sleep, to

tempt her with presents.  I'd have to rebuild the cabin

and there's not a chance in ten she would not fret the life

out of me whining to go to the city to live, arrange for her

here the best I could.  Of all the fool, unreliable dogs that

ever trod a man's tracks, you are the limit!  And you

never before failed me!  You blame, degenerate pup,

you!''



The Harvester paused for breath and the dog subsided

to a pitiful whimper.  He was eager to return to the

man who had struck him the first blow his pampered

body ever had received; but he could not understand a

kick and harsh words for him, so he lay quivering with

anxiety and fear.



``You howling, whimpering idiot!'' exclaimed the

Harvester.  ``Choose a day like this to spoil!  Air to

intoxicate a mummy!  Roots swelling!  Buds bursting!  Harvest

close and you'd call me off and put me at work

like that, would you?  If I ever had supposed

lost all your senses, I never would have asked you. 

Six years you have decided my fate, when the first

bluebird came, and you've been true blue every time. 

If I ever trust you again!   But the mischief is done

now.



``Have you forgotten that your name means `to protect?' 

Don't you remember it is because of that, it is

your name?  Protect!  I'd have trusted you with my

life, Bell!  You gave it to me the time you pointed that

rattler within six inches of my fingers in the blood-root

bed.  You saw the falling limb in time to warn me.  You

always know where the quicksands lie.  But you are

protecting me now, like sin, ain't you?  Bring a girl

here to spoil both our lives!  Not if I know myself! 

Protect!''



The man arose and going inside the cabin closed the

door.  After that the dog lay in abject misery so deep

that two big tears squeezed from his eyes and rolled down

his face.  To be shut out was worse than the blow.  He

did not take the trouble to arise from the wet leaves

covering the cold earth, but closing his eyes went to sleep.



The man leaned against the door and ran his fingers

through his hair as he anathematized the dog.  Slowly his

eyes travelled around the room.  He saw his tumbled bed

by the open window facing the lake, the small table with

his writing material, the crude rack on the wall loaded

with medical works, botanies, drug encyclopaedias, the

books of the few authors who interested him, and the bare,

muck-tracked floor.  He went to the kitchen, where he

built a fire in the cook stove, and to the smoke-house, from

which he returned with a slice of ham and some eggs.  He

set some potatoes boiling and took bread, butter and milk

from the pantry.  Then he laid a small note-book on the

table before him and studied the transactions of the

day.



10 lbs.  wild cherry bark      6 cents       $ .60

5   ``   wahoo root bark      25 ``           1.25

20  ``   witch hazel bark      5 ``           1.00

5   ``   blue flag root       12 ``            .60

10  ``   snake root           18 ``           1.80

10  ``   blood root           12 ``           1.20

15  ``   hoarhound            10 ``           1.50

                                             -----

                                             $7.95





``Not so bad,'' he muttered, bending over the figures. 

``I wonder if any of my neighbours who harvest the

fields average as well at this season.  I'll wager they don't. 

That's pretty fair!  Some days I don't make it, and then

when a consignment of seeds go or ginseng is wanted the

cash comes in right properly.  I could waste half of it on

a girl and yet save money.  But where is the woman who

would be content with half?  She'd want all and fret

because there wasn't more.  Blame that dog!''



He put the book in his pocket, prepared and ate his

supper, heaped a plate generously, placed it on the floor

beneath the table, and set away the food that remained.



``Not that you deserve it,'' he said to space.  ``You get

this in honour of your distinguished name and the faithfulness

with which you formerly have lived up to its import. 

If you hadn't been a dog with more sense than some

men, I wouldn't take your going back on me now so

hard.  One would think an animal of your intelligence

might realize that you would get as much of a dose as I. 

Would she permit you to eat from a plate on the kitchen

floor?  Not on your life, Belshazzar!  Frozen scraps

around the door for you!  Would she allow you to sleep

across the foot of the bed?  Ho, ho, ho!  Would she have

you tracking on her floor?  It would be the barn, and

growling you didn't do at that.  If I'd serve you right, I'd

give you a dose and allow you to see how you like it.  But

it's cutting off my nose to spite my face, as the old adage

goes, for whatever she did to a dog, she'd probably do

worse to a man.  I think not!''



He entered the front room and stood before a long shelf

on which were arranged an array of partially completed

candlesticks carved from wood.  There were black and

white walnut, red, white, and golden oak, cherry and

curly maple, all in original designs.  Some of them were

oddities, others were failures, but most of them were

unusually successful.  He selected one of black walnut,

carved until the outline of his pattern was barely

distinguishable.  He was imitating the trunk of a tree with

the bark on, the spreading, fern-covered roots widening

for the base, from which a vine sprang.  Near the top was

the crude outline of a big night moth climbing toward

the light.  He stood turning this stick with loving hands

and holding it from him for inspection.



``I am going to master you!'' he exulted.  ``Your

lines are right.  The design balances and it's graceful.  If

I have any trouble it will be with the moth, and I think

I can manage.  I've got to decide whether to use cecropia

or polyphemus before long.  Really, on a walnut, and in

the woods, it should be a luna, according to the eternal

fitness of things----but I'm afraid of the trailers.  They

turn over and half curl and I believe I had better not

tackle them for a start.  I'll use the easiest to begin on,

and if I succeed I'll duplicate the pattern and try a luna

then.  The beauties!''



The Harvester selected a knife from the box and began

carving the stick slowly and carefully.  His brain was

busy, for presently he glanced at the floor.



``She'd object to that!'' he said emphatically.  ``A

man could no more sit and work where he pleased than

he could fly.  At least I know mother never would have

it, and she was no nagger, either.  What a mother she

was!  If one only could stop the lonely feeling that will

creep in, and the aching hunger born with the body, for

a mate; if a fellow only could stop it with a woman like

mother!  How she revelled in sunshine and beauty! 

How she loved earth and air!  How she went straight to

the marrow of the finest line in the best book I could

bring from the library!  How clean and true she was and

how unyielding!  I can hear her now, holding me with

her last breath to my promise.  If I could marry a girl

like mother----great Caesar!  You'd see me buying an

automobile to make the run to the county clerk.  Wouldn't

that be great!  Think of coming in from a long, difficult

day, to find a hot supper, and a girl such as she must have

been, waiting for me!  Bel, if I thought there was a woman

similar to her in all the world, and I had even the ghost of

a chance to win her, I'd call you in and forgive you.  But

I know the girls of to-day.  I pass them on the roads, on

the streets, see them in the cafe's, stores, and at the library. 

Why even the nurses at the hospital, for all the gravity

of their positions, are a giggling, silly lot; and they never

know that the only time they look and act presentably to

me is when they stop their chatter, put on their uniforms,

and go to work.  Some of them are pretty, then. 

There's a little blue-eyed one, but all she needs is feathers

to make her a `ha! ha! bird.'  Drat that dog!''



The Harvester took the candlestick and the box of

knives, opened the door, and returned to the stoop.  Belshazzar

arose, pleading in his eyes, and cautiously advanced

a few steps.  The man bent over his work and

paid not the slightest heed, so the discouraged dog sank to

earth and fixedly watched the unresponsive master.  The

carving of the candlestick went on steadily.  Occasionally

the Harvester lifted his head and repeatedly sucked his

lungs full of air.  Sometimes for an instant he scanned

the surface of the lake for signs of breaking fish or splash

of migrant water bird.  Again his gaze wandered up the

steep hill, crowned with giant trees, whose swelling buds

he could see and smell.  Straight before him lay a low

marsh, through which the little creek that gurgled and

tumbled down hill curved, crossed the drive some distance

below, and entered the lake of Lost Loons.



While the trees were bare, and when the air was clear as

now, he could see the spires of Onabasha, five miles away,

intervening cultivated fields, stretches of wood, the long

black line of the railway, and the swampy bottom lands

gradually rising to the culmination of the tree-crowned

summit above him.  His cocks were crowing warlike

challenges to rivals on neighbouring farms.  His hens

were carolling their spring egg-song.  In the barn yard

ganders were screaming stridently.  Over the lake and the

cabin, with clapping snowy wings, his white doves circled

in a last joy-flight before seeking their cotes in the

stable loft.  As the light grew fainter, the Harvester

worked slower.  Often he leaned against the casing, and

closed his eyes to rest them.  Sometimes he whistled

snatches of old songs to which his mother had cradled

him, and again bits of opera and popular music he had

heard on the streets of Onabasha.  As he worked, the

sun went down and a half moon appeared above the wood

across the lake.  Once it seemed as if it were a silver bowl

set on the branch of a giant oak; higher, it rested a tilted

crescent on the rim of a cloud.



The dog waited until he could endure it no longer, and

straightening from his crouching position, he took a few

velvet steps forward, making faint, whining sounds in his

throat.  When the man neither turned his head nor gave

him a glance, Belshazzar sank to earth again, satisfied

for the moment with being a little closer.  Across Loon

Lake came the wavering voice of a night love song. 

The Harvester remembered that as a boy he had shrunk

from those notes until his mother explained that they

were made by a little brown owl asking for a mate to

come and live in his hollow tree.  Now he rather liked

the sound.  It was eloquent of earnest pleading.  With

the lonely bird on one side, and the reproachful dog eyes

on the other, the man grinned rather foolishly.



Between two fires, he thought.  If that dog ever

catches my eye he will come tearing as a cyclone, and I

would not kick him again for a hundred dollars.  First

time I ever struck him, and didn't intend to then.  So

blame mad and disappointed my foot just shot out before

I knew it.  There he lies half dead to make up, but I'm

blest if I forgive him in a hurry.  And there is that

insane little owl screeching for a mate.  If I'd start out

making sounds like that, all the girls would line up and

compete for possession of my happy home.



The Harvester laughed and at the sound Belshazzar

took courage and advanced five steps before he sank belly

to earth again.  The owl continued its song.  The Harvester

imitated the cry and at once it responded.  He

called again and leaned back waiting.  The notes came

closer.  The Harvester cried once more and peered across

the lake, watching for the shadow of silent wings.  The

moon was high above the trees now, the knife dropped in

the box, the long fingers closed around the stick, the head

rested against the casing, and the man intoned the cry

with all his skill, and then watched and waited.  He had

been straining his eyes over the carving until they were

tired, and when he watched for the bird the moonlight

tried them; for it touched the lightly rippling waves of

the lake in a line of yellow light that stretched straight

across the water from the opposite bank, directly to the

gravel bed below, where lay the bathing pool.  It made

a path of gold that wavered and shimmered as the water

moved gently, but it appeared sufficiently material to

resemble a bridge spanning the lake.



``Seems as if I could walk it,'' muttered the Harvester.



The owl cried again and the man intently watched the

opposite bank.  He could not see the bird, but in the

deep wood where he thought it might be he began to

discern a misty, moving shimmer of white.  Marvelling,

he watched closer.  So slowly he could not detect motion

it advanced, rising in height and taking shape.



``Do I end this day by seeing a ghost?'' he queried.



He gazed intently and saw that a white figure really

moved in the woods of the opposite bank.



``Must be some boys playing fool pranks!'' exclaimed

the Harvester.



He watched fixedly with interested face, and then

amazement wiped out all other expression and he sat

motionless, breathless, looking, intently looking.  For

the white object came straight toward the water and at

the very edge unhesitatingly stepped upon the bridge of

gold and lightly, easily advanced in his direction.  The man

waited.  On came the figure and as it drew closer he could

see that it was a very tall, extremely slender woman,

wrapped in soft robes of white.  She stepped along

the slender line of the gold bridge with grace unequalled.



From the water arose a shining mist, and behind the

advancing figure a wall of light outlined and rimmed her

in a setting of gold.  As she neared the shore the 

Harvester's blood began to race in his veins and his lips parted

in wonder.  First she was like a slender birch trunk, then

she resembled a wild lily, and soon she was close enough

to prove that she was young and very lovely.  Heavy

braids of dark hair rested on her head as a coronet.  Her

forehead was low and white.  Her eyes were wide-open

wells of darkness, her rounded cheeks faintly pink, and

her red lips smiling invitation.  Her throat was long,

very white, and the hands that caught up the fleecy robe

around her were rose-coloured and slender.  In a panic

the Harvester saw that the trailing robe swept the undulant

gold water, but was not wet; the feet that alternately

showed as she advanced were not purple with cold, but

warm with a pink glow.



She was coming straight toward him, wonderful,

alluring, lovely beyond any woman the Harvester ever

had seen.  Straightway the fountains of twenty-six years'

repression overflowed in the breast of the man and all

his being ran toward her in a wave of desire.  On she

came, and now her tender feet were on the white gravel. 

When he could see clearly she was even more beautiful

than she had appeared at a distance.  He opened his lips,

but no sound came.  He struggled to rise, but his legs

would not bear his weight.  Helpless, he sank against

the casing.  The girl walked to his feet, bent, placed a

hand on each of his shoulders, and smiled into his eyes. 

He could scent the flower-like odour of her body and

wrapping, even her hair.  He struggled frantically to

speak to her as she leaned closer, yet closer, and softly

but firmly laid lips of pulsing sweetness on his in a

deliberate kiss.



The Harvester was on his feet now.  Belshazzar shrank

into the shadows.



``Come back!'' cried the man.  ``Come back!  For

the love of mercy, where are you?''



He ran stumblingly toward the lake.  The bridge of

gold was there, the little owl cried lonesomely; and did

he see or did he only dream he saw a mist of white vanishing

in the opposite wood?



His breath came between dry lips, and he circled the

cabin searching eagerly, but he could find nothing, hear

nothing, save the dog at his heels.  He hurried to the

stoop and stood gazing at the molten path of moonlight. 

One minute he was half frozen, the next a rosy glow

enfolded him.  Slowly he lifted a hand and touched his

lips.  Then he raised his eyes from the water and swept

the sky in a penetrant gaze.



``My gracious Heavenly Father,'' said the Harvester

reverently.  ``Would it be like that?''


