





CHAPTER XV



THE HARVESTER INTERPRETS LIFE



They went through the rooms together, and

the Girl suggested the furnishings she thought

necessary, while the Harvester wrote the list.  The

following morning he was eager to have her company,

but she was very tired and begged to be allowed to

wait in the swing, so again he drove away and left her

with Belshazzar on guard.  When he had gone, she went

through the cabin arranging the furniture the best she

could, then dressed and went to the swinging couch.  It

was so wide and heavy a light wind rocked it gently,

and from it she faced the fern and lily carpeted hillside,

the majesty of big trees of a thousand years, and heard

the music of Singing Water as it sparkled diamond-like

where the sun rays struck its flow.  Across the drive and

down the valley to the brilliant bit of marsh it hurried

on its way to Loon Lake.



There were squirrels barking and racing in the big trees

and over the ground.  They crossed the sodded space

of lawn and came to the top step for nuts, eating them

from cunning paws.  They were living life according

to the laws of their nature.  She knew that their sharp,

startling bark was not to frighten her, but to warn straying

intruders of other species of their kindred from a nest,

because the Harvester had told her so.  He had said

their racing here and there in wild scramble was a game

of tag and she found it most interesting to observe.



Birds of brilliant colour flashed everywhere, singing

in wild joy, and tilted on the rising hedge before her,

hunting berries and seeds.  Their bubbling, spontaneous

song was an instinctive outpouring of their joy over

mating time, nests, young, much food, and running water. 

Their social, inquiring, short cry was to locate a mate,

and call her to good feeding.  The sharp wild scream of a

note was when a hawk passed over, a weasel lurked in

the thicket, or a black snake sunned on the bushes.  She

remembered these things, and lay listening intently,

trying to interpret every sound as the Harvester did.



Birds of wide wing hung as if nailed to the sky, or

wheeled and sailed in grandeur.  They were searching

the landscape below to locate a hare or snake in the waving

grass or carrion in the fields.  The wonderful exhibitions

of wing power were their expression of exultation

in life, just as the song sparrow threatened to rupture

his throat as he swung on the hedge, and the red bird

somewhere in the thicket whistled so forcefully it sounded

as if the notes might hurt him.



On the lake bass splashed in a game with each other. 

Grebes chattered, because they were very social.  Ducks

dived and gobbled for roots and worms of the lake shore,

and congratulated each other when they were lucky.



Killdeer cried for slaughter, in plaintive tones, as their

white breasts gleamed silver-like across the sky.  They

insisted on the death of their ancient enemies, because

the deer had trampled nests around the shore, roiled the

water, spoiled the food hunting, and had been wholly

unmindful of the laws of feathered folk from the beginning.



Behind the barn imperial cocks crowed challenges

of defiance to each other and all the world, because

they once had worn royal turbans on their heads, and

ruled the forests, even the elephants and lions.  Happy

hens cackled when they deposited an egg, and wandered

through their park singing the spring egg song

unceasingly.



Upon the barn Ajax spread and exulted in glittering

plumage, and screamed viciously.  He was sending a

wireless plea to the forests of Ceylon for a gray mate to

come and share the ridge pole with him, and help him

wage red war on the sickening love making of the white

doves he hated.



Everything was beautiful, some of it was amusing,

all instructive, and intensely interesting.  The Girl

wanted to know about the brown, yellow, and black

butterflies sailing from flower to flower.  She watched

big black and gold bees come from the forest for pollen

and listened to their monotonous bumbling.  Her first

humming bird poised in air, and sipped nectar before

her astonished eyes.  It was marvellous, but more

wonderful to the Girl than anything she saw or heard was

the fact that because of the Harvester's teachings she

now could trace through all of it the ordained processes

of the evolution of life.  Everything was right in its way,

all necessary to human welfare, and so there was nothing

to fear, but marvels to learn and pictures to appreciate. 

She would have taken Belshazzar and gone out, but

the Harvester had exacted a promise that she would not. 

The fact was, he could see that she was coming gradually

to a sane and natural view of life and living things, and

he did not want some sound or creature to frighten her,

and spoil what he had accomplished.  So she swayed

in the swing and watched, and tried to interpret sights

and sounds as he did.



Before an hour she realized that she was coming

speedily into sympathy with the wild life around her; for,

instead of shivering and shrinking at unaccustomed

sounds, she was listening especially for them, and trying

to arrive at a sane version.  Instead of the senseless

roar of commerce, manufacture, and life of a city,

she was beginning to appreciate sounds that varied and

carried the Song of Life in unceasing measure and

absorbing meaning, while she was more than thankful

for the fresh, pure air, and the blessed, God-given light. 

It seemed to the Girl that there was enough sunshine at

Medicine Woods to furnish rays of gold for the whole

world.



``Bel,'' she said to the dog standing beside her, ``it's a

shame to separate you from the Medicine Man and pen

you here with me.  It's a wonder you don't bite off my

head and run away to find him.  He's gone to bring more

things to make life beautiful.  I wanted to go with him,

but oh Bel, there's something dreadfully wrong with

me.  I was afraid I'd fall on the streets and frighten and

shame him.  I'm so weak, I scarcely can walk straight

across one of these big, cool rooms that he has built for

me.  He can make everything beautiful, Bel, a home,

rooms, clothing, grounds, and life----above everything

else he can make life beautiful.  He's so splendid and

wonderful, with his wide understanding and sane

interpretation and God-like sympathy and patience.  Why

Belshazzar, he can do the greatest thing in all the world! 

He can make you forget that the grave annihilates your

dear ones by hideous processes, and set you to thinking

instead that they come back to you in whispering leaves

and flower perfumes.  If I didn't owe him so much that

I ought to pay, if this wasn't so alluringly beautiful, I'd

like to go to the oak and lie beside those dear women

resting there, and give my tired body to furnish sap for

strength and leaves for music.  He can take its bitterest

sting----from death, Bel----and that's the most

wonderful thing----in life, Bel----''



Her voice became silent, her eyes closed; the dog

stretched himself beside her on guard, and it was so the

Harvester found them when he drove home from the

city.  He heaped his load in the dining-room, stabled

Betsy, carried the things he had brought where he thought

they belonged, and prepared food.  When she awakened

she came to him.



``How is it going, Girl?'' asked the Harvester.



``I can't tell you how lovely it has been!''



``Do you really mean that your heart is warming a

little to things here?''



``Indeed I do!  I can't tell you what a morning I've had. 

There have been such myriad things to see and hear.  Oh,

Harvester, can you ever teach me what all of it means?''



``I can right now,'' said the Harvester promptly. 

``It means two things, so simple any little child can

understand----the love of God and the evolution of life. 

I am not precisely clear as to what I mean when I say

God.  I don't know whether it is spirit, matter, or force;

it is that big thing that brings forth worlds, establishes

their orbits, and gives us heat, light, food, and water.  To

me, that is God and His love.  Just that we are given

birth, sheltered, provisioned, and endowed for our work. 

Evolution is the natural consequence of this.  It is the

plan steadily unfolding.  If I were you, I wouldn't

bother my head over these questions, they never have

been scientifically explained to the beginning; I doubt if

they ever will be, because they start with the origin of

matter and that is too far beyond man for him to

penetrate.  Just enjoy to the depths of your soul----that's

worship.  Be thankful for everything----that's praising

God as the birds praise him.  And `do unto others'

that's all there is of love and religion combined in

one fell swoop.''



``You should go before the world and tell every one

that!''



``No! It isn't my vocation,'' said the Harvester.

``My work is to provide pain-killer.  I don't believe,

Ruth, that there is any one on the footstool who is doing

a better job along that line.  I am boastfully proud of

it----just of sending in the packages that kill fever,

refresh poor blood, and strengthen weak hearts;

unadulterated, honest weight, fresh, and scrupulously clean. 

My neighbours have a different name for it; I call it a

man's work.''



``Every one who understands must,'' said the Girl. 

``I wish I could help at that.  I feel as if it would do

more to wipe out the pain I've suffered and seen her

endure than anything else.  Man, when I grow strong

enough I want to help you.  I believe that I am going

to love it here.''



``Don't ever suppress your feelings, Ruth!'' hastily

cried the Harvester.  ``It will be very bad for you.  You

will become wrought up, and `het up,' as Granny Moreland

says, and it will make you very ill.  When we drive

the fever from your blood, the ache from your bones, the

poison of wrong conditions from your soul, and good,

healthy, red corpuscles begin pumping through your

little heart like a windmill, you can stake your life you're

going to love it here.  And the location and work are

not all you're going to care for either, honey.  Now

just wait!  That was not `nominated in the bond.'  I'm

allowed to talk.  I never agreed not to SAY things.  What

I promised was not to DO them.  So as I said, honey,

sit at this table, and eat the food I've cooked; and by

that time the furniture van will be here, and the men will

unload, and you shall reign on a throne and tell me where

and how.''



``Oh if I were only stronger, David!''



``You are!'' said the Harvester.  ``You are much

better than you were yesterday.  You can talk, and that's

all that's necessary.  The rooms are ready for furniture. 

The men will carry it where you want it.  A decorator

is coming to hang the curtains.  By night we will be

settled; you can lie in the swing while I read to you a

story so wonderful that the wildest fairy tale you ever

heard never touched it.''



``What will it be, David?''



``Eat all the red raspberries and cream, bread and

butter, and drink all the milk you can.  There's blood,

beefsteak, and bones in it.  As I was saying, you have

come here a stranger to a strange land.  The first thing

is for you to understand and love the woods.  Before

you can do that you should master the history of one

tree; just the same as you must learn to know and love

me before your childlike trust in all mankind returns

again.  Understand?  Well, the fates knew you were on

the way, coming trembling down the brink, Ruth, so

they put it into the heart of a great man to write largely

of a wonderful tree, especially for your benefit.  After

it had fallen he took it apart, split it in sections, and year

by year spread out history for all the world to read.  It

made a classic story filled with unsurpassed wonders. 

It was a pine of a thousand years, close the age of our

mother tree, Ruth, and when we have learned from Enos

Mills how to wrest secrets from the hearts of centuries,

we will climb the hill and measure our oak, and then I

will estimate, and you will write, and we will make a

record for our tree.''



``Oh, I'd like that!''



``So would I,'' said the Harvester.  ``And a million

other things I can think of that we can learn together. 

It won't require long for me to teach you all I know, and

by that time your hand will be clasped in mine, and

our `hearts will beat as one,' and you will give me a kiss

every night and morning, and a few during the day for

interest, and we will go on in life together and learn songs,

miracles, and wonders until the old oak calls us.  Then

we will ascend the hill gladly and lie down and offer

up our bodies, and our children will lay flowers over our

hearts, and gather the herbs and paint the pictures?  Amen. 

I hear a van on the bridge.  Just you go to your room

and lie down until I get things unloaded and where they

belong.  Then you and the decorator can make us home-

like, and to-morrow we will begin to live.  Won't that

be great, Ruth?''



``With you, yes, I think it will.''



``That will do for this time,'' said the Harvester, as

he opened the door to her room.  ``Lie and rest until

I say ready.''



As he went to meet the men, she could hear him singing

lustily, ``Praise God from whom all blessings flow.''



``What a child he is!'' she said.  ``And what a man!''



For an hour heavy feet sounded through the cabin 

carrying furniture to different rooms.  Then with a floor

brush in one hand, and a polishing cloth in the other,

the Harvester tapped at her door and helped the Girl

upstairs.  He had divided the space into three large, square

sleeping chambers.  In each he had set up a white iron

bed, a dressing table, and wash stand, and placed two

straight-backed and one rocking chair, all white.  The

walls were tinted lightly with green added to the plaster. 

There was a mattress and a stack of bedding on each bed,

and a large rug and several small ones on the floors.  He

led her to the rocking chair in the middle room, where

she could see through the open doors of the other two.



``Now,'' said the Harvester, ``I didn't know whether

the room with two windows toward the lake and one on

the marsh, or two facing the woods and one front, was

the guest chamber.  It seemed about an even throw

whether a visitor would prefer woods or water, so I made

them both guest chambers, and got things alike for them. 

Now if we are entertaining two, one can't feel more highly

honoured than the other.  Was that a scheme?''



``Fine!'' said the Girl.  ``I don't see how it could be

surpassed.''



`` `Be sure you are right, then go ahead,' '' quoted the

Harvester.  ``Now I'll make the beds and Mr. Rogers

can hang the curtains.  Is white correct for sleeping

rooms?  Won't that wash best and always be fresh?''



``It will,'' said the Girl.  ``White wash curtains are

much the nicest.''



``Make them short Mr. Rogers; keep them off the

floor,'' advised the Harvester.  ``And simple----don't

arrange any thing elaborate that will tire a woman to

keep in order.  Whack them off the right length and pin

them to the poles.''



``How about that, Mrs. Langston?'' asked the decorator.



``I am quite sure that is the very best thing to do,''

said the Girl; and the curtains were hung while the mattress

was placed.



``Now about this?'' inquired the Harvester.  ``Do I

put on sheets and fix these beds ready to use?''



``I would not,'' said the Girl.  ``I would spread the

pad and the counterpane and lay the sheets and pillows

in the closet until they are wanted.  They can be sunned

and the bed made delightfully fresh.''



``Of course,'' said the Harvester.



When he had finished, he spread a cover on the dressing

table and laid out white toilet articles and grouped a

white wash set with green decorations on the stand. 

Then he brushed the floor, spread a big green rug in the

middle and small ones before the bed, stand, and table,

and coming out closed the door.



``Guest chamber with lake view is now ready for

company,'' announced the Harvester.  ``Repeat the

operation on the woods room, finished also.  Why do

some people make work of things and string them out

eternally and fuss so much?  Isn't this simple and easy,

Ruth?''



``Yes, if you can afford it,'' said the Girl.



``Forbear!'' cried the Harvester.  ``We have the goods,

the dealer has my check.  Excuse me ten minutes, until

I furnish another room.''



The laughing Girl could catch glimpses of him busy

over beds and dresser, floor and rugs; then he came where

she sat.



``Woods guest chamber ready,'' he said.  ``Now we

come to the interior apartment, that from its view might

be called the marsh room.  Aside from being two windows

short, it is exactly similar to the others.  It occurred

to me that, in order to make up for the loss of those

windows, and also because I may be compelled to ask

some obliging woman to occupy it in case your health

is precarious at any time, and in view of the further fact

that if any such woman could be found, and would kindly

and willingly care for us, my gratitude would be

inexpressible; on account of all these things, I got a shade

the BEST furnishings for this room.''



The Girl stared at him with blank face.



``You see,'' said the Harvester, ``this is a question of

ethics.  Now what is a guest?  A thing of a day!  A

person who disturbs your routine and interferes with

important concerns.  Why should any one be grateful

for company?  Why should time and money be lavished

on visitors?  They come.  You overwork yourself. 

They go.  You are glad of it.  You return the visit,

because it's the only way to have back at them; but why

pamper them unnecessarily?  Now a good housekeeper,

that means more than words can express.  Comfort, 

kindness, sanitary living, care in illness!  Here's to the

prospective housekeeper of Medicine Woods!  Rogers,

hang those ruffled embroidered curtains.  Observe that

whereas mere guest beds are plain white, this has a

touch of brass.  Where guest rugs are floor coverings,

this is a work of art.  Where guest brushes are celluloid,

these are enamelled, and the dresser cover is hand

embroidered.  Let me also call your attention to the chairs

touched with gold, cushioned for ease, and a decorated

pitcher and bowl.  Watch the bounce of these springs

and the thickness of this mattress and pad, and notice

that where guests, however welcome, get a down

cover of sateen, the lady of the house has silkaline. 

Won't she prepare us a breakfast after a night in this

room?''



``David, are you in earnest?'' gasped the Girl.



``Don't these things prove it?'' asked the Harvester. 

``No woman can enter my home, when my necessities

are so great I have to hire her to come, and take the

WORST in the house.  After my wife, she gets the best,

every time.  Whenever I need help, the woman who will

come and serve me is what I'd call the real guest of the

house.  Friend?  Where are your friends when trouble

comes?  It always brings a crowd on account of the

excitement, and there is noise and racing; but if your soul

is saved alive, it is by a steady, trained hand you pay to

help you.  Friends come and go, but a good housekeeper

remains and is a business proposition--one that

if conducted rightly for both parties and on a strictly

common-sense basis, gives you living comfort.  Now that

we have disposed of the guests that go and the one that

remains, we will proceed downward and arrange for

ourselves.''



``David, did you ever know any one who treated a

housekeeper as you say you would?''



``No.  And I never knew any one who raised medicinal

stuff for a living, but I'm making a gilt-edged success of

it, and I would of a housekeeper, too.''



``It doesn't seem----''



``That's the bedrock of all the trouble on the earth,''

interrupted the Harvester.  ``We are a nation and a

part of a world that spends our time on `seeming.'  Our

whole outer crust is `seeming.'  When we get beneath

the surface and strike the BEING, then we live as we are

privileged by the Almighty.  I don't think I give

a tinker how anything SEEMS.  What concerns me is

how it IS.  It doesn't `seem' possible to you to hire a

woman to come into your home and take charge of its

cleanliness and the food you eat--the very foundation

of life--and treat her as an honoured guest,

and give her the best comfort you have to offer.  The

cold room, the old covers, the bare floor, and the cast

off furniture are for her.  No wonder, as a rule, she

gives what she gets.  She dignifies her labour in the

same ratio that you do.  Wait until we need a housekeeper,

and then gaze with awe on the one I will raise

to your hand.''



``I wonder----''



``Don't!  It's wearing!  Come tell me how to make our

living-room less bare than it appears at present.''



They went downstairs together, followed by the

decorator, and began work on the room.  The Girl

was placed on a couch and made comfortable and then

the Harvester looked around.



``That bundle there, Rogers, is the curtains we bought

for this room.  If you and my wife think they are not

right, we will not hang them.''



The decorator opened the package and took out

curtains of tan-coloured goods with a border of blue and

brown.



``Those are not expensive,'' said the Harvester, ``but

to me a window appears bare with only a shade, so I

thought we'd try these, and when they become soiled

we'll burn them and buy some fresh ones.''



``Good idea!'' laughed the Girl.  ``As a house

decorator you surpass yourself as a Medicine Man.''



``Fix these as you did those upstairs,'' ordered the

Harvester.  ``We don't want any fol-de-rols.  Put the

bottom even with the sill and shear them off at the top.''



``No, I am going to arrange these,'' said the decorator,

``you go on with your part.''



``All right!'' agreed the Harvester.  ``First, I'll lay

the big rug.''



He cleared the floor, spread a large rug with a rich

brown centre and a wide blue border.  Smaller ones of

similar design and colour were placed before each of the

doors leading from the room.



``Now for the hearth,'' said the Harvester, ``I got this

tan goat skin.  Doesn't that look fairly well?''



It certainly did; and the Girl and the decorator

hastened to say so.  The Harvester replaced the table and

chairs, and then sat on the couch at the Girl's feet.



``I call this almost finished,'' he remarked.  ``All we

need now is a bouquet and something on the walls, and

that is serious business.  What goes on them usually

remains for a long time, and so it should be selected with

care.  Ruth, have you a picture of your mother?''



``None since she was my mother.  I have some lovely

girl photographs.''



``Good!'' cried the Harvester.  ``Exactly the thing! 

I have a picture of my mother when she was a pretty

girl.  We will select the best of yours and have them

enlarged in those beautiful brown prints they make in

these days, and we'll frame one for each side of the

mantel.  After that you can decorate the other walls

as you see things you want.  Fifteen minutes gone; we

are ready to take up the line of march to the dining-room. 

Oh I forgot my pillows!  Here are a half dozen tan,

brown, and blue for this room.  Ruth, you arrange

them.''



The Girl heaped four on the couch, stood one beside

the hearth, and laid another in a big chair.



``Now I don't know what you will think of this,''

said the Harvester.  ``I found it in a magazine at the

library.  I copied this whole room.  The plan was to

have the floor, furniture, and casings of golden oak and

the walls pale green.  Then it said get yellow curtains

bordered with green and a green rug with yellow figures,

so I got them.  I had green leather cushions made for

the window seats, and these pillows go on them.  Hang

the saffron curtains, Rogers, and we will finish in good

shape for dinner by six.  By the way, Ruth, when will

you select your dishes?  It will take a big set to fill

all these shelves and you shall have exactly what you

want.''



``I can use those you have very well.''



``Oh no you can't!'' cried the Harvester.  ``I may live

and work in the woods, but I am not so benighted that

I don't own and read the best books and magazines, and

subscribe for a few papers.  I patronize the library and

see what is in the stores.  My money will buy just as

much as any man's, if I do wear khaki trousers.  Kindly

notice the word.  Save in deference to your ladyship I

probably would have said pants.  You see how ELITE

I can be if I try.  And it not only extends to my wardrobe,

to a `yaller' and green dining-room, but it takes in

the `chany' as well.  I have looked up that, too.  You

want china, cut glass, silver cutlery, and linen.  Ye! 

Ye!  You needn't think I don't know anything but how

to dig in the dirt.  I have been studying this especially,

and I know exactly what to get.''



``Come here,'' said the Girl, making a place for him

beside her.  ``Now let me tell you what I think.  We

are going to live in the woods, and our home is a log

cabin----''



``With acetylene lights, a furnace, baths, and hot and

cold water----'' interpolated the Harvester.



The Girl and the decorator laughed.



``Anyway,'' said she, ``if you are going to let me have

what I would like, I'd prefer a set of tulip yellow dishes

with the Dutch little figures on them.  I don't know

what they cost, but certainly they are not so expensive

as cut glass and china.''



``Is that earnest or is it because you think I am

spending too much money?''



``It is what I want.  Everything else is different; why

should we have dishes like city folk?  I'd dearly love

to have the Dutch ones, and a white cloth with a yellow

border, glass where it is necessary, and silver knives,

forks, and spoons.''



``That would be great, all right!'' endorsed the decorator. 

``And you have got a priceless old lustre tea set

there, and your willow ware is as fine as I ever saw.  If

I were you, I wouldn't buy a dish with what you have,

except the yellow set.''



``Great day!'' ejaculated the Harvester.  ``Will you

tell me why my great grandmother's old pink and green

teapot is priceless?''



The Girl explained pink lustre.  ``That set in the

shop I knew in Chicago would sell for from three to five

hundred dollars.  Truly it would!  I've seen one little

pink and green pitcher like yours bring nine dollars there. 

And you've not only got the full tea set, but water and

dip pitchers, two bowls, and two bread plates.  They

are priceless, because the secret of making them is lost;

they take on beauty with age, and they were your great-

grandmother's.''



The Harvester reached over and energetically shook

hands.



``Ruth, I'm so glad you've got them!'' he bubbled. 

``Now elucidate on my willow ware.  What is it?  Where

is it?  Why have I willow ware and am not informed. 

Who is responsible for this?  Did my ancestors buy

better than they knew, or worse?  Is willow ware a

crime for which I must hide my head, or is it further

riches thrust upon me?  I thought I had investigated

the subject of proper dishes quite thoroughly; but I am

very certain I saw no mention of lustre or willow.  I

thought, in my ignorance, that lustre was a dress, and

willow a tree.  Have I been deceived?  Why is a blue

plate or pitcher willow ware?''



``Bring that platter from the mantel,'' ordered the

Girl, ``and I will show you.''



The Harvester obeyed and followed the finger that

traced the design.



``That's a healthy willow tree!'' he commented.  ``If

Loon Lake couldn't go ahead of that it should be drained. 

And will you please tell me why this precious platter

from which I have eaten much stewed chicken, fried

ham, and in youthful days sopped the gravy----will

you tell me why this relic of my ancestors is called a

willow plate, when there are a majority of orange trees

so extremely fruitful they have neglected to grow a leaf? 

Why is it not an orange plate?  Look at that boat! 

And in plain sight of it, two pagodas, a summer house,

a water-sweep, and a pair of corpulent swallows; you

would have me believe that a couple are eloping in broad

daylight.''



``Perhaps it's night!  And those birds are doves.''



``Never!'' cried the Harvester.  ``There is a total

absence of shadows.  There is no moon.  Each orange

tree is conveniently split in halves, so you can see to

count the fruit accurately; the birds are in flight.  Only

a swallow or a stork can fly in decorations, either by day

or by night.  And for any sake look at that elopment! 

He goes ahead carrying a cane, she comes behind lugging

the baggage, another man with a cane brings up the

rear.  They are not running away.  They have been

married ten years at least.  In a proper elopement, they

forget there are such things as jewels and they always

carry each other.  I've often looked up the statistics

and it's the only authorized version.  As I regard this

treasure, I grow faint when I remember with what

unnecessary force my father bore down when he carved

the ham.  I'll bet a cooky he split those orange trees. 

Now me----I'll never dare touch knife to it again.  I'll

always carve the meat on the broiler, and gently lift it

to this platter with a fork.  Or am I not to be allowed

to dine from my ancestral treasure again?''



``Not in a green and yellow room,'' laughed the Girl. 

``I'll tell you what I think.  If I had a tea table to match

the living-room furniture, and it sat beside the hearth,

and on it a chafing dish to cook in, and the willow ware

to eat from, we could have little tea parties in there,

when we aren't very hungry or to treat a visitor.  It

would help make that room `homey,' and it's wonderful

how they harmonize with the other things.''



``How much willow ware have I got to `bestow' on

you?'' inquired the Harvester.  ``Suppose you show me

all of it.  A guilty feeling arises in my breast, and I fear

me I have committed high crimes!''



``Oh Man!  You didn't break or lose any of those

dishes, did you?''



``Show me!'' insisted the Harvester.



The Girl arose and going to the cupboard he had

designed for her china she opened it, and set before him

a teapot, cream pitcher, two plates, a bowl, a pitcher,

the meat platter, and a sugar bowl.  ``If there were all

of the cups, saucers, and plates, I know where they would

bring five hundred dollars,'' she said.



``Ruth, are you getting even with me for poking fun

at them, or are you in earnest?'' asked the Harvester.



``I mean every word of it.''



``You really want a small, black walnut table made

especially for those old dishes?''



``Not if you are too busy.  I could use it with beautiful

effect and much pleasure, and I can't tell you how proud

I'd be of them.''



The Harvester's face flushed.  ``Excuse me,'' he said

rising.  ``I have now finished furnishing a house; I will

go and take a peep at the engine.''  He went into the

kitchen and hearing the rattle of dishes the Girl followed. 

She stepped in just in time to see him hastily slide something

into his pocket.  He picked up a half dozen old

white plates and saucers and several cups and started

toward the evaporator.  He heard her coming.



``Look here, honey,'' he said turning, ``you don't want

to see the dry-house just now.  I have terrific heat to

do some rapid work.  I won't be gone but a few minutes. 

You better boss the decorator.



``I'm afraid that wasn't very diplomatic,'' he muttered. 

``It savoured a little of being sent back.  But if what

she says is right, and she should know if they handle

such stuff at that art store, she will feel considerably

better not to see this.''



He set his load at the door, drew an old blue saucer

from his pocket and made a careful examination.  He

pulled some leaves from a bush and pushed a greasy

cloth out of the saucer, wiped it the best he could, and

held it to light.



``That is a crime!'' he commented.  ``Saucer from your

maternal ancestors' tea set used for a grease dish.  I am

afraid I'd better sink it in the lake.  She'd feel worse

to see it than never to know.  Wish I could clean off

the grease!  I could do better if it was hot.  I can set it

on the engine.''



The Harvester placed the saucer on the engine, entered

the dry-house, and closed the door.  In the stifling air

he began pouring seed from beautiful, big willow plates

to the old white ones.



``About the time I have ruined you,'' he said to a white

plate, ``some one will pop up and discover that the art

of making you is lost and you are priceless, and I'll have

been guilty of another blunder.  Now there are the

dishes mother got with baking powder.  She thought

they were grand.  I know plenty well she prized them

more than these blue ones or she wouldn't have saved

them and used these for every day.  There they set,

all so carefully taken care of, and the Girl doesn't even

look at them.  Thank Heaven, there are the four remaining

plates all right, anyway!  Now I've got seed in some

of the saucers; one is there; where on earth is the last one? 

And where, oh unkind fates! are the cups?''



He found more saucers and set them with the plates. 

As he passed the engine he noticed the saucer on it was

bubbling grease, literally exuding it from the particles

of clay.



``Hooray!'' cried the Harvester.  He took it up, but

it was so hot he dropped it.  With a deft sweep he caught

it in air, and shoved it on a tray.  Then he danced and

blew on his burned hand.  Snatching out his handkerchief

he rubbed off all the grease, and imagined the saucer

was brighter.



``If `a little is good, more is better,' '' quoted the

Harvester.



Wadding the handkerchief he returned the saucer to

the engine.  Then he slipped out, dripping perspiration,

glanced toward the cabin, and ran into the work room. 

The first object he saw was a willow cup half full of red

paint, stuck and dried as if to remain forever.  He took

his knife and tried to whittle it off, but noticing that he

was scratching the cup he filled it with turpentine, set

it under a work bench, turned a tin pan over it, and

covered it with shavings.  A few steps farther brought one

in sight, filled with carpet tacks.  He searched everywhere,

but could find no more, so he went to the laboratory. 

Beside his wash bowl at the door stood the last

willow saucer.  He had used it for years as a soap dish. 

He scraped the contents on the bench and filled the dish

with water.  Four cups held medicinal seeds and were in

good condition.  He lacked one, although he could not

remember of ever having broken it.  Gathering his

collection, he returned to the dry-house to see how the

saucer was coming on.  Again it was bubbling, and he

polished off the grease and set back the dish.  It certainly

was growing better.  He carried his treasures into the

work room, and went to the barn to feed.  As he was

leaving the stable he uttered a joyous exclamation and

snatched from a window sill a willow cup, gummed and

smeared with harness oil.



``The full set, by hokey!'' marvelled the Harvester. 

``Say, Betsy, the only name for this is luck!  Now if

I only can clean them, I'll be ready to make her tea table,

whatever that is.  My I hope she will stay away until

I get these in better shape!''



He filled the last cup with turpentine, set it with the

other under the work bench, stacked the remaining pieces,

polished the saucer he was baking, and went to bring a

dish pan and towel.  He drew some water from the pipes

of the evaporator, put in the soap, and carried it to the

work room.  There he carefully washed and wiped all

the pieces, save two cups and one saucer.  He did not

know how long it would require to bake the grease from

that, but he was sure it was improving.  He thought he

could clean the paint cup, but he imagined the harness

oil one would require baking also.



As he stood busily working over the dishes, with light

step the Girl came to the door.  She took one long look

and understood.  She turned and swiftly went back to

the cabin, but her shoulders were shaking.  Presently

the Harvester came in and explained that after finishing

in the dry-house he had gone to do the feeding.  Then he

suggested that before it grew dark they should go through

the rooms and see how they appeared, and gather the

flowers the Girl wanted.  So together they decided everything

was clean, comfortable, and harmonized.



Then they went to the hillside sloping to the lake.  For

the dining-room, the Girl wanted yellow water lilies, so

the Harvester brought his old boat and gathered enough

to fill the green bowl.  For the living-room, she used wild

ragged robins in the blue bowl, and on one end of the

mantel set a pitcher of saffron and on the other arrowhead

lilies.  For her room, she selected big, blushy

mallows that grew all along Singing Water and around

the lake.



``Isn't that slightly peculiar?'' questioned the Harvester.



``Take a peep,'' said the Girl, opening her door.



She had spread the pink coverlet on her couch, and

when she set the big pink bowl filled with mallows on the

table the effect was exquisite.



``I think perhaps that's a little Frenchy,'' she said,

``and you may have to be educated to it; but salmon

pink and buttercup yellow are colours I love in combination.''



She closed the door and went to find something to

eat, and then to the swing, where she liked to rest, look,

and listen.  The Harvester suggested reading to her, but

she shook her head.



``Wait until winter,'' she said, ``when the days are

longer and cold, and the snow buries everything, and

then read.  Now tell me about my hedge and the things

you have planted in it.''



The Harvester went out and collected a bunch of twigs. 

He handed her a big, evenly proportioned leaf of ovate

shape, and explained:  ``This is burning bush, so called

because it has pink berries that hang from long, graceful

stems all winter, and when fully open they expose a

flame-red seed pod.  It was for this colour on gray and

white days that I planted it.  In the woods I grow it in

thickets.  The root bark brings twenty cents a pound,

at the very least.  It is good fever medicine.''



``Is it poison?''



``No.  I didn't set anything acutely poisonous in

your hedge.  I wanted it to be a mass of bloom you were

free to cut for the cabin all spring, an attraction to birds

in summer, and bright with colour in winter.  To draw

the feathered tribe, I planted alder, wild cherry, and

grape-vines.  This is cherry.  The bark is almost as

beautiful as birch.  I raise it for tonics and the birds

love the cherries.  This fern-like leaf is from mountain

ash, and when it attains a few years' growth it will flame

with colour all winter in big clusters of scarlet berries. 

That I grow in the woods is a picture in snow time, and

the bark is one of my standard articles.''



The Girl raised on her elbow and looked at the hedge.



``I see it,'' she said.  ``The berries are green now.  I

suppose they change colour as they ripen.''



``Yes,'' said the Harvester.  ``And you must not

confuse them with sumac.  The leaves are somewhat similar,

but the heads differ in colour and shape.  The sumac and

buckeye you must not touch, until we learn what they

will do to you.  To some they are slightly poisonous, to

others not.  I couldn't help putting in a few buckeyes

on account of the big buds in early spring.  You will

like the colour if you are fond of pink and yellow in

combination, and the red-brown nuts in grayish-yellow,

prickly hulls, and the leaf clusters are beautiful, but you

must use care.  I put in witch hazel for variety, and I

like its appearance; it's mighty good medicine, too; so

is spice brush, and it has leaves that colour brightly, and

red berries.  These selections were all made for a purpose. 

Now here is wafer ash; it is for music as well as medicine. 

I have invoked all good fairies to come and dwell in this

hedge, and so I had to provide an orchestra for their

dances.  This tree grows a hundred tiny castanets in a

bunch, and when they ripen and become dry the wind

shakes fine music from them.  Yes, they are medicine;

that is, the bark of the roots is.  Almost without

exception everything here has medicinal properties.  The

tulip poplar will bear you the loveliest flowers of all,

and its root bark, taken in winter, makes a good fever

remedy.''



``How would it do to eat some of the leaves and see

if they wouldn't take the feverishness from me?''



``It wouldn't do at all,'' said the Harvester.  ``We

are well enough fixed to allow Doc to come now, and he

is the one to allay the fever.''



``Oh no!'' she cried.  ``No!  I don't want to see a

doctor.  I will be all right very soon.  You said I was

better.''



``You are,'' said the Harvester.  ``Much better!  We

will have you strong and well soon.  You should have

come in time for a dose of sassafras.  Your hedge is

filled with that, because of its peculiar leaves and odour. 

I put in dogwood for the white display around the little

green bloom, lots of alder for bloom and berries, haws

for blossoms and fruit for the squirrels, wild crab apples

for the exquisite bloom and perfume, button bush for the

buttons, a few pokeberry plants for the colour, and I

tried some mallows, but I doubt if it's wet enough for

them.  I set pecks of vine roots, that are coming nicely,

and ferns along the front edge.  Give it two years and

that hedge will make a picture that will do your eyes

good.''



``Can you think of anything at all you forgot?''



``Yes indeed!'' said the Harvester.  ``The woods are

full of trees I have not used; some because I overlooked

them, some I didn't want.  A hedge like this, in

perfection, is the work of years.  Some species must be cut

back, some encouraged, but soon it will be lovely, and

its colour and fruit attract every bird of the heavens

and butterflies and insects of all varieties.  I set several

common cherry trees for the robins and some blackberry

and raspberry vines for the orioles.  The bloom is pretty

and the birds you'll have will be a treat to see and hear,

if we keep away cats, don't fire guns, scatter food, and

move quietly among them.  With our water attractions

added, there is nothing impossible in the way of making

friends with feathered folk.''



``There is one thing I don't understand,'' said the Girl. 

``You wouldn't risk breaking the wing of a moth by keeping

it when you wanted a drawing very much; you don't

seem to kill birds and animals that other people do.  You

almost worship a tree; now how can you take a knife

and peel the bark to sell or dig up beautiful bushes by

the root.''



``Perhaps I've talked too much about the woods,''

said the Harvester gently.  ``I've longed inexpressibly

for sympathetic company here, because I feel rooted for

life, so I am more than anxious that you should care for

it.  I may have made you feel that my greatest interest

is in the woods, and that I am not consistent when I

call on my trees and plants to yield of their store for my

purposes.  Above everything else, the human proposition

comes first, Ruth.  I do love my trees, bushes,

and flowers, because they keep me at the fountain of life,

and teach me lessons no book ever hints at; but above

everything come my fellow men.  All I do is for them. 

My heart is filled with feeling for the things you see

around you here, but it would be joy to me to uproot

the most beautiful plant I have if by so doing I could

save you pain.  Other men have wives they love as well,

little children they have fathered, big bodies useful to

the world, that are sometimes crippled with disease. 

There is nothing I would not give to allay the pain of

humanity.  It is not inconsistent to offer any growing

thing you soon can replace, to cure suffering.  Get that

idea out of your head!  You said you could worship at

the shrine of the pokeberry bed, you feel holier before

the arrowhead lilies, your face takes on an appearance of

reverence when you see pink mallow blooms.  Which

of them would you have hesitated a second in uprooting

if you could have offered it to subdue fever or pain in the

body of the little mother you loved?''



``Oh I see!'' cried the Girl.  ``Like everything else

you make this different.  You worship all this beauty

and grace, wrought by your hands, but you carry your

treasure to the market place for the good of suffering

humanity.  Oh Man!  I love the work you do!''



``Good!'' cried the Harvester.  ``Good!  And Ruth-

girl, while you are about it, see if you can't combine the

man and his occupation a little.''

