





CHAPTER III



HARVESTING THE FOREST





The forest is never so wonderful as when spring

wrestles with winter for supremacy.  While

the earth is yet ice bound, while snows occasionally

fly, spring breathes her warmer breath of

approach, and all nature responds.  Sunny knolls,

embankments, and cleared spaces become bare, while shadow

spots and sheltered nooks remain white.  This perfumes

the icy air with a warmer breath of melting snow.  The

sap rises in the trees and bushes, sets buds swelling, and

they distil a faint, intangible odour.  Deep layers of

dead leaves cover the frozen earth, and the sun shining

on them raises a steamy vapour unlike anything else in

nature.  A different scent rises from earth where the

sun strikes it.  Lichen faces take on the brightest colours

they ever wear, and rough, coarse mosses emerge in rank

growth from their cover of snow and add another perfume

to mellowing air.  This combination has breathed a

strange intoxication into the breast of mankind in all

ages, and bird and animal life prove by their actions that

it makes the same appeal to them.



Crows caw supremacy from tall trees; flickers, drunk

on the wine of nature, flash their yellow-lined wings

and red crowns among trees in a search for suitable

building places; nut-hatches run head foremost down

rough trunks, spying out larvae and early emerging insects;

titmice chatter; the bold, clear whistle of the cardinal

sounds never so gaily; and song sparrows pipe from every

wayside shrub and fence post.  Coons and opossums

stir in their dens, musk-rat and ground-hog inspect the

weather, while squirrels race along branches and bound

from tree to tree like winged folk.



All of them could have outlined the holdings of the

Harvester almost as well as any surveyor.  They understood

where the bang of guns and the snap of traps

menaced life.  Best of all, they knew where cracked

nuts, handfuls of wheat, oats, and crumbs were scattered

on the ground, and where suet bones dangled from bushes. 

Here, too, the last sheaf from the small wheat field at the

foot of the hill was stoutly fixed on a high pole, so that

the grain was free to all feathered visitors.



When the Harvester hitched Betsy, loaded his spiles

and sap buckets into the wagon, and started to the

woods to gather the offering the wet maples were pouring

down their swelling sides, almost his entire family came

to see him.  They knew who fed and passed every day

among them, and so were unafraid.



After the familiarity of a long, cold winter, when it had

been easier to pick up scattered food than to search for

it, they became so friendly with the man, the dog, and

the gray horse that they hastily snatched the food offered

at the barn and then followed through the woods.  The

Harvester always was particular to wear large pockets,

for it was good company to have living creatures flocking

after him, trusting to his bounty.  Ajax, a shimmering

wonder of gorgeous feathers, sunned on the ridge pole

of the old log stable, preened, spread his train, and uttered

the peacock cry of defiance, to exercise his voice or to

express his emotions at all times.  But at feeding hour

he descended to the park and snatched bites from the

biggest turkey cocks and ganders and reigned in power

absolute over ducks, guineas, and chickens.  Then he

followed to the barn and tried to frighten crows and

jays, and the gentle white doves under the eaves.



The Harvester walked through deep leaves and snow

covering the road that only a forester could have

distinguished.  Over his shoulder he carried a mattock,

and in the wagon were his clippers and an ax.  Behind

him came Betsy drawing the sap buckets and big evaporating

kettles.  Through the wood ranged Belshazzar,

the craziest dog in all creation.  He always went wild

at sap time.  Here was none of the monotony of trapping

for skins around the lake.  This marked the first full

day in the woods for the season.  He ranged as he pleased

and came for a pat or a look of confidence when he grew

lonely, while the Harvester worked.



At camp the man unhitched Betsy and tied her to the

wagon and for several hours distributed buckets.  Then

he hung the kettles and gathered wood for the fire.  At

noon he returned to the cabin for lunch and brought back

a load of empty syrup cans, and barrels in which to

collect the sap.  While the buckets filled at the dripping

trees, he dug roots in the sassafras thicket to fill orders

and supply the demand of Onabasha for tea.  Several

times he stopped to cut an especially fine tree.



``You know I hate to kill you,'' he apologized to the

first one he felled.  ``But it certainly must be legitimate

for a man to take enough of his trees to build a

home.  And no other house is possible for a creature of

the woods but a cabin, is there?  The birds use of the

material they find here; surely I have the right to do the

same.  Seems as if nothing else would serve, at least for

me.  I was born and reared here, I've always loved

you; of course, I can't use anything else for my home.''



He swung the ax and the chips flew as he worked on

a straight half-grown oak.  After a time he paused an

instant and rested, and as he did so he looked speculatively

at his work.



``I wonder where she is to-day,'' he said.  ``I wonder

what she is going to think of a log cabin in the woods. 

Maybe she has been reared in the city and is afraid of a

forest.  She may not like houses made of logs.  Possibly

she won't want to marry a Medicine Man.  She may

dislike the man, not to mention his occupation.  She may

think it coarse and common to work out of doors with

your hands, although I'd have to argue there is a little

brain in the combination.  I must figure out all these

things.  But there is one on the lady:  She should have

settled these points before she became quite so familiar. 

I have that for a foundation anyway, so I'll go on cutting

wood, and the remainder will be up to her when I find

her.  When I find her,'' repeated the Harvester slowly. 

``But I am not going to locate her very soon monkeying

around in these woods.  I should be out where people

are, looking for her right now.''



He chopped steadily until the tree crashed over, and

then, noticing a rapidly filling bucket, he struck the ax

in the wood and began gathering sap.  When he had

made the round, he drove to the camp, filled the kettles,

and lighted the fire.  While it started he cut and scraped

sassafras roots, and made clippings of tag alder, spice

brush and white willow into big bundles that were ready

to have the bark removed during the night watch, and

then cured in the dry-house.



He went home at evening to feed the poultry and

replenish the ever-burning fire of the engine and to

keep the cabin warm enough that food would not freeze. 

With an oilcloth and blankets he returned to camp and

throughout the night tended the buckets and boiling

sap, and worked or dozed by the fire between times. 

Toward the end of boiling, when the sap was becoming

thick, it had to be watched with especial care so it would

not scorch.  But when the kettles were freshly filled

the Harvester sat beside them and carefully split tender

twigs of willow and slipped off the bark ready to be

spread on the trays.



``You are a good tonic,'' he mused as he worked,

``and you go into some of the medicine for rheumatism. 

If she ever has it we will give her some of you, and

then she will be all right again.  Strange that I should

be preparing medicinal bark by the sugar camp fire,

but I have to make this hay, not while the sun shines,

but when the bark is loose, while the sap is rising.  Wonder

who will use this.  Depends largely on where I sell it. 

Anyway, I hope it will take the pain out of some poor

body.  Prices so low now, not worth gathering unless

I can kill time on it while waiting for something else. 

Never got over seven cents a pound for the best I ever

sold, and it takes a heap of these little quills to make a

pound when they are dry.  That's all of you----about

twenty-five cents' worth.  But even that is better than

doing nothing while I wait, and some one has to keep the

doctors supplied with salicin and tannin, so, if I do,

other folks needn't bother.''



He arose and poured more sap into the kettles as it

boiled away and replenished the fire.  He nibbled a twig

when he began on the spice brush.  As he sat on the

piled wood, and bent over his work he was an attractive

figure.  His face shone with health and was bright with

anticipation.  While he split the tender bark and slipped

out the wood he spoke his thoughts slowly:



``The five cents a pound I'll get for you is even less,

but I love the fragrance and taste.  You don't peel so

easy as the willow, but I like to prepare you better,

because you will make some miserable little sick child well

or you may cool some one's fevered blood.  If ever she

has a fever, I hope she will take medicine made from my

bark, because it will be strong and pure.  I've half a

notion to set some one else gathering the stuff and tending

the plants and spend my time in the little laboratory

compounding different combinations.  I don't see what

bigger thing a man can do than to combine pure, clean,

unadulterated roots and barks into medicines that will

cool fevers, stop chills, and purify bad blood.  The

doctors may be all right, but what are they going to do

if we men behind the prescription cases don't supply them

with unadulterated drugs.  Answer me that, Mr. Sapsucker. 

Doc says I've done mighty well so far as I

have gone.  I can't think of a thing on earth I'd rather

do, and there's money no end in it.  I could get too rich

for comfort in short order.  I wouldn't be too wealthy

to live just the way I do for any consideration.  I don't

know about her, though.  She is lovely, and handsome

women usually want beautiful clothing, and a quantity

of things that cost no end of money.  I may need all I

can get, for her.  One never can tell.''



He arose to stir the sap and pour more from the barrels

to the kettles before he began on the tag alder he had

gathered.



``If it is all the same to you, I'll just keep on chewing

spice brush while I work,'' he muttered.  ``You are

entirely too much of an astringent to suit my taste and

you bring a cent less a pound.  But you are thicker and

dry heavier, and you grow in any quantity around the

lake and on the marshy places, so I'll make the size of

the bundle atone for the price.  If I peel you while I wait

on the sap I'm that much ahead.  I can spread you on

drying trays in a few seconds and there you are.  Howl

your head off, Bel, I don't care what you have found.  I

wouldn't shoot anything to-day, unless the cupboard was

bare and I was starvation hungry.  In that case I think

a man comes first, and I'd kill a squirrel or quail in season,

but blest if I'd butcher a lot or do it often.  Vegetables

and bread are better anyway.  You peel easier even than

the willow.  What jolly whistles father used to make! 



``There was about twenty cents' worth of spice, and

I'll easy raise it to a dollar on this.  I'll get a hundred

gallons of syrup in the coming two weeks and it will

bring one fifty if I boil and strain it carefully and can

guarantee it contains no hickory bark and brown sugar. 

And it won't!  Straight for me or not at all.  Pure is

the word at Medicine Woods; syrup or drugs it's the same

thing.  Between times I can fell every tree I'll need for

the new cabin, and average a dollar a day besides on spice,

alder, and willow, and twice that for sassafras for the

Onabasha markets; not to mention the quantities I

can dry this year.  Aside from spring tea, they seem

to use it for everything.  I never yet have had enough. 

It goes into half the tonics, anodyne, and stimulants;

also soap and candy.  I see where I grow rich in spite of

myself, and also where my harvest is going to spoil

before I can garner it, if I don't step lively and double

even more than I am now.  Where the cabin is to come

in----well it must come if everything else goes.



``The roots can wait and I'll dig them next year and

get more and larger pieces.  I won't really lose anything,

and if she should come before I am ready to start to find

her, why then I'll have her home prepared.  How long

before you begin your house, old fire-fly?'' he inquired

of a flaming cardinal tilting on a twig.



He arose to make the round of the sap buckets again,

then resumed his work peeling bark, and so the time

passed.  In the following ten days he collected and

boiled enough sap to make more syrup than he had

expected.  His earliest spring store of medicinal twigs,

that were peeled to dry in quills, were all collected and

on the trays; he had digged several wagon loads of sassafras

and felled all the logs of stout, slender oak he would

require for his walls.  Choice timber he had been curing

for candlestick material he hauled to the saw-mills to

have cut properly, for the thought of trying his hand

at tables and chairs had taken possession of him.  He

was sure he could make furniture that would appear

quite as well as the mission pieces he admired on display

in the store windows of the city.  To him, chairs and

tables made from trees that grew on land that had

belonged for three generations to his ancestors, trees among

which he had grown, played, and worked, trees that

were so much his friends that he carefully explained

the situation to them before using an ax or saw, trees

that he had cut, cured, and fashioned into designs of his

own, would make vastly more valuable furnishings in his

home than anything that could be purchased in the city.



As he drove back and forth he watched constantly

for her.  He was working so desperately, planning far

ahead, doubling and trebling tasks, trying to do everything

his profession demanded in season, and to prepare

timber and make plans for the new cabin, as well as to

start a pair of candlesticks of marvellous design for her,

that night was one long, unbroken sleep of the thoroughly

tired man, but day had become a delightful dream.



He fed the chickens to produce eggs for her.  He

gathered barks and sluiced roots on the raft in the lake,

for her.  He grubbed the spice thicket before the door

and moved it into the woods to make space for a lawn,

for her.  His eyes were wide open for every woven case

and dangling cocoon of the big night moths that propagated

around him, for her.  Every night when he left

the woods from one to a dozen cocoons, that he had

detected with remarkable ease while the trees were bare,

were stuck in his hat band.  As he arranged them in a

cool, dry place he talked to them.



``Of course I know you are valuable and there are

collectors who would pay well for you, but I think not. 

You are the prettiest thing God made that I ever saw,

and those of you that home with me have no price on

your wings.  You are much safer here than among the

crows and jays of the woods.  I am gathering you to

protect you, and to show to her.  If I don't find her by

June, you may go scot free.  All I want is the best pattern

I can get from some of you for candlestick designs. 

Of everything in the whole world a candlestick should

be made of wood.  It should be carved by hand, and

of all ornamentations on earth the moth that flies to

the night light is the most appropriate.  Owls are not

so bad.  They are of the night, and they fly to light,

too, but they are so old.  Nobody I ever have known

used a moth.  They missed the best when they neglected

them.  I'll make her sticks over an original pattern;

I'll twine nightshade vines, with flowers and berries

around them, and put a trailed luna on one, and what

is the next prettiest for the other?  I'll think well before

if decide.  Maybe she'll come by the time I get to carving

and tell me what she likes.  That would beat my taste

or guessing a mile.''



He carefully arranged the twigs bearing cocoons in a

big, wire-covered box to protect them from the depredations

of nibbling mice and the bolder attacks of the

saucy ground squirrels that stored nuts in his loft and

took possession of the attic until their scampering

sometimes awoke him in the night.



Every trip he made to the city he stopped at the

library to examine plans of buildings and furniture and

to make notes.  The oak he had hauled was being hewed

into shape by a neighbour who knew how, and every

wagon that carried a log to the city to be dressed at

the mill brought back timber for side walls, joists, and

rafters.  Night after night he sat late poring over his

plans for the new rooms, above all for her chamber. 

With poised pencil he wavered over where to put the

closet and entrance to her bath.  He figured on how wide

to make her bed and where it should stand.  He remembered

her dressing table in placing windows and a space

for a chest of drawers.  In fact there was nothing the

active mind of the Harvester did not busy itself with

in those days that might make a woman a comfortable

home.  Every thought emanated from impulses evolved

in his life in the woods, and each was executed with

mighty tenderness.



A killdeer sweeping the lake close two o'clock one

morning awakened him.  He had planned to close the

sugar camp for the season that day, but when he heard

the notes of the loved bird he wondered if that would

not be a good time to stake out the foundations and

begin digging.  There was yet ice in the ground, but the

hillside was rapidly thawing, and although the work

would be easier later, so eager was the Harvester to have

walls up and a roof over that he decided to commence.



But when morning came and he and Belshazzar

breakfasted and fed Betsy and the stock, he concluded to

return to his first plan and close the camp.  All the sap

collected that day went into the vinegar barrel.  He

loaded the kettles, buckets, and spiles and stopped at

the spice thicket to cut a bale of twigs as he passed.  He

carried one load to the wagon and returned for another. 

Down wind on swift wing came a bird and entered the

bushes.  Motionless the Harvester peered at it.  A

mourning dove had returned to him through snow,

skifting over cold earth.  It settled on a limb and began

dressing its plumage.  At that instant a wavering, ``Coo

coo a'gh coo,'' broke in sobbing notes from the deep

wood.  Without paying the slightest heed, the dove

finished a wing, ruffled and settled her feathers, and

opened her bill in a human-like yawn.  The Harvester

smiled.  The notes swelled closer in renewed pleading. 

The cry was beyond doubt a courting male and this

an indifferent female.  Her beady eyes snapped, her

head turned coquettishly, a picture of self-possession,

she hid among the dense twigs of the spice thicket. 

Around the outside circled the pleading male.



With shining eyes the Harvester watched.  These

were of the things that made life in the woods most worth

while.  More insistent grew the wavering notes of the

lover.  More indifferent became the beloved.  She was

superb in her poise as she amused herself in hiding.  A

perfect burst of confused, sobbing notes broke on the

air.  Then away in the deep wood a softly-wavering,

half-questioning ``Coo-ah!'' answered them.  Amazement

flashed into the eyes of the Harvester, but his face

was not nearly so expressive as that of the bird.  She

lifted a bewildered head and grew rigid in an attitude of

tense listening.  There was a pause.  In quicker measure

and crowding notes the male called again.  Instantly

the soft ``Coo!'' wavered in answer.  The surprised

little hen bird of the thicket hopped straight up and

settled on her perch again, her dark eyes indignant as

she uttered a short ``Coo!''  The muscles of the

Harvester's chest were beginning to twitch and quiver. 

More intense grew the notes of the pleading male.  Softly

seductive came the reply.  The clapping of his wings

could be heard as he flew in search of the charmer.  ``A'gh

coo!'' cried the deserted female as she tilted off the branch

and tore through the thicket in pursuit, with wings hastened

by fright at the ringing laugh of the Harvester.



``Not so indifferent after all, Bel,'' he said to the dog

standing in stiff point beside him.  ``That was all `pretend!' 

But she waited just a trifle too long.  Now she

will have to fight it out with a rival.  Good thing if

some of the flirtatious women could have seen that. 

Help them to learn their own minds sooner.''



He laughed as he heaped the twigs on top of the wagon

and started down the hill chuckling.  Belshazzar followed,

leading Betsy straight in the middle of the road by the

hitching strap.  A few yards ahead the man stopped

suddenly with lifted hand.  The dog and horse stood

motionless.  A dove flashed across the road and settled

in sight on a limb.  Almost simultaneously another

perched beside it, and they locked bills in a long caress,

utterly heedless of a plaintive ``Coo'' in the deep wood.



``Settled!'' said the Harvester.  ``Jupiter!  I wish my

troubles were that nearly finished!  Wish I knew where

she is and how to find my way to her lips!  Wonder if

she will come when I call her.  What if I should find her,

and she would have everything on earth, other lovers,

and indifference worse than Madam Dove's for me. 

Talk about bitterness!  Well I'd have the dream left

anyway.  And there are always two sides.  There is

just a possibility that she may be poor and overworked,

sick and tired, and wondering why I don't come.  Possibly

she had a dream, too, and she wishes I would hurry. 

Dear Lord!''



The Harvester began to perspire as he strode down

the hill.  He scarcely waited to hang the harness properly. 

He did not stop to unload the wagon until night,

but went after an ax and a board that he split into pegs. 

Then he took a ball of twine, a measuring line, and

began laying out his foundation, when the hard earth

would scarcely hold the stakes he drove into it.  When

he found he only would waste time in digging he put

away the neatly washed kettles, peeled the spice brush,

spread it to dry, and prepared his dinner.  After that

he began hauling stone and cement for his basement

floor and foundation walls.  Occasionally he helped at

hewing logs when the old man paused to rest.  That afternoon

the first robin of the season hailed him in passing.



``Hello!'' cried the Harvester.  ``You don't mean

to tell me that you have beaten the larks!  You really

have!  Well since I see it, I must believe, but you are

early.  Come around to the back door if crumbs or wheat

will do or if you can make out on suet and meat bones! 

We are good and ready for you.  Where is your mate? 

For any sake, don't tell me you don't know.  One case

of that kind at Medicine Woods is enough.  Say you

came ahead to see if it is too cold or to select a home and

get ready for her.  Say anything on earth except that

you love her, and want her until your body is one quivering

ache, and you don't know where she is.''


