





CHAPTER II



THE EFFECT OF A DREAM



Fully convinced at last that he had been dreaming,

the Harvester picked up his knives and

candlestick and entered the cabin.  He placed

them on a shelf and turned away, but after a second's

hesitation he closed the box and arranged the sticks

neatly.  Then he set the room in order and carefully

swept the floor.  As he replaced the broom he thought

for an instant, then opened the door and whistled softly. 

Belshazzar came at a rush.  The Harvester pushed the

plate of food toward the hungry dog and he ate greedily. 

The man returned to the front room and closed the door.



He stood a long time before his shelf of books, at last

selected a volume of ``Medicinal Plants'' and settled

to study.  His supper finished, Belshazzar came scratching

and whining at the door.  Several times the man

lifted his head and glanced in that direction, but he only

returned to his book and read again.  Tired and sleepy,

at last, he placed the volume on the shelf, went to a

closet for a pair of bath towels, and hung them across a

chair.  Then he undressed, opened the door, and ran

for the lake.  He plunged with a splash and swam vigorously 

for a few minutes, his white body growing pink

under the sting of the chilled water.  Over and over he

scanned the golden bridge to the moon, and stood an

instant dripping on the gravel of the landing to make sure

that no dream woman was crossing the wavering floor! 

He rubbed to a glow and turned back the covers of his

bed.  The door and window stood wide.  Before he lay

down, the Harvester paused in arrested motion a second,

then stepped to the kitchen door and lifted the latch.



As the man drew the covers over him, the dog's nose

began making an opening, and a little later he quietly

walked into the room.  The Harvester rested, facing

the lake.  The dog sniffed at his shoulder, but the man

was rigid.  Then the click of nails could be heard on the

floor as Belshazzar went to the opposite side.  At his

accustomed place he paused and set one foot on the bed. 

There was not a sound, so he lifted the other.  Then

one at a time he drew up his hind feet and crouched as

he had on the gravel.  The man lay watching the bright

bridge.  The moonlight entered the window and flooded

the room.  The strong lines on the weather-beaten face

of the Harvester were mellowed in the light, and he

appeared young and good to see.  His lithe figure stretched

the length of the bed, his hair appeared almost white,

and his face, touched by the glorifying light of the moon,

was a study.



One instant his countenance was swept with ultimate

scorn; then gradually that would fade and the lines soften,

until his lips curved in child-like appeal and his eyes

were filled with pleading.  Several times he lifted a

hand and gently touched his lips, as if a kiss were a material

thing and would leave tangible evidence of having

been given.  After a long time his eyes closed and he

scarcely was unconscious before Belshazzar's cold nose

touched the outstretched hand and the Harvester lifted

and laid it on the dog's head.



``Forgive me, Bel,'' he muttered.  ``I never did that. 

I wouldn't have hurt you for anything.  It happened

before I had time to think.''



They both fell asleep.  The clear-cut lines of manly

strength on the face of the Harvester were touched to

tender beauty.  He lay smiling softly.  Far in the night

he realized the frost-chill and divided the coverlet with

the happy Belshazzar.



The golden dream never came again.  There was no

need.  It had done its perfect work.  The Harvester

awoke the next morning a different man.  His face was

youthful and alive with alert anticipation.  He began

his work with eager impetuosity, whistling and singing

the while, and he found time to play with and talk to

Belshazzar, until that glad beast almost wagged off his

tail in delight.  They breakfasted together and arranged

the rooms with unusual care.



``You see,'' explained the Harvester to the dog, ``we

must walk neatly after this.  Maybe there is such a

thing as fate.  Possibly your answer was right.  There

might be a girl in the world for me.  I don't expect it,

but there is a possibility that she may find us before we

locate her.  Anyway, we should work and be ready. 

All the old stock in the store-house goes out as soon as

we can cart it.  A new cabin shall rise as fast as we

can build it.  There must be a basement and furnace,

too.  Dream women don't have cold feet, but if there is

a girl living like that, and she is coming to us or waiting

for us to come to her, we must have a comfortable home

to offer.  There should be a bathroom, too.  She couldn't

dip in the lake as we do.  And until we build the new

house we must keep the old one clean, just on the chance

of her happening on us.  She might be visiting some

of the neighbours or come from town with some one

or I might see her on the street or at the library or

hospital or in some of the stores.  For the love of mercy,

help me watch for her, Bel!  The half of my kingdom

if you will point her for me!''



The Harvester worked as he talked.  He set the rooms

in order, put away the remains of breakfast, and started

to the stable.  He turned back and stood for a long time,

scanning the face in the kitchen mirror.  Once he went

to the door, then he hesitated, and finally took out his

shaving set and used it carefully and washed vigorously. 

He pulled his shirt together at the throat, and hunting

among his clothing, found an old red tie that he knotted

around his neck.  This so changed his every-day appearance

that he felt wonderfully dressed and whistled gaily

on his way to the barn.  There he confided in the old

gray mare as he curried and harnessed her to the spring

wagon.



``Hardly know me, do you, Betsy?'' he inquired. 

``Well, I'll explain.  Our friend Bel, here, has doomed me

to go courting this year.  Wouldn't that durnfound you? 

I was mad as hornets at first, but since I've slept on the

idea, I rather like it.  Maybe we are too lonely and dull. 

Perhaps the right woman would make life a very different

matter.  Last night I saw her, Betsy, and between

us, I can't tell even you.  She was the loveliest, sweetest

girl on earth, and that is all I can say.  We are going to

watch for her to-day, and every trip we make, until

we find her, if it requires a hundred years.  Then some

glad time we are going to locate her, and when we do, well,

you just keep your eye on us, Betsy, and you'll see how

courting straight from the heart is done, even if we lack

experience.''



Intoxicated with new and delightful sensations his

tongue worked faster than his hands.



``I don't mind telling you, old faithful, that I am in

love this morning,'' he said.  ``In love heels over, Betsy,

for the first time in all my life.  If any man ever was a

bigger fool than I am to-day, it would comfort me to

know about it.  I am acting like an idiot, Betsy.  I know

that, but I wish you could understand how I feel.  Power! 

I am the head-waters of Niagara!  I could pluck down

the stars and set them in different places!  I could twist

the tail from the comet!  I could twirl the globe on my

palm and topple mountains and wipe lakes from

the surface!  I am a live man, Betsy.  Existence is over. 

So don't you go at any tricks or I might pull off your

head.  Betsy, if you see the tallest girl you ever saw,

and she wears a dark diadem, and has big black eyes and

a face so lovely it blinds you, why you have seen Her, and

you balk, right on the spot, and stand like the rock of

Gibraltar, until you make me see her, too.  As if I wouldn't

know she was coming a mile away!  There's more I

could tell you, but that is my secret, and it's too precious

to talk about, even to my best friends.  Bel, bring Betsy

to the store-room.''



The Harvester tossed the hitching strap to the dog and

walked down the driveway to a low structure built on

the embankment beside the lake.  One end of it was a

dry-house of his own construction.  Here, by an arrangement

of hot water pipes, he evaporated many of the barks,

roots, seeds, and leaves he grew to supply large concerns

engaged in the manufacture of drugs.  By his process

crude stock was thoroughly cured, yet did not lose in

weight and colour as when dried in the sun or outdoor

shade.



So the Harvester was enabled to send his customers

big packages of brightly coloured raw material, and the

few cents per pound he asked in advance of the catalogued

prices were paid eagerly.  He lived alone, and never

talked of his work; so none of the harvesters of the fields

adjoining dreamed of the extent of his reaping.  The

idea had been his own.  He had been born in the cabin

in which he now lived.  His father and grandfather

were old-time hunters of skins and game.  They had

added to their earnings by gathering in spring and fall

the few medicinal seeds, leaves, and barks they knew. 

His mother had been of different type.  She had

loved and married the picturesque young hunter, and

gone to live with him on the section of land taken

by his father.  She found life, real life, vastly different

from her girlhood dreams, but she was one of those

changeless, unyielding women who suffer silently, but

never rue a bargain, no matter how badly they are

cheated.  Her only joy in life had been her son.  For

him she had worked and saved unceasingly, and when

he was old enough she sent him to the city to school

and kept pace with him in the lessons he brought home

at night.



Using what she knew of her husband's work as a guide,

and profiting by pamphlets published by the government,

every hour of the time outside school and in

summer vacations she worked in the woods with the boy,

gathering herbs and roots to pay for his education and

clothing.  So the son passed the full high-school course,

and then, selecting such branches as interested him,

continued his studies alone.



From books and drug pamphlets he had learned every

medicinal plant, shrub, and tree of his vicinity, and for

years roamed far afield and through the woods collecting. 

After his father's death expenses grew heavier and the

boy saw that he must earn more money.  His mother

frantically opposed his going to the city, so he thought out

the plan of transplanting the stuff he gathered, to the

land they owned and cultivating it there.  This work

was well developed when he was twenty, but that year

he lost his mother.



From that time he went on steadily enlarging his

species, transplanting trees, shrubs, vines, and medicinal

herbs from such locations as he found them to similar

conditions on his land.  Six years he had worked

cultivating these beds, and hunting through the woods on

the river banks, government land, the great Limberlost

Swamp, and neglected corners of earth for barks and

roots.  He occasionally made long trips across the

country for rapidly diminishing plants he found in the

woodland of men who did not care to bother with a few

specimens, and many big beds of profitable herbs,

extinct for miles around, now flourished on the banks of

Loon Lake, in the marsh, and through the forest rising

above.  To what extent and value his venture had grown,

no one save the Harvester knew.  When his neighbours

twitted him with being too lazy to plow and sow, of

``mooning'' over books, and derisively sneered when they

spoke of him as the Harvester of the Woods or the

Medicine Man, David Langston smiled and went his way.



How lonely he had been since the death of his mother

he never realized until that morning when a new idea

really had taken possession of him.  From the store-

house he heaped packages of seeds, dried leaves, barks,

and roots into the wagon.  But he kept a generous supply

of each, for he prided himself on being able to fill all

orders that reached him.  Yet the load he took to

the city was much larger than usual.  As he drove

down the hill and passed the cabin he studied the

location.



``The drainage is perfect,'' he said to Belshazzar beside

him on the seat.  ``So is the situation.  We get the cool

breezes from the lake in summer and the hillside warmth

in winter.  View down the valley can't be surpassed.  We

will grub out that thicket in front, move over the driveway,

and build a couple of two-story rooms, with basement

for cellar and furnace, and a bathroom in front of

the cabin and use it with some fixing over for a dining-

room and kitchen.  Then we will deepen and widen

Singing Water, stick a bushel of bulbs and roots and

sow a peck of flower seeds in the marsh, plant a hedge

along the drive, and straighten the lake shore a little.  I

can make a beautiful wild-flower garden and arrange

so that with one season's work this will appear very

well.  We will express this stuff and then select and fell

some trees to-night.  Soon as the frost is out of the

ground we will dig our basement and lay the foundations. 

The neighbours will help me raise the logs; after that I

can finish the inside work.  I've got some dried maple,

cherry, and walnut logs that would work into beautiful

furniture.  I haven't forgotten the prices McLean offered

me.  I can use it as well as he.  Plain way the best

things are built now, I believe I could make tables

and couches myself.  I can see plans in the magazines

at the library.  I'll take a look when I get this off.  I

feel strong enough to do all of it in a few days and I am

crazy to commence.  But I scarcely know where to begin. 

There are about fifty things I'd like to do.  But to fell

and dry the trees and get the walls up come first, I believe. 

What do you think, old unreliable?''



Belshazzar thought the world was a place of beauty

that morning.  He sniffed the icy, odorous air and with

tilted head watched the birds.  A wearied band of ducks

had settled on Loon Lake to feed and rest, for there was

nothing to disturb them.  Signs were numerous everywhere

prohibiting hunters from firing over the Harvester's

land.  Beside the lake, down the valley, crossing

the railroad, and in the farther lowlands, the dog was a

nervous quiver, as he constantly scented game or saw

birds he wanted to point.  But when they neared the

city, he sat silently watching everything with alert

eyes.  As they reached the outer fringe of residences

the Harvester spoke to him.



``Now remember, Bel,'' he said.  ``Point me the

tallest girl you ever saw, with a big braid of dark hair,

shining black eyes, and red velvet lips, sweeter than wild

crab apple blossoms.  Make a dead set!  Don't allow

her to pass us.  Heaven is going to begin in Medicine

Woods when we find her and prove to her that there

lies her happy home.



``When we find her,'' repeated the Harvester softly

and exultantly.  ``When we find her!''



He said it again and again, pronouncing the words with

tender modulations.  Because he was chanting it in

his soul, in his heart, in his brain, with his lips, he had a

hasty glance for every woman he passed.  Light hair,

blue eyes, and short figures got only casual inspection:

but any tall girl with dark hair and eyes endured rather

close scrutiny that morning.  He drove to the express

office and delivered his packages and then to the hospital. 

In the hall the blue-eyed nurse met him and cried gaily,

``Good morning, Medicine Man!''



``Ugh!  I scalp pale-faces!'' threatened the Harvester,

but the girl was not afraid and stood before him laughing. 

She might have gone her way quite as well.  She could

not have differed more from the girl of the newly begun

quest.  The man merely touched his wide-brimmed hat

as he walked around her and entered the office of the

chief surgeon.



A slender, gray-eyed man with white hair turned from

his desk, smiled warmly, pushed a chair, and reached a

welcoming hand.



``Ah good-morning, David,'' he cried.  ``You bring

the very breath of spring with you.  Are you at the

maples yet?''



``Begin to-morrow,'' was the answer.  ``I want to get

all my old stock off hands.  Sugar water comes next,

and then the giddy sassafras and spring roots rush me,

and after that, harvest begins full force, and all my land

is teeming.  This is going to be a big year.  Everything

is sufficiently advanced to be worth while.  I have

decided to enlarge the buildings.''



``Store-room too small?''



``Everything!'' said the Harvester comprehensively. 

``I am crowded everywhere.''



The keen gray eyes bent on him searchingly.



``Ho, ho!'' laughed the doctor.  `` `Crowded everywhere.' 

I had not heard of cramped living quarters

before.  When did you meet her?''



``Last night,'' replied the Harvester.  ``Her home is

already in construction.  I chose seven trees as I drove

here that are going to fall before night.''



So casual was the tone the doctor was disarmed.



``I am trying your nerve remedy,'' he said.



Instantly the Harvester tingled with interest.



``How does it work?'' he inquired.



``Finely!  Had a case that presented just the symptoms

you mentioned.  High-school girl broken down

from trying to lead her classes, lead her fraternity, lead

her parents, lead society----the Lord only knows what

else.  Gone all to pieces!  Pretty a case of nervous

prostration as you ever saw in a person of fifty.  I began

on fractional doses with it, and at last got her where she

can rest.  It did precisely what you claimed it would,

David.''



``Good!'' cried the Harvester.  ``Good!  I hoped it

would be effective.  Thank you for the test.  It will

give me confidence when I go before the chemists with it. 

I've got a couple more compounds I wish you would

try when you have safe cases where you can do no harm.''



``You are cautious for a young man, son!''



``The woods do that.  You not only discover miracles

and marvels in them, you not only trace evolution and the

origin of species, but you get the greatest lessons taught

in all the world ground into you early and alone----

courage, caution, and patience.''



``Those are the rocks on which men are stranded as a

rule.  You think you can breast them, David?''



The Harvester laughed.



``Aside from breaking a certain promise mother rooted

in the blood and bones of me, if I am afraid of anything,

I don't know it.  You don't often see me going head-

long, do you?  As to patience!  Ten years ago I began

removing every tree, bush, vine, and plant of medicinal

value from the woods around to my land; I set and sowed

acres in ginseng, knowing I must nurse, tend, and cultivate

seven years.  If my neighbours had understood

what I was attempting, what do you think they would

have said?  Cranky and lazy would have become adjectives

too mild.  Lunatic would have expressed it better. 

That's close the general opinion, anyway.  Because I

will not fell my trees, and the woods hide the work I do,

it is generally conceded that I spend my time in the sun

reading a book.  I do, as often as I have an opportunity. 

But the point is that this fall, when I harvest that ginseng

bed, I will clear more money than my stiffest detractor

ever saw at one time.  I'll wager my bank account won't

compare so unfavourably with the best of them now. 

I did well this morning.  Yes, I'll admit this much: 

I am reasonably cautious, I'm a pattern for patience,

and my courage never has failed me yet, anyway.  But

I must rap on wood; for that boast is a sign that I probably

will meet my Jonah soon.''



``David, you are a man after my own heart,'' said the

doctor.  ``I love you more than any other friend I have

I wouldn't see a hair of your head changed for the world. 

Now I've got to hurry to my operation.  Remain as

long as you please if there is anything that interests you;

but don't let the giggling little nurse that always haunts

the hall when you come make any impression.  She is

not up to your standard.''



``Don't!'' said the Harvester.  ``I've learned one of

the big lessons of life since last I saw you, Doc.  I have

no standard.  There is just one woman in all the world

for me, and when I find her I will know her, and I will

be happy for even a glance; as for that talk of standards,

I will be only too glad to take her as she is.''



``David!  I supposed what you said about enlarged

buildings was nonsense or applied to store-rooms.''



``Go to your operation!''



``David, if you send me in suspense, I may operate

on the wrong man.  What has happened?''



``Nothing!'' said the Harvester.  ``Nothing!''



``David, it is not like you to evade.  What happened?''



``Nothing!  On my word!  I merely saw a vision and

dreamed a dream.''



``You!  A rank materialist!  Saw a vision and

dreamed a dream!  And you call it nothing.  Worst

thing that could happen!  Whenever a man of common-

sense goes to seeing things that don't exist, and dreaming

dreams, why look out!  What did you see?  What did

you dream?''



``You woman!'' laughed the Harvester.  ``Talk about

curiosity!  I'd have to be a poet to describe my vision,

and the dream was strictly private.  I couldn't tell it,

not for any price you could mention.  Go to your operation.''



The doctor paused on the threshold.



``You can't fool me,'' he said.  ``I can diagnose you

all right.  You are poet enough, but the vision was

sacred; and when a man won't tell, it's always and forever

a woman.  I know all now I ever will, because I know

you, David.  A man with a loose mouth and a low mind

drags the women of his acquaintance through whatever

mire he sinks in; but you couldn't tell, David, not even

about a dream woman.  Come again soon!  You are

my elixir of life, lad!  I revel in the atmosphere you bring. 

Wish me success now, I am going to a difficult, delicate

operation.''



``I do!'' cried the Harvester heartily.  ``I do!  But

you can't fail.  You never have and that proves you

cannot!  Good-bye!''



Down the street went the Harvester, passing over city

pave with his free, swinging stride, his head high, his

face flushed with vivid outdoor tints, going somewhere

to do something worth while, the impression always left

behind him.  Men envied his robust appearance and

women looked twice, always twice, and sometimes

oftener if there was any opportunity; but twice at least

was the rule.  He left a little roll of bills at the bank and

started toward the library.  When he entered the reading

room an attendant with an eager smile hastily came toward him.



``What will you have this morning, Mr. Langston?'' she

asked in the voice of one who would render willing service.



``Not the big books to-day,'' laughed the Harvester. 

``I've only a short time.  I'll glance through the magazines.''



He selected several from a table and going to a corner

settled with them and for two hours was deeply engrossed. 

He took an envelope from his pocket, traced lines, and

read intently.  He studied the placing of rooms, the

construction of furniture, and all attractive ideas were

noted.  When at last he arose the attendant went to

replace the magazines on the table.  They had been

opened widely, and as she turned the leaves they

naturally fell apart at the plans for houses or articles

of furniture.



The Harvester slowly went down the street.  Before

every furniture store he paused and studied the designs

displayed in the windows.  Then he untied Betsy and

drove to a lumber mill on the outskirts of the city and

made arrangements to have some freshly felled logs of

black walnut and curly maple sawed into different sizes


and put through a course in drying.



He drove back to Medicine Woods whistling, singing,

and talking to Belshazzar beside him.  He ate a hasty

lunch and at three o'clock was in the forest, blazing and

felling slender, straight-trunked oak and ash of the

desired proportions.


