





CHAPTER VIII



BELSHAZZAR'S RECORD POINT



The Harvester set the neglected cabin in order;

then he carefully and deftly packed all his dried

herbs, barks, and roots.  Next came carrying

the couch grass, wild alum, and soapwort into the store-

room.  Then followed July herbs.  He first went to his

beds of foxglove, because the tender leaves of the second

year should be stripped from them at flowering time, and

that usually began two weeks earlier; but his bed lay in

a shaded, damp location and the tall bloom stalks were

only in half flower, their pale lavender making an exquisite

picture.  It paid to collect those leaves, so the Harvester

hastily stripped the amount he wanted.



Yarrow was beginning to bloom and he gathered as

much as he required, taking the whole plant.  That only

brought a few cents a pound, but it was used entire, so

the weight made it worth while.



Catnip tops and leaves were also ready.  As it grew

in the open in dry soil and the beds had been weeded that

spring, he could gather great arm loads of it with a sickle,

but he had to watch the swarming bees.  He left the

male fern and mullein until the last for different reasons.



On the damp, cool, rocky hillside, beneath deep shade

of big forest trees, grew the ferns, their long, graceful

fronds waving softly.  Tree toads sang on the cool rocks

beneath them, chewinks nested under gnarled roots

among them, rose-breasted grosbeaks sang in grape-vines

clambering over the thickets, and Singing Water ran

close beside.  So the Harvester left digging these roots

until nearly the last, because he so disliked to disturb

the bed.  He could not have done it if he had not been

forced.  All of the demand for his fern never could be

supplied.  Of his products none was more important to

the Harvester because this formed the basis of one of the

oldest and most reliable remedies for little children.  The

fern had to be gathered with especial care, deteriorated

quickly, and no staple was more subject to adulteration.



So he kept his bed intact, lifted the roots at the proper

time, carefully cleaned without washing, rapidly dried

in currents of hot air, and shipped them in bottles to

the trade.  He charged and received fifteen cents a pound,

where careless and indifferent workers got ten.



On the banks of Singing Water, at the head of the fern

bed, the Harvester stood under a gray beech tree and

looked down the swaying length of delicate green.  He

was lean and rapidly bronzing, for he seldom remembered

a head covering because he loved the sweep of the wind

in his hair.



``I hate to touch you,'' he said.  ``How I wish she

could see you before I begin.  If she did, probably she

would say it was a sin, and then I never could muster

courage to do it at all.  I'd give a small farm to know

if those violets revived for her.  I was crazy to ask

Doc if they were wilted, but I hated to.  If they were

from the ones I gathered that morning they should have

been all right.''



A tree toad dared him to come on; a chipmunk grew

saucy as the Harvester bent to an unloved task.  If he

stripped the bed as closely as he dared and not injure

it, he could not fill half his orders; so, deftly and with

swift, skilful fingers and an earnest face, he worked. 

Belshazzar came down the hill on a rush, nose to earth and

began hunting among the plants.  He never could

understand why his loved master was so careless as to go

to work before he had pronounced it safe.  When the

fern bed was finished, the Harvester took time to make

a trip to town, but there was no word waiting him; so

he went to the mullein.  It lay on a sunny hillside beyond

the couch grass and joined a few small fields, the only

cleared land of the six hundred acres of Medicine Woods. 

Over rocks and little hills and hollows spread the pale,

grayish-yellow of the green leaves, and from five to seven

feet arose the flower stems, while the entire earth between

was covered with rosettes of young plants.  Belshazzar

went before to give warning if any big rattlers curled

in the sun on the hillside, and after him followed the

Harvester cutting leaves in heaps.  That was warm

work and he covered his head with a floppy old straw hat,

with wet grass in the crown, and stopped occasionally

to rest.



He loved that yellow-faced hillside.  Because so much

of his reaping lay in the shade and commonly his feet

sank in dead leaves and damp earth, the change was

a rest.  He cheerfully stubbed his toes on rocks, and

endured the heat without complaint.  It appeared to

him as if a member of every species of butterfly he knew

wavered down the hillside.  There were golden-brown

danais, with their black-striped wings, jetty troilus with

an attempt at trailers, big asterias, velvety black with

longer trails and wide bands of yellow dots.  Coenia

were most numerous of all and to the Harvester wonderfully

attractive in rich, subdued colours with a wealth of

markings and eye spots.  Many small moths, with transparent

wings and noses red as blood, flashed past him

hunting pollen.  Goldfinches, intent on thistle bloom,

wavered through the air trailing mellow, happy notes

behind them, and often a humming-bird visited the

mullein.  On the lake wild life splashed and chattered

incessantly, and sometimes the Harvester paused and stood

with arms heaped with leaves, to interpret some unusually

appealing note of pain or anger or some very attractive

melody.  The red-wings were swarming, the killdeers

busy, and he thought of the Dream Girl and smiled.



``I wonder if she would like this,'' he mused.



When the mullein leaves were deep on the trays of the

dry-house he began on the bloom and that was a task

he loved.  Just to lay off the beds in swaths and follow

them, deftly picking the stamens and yellow petals from

the blooms.  These he would dry speedily in hot air,

bottle, and send at once to big laboratories.  The listed

price was seventy-five cents a pound, but the beautiful

golden bottles of the Harvester always brought more. 

The work was worth while, and he liked the location and

gathering of this particular crop: for these reasons he

always left it until the last, and then revelled in the gold

of sunshine, bird, butterfly, and flower.  Several days

were required to harvest the mullein and during the

time the man worked with nimble fingers, while his brain

was intensely occupied with the question of what to do

next in his search for the Girl.



When the work was finished, he went to the deep wood

to take a peep at acres of thrifty ginseng, and he was

satisfied as he surveyed the big bed.  Long years he

had laboured diligently; soon came the reward.  He

had not realized it before, but as he studied the situation

he saw that he either must begin this harvest at once or

employ help.  If he waited until September he could not

gather one third of the crop alone.



``But the roots will weigh less if I take them now,'' he

argued, ``and I can work at nothing in comfort until

I have located her.  I will go on with my search and

allow the ginseng to grow that much heavier.  What

a picture!  It is folly to disturb this now, for I will lose

the seed of every plant I dig, and that is worth almost as

much as the root.  It is a question whether I want to

furnish the market with seed, and so raise competition

for my bed.  I think, be jabbers, that I'll wait for this

harvest until the seed is ripe, and then bury part of a

head where I dig a root, as the Indians did.  That's

the idea!  The more I grow, the more money; and I

may need considerable for her.  One thing I'd like to

know:  Are these plants cultivated?  All the books quote

the wild at highest rates and all I've ever sold was wild. 

The start grew here naturally.  What I added from the

surrounding country was wild, but through and among

it I've sown seed I bought, and I've tended it with every

care.  But this is deep wood and wild conditions.  I

think I have a perfect right to so label it.  I'll ask Doc. 

And another thing I'll go through the woods west

of Onabasha where I used to find ginseng, and see if I

can get a little and then take the same amount of plants

grown here, and make a test.  That way I can discover

any difference before I go to market.  This is my gold

mine, and that point is mighty important to me, so I'll

go this very day.  I used to find it in the woods northeast

of town and on the land Jameson bought, west.  Wonder

if he lives there yet.  He should have died of pure meanness

long ago.  I'll drive to the river and hunt along

the bank.''



Early the following morning the Harvester went to

Onabasha and stopped at the hospital for news.  Finding

none, he went through town and several miles into the

country on the other side, to a piece of lowland lying

along the river bank, where he once had found and

carried home to reset a big bed of ginseng.  If he could

get only a half pound of roots from there now, they would

serve his purpose.  He went down the bank, Belshazzar

at his heels, and at last found the place.  Many trees

had been cut, but there remained enough for shade;

the fields bore the ragged, unattractive appearance of

old.  The Harvester smiled grimly as he remembered

that the man who lived there once had charged him for

damage he might do to trees in driving across his woods,

and boasted to his neighbours that a young fool was paying

for the privilege of doing his grubbing.  If Jameson

had known what the roots he was so anxious to dispose

of brought a pound on the market at that time, he would

have been insane with anger.  So the Harvester's eyes

were dancing with fun and a wry grin twisted his lips as

he clambered over the banks of the recently dredged

river, and looked at its pitiful condition and straight,

muddy flow.



``Appears to match the remainder of the Jameson

property,'' he said.  ``I don't know who he is or where he

came from, but he's no farmer.  Perhaps he uses this

land to corral the stock he buys until he can sell it again.''



He went down the embankment and began to search

for the location where he formerly had found the ginseng. 

When he came to the place he stood amazed, for from

seed, roots, and plants he had missed, the growth had

sprung up and spread, so that at a rapid estimate the

Harvester thought it contained at least five pounds,

allowing for what it would shrink on account of being

gathered early.  He hesitated an instant, and thought

of coming later; but the drive was long and the loss

would not amount to enough to pay for a second trip. 

About taking it, he never thought at all.  He once had

permission from the owner to dig all the shrubs, bushes,

and weeds he desired from that stretch of woods, and had

paid for possible damages that might occur.  As he bent

to the task there did come a fleeting thought that the

patch was weedless and in unusual shape for wild stuff. 

Then, with swift strokes of his light mattock, he lifted

the roots, crammed them into his sack, whistled to

Belshazzar, and going back to the wagon, drove away. 

Reaching home he washed the ginseng, and spread it on

a tray to dry.  The first time he wanted the mattock

he realized that he had left it lying where he had worked. 

It was an implement that he had directed a blacksmith

to fashion to meet his requirements.  No store contained

anything half so useful to him.  He had worked with it

for years and it just suited him, so there was nothing to

do but go back.  Betsy was too tired to return that

day, so he planned to dig his ginseng with something

else, finish his work the following morning, and get the

mattock in the afternoon.



``It's like a knife you've carried for years, or a gun,''

muttered the Harvester.  ``I actually don't know how

to get along without it.  What made me so careless I

can't imagine.  I never before in my life did a trick like

that.  I wonder if I hurried a little.  I certainly was

free to take it.  He always wanted the stuff dug up.  Of

all the stupid tricks, Belshazzar, that was the worst. 

Now Betsy and a half day of wasted time must pay for

my carelessness.  Since I have to go, I'll look a little

farther.  Maybe there is more.  Those woods used to

be full of it.''



According to this programme, the next afternoon the

Harvester again walked down the embankment of the

mourning river and through the ragged woods to the

place where the ginseng had been.  He went forward,

stepping lightly, as men of his race had walked the forest

for ages, swerving to avoid boughs, and looking straight

ahead.  Contrary to his usual custom of coming to heel

in a strange wood, Belshazzar suddenly darted around the

man and took the path they had followed the previous

day.  The animal was performing his office in life; he

had heard or scented something unusual.  The Harvester

knew what that meant.  He looked inquiringly at the

dog, glanced around, and then at the earth.  Belshazzar

proceeded noiselessly at a rapid pace over the leaves: 

Suddenly the master saw the dog stop in a stiff point. 

Lifting his feet lightly and straining his eyes before

him, the Harvester passed a spice thicket and came in

line.



For one second he stood as rigid as Belshazzar.  The

next his right arm shot upward full length, and began

describing circles, his open palm heavenward, and into

his face leapt a glorified expression of exultation.  Face

down in the rifled ginseng bed lay a sobbing girl.  Her

frame was long and slender, a thick coil of dark hair;

bound her head.  A second more and the Harvester bent

and softly patted Belshazzar's head.  The beast broke

point and looked up.  The man caught the dog's chin

in a caressing grip, again touched his head, moved soundless

lips, and waved toward the prostrate figure.  The

dog hesitated.  The Harvester made the same motions. 

Belshazzar softly stepped over the leaves, passed around

the feet of the girl, and paused beside her, nose to earth,

softly sniffing.



In one moment she came swiftly to a sitting posture.



``Oh!'' she cried in a spasm of fright.



Belshazzar reached an investigating nose and wagged

an eager tail.



``Why you are a nice friendly dog!'' said the trembling

voice.



He immediately verified the assertion by offering his

nose for a kiss.  The girl timidly laid a hand on his head.



``Heaven knows I'm lonely enough to kiss a dog,''

she said, ``but suppose you belong to the man who stole

my ginseng, and then ran away so fast he forgot his----

his piece he digged with.''



Belshazzar pressed closer.



``I am just killed, and I don't care whose dog you are,''

sobbed the girl.



She threw her arms around Belshazzar's neck and laid

her white face against his satiny shoulder.  The Harvester

could endure no more.  He took a step forward, his face

convulsed with pain.



``Please don't!'' he begged.  ``I took your ginseng. 

I'll bring it back to-morrow.  There wasn't more than

twenty-five or thirty dollars' worth.  It doesn't amount

to one tear.''



The girl arose so quickly, the Harvester could not see

how she did it.  With a startled fright on her face, and the

dark eyes swimming, she turned to him in one long look. 

Words rolled from the lips of the man in a jumble.  Behind

the tears there was a dull, expressionless blue in the

girl's eyes and her face was so white that it appeared

blank.  He began talking before she could speak, in an

effort to secure forgiveness without condemnation.



``You see, I grow it for a living on land I own, and I've

always gathered all there was in the country and no one

cared.  There never was enough in one place to pay, and

no other man wanted to spend the time, and so I've always

felt free to take it.  Every one knew I did, and no

one ever objected before.  Once I paid Henry Jameson

for the privilege of cleaning it from these woods.  That

was six or seven years ago, and it didn't occur to me that

I wasn't at liberty to dig what has grown since.  I'll

bring it back at once, and pay you for the shrinkage from

gathering it too early.  There won't be much over six

pounds when it's dry.  Please, please don't feel badly. 

Won't you trust me to return it, and make good the

damage I've done?''



The face of the Harvester was eager and his tones

appealing, as he leaned forward trying to make her

understand.



``Certainly!'' said the Girl as she bent to pat the dog,

while she dried her eyes under cover of the movement.

``Certainly!  It can make no difference!''



But as the Harvester drew a deep breath of relief, she

suddenly straightened to full height and looked straight

at him.



``Oh what is the use to tell a pitiful lie!'' she cried. 

``It does make a difference!  It makes all the difference

in the world!  I need that money!  I need it unspeakably. 

I owe a debt I must pay.  What----what did I

understand you to say ginseng is worth?''



``If you will take a few steps,'' said the Harvester, ``and

make yourself comfortable on this log in the shade, I will

tell you all I know about it.''



The girl walked swiftly to the log indicated, seated

herself, and waited.  The Harvester followed to a

respectful distance.



``I can't tell to an ounce what wet roots would weigh,''

he said as easily as he could command his voice to speak

with the heart in him beating wildly, ``and of course

they lose greatly in drying; but I've handled enough that

I know the weight I carried home will come to six pounds

at the very least.  Then you must figure on some loss,

because I dug this before it really was ready.  It does

not reach full growth until September, and if it is taken

too soon there is a decrease in weight.  I will make that

up to you when I return it.''



The troubled eyes were gazing on his face intently,

and the Harvester studied them as he talked.



``You would think, then, there would be all of six

pounds?



``Yes,'' said the Harvester, ``closer eight.  When I

replace the shrinkage there is bound to be over seven.''



``And how much did I understand you to say it brought

a pound?''



``That all depends,'' answered he.  ``If you cure it

yourself, and dry it too much, you lose in weight.  If

you carry it in a small lot to the druggists of Onabasha,

probably you will not get over five dollars for it.''



``Five?''



It was a startled cry.



``How much did you expect?'' asked the Harvester

gently.



``Uncle Henry said he thought he could get fifty cents

a pound for all I could find.''



``If your Uncle Henry has learned at last that ginseng

is a salable article he should know something about the

price also.  Will you tell me what he said, and how you

came to think of gathering roots for the market?''



``There were men talking beneath the trees one Sunday

afternoon about old times and hunting deer, and

they spoke of people who made money long ago gathering

roots and barks, and they mentioned one man who lived

by it yet.''



``Was his name Langston?''



``Yes, I remember because I liked the name.  I was

so eager to earn something, and I can't leave here just

now because Aunt Molly is very ill, so the thought came

that possibly I could gather stuff worth money, after

my work was finished.  I went out and asked questions. 

They said nothing brought enough to make it pay any

one, except this ginseng plant, and the Langston man

almost had stripped the country.  Then uncle said he

used to get stuff here, and he might have got some of

that.  I asked what it was like, so they told me and I

hunted until I found that, and it seemed a quantity to

me.  Of course I didn't know it had to be dried.  Uncle

took a root I dug to a store, and they told him that it

wasn't much used any more, but they would give him

fifty cents a pound for it.  What MAKES you think you

can get five dollars?''



``With your permission,'' said the Harvester.



He seated himself on the log, drew from his pocket

an old pamphlet, and spreading it before her, ran a pencil

along the line of a list of schedule prices for common

drug roots and herbs.  Because he understood, his eyes

were very bright, and his voice a trifle crisp.  A latent

anger springing in his breast was a good curb for his

emotions.  He was closely acquainted with all of the

druggists of Onabasha, and he knew that not one of them

had offered less than standard prices for ginseng.



``The reason I think so,'' he said gently, ``is because

growing it is the largest part of my occupation, and it was

a staple with my father before me.  I am David Langston,

of whom you heard those men speak.  Since I was a

very small boy I have lived by collecting herbs and roots,

and I get more for ginseng than anything else.  Very

early I tired of hunting other people's woods for herbs,

so I began transplanting them to my own.  I moved

that bed out there seven years ago.  What you found has

grown since from roots I overlooked and seeds that fell

at that time.  Now do you think I am enough of an

authority to trust my word on the subject?''



There was not a change of expression on her white

face.



``You surely should know,'' she said wearily, ``and

you could have no possible object in deceiving me.  Please

go on.''



``Any country boy or girl can find ginseng, gather,

wash, and dry it, and get five dollars a pound.  I can

return yours to-morrow and you can cure and take it

to a druggist I will name you, and sell for that.  But if

you will allow me to make a suggestion, you can get

more.  Your roots are now on the trays of an evaporating

house.  They will dry to the proper degree desired by

the trade, so that they will not lose an extra ounce in

weight, and if I send them with my stuff to big wholesale

houses I deal with, they will be graded with the

finest wild ginseng.  It is worth more than the cultivated

and you will get closer eight dollars a pound for

it than five.  There is some speculation in it, and the

market fluctuates: but, as a rule, I sell for the highest

price the drug brings, and, at times when the season is

very dry, I set my own prices.  Shall I return yours or

may I cure and sell it, and bring you the money?''



``How much trouble would that make you?''



``None.  The work of digging and washing is already

finished.  All that remains is to weigh it and make a

memorandum of the amount when I sell.  I should very

much like to do it.  It would be a comfort to see the

money go into your hands.  If you are afraid to trust

me, I will give you the names of several people you can

ask concerning me the next time you go to the city.''



She looked at him steadily.



``Never mind that,'' she said.  ``But why do you offer

to do it for a stranger?  It must be some trouble, no

matter how small you represent it to be.''



``Perhaps I am going to pay you eight and sell for

ten.''



``I don't think you can.  Five sounds fabulous to me. 

I can't believe that.  If you wanted to make money you

needn't have told me you took it.  I never would have

known.  That isn't your reason!''



``Possibly I would like to atone for those tears I

caused,'' said the Harvester.



``Don't think of that!  They are of no consequence

to any one.  You needn't do anything for me on that

account.''



``Don't search for a reason,'' said the Harvester, in

his gentlest tones.  ``Forget that feature of the case. 

Say I'm peculiar, and allow me to do it because it would

be a pleasure.  In close two weeks I will bring you the

money.  Is it a bargain?''



``Yes, if you care to make it.''



``I care very much.  We will call that settled.''



``I wish I could tell you what it will mean to me,'' said

the Girl.



``If you only would,'' plead the Harvester.



`` I must not burden a stranger with my troubles.''



``But if it would make the stranger so happy!''



``That isn't possible.  I must face life and bear what

it brings me alone.''



``Not unless you choose,'' said the Harvester.  ``That

is, if you will pardon me, a narrow view of life.  It cuts

other people out of the joy of service.  If you can't tell

me, would you trust a very lovely and gentle woman I

could bring to you?''



``No more than you.  It is my affair; I must work it

out myself.''



``I am mighty sorry,'' said the Harvester.  ``I believe

you err in that decision.  Think it over a day or so, and

see if two heads are not better than one.  You will

realize when this ginseng matter is settled that you profited

by trusting me.  The same will hold good along

other lines, if you only can bring yourself to think so. 

At any rate, try.  Telling a trouble makes it lighter. 

Sympathy should help, if nothing can be done.  And

as for money, I can show you how to earn sums at least

worth your time, if you have nothing else you want

to do.''



The Girl bent toward him.



``Oh please do tell me!'' she cried eagerly.  ``I've tried

and tried to find some way ever since I have been here,

but every one else I have met says I can't, and nothing

seems to be worth anything.  If you only would tell me

something I could do!''



``If you will excuse my saying so,'' said the Harvester,

``it appeals to me that ease, not work, is the

thing you require.  You appear extremely worn.  Won't

you let me help you find a way to a long rest first?''



``Impossible!'' cried the Girl.  ``I know I am white

and appear ill, but truly I never have been sick in all

my life.  I have been having trouble and working too

much, but I'll be better soon.  Believe me, there is no

rest for me now.  I must earn the money I owe first.''



``There is a way, if you care to take it,'' said the

Harvester.  ``In my work I have become very well

acquainted with the chief surgeon of the city hospital. 

Through him I happen to know that he has a free bed in

a beautiful room, where you could rest until you are

perfectly strong again, and that room is empty just now. 

When you are well, I will tell you about the work.''



As she arose the Harvester stood, and tall and straight

she faced him.



``Impossible!'' she said.  ``It would be brutal to leave my

aunt.  I cannot pay to rest in a hospital ward, and I will

not accept charity.  If you can put me in the way of earning,

even a few cents a day, at anything I could do outside

the work necessary to earn my board here, it would bring

me closer to happiness than anything else on earth.''



``What I suggest is not impossible,'' said the Harvester

softly.  ``If you will go, inside an hour a sweet and gentle

lady will come for you and take you to ease and perfect

rest until you are strong again.  I will see that your aunt

is cared for scrupulously.  I can't help urging you.  It

is a crime to talk of work to a woman so manifestly worn

as you are.''



``Then we will not speak of it,'' said the Girl wearily. 

``It is time for me to go, anyway.  I see you mean to

be very kind, and while I don't in the least understand

it, I do hope you feel I am grateful.  If half you say about

the ginseng comes true, I can make a payment worth

while before I had hoped to.  I have no words to tell you

what that will mean to me.''



``If this debt you speak of were paid, could you rest

then?''



``I could lie down and give up in peace, and I think

I would.''



``I think you wouldn't,'' said the Harvester, ``because

you wouldn't be allowed.  There are people in these days

who make a business of securing rest for the tired and

over weary, and they would come and prevent that if

you tried it.  Please let me make another suggestion. 

If you owe money to some one you feel needs it and the

debt is preying on you, let's pay it.''



He drew a small check-book from his pocket and slipped

a pen from a band.



``If you will name the amount and give me the address,

you shall be free to go to the rest I ask for you inside

an hour.''



Then slowly from head to foot she looked at him.



``Why?''



``Because your face and attitude clearly indicate that

you are over tired.  Believe me, you do yourself wrong

if you refuse.''



``In what way would changing creditors rest me?''



``I thought perhaps you were owing some one who

needed the money.  I am not a rich man, but I have no

one save myself to provide for and I have funds lying

idle that I would be glad to use for you.  If you make a

point of it, when you are rested, you can repay me.''



``My creditor needs the money, but I should prefer

owing him rather than a perfect stranger.  What you

suggest would help me not at all.  I must go now.''



``Very well,'' said the Harvester.  ``If you will tell me

whom to ask for and where you live, I will come to see

you to-morrow and bring you some pamphlets.  With

these and with a little help you soon can earn any amount

a girl is likely to owe.  It will require but a little while. 

Where can I find you?''



The Girl hesitated and for the first time a hint of colour

flushed her cheek.  But courage appeared to be her

strong point.



``Do you live in this part of the country?'' she asked.



``I live ten miles from here, east of Onabasha,'' he

answered.



``Do you know Henry Jameson?''



``By sight and by reputation.''



``Did you ever know anything kind or humane of him?''



``I never did.''



``My name is Ruth Jameson.  At present I am

indebted to him for the only shelter I have.  His wife

is ill through overwork and worry, and I am paying for

my bed and what I don't eat, principally, by attempting

her work.  It scarcely would be fair to Uncle Henry to 

say that I do it.  I stagger around as long as I can stand,

then I sit through his abuse.  He is a pleasant man. 

Please don't think I am telling you this to harrow your

sympathy further.  The reason I explain is because I

am driven.  If I do not, you will misjudge me when I

say that I only can see you here.  I understood what

you meant when you said Uncle Henry should have

known the price of ginseng if he knew it was for sale. 

He did.  He knew what he could get for it, and what

he meant to pay me.  That is one of his original methods

with a woman.  If he thought I could earn anything

worth while, he would allow me, if I killed myself doing

it; and then he would take the money by force if necessary. 

So I can meet you here only.  I can earn just

what I may in secret.  He buys cattle and horses and

is away from home much of the day, and when Aunt

Molly is comfortable I can have a few hours.''



``I understand,'' said the Harvester.  ``But this is an

added hardship.  Why do you remain?  Why subject

yourself to force and work too heavy for you?''



``Because his is the only roof on earth where I feel I

can pay for all I get.  I don't care to discuss it, I only

want you to say you understand, if I ask you to bring the

pamphlets here and tell me how I can earn money.''



``I do,'' said the Harvester earnestly, although his

heart was hot in protest.  ``You may be very sure that

I will not misjudge you.  Shall I come at two o'clock

to-morrow, Miss Jameson?''



``If you will be so kind.''



The Harvester stepped aside and she passed him and

crossing the rifled ginseng patch went toward a low

brown farmhouse lying in an unkept garden, beside a

ragged highway.  The man sat on the log she had vacated,

held his head between his hands and tried to think,

but he could not for big waves of joy that swept over

him when he realized that at last he had found her, had

spoken with her, and had arranged a meeting for the

morrow.



``Belshazzar,'' he said softly, ``I wish I could leave you

to protect her.  Every day you prove to me that I need

you, but Heaven knows her necessity is greater.  Bel,

she makes my heart ache until it feels like jelly.  There

seems to be just one thing to do.  Get that fool debt

paid like lightning, and lift her out of here quicker than

that.  Now, we will go and see Doc, and call off the

watch-dogs of the law.  Ahead of them, aren't we,

Belshazzar?  There is a better day coming; we feel it in our

bones, don't we, old partner?''



The Harvester started through the woods on a rush,

and as the exercise warmed his heart, he grew wonderfully

glad.  At last he had found her.  Uncertainty was

over.  If ever a girl needed a home and care he thought

she did.  He was so jubilant that he felt like crying

aloud, shouting for joy, but by and by the years of sober

repression made their weight felt, so he climbed into

the wagon and politely requested Betsy to make her

best time to Onabasha.  Betsy had been asked to make

haste so frequently of late that she at first almost doubted

the sanity of her master, the law of whose life, until

recently, had been to take his time.  Now he appeared

to be in haste every day.  She had become so accustomed

to being urged to hurry that she almost had developed

a gait; so at the Harvester's suggestion she did her level

best to Onabasha and the hospital, where she loved to

nose Belshazzar and rest near the watering tap under

a big tree.



The Harvester went down the hall and into the office

on the run, and his face appeared like a materialized

embodiment of living joy.  Doctor Carey turned at his

approach and then bounded half way across the room,

his hands outstretched.



``You've found her, David!''



The Harvester grabbed the hand of his friend and

stood pumping it up and down while he gulped at the

lump in his throat, and big tears squeezed from his eyes,

but he could only nod his proud head.



``Found her!'' exulted Doctor Carey.  ``Really found

her!  Well that's great!  Sit down and tell me, boy! 

Is she sick, as we feared?  Did you only see her or did

you get to talk with her?''



``Well sir,'' said the Harvester, choking back his

emotions, ``you remember that ginseng I told you about

getting on the old Jameson place last night.  To-day,

I learned I'd lost that hand-made mattock I use most,

and I went back for it, and there she was.''



``In the country?''



``Yes sir!''



``Well why didn't we think of it before?''



``I suppose first we would have had to satisfy

ourselves that she wasn't in town, anyway.''



``Sure!  That would be the logical way to go at it! 

And so you found her?''



``Yes sir, I found her!  Just Belshazzar and I!  I was

going along on my way to the place, and he ran past

me and made a stiff point, and when I came up, there she

was!'' 



``There she was?''



``Yes sir; there she was!''



They shook hands again.



``Then of course you spoke to her.''



``Yes I spoke to her.''



`` Were you pleased?''



``With her speech and manner?----yes.  But, Doc, if

ever a woman needed everything on earth!''



``Well did you get any kind of a start made?''



``I couldn't do so very much.  I had to go a little slow

for fear of frightening her, but I tried to get her to come

here and she won't until a debt she owes is paid, and she's

in no condition to work.''



``Got any idea how much it is?''



``No, but it can't be any large sum.  I tried to offer

to pay it, but she had no hesitation in telling me she

preferred owing a man she knew to a stranger.''



``Well if she is so particular, how did she come to tell

you first thing that she was in debt?''



The Harvester explained.



``Oh I see!'' said the doctor.  ``Well you'll have to

baby her along with the idea that she is earning money

and pay her double until you get that off her mind, and

while you are at it, put in your best licks, my boy; perk

right up and court her like a house afire.  Women like it. 

All of them do.  They glory in feeling that a man is

crazy about them.''



``Well I'm insane enough over her,'' said the Harvester,

``but I'd hate like the nation for her to know it. 

Seems as if a woman couldn't respect such an addle-pate

as I am lately.''



``Don't you worry about that,'' advised the doctor. 

``Just you make love to her.  Go at it in the good old-

fashioned way.''



``But maybe the `good old-fashioned way' isn't my

way.''



``What's the difference whose way it is, if it wins?''



``But Kipling says:  `Each man makes love his own

way!' ''



``I seem to have heard you mention that name be

fore,'' said the doctor.  ``Do you regard him as an

authority?''



``I do!'' said the Harvester.  ``Especially when he

advises me after my own heart and reason.  Miss Jameson

is not a silly girl.  She's a woman, and twenty-four

at least.  I don't want her to care for a trick or a

pretence.  I do want her to love me.  Not that I am worth

her attention, but because she needs some strong man

fearfully, and I am ready and more `willing' than the

original Barkis.  But, like him, I have to let her know

it in my way, and court her according to the promptings

of my heart.''



``You deceive yourself!'' said the doctor flatly.  ``That's

all bosh!  Your tongue says it for the satisfaction of

your ears, and it does sound well.  You will court her

according to your ideas of the conventions, as you understand

them, and strictly in accordance with what you

consider the respect due her.  If you had followed the

thing you call the `promptings of your heart,' you would

have picked her up by main force and brought her to

my best ward, instead of merely suggesting it and giving

up when she said no.  If you had followed your heart,

you would have choked the name and amount out of her

and paid that devilish debt.  You walk away in a case

like that, and then have the nerve to come here and

prate to me about following your heart.  I'll wager my

last dollar your heart is sore because you were not allowed

to help her; but on the proposition that you followed

its promptings I wouldn't stake a penny.  That's all

tommy-rot!''



``It is,'' agreed the Harvester.  ``Utter!  But what can

a man do?''



``I don't know what you can do!  I'd have paid that

debt and brought her to the hospital.''



``I'll go and ask Mrs. Carey about your courtship.  I

want her help on this, anyway.  I can pick up Miss

Jameson and bring her here if any man can, but she is

nursing a sick woman who depends solely on her for care.

She is above average size, and she has a very decided

mind of her own.  I don't think you would use force

and do what you think best for her, if you were in my

place.  You would wait until you understood the situation

better, and knew that what you did was for the

best, ultimately.''



``I don't know whether I would or not.  One thing is

sure:  I'm mighty glad you have found her.  May I

tell my wife?''



``Please do!  And ask her if I may depend on her if

I need a woman's help.  Now I'll call off the valiant

police and go home and take a good, sound sleep.  Haven't

had many since I first saw her.''



So Betsy trotted down the valley, up the embankment,

crossed the railroad, over the levee across Singing Water,

and up the hill to the cabin.  As they passed it, the

Harvester jumped from the wagon, tossed the hitching

strap to Belshazzar, and entered.  He walked straight

to her door, unlocked it, and uncovering, went inside. 

Softly he passed from piece to piece of the furniture he

had made for her, and then surveyed the walls and floor.



``It isn't half good enough,'' he said, ``but it will have

to answer until I can do better.  Surely she will know

I tried and care for that, anyway.  I wonder how long

it will take me to get her here.  Oh, if I only could know

she was comfortable and happy!  Happy!  She doesn't

appear as if she ever had heard that word.  Well this

will be a good place to teach her.  I've always enjoyed

myself here.  I'm going to have faith that I can win

her and make her happy also.  When I go to the stable

to do my work for the night if I could know she was in

this cabin and glad of it, and if I could hear her down

here singing like a happy care-free girl, I'd scarcely be

able to endure the joy of it.''

