






CHAPTER XIV



SNOWY WINGS



The Harvester sat at the table in deep thoughts

until the lights in the Girl's room were darkened

and everything was quiet.  Then he locked

the screens inside and went into the night.  The moon

flooded all the hillside, until coarse print could have been

read with keen eyes in its light.  A restlessness, born of

exultation he could not allay or control, was on him.  She

had not forgotten!  After this, the dream would be

effaced by reality.  It was the beginning.  He scarcely

had dared hope for so much.  Surely it presaged the love

with which she some day would come to him and crown

his life.  He walked softly up and down the drive, passing

her windows, unable to think of sleep.  Over and over

he dwelt on the incidents of the day, so inevitably he

came to his promise.



``Merciful Heaven!'' he muttered.  ``How can such

things happen?  The poor, overworked, tired, suffering

girl.  It will give her some comfort.  She will feel better. 

It has to be done.  I believe I will do the worst part of it

while she sleeps.''



He went to the cabin, crept very close to one of her

windows and listened intently.  Surely no mortal awake

could lie motionless so long.  She must be sleeping.  He

patted Belshazzar, whispered, ``Watch, boy, watch for

your life!'' and then crossed to the dry-house.  Beside

it he found a big roll of coffee sacks that he used in

collecting roots, and going to the barn, he took a spade and

mattock.  Then he climbed the hill to the oak; in the

white moonlight laid off his measurements and began

work.  His heart was very tender as he lifted the earth,

and threw it into the tops of the big bags he had propped

open.



``I'll line it with a couple of sheets and finish the edge

with pond lilies and ferns,'' he planned, ``and I'll drag

this earth from sight, and cover it with brush until I

need it.''



Sometimes he paused in his work to rest a few minutes

and then he stood and glanced around him.  Several

times he went down the hill and slipped close to a window,

but he could not hear a sound.  When his work was

finished, he stood before the oak, scraping clinging earth

from the mattock with which he had cut roots he had

been compelled to remove.  He was tired now and he

thought he would go to his room and sleep until daybreak. 

As he turned the implement he remembered how through

it he had found her, and now he was using it in her

service.  He smiled as he worked, and half listened to

the steady roll of sound encompassing him.  A cool

breath swept from the lake and he wondered if it found

her wet, hot cheek.  A wild duck in the rushes below

gave an alarm signal, and it ran in subdued voice, note

by note, along the shore.  The Harvester gripped the

mattock and stood motionless.  Wild things had taught

him so many lessons he heeded their warnings instinctively. 

Perhaps it was a mink or muskrat approaching

the rushes.  Listening intently, he heard a stealthy step

coming up the path behind him.



The Harvester waited.  He soundlessly moved around

the trunk of the big tree.  An instant more the night

prowler stopped squarely at the head of the open grave,

and jumped back with an oath.  He stood tense a second,

then advanced, scratched a match and dropped it into

the depths of the opening.  That instant the Harvester

recognized Henry Jameson, and with a spring landed between

the man's shoulders and sent him, face down, headlong

into the grave.  He snatched one of the sacks of

earth, and tipping it, gripped the bottom and emptied

the contents on the head and shoulders of the prostrate

man.  Then he dropped on him and feeling across his

back took an ugly, big revolver from a pocket.  He swung

to the surface and waited until Henry Jameson crawled

from under the weight of earth and began to rise; then,

at each attempt, he knocked him down.  At last he

caught the exhausted man by the collar and dragged

him to the path, where he dropped him and stood gloating.



``So!'' he said; ``It's you!  Coming to execute your

threat, are you?  What's the matter with my finishing

you, loading your carcass with a few stones into this sack,

and dropping you in the deepest part of the lake.''



There was no reply.



``Ain't you a little hasty?'' asked the Harvester. 

``Isn't it rather cold blooded to come sneaking when you

thought I'd be asleep?  Don't you think it would be

low down to kill a man on his wedding day?''



Henry Jameson arose cautiously and faced the Harvester.



``Who have you killed?'' he panted.



``No one,'' answered the Harvester.  ``This is for the

victim of a member of your family, but I never dreamed

I'd have the joy of planting any of you in it first, even

temporarily.  Did you rest well?  What I should have

done was to fill in, tread down, and leave you at the

bottom.''



Jameson retreated a few steps.  The Harvester laughed

and advanced the same distance.



``Now then,'' he said, ``explain what you are doing

on my premises, a few hours after your threat, and

armed with another revolver before I could return the

one I took from you this afternoon.  You must grow

them on bushes at your place, they seem so numerous. 

Speak up!  What are you doing here?''



There was no answer.



``There are three things it might be,'' mused the

Harvester.  ``You might think to harm me, but you're

watched on that score and I don't believe you'd enjoy

the result sure to follow.  You might contemplate trying

to steal Ruth's money again, but we'll pass that up. 

You might want to go through my woods to inform yourself

as to what I have of value there.  But, in all prob-

ability, you are after me.  Well, here I am.  Go ahead! 

Do what you came to!''



The Harvester stepped toward the lake bank and

Jameson, turning to watch him, exposed a face ghastly

through its grime.



``Look here!'' cried the Harvester, sickening.  ``We

will end this right now.  I was rather busy this afternoon,

but I wasn't too hurried to take that little weapon

of yours to the chief of police and tell him where and how

I got it and what occurred.  He was to return it to you

to-morrow with his ultimatum.  When I have added

the history of to-night, reinforced by another gun, he

will understand your intentions and know where you

belong.  You should be confined, but because your name

is the same as the Girl's, and there is of your blood in her

veins, I'll give you one more chance.  I'll let you go this

time, but I'll report you, and deliver this implement to

be added to your collection at headquarters.  And I

tell you, and I'll tell them, that if ever I find you on my

premises again, I'll finish you on sight.  Is that clear?''



Jameson nodded.



``What I should do is to plump you squarely into

confinement, as I could easily enough, but that's not my

way.  I am going to let you off, but you go knowing the

law.  One thing more:  Don't leave with any distorted

ideas in your head.  I saw Ruth the day she stepped

from the cars in Onabasha and I loved her.  I wanted

to court and marry her, as any man would the girl he

loves, but you spoiled that with your woman killing

brutality.  So I married her in Onabasha this afternoon. 

You can see the records at the county clerk's office and

interview the minister who performed the ceremony,

if you doubt me.  Ruth is in her room, comfortable as

I can make her, asleep and unafraid, thank God!  This

grave is for her mother.  The Girl wants her lifted from

the horrible place you put her, and laid where it is

sheltered and pleasant.  Now, I'll see you off my land. 

Hurry yourself!''



With the Harvester following, Henry Jameson went

back over the path he had come, until he reached and

mounted the horse he had ridden.  As the Harvester

watched him, Jameson turned in the saddle and spoke

for the second time.



``What will you give me in cold cash to tell you who

she is, and where her mother's people are?''



The Harvester leaped for the bridle and missed. 

Jameson bent over the horse and lashed it to a run. 

Half way to the oak the Harvester remembered the

revolver, but being unaccustomed to weapons, he had

forgotten it when he needed it most.  He replaced the

earth in the sack and dragged it away, then plunged

into the lake, and afterward went to bed, where he slept

soundly until dawn.  First, he slipped into the living-

room and wrote a note to the Girl.  Then he fed Belshazzar

and ate a hearty breakfast.  He stationed the

dog at her door, gave him the note, and went to the oak. 

There he arranged everything neatly and as he desired,

and then hitching Betsy he quietly guided her down the

drive and over the road to Onabasha.  He went to an

undertaking establishment, made all his arrangements,

and then called up and talked with the minister who

had performed the marriage ceremony the previous day.



The sun shining in her face awoke Ruth and she lay

revelling in the light.  ``Maybe it will colour me faster

than the powder,'' she thought.  ``How peculiar for him

to say what he did!  I always thought men detested it. 

But he is not like any one else.  ``She lay looking around

the beautiful room and wondering where the Harvester

was.  She could not hear him.  Then, slowly and painfully,

she dragged her aching limbs from the bed and

went to the door.  The dog was gone from the porch

and she could not see the man at the stable.  She

selected a frock and putting it on opened the door. 

Belshazzar arose and offered this letter:



DEAR RUTH:



I have gone to keep my promise.  You are locked in

with Bel.  Please obey me and do not step outside the

door until four o'clock.  Then put on a pretty white

dress, and with the dog, come to the bridge to meet me. 

I hope you will not suffer and fret.  Put away your

clothing, arrange the rooms to keep busy, or better

yet, lie in the swing and rest.  There is food in the ice

chest, pantry, and cellar.  Forgive me for leaving you

to-day, but I thought you would feel easier to have this

over.  I am so glad to bring your mother here.  I hope

it will make you happy enough to meet us with a smile. 

Do not forget the pink box until the reality comes.

                         With love,

                                   DAVID.





The Girl went to the kitchen and found food.  She

offered to share with Belshazzar, but she could see from

his indifference he was not hungry.  Then she returned

to the room flooded with light, and filled with treasures,

and tried to decide how she would arrange her clothing. 

She spent hours opening boxes and putting dainty, pretty

garments in the drawers, hanging the dresses, and placing

the toilet articles.  Often she wearily dropped to the

chairs and couches, or gazed from door and windows at

the pictures they framed.  ``I wonder why he doesn't

want me to go outside,'' she thought.  ``I wouldn't

be afraid in the least, with Bel.  I'd just love to go across

to that wonderful little river of Singing Water and sit

in the shade; but I won't open the door until four o'clock,

just as he wrote.''



When she thought of where he had gone, and why, the

swift tears filled her eyes, but she forced them back and

resolutely went to investigate the dining-room.  Then

for two hours she was a home builder, with a touch of

that homing instinct found in the heart of every good

woman.  First, she looked where the Harvester had said

the dishes were, and suddenly sat on the floor exulting. 

There was a quantity of old chipped and cracked white

ware and some gorgeous baking powder prizes; but there

were also big blue, green, and pink bowls, several large

lustre plates, and a complete tea set without chip or

blemish, two beautiful pitchers, and a number of willow

pieces.  She set the green bowl on the dining table,

the blue on the living-room, and took the pink herself,

while a beautiful yellow one she placed in the dining-

room window seat.



``Oh, if I only dared fill them with those lovely flowers!'' 

She stood in the window and gazed longingly toward the

lake.  ``I know what colour I'd like to put in each of

them,'' she said, ``but I promised not to touch anything,

and the ones I want most I never saw before, and I'm

not to go out anyway.  I can't see the sense in that,

when I'm not at all afraid, but if he does this wonderful

thing for me I must do what he asks.  Oh mother,

mother!  Are you really coming to this beautiful place

and to rest at last?''



She sank to the window seat and lay trembling, but

she bravely restrained the tears.  After a time she

remembered the upstairs and went to see the coverlets. 

She found a half dozen beautiful ones, and smiled as

she examined the stiffly conventionalized birds facing

each other in the border designs, and in one corner of

each blanket she read, woven in the cloth----

     Peter and John

        Hartman

        Wooster

         Ohio

         1837



She took a blue and a green one, several fine skins

from the fur box the Harvester had told her about, and

went downstairs.  It required all her strength to push

the heavy tables before the fireplaces.  She spread papers

on them to stand on, and tacked a skin above each

mantel.  She set all of the candlesticks, except those 

she wanted to use, in the lower part of an empty bookcase. 

A pair of black walnut she placed on the living-

room mantel, together with a big blue plate, a yellow

one, and an old brass candlestick.  She admired the

effect very much.  She spread the blue coverlet on

the couch, and arranged the blue bowl and some books

on the table.  Here and there she hung a skin across a

chair back, or spread it in a wide window seat.  Having

exhausted all her resources, she returned to the dining-

room, spread a skin before the hearth and in each window

seat, set a pink and green lustre plate on the mantel,

and a pair of oak candlesticks, and arranged the lustre

tea set on the side table.  The pink coverlet she took

for herself, and after resting a time she was surprised

on going back to the rooms to see how homelike they

appeared.



At three o'clock she dressed and at almost four unlocked

the screen, called Belshazzar to her side, and slowly

went down the drive to the bridge.  She had used the

pink powder, put on a beautiful white dress, carefully

arranged her hair, and she wore the pearl ornament. 

Once her fingers strayed to the pendant and she said

softly, ``I think both he and mother would like me to

wear it.''



At the foot of the hill she stopped at a bench and sat

in the shade waiting.  Belshazzar stretched beside her,

and gazed at her with questioning, friendly dog eyes. 

The Girl looked from Singing Water to the lake, and

up the hill to make sure it was real.  She tried to quiet

her quivering muscles and nerves.  He had asked her

to meet him with a smile.  How could she?  He could

not have understood what it meant when he made the

request.  There never would be any way to make him

realize; indeed, why should he?  The smile must be

ready.  He had loved his mother deeply, and yet he

had said he did not grieve to lay her to rest.  Earth

had not been kind.  Then why should she sorrow for

her mother?  Again life had been not only unkind, but

bitterly cruel.



Belshazzar arose and watched down the drive.  The

Girl looked also.  Through the gate and up the levee

came a strange procession.  First walked the Harvester

alone, with bared head, and he carried an arm load of

white lilies.  A carriage containing a man and several

women followed.  Then came a white hearse with snowy

plumes, and behind that another carriage filled with

people, and Betsy followed drawing men in the spring

wagon.  The Girl arose and as she stepped to the drive

she swayed uncertainly an instant.



``Gracious Heaven!'' she gasped.  ``He is bringing

her in white, and with flowers and song!''



Then she lifted her head, and with a smile on her lips

she went to meet him.  As she reached his side, he

tenderly put an arm around her, and came on steadily.



``Courage Girl!'' he whispered.  ``Be as brave as she

was!''



Around the driveway and up the hill he half carried

her, to a seat he had placed under the oak.  Before her

lay the white-lined grave, and the Harvester arranged

his lilies around it.  The teams stopped at the barn and

men came up the hill bearing a white burden.  Behind

them followed the minister who yesterday had performed

their marriage ceremony, and after him a choir

of trained singers softly chanting:



     ``Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord,

     For they shall cease from their labours.''





``But David,'' panted the Girl, ``It was mean and

poor.  That is not she!''



``Sush!'' said the Harvester.  ``It is your mother. 

The location was high and dry, and it has been only a

short time.  We wrapped her in white silk, laid her

on a soft cushion and pillow, and housed her securely. 

She can sleep well now, Ruth.  Listen!''



Covered with white lilies, slowly the casket sank into

earth.  At its head stood the minister and as it began

to disappear, the white doves, frightened by the strange

conveyances at the stable, came circling above.  The

minister looked up.  He lifted a clear tenor, and softly

and purely he sang, while at a wave of his hand the choir

joined him:



     ``Oh, come angel band!  Oh, come, and around me stand!

     Oh, bear me away on your snowy wings to my immortal home!''





He uttered a low benediction, and singing, the people

turned and went downhill.  The Harvester gathered

the Girl in his arms and carried her to the lake.  He

laid her in his boat and taking the oars sent it along the

bank in the shade, and through cool, green places.



``Now cry all you choose!'' he said.



The overstrained Girl covered her face and sobbed

wildly.  After a time he began to talk to her gently,

and before she realized it, she was listening.



``Death has been kinder to her than life, Ruth,'' he

said.  ``She is lying as you saw her last, I think.  We

lifted her very tenderly, wrapped her carefully, and

brought her gently as we could.  Now they shall rest

together, those little mothers of ours, to whom men

were not kind; and in the long sleep we must forget, as

they have forgotten, and forgive, as no doubt they have

forgiven.  Don't you want to take some lilies to them

before we go to the cabin?  Right there on your left

are unusually large ones.''



The Girl sat up, dried her eyes and gathered the white

flowers.  When the last vehicle crossed the bridge, the

Harvester tied the boat and helped her up the hill.  The

old oak stretched its wide arms above two little mounds,

both moss covered and scattered with flowers.  The

Girl added her store and then went to the Harvester, and

sank at his feet.



``Ruth, you shall not!'' cried the man.  ``I simply

will not have that.  Come now, I will bring you back

this evening.''



He helped her to the veranda and laid her in the swing. 

He sat beside her while she rested, and then they went

into the cabin for supper.  Soon he had her telling

what she had found, and he was making notes of what

was yet required to transform the cabin into a home. 

The Harvester left it to her to decide whether he should

roof the bridge the next day or make a trip for furnishings. 

She said he had better buy what they needed

and then she could make the cabin homelike while he

worked on the bridge.

