





CHAPTER V





WHEN THE HARVESTER MADE GOOD



The sassafras and skunk cabbage were harvested. 

The last workman was gone.  There was not a

sound at Medicine Woods save the babel of bird

and animal notes and the never-ending accompaniment

of Singing Water.  The geese had gone over, some flocks

pausing to rest and feed on Loon Lake, and ducks that

homed there were busy among the reeds and rushes.  In

the deep woods the struggle to maintain and reproduce

life was at its height, and the courting songs of gaily

coloured birds were drowned by hawk screams and crow

calls of defiance.



Every night before he plunged into the lake and went

to sleep the Harvester made out a list of the most pressing

work that he would undertake on the coming day.  By

systematizing and planning ahead he was able to accomplish

an unbelievable amount.  The earliest rush of

spring drug gathering was over.  He could be more

deliberate in collecting the barks he wanted.  Flowers

that were to be gathered at bloom time and leaves were

not yet ready.  The heavy leaf coverings he had helped

the winds to heap on his beds of lily of the valley, 

bloodroot, and sarsaparilla were removed carefully.



Inside the cabin the Harvester cleaned the glass, swept

the floors with a soft cloth pinned over the broom, and

hung pale yellow blinds at the windows.  Every spare minute

he worked on making furniture, and with each piece

he grew in experience and ventured on more difficult

undertakings.  He had progressed so far that he now

allowed himself an hour each day on the candlesticks

for her.  Every evening he opened her door and with soft

cloths polished the furniture he had made.  When her

room was completed and the dining-room partially finished,

the Harvester took time to stain the cabin and

porch roofs the shade of the willow leaves, and on the logs

and pillars he used oil that served to intensify the light

yellow of the natural wood.  With that much accomplished

he felt better.  If she came now, in a few hours

he would be able to offer a comfortable room, enough

conveniences to live until more could be provided, and

of food there was always plenty.



His daily programme was to feed and water his animals

and poultry, prepare breakfast for himself and Belshazzar,

and go to the woods, dry-house or store-room

to do the work most needful in his harvesting.  In the

afternoon he laboured over furniture and put finishing

touches on the new cabin, and after supper he carved and

found time to read again, as before his dream.



He was so happy he whistled and sang at his work much

of the time at first, but later there came days when doubts

crept in and all his will power was required to proceed

steadily.  As the cabin grew in better shape for occupancy

each day, more pressing became the thought of how he

was going to find and meet the girl of his dream. Sometimes

it seemed to him that the proper way was to remain

at home and go on with his work, trusting her to come to

him.  At such times he was happy and gaily whistled

and sang:



     ``Stay in your chimney corner,

          Don't roam the world about,

       Stay in your chimney corner,

          And your own true love will find you out.''





But there were other days while grubbing in the forest,

battling with roots in the muck and mire of the lake

bank, staggering under a load for two men, scarcely taking

time to eat and sleep enough to keep his condition

perfect, when that plan seemed too hopeless and senseless

to contemplate.  Then he would think of locking

the cabin, leaving the drugs to grow undisturbed by

collecting, hiring a neighbour to care for his living

creatures, and starting a search over the world to find her. 

There came times when the impulse to go was so strong

that only the desire to take a day more to decide where,

kept him.  Every time his mind was made up to start

the following day came the counter thought, what if I

should go and she should come in my absence?  In the

dream she came.  That alone held him, even in the face

of the fact that if he left home some one might know of

and rifle the precious ginseng bed, carefully tended these

seven years for the culmination the coming fall would

bring.  That ginseng was worth many thousands and he

had laboured over it, fighting worms and parasites, covering

and uncovering it with the changing seasons, a

siege of loving labour.



Sometimes a few hours of misgiving tortured him, but

as a rule he was cheerful and happy in his preparations. 

Without intending to do it he was gradually furnishing

the cabin.  Every few days saw a new piece finished in

the workshop.  Each trip to Onabasha ended in the

purchase of some article he could see would harmonize

with his colour plans for one of the rooms.  He had filled

the flower boxes for the veranda with delicate plants

that were growing luxuriantly.



Then he designed and began setting a wild-flower

garden outside her door and started climbing vines over

the logs and porches, but whatever he planted he found

in the woods or took from beds he cultivated.  Many of

the medicinal vines had leaves, flowers, twining tendrils,

and berries or fruits of wonderful beauty.  Every trip

to the forest he brought back a half dozen vines, plants,

or bushes to set for her.  All of them either bore lovely

flowers, berries, quaint seed pods, or nuts, and beside

the drive and before the cabin he used especial care

to plant a hedge of bittersweet vines, burning bush,

and trees of mountain ash, so that the glory of their colour

would enliven the winter when days might be gloomy.



He planted wild yam under her windows that its queer

rattles might amuse her, and hop trees where their castanets

would play gay music with every passing wind of

fall.  He started a thicket along the opposite bank of

Singing Water where it bubbled past her window, and in

it he placed in graduated rows every shrub and small tree

bearing bright flower, berry, or fruit.  Those remaining

he used as a border for the driveway from the lake, so that

from earliest spring her eyes would fall on a procession of

colour beginning with catkins and papaw lilies, and running

through alders, haws, wild crabs, dogwood, plums,

and cherry intermingled with forest saplings and vines

bearing scarlet berries in fall and winter.  In the damp soil

of the same character from which they were removed, in

the shade and under the skilful hand of the Harvester, few

of these knew they had been transplanted, and when May

brought the catbirds and orioles much of this growth was

flowering quite as luxuriantly as the same species in the

woods.



The Harvester was in the store-house packing boxes

for shipment.  His room was so small and orders so

numerous that he could not keep large quantities on hand. 

All crude stuff that he sent straight from the drying-house

was fresh and brightly coloured.  His stock always was

marked prime A-No. 1.  There was a step behind him and

the Harvester turned.  A boy held out a telegram.  The

man opened it to find an order for some stuff to be shipped

that day to a large laboratory in Toledo.



His hands deftly tied packages and he hastily packed

bottles and nailed boxes.  Then he ran to harness Betsy



and load.  As he drove down the hill to the bridge he

looked at his watch and shook his head.



``What are you good for at a pinch, Betsy?'' he asked

as he flecked the surprised mare's flank with a switch. 

Belshazzar cocked his ears and gazed at the Harvester

in astonishment.



``That wasn't enough to hurt her,'' explained the man. 

``She must speed up.  This is important business.  The

amount involved is not so much, but I do love to make

good.  It's a part of my religion, Bel.  And my religion

has so precious few parts that if I fail in the observance

of any of them it makes a big hole in my performances. 

Now we don't want to end a life full of holes, so we must

get there with this stuff, not because it's worth the exertion

in dollars and cents, but because these men patronize

us steadily and expect us to fill orders, even by telegraph. 

Hustle, Betsy!''



The whip fell again and Belshazzar entered indignant

protest.



``It isn't going to hurt her,'' said the Harvester

impatiently.  ``She may walk all the way back.  She can rest

while I get these boxes billed and loaded if she can be

persuaded to get them to the express office on time.  The

trouble with Betsy is that she wants to meander along the

road with a loaded wagon as her mother and grandmother

before her wandered through the woods wearing a bell to

attract the deer.  Father used to say that her mother

was the smartest bell mare that ever entered the forest. 

She'd not only find the deer, but she'd make friends with

them and lead them straight as a bee-line to where he was

hiding.  Betsy, you must travel!''



The Harvester drew the lines taut, and the whip fell

smartly.  The astonished Betsy snorted and pranced down

the valley as fast as she could, but every step indicated

that she felt outraged and abused.  This was the loveliest

day of the season.  The sun was shining, the air was

heavy with the perfume of flowering shrubs and trees, the

orchards of the valley were white with bloom.  Farmers

were hurrying back and forth across fields, leaving up

turned lines of black, swampy mould behind them, and

one progressive individual rode a wheeled plow, drove

three horses and enjoyed the shelter of a canopy.



``Saints preserve us, Belshazzar!'' cried the Harvester. 

``Do you see that?  He is one of the men who makes a

business of calling me shiftless.  Now he thinks he is

working.  Working!  For a full-grown man, did you ever

see the equal?  If I were going that far I'd wear a tucked

shirt, panama hat, have a pianola attachment, and an

automatic fan.''



The Harvester laughed as he again touched Betsy and

hurried to Onabasha.  He scarcely saw the delights

offered on either hand, and where his eyes customarily

took in every sight, and his ears were tuned for the faintest

note of earth or tree top, to day he saw only Betsy and

listened for a whistle he dreaded to hear at the water tank. 

He climbed the embankment of the railway at a slower

pace, but made up time going down hill to the city.



``I am not getting a blame thing out of this,'' he

complained to Belshazzar.  ``There are riches to stagger

any scientist wasting to-day, and all I've got to show is one

oriole.  I did hear his first note and see his flash, and so

unless we can take time to make up for this on the home

road we will have to christen it oriole day.  It's a perfumed

golden day, too; I can get that in passing, but how

I loathe hurrying.  I don't mind planning things and

working steadily, but it's not consistent with the dignity

of a sane man to go rushing across country with as much

appreciation of the delights offered right now as a chicken

with its head off would have.  We will loaf going back to

pay for this!  And won't we invite our souls?  We will

stop and gather a big bouquet of crab apple blossoms to

fill the green pitcher for her.  Maybe some of their

wonderful perfume will linger in her room.  When the

petals fall we will scatter them in the drawers of her

dresser, and they may distil a faint flower odour there.  We

could do that to all her furniture, but perhaps she doesn't

like perfume.  She'll be compelled to after she reaches

Medicine Woods.  Betsy, you must travel faster!''



The whip fell again and the Harvester stopped at the

depot with a few minutes to spare.  He threw the hitching

strap to Belshazzar, and ran into the express office with

an arm load of boxes.



``Bill them!'' he cried.  ``It's a rush order.  I want it

to go on the next express.  Almost due I think.  I'll help

you and we can book them afterward.''



The expressman ran for a truck and they hastily

weighed and piled on boxes.  When the last one was

loaded from the wagon, a heap more lying in the office

were added, pitched on indiscriminately as the train pulled

under the sheds of the Union Station.



``I'll push,'' cried the Harvester, ``and help you get

them on.''



Hurrying as fast as he could the expressman drew the

heavy truck through the iron gates and started toward

the train slowing to a stop, and the Harvester pushed. 

As they came down the platform they passed the dining

and sleeping cars of the long train and were several times

delayed by descending passengers.  Just opposite the

day coach the expressman narrowly missed running into

several women leading small children and stopped

abruptly.  A toppling box threatened the head of the

Harvester.  He peered around the truck and saw they

must wait a few seconds.  He put in the time watching

the people.  A gray-haired old man, travelling in a silk

hat, wavered on the top step and went his way.  A fat

woman loaded with bundles puffed as she clung trembling

a second in fear she would miss the step she could not see. 

A tall, slender girl with a face coldly white came next, and

from the broken shoe she advanced, the bewildered fright

of big, dark eyes glancing helplessly, the Harvester saw

that she was poor, alone, ill, and in trouble.  Pityingly

he turned to watch her, and as he gauged her height,

saw her figure, and a dark coronet of hair came into view,

a ghastly pallor swept his face.



``Merciful God!'' he breathed, ``that's my Dream

Girl!''



The truck started with a jerk.  The toppling box fell,

struck a passing boy, and knocked him down.  The

mother screamed and the Harvester sprang to pick up the

child and see that he was not dangerously hurt.  Then

he ran after the truck, pitched on the box, and whirling,

sped beside the train toward the gates of exit.  There was

the usual crush, but he could see the tall figure passing up

the steps to the depot.  He tried to force his way and was

called a brute by a crowded woman.  He ran down the

platform to the gates he had entered with the truck. 

They were automatic and had locked.  Then he became a

primal creature being cheated of a lawful mate and

climbed the high iron fence and ran for the waiting room.



He swept it at a glance, not forgetting the women's

apartment and the side entrance.  Then he hurried to the

front exit.  Up the street leading from the city there were

few people and he could see no sign of the slight, white-

faced girl.  He crossed the sidewalk and ran down the

gutter for a block and breathlessly waited the passing

crowd on the corner.  She was not among it.  He tried

one more square.  Still he could not see her.  Then he

ran back to the depot.  He thought surely he must have

missed her.  He again searched the woman's and general

waiting room and then he thought of the conductor. 

From him it could be learned where she entered the car. 

He ran for the station, bolted the gate while the official

called to him, and reached the track in time to see the

train pull out within a few yards of him.



``You blooming idiot!'' cried the angry expressman as

the Harvester ran against him, ``where did you go? 

Why didn't you help me?  You are white as a sheet! 

Have you lost your senses?''



``Worse!'' groaned the Harvester.  ``Worse!  I've lost

what I prize most on earth.  How could I reach the

conductor of that train?''



``Telegraph him at the next station.  You can have an

answer in a half hour.''



The Harvester ran to the office, and with shaking hand

wrote this message:



``Where did a tall girl with big black eyes and wearing a

gray dress take your train?  Important.''



Then he went out and minutely searched the depot and

streets.  He hired an automobile to drive him over the

business part of Onabasha for three quarters of an hour. 

Up one street and down another he went slowly where

there were crowds, faster as he could, but never a sight

of her.  Then he returned to the depot and found his

message.  It read, ``Transferred to me at Fort Wayne

from Chicago.''



``Chicago baggage!'' he cried, and hurried to the

check room.  He had lost almost an hour.  When he

reached the room he found the officials busy and unwilling

to be interrupted.  Finally he learned there had been a

half dozen trunks from Chicago.  All were taken save

two, and one glance at them told the Harvester that they

did not belong to the girl in gray.  The others had been

claimed by men having checks for them.  If she had been

there, the officials had not noticed a tall girl having a white

face and dark eyes.  When he could think of no further

effort to make he drove to the hospital.



Doctor Carey was not in his office, and the Harvester

sat in the revolving chair before the desk and gripped his

head between his hands as he tried to think.  He could

not remember anything more he could have done, but

since what he had done only ended in failure, he was

reproaching himself wildly that he had taken his eyes

from the Girl an instant after recognizing her.  Yet it

was in his blood to be decent and he could not have run

away and left a frightened woman and a hurt child. 

Trusting to his fleet feet and strength he had taken time

to replace the box also, and then had met the crowd and

delay.  Just for the instant it appeared to him as if he

had done all a man could, and he had not found her.  If

he allowed her to return to Chicago, probably he never

would.  He leaned his head on his hands and groaned in

discouragement.



Doctor Carey whirled the chair so that it faced him

before the Harvester realized that he was not alone.



``What's the trouble, David?'' he asked tersely.



The Harvester lifted a strained face.



``I came for help,'' he said.



``Well you will get it!  All you have to do is to state

what you want.''



That seemed simplicity itself to the doctor.  But when

it came to putting his case into words, it was not easy for

the Harvester.



``Go on!'' said the doctor.



``You'll think me a fool.''



The doctor laughed heartily.



``No doubt!'' he said soothingly.  ``No doubt, David! 

Probably you are; so why shouldn't I think so.  But

remember this, when we make the biggest fools of ourselves

that is precisely the time when we need friends,

and when they stick to us the tightest, if they are worth

while.  I've been waiting since latter February for you

to tell me.  We can fix it, of course; there's always a way. 

Go on!''



``Well I wasn't fooling about the dream and the vision

I told you of then, Doc.  I did have a dream--and it

was a dream of love.  I did see a vision--and it was a

beautiful woman.''



``I hope you are not nursing that experience as

something exclusive and peculiar to you,'' said the doctor. 

``There is not a normal, sane man living who has not

dreamed of love and the most exquisite woman who came

from the clouds or anywhere and was gracious to him. 

That's a part of a man's experience in this world, and it

happens to most of us, not once, but repeatedly.  It's a

case where the wish fathers the dream.''



``Well it hasn't happened to me `on repeated

occasions,' but it did one night, and by dawn I was converted. 

How CAN a dream be so real, Doc?  How could I see as

clearly as I ever saw in the daytime in my most alert

moment, hear every step and garment rustle, scent the

perfume of hair, and feel warm breath strike my face?  I

don't understand it!''



``Neither does any one else!  All you need say is that

your dream was real as life.  Go on!''



``I built a new cabin and pretty well overturned the

place and I've been making furniture I thought a woman

would like, and carrying things from town ever since.''



``Gee!  It was reality to you, lad!''



``Nothing ever more so,'' said the Harvester.



``And of course, you have been looking for her?''



``And this morning I saw her!''



``David!''



``Not the ghost of a chance for a mistake.  Her height,

her eyes, her hair, her walk, her face; only something

terrible has happened since she came to me.  It was the

same girl, but she is ill and in trouble now.''



``Where is she?''



``Do you suppose I'd be here if I knew?''



``David, are you dreaming in daytime?''



``She got off the Chicago train this morning while I was

helping Daniels load a big truck of express matter. 

Some of it was mine, and it was important.  Just at the

wrong instant a box fell and knocked down a child and

I got in a jam----''



``And as it was you, of course you stopped to pick up

the child and do everything decent for other folks, before

you thought of yourself, and so you lost her.  You needn't

tell me anything more.  David, if I find her, and prove

to you that she has been married ten years and has an

interesting family, will you thank me?''



``Can't be done!'' said the Harvester calmly.  ``She

has been married only since she gave herself to me in

February, and she is not a mother.  You needn't bank

on that.''



``You are mighty sure!''



``Why not?  I told you the dream was real, and now

that I have seen her, and she is in this very town, why

shouldn't I be sure?''



``What have you done?''



The Harvester told him.



``What are you going to do next?''



``Talk it over with you and decide.''



The doctor laughed.



``Well here are a few things that occur to me without

time for thought.  Talk to the ticket agents, and leave

her description with them.  Make it worth their while to

be on the lookout, and if she goes anywhere to find out

all they can.  They could make an excuse of putting her

address on her ticket envelope, and get it that way. 

See the baggagemen.  Post the day police on Main

Street.  There is no chance for her to escape you.  A

full-grown woman doesn't vanish.  How did she act when

she got off the car?  Did she appear familiar?''



``No.  She was a stranger.  For an instant she looked

around as if she expected some one, then she followed the

crowd.  There must have been an automobile waiting

or she took a street car.  Something whirled her out of

sight in a few seconds.''



``Well we will get her in range again.  Now for the

most minute description you can give.''



The Harvester hesitated.  He did not care to describe

the Dream Girl to any one, much less the living, suffering

face and poorly clad form of the reality.



``Cut out your scruples,'' laughed the doctor.  ``You

have asked me to help you; how can I if I don't know what

kind of a woman to look for?''



``Very tall and slender,'' said the Harvester.  ``Almost

as tall as I am.''



``Unusually tall you think?''



``I know!''



``That's a good point for identification.  How about

her complexion, hair, and eyes?''



``Very large, dark eyes, and a great mass of black hair.''



The doctor roared.



``The eyes may help,'' he said.  ``All women have

masses of hair these days.  I hope----''



``Her hair is fast to her head,'' said the Harvester

indignantly.  ``I saw it at close range, and I know.  It

went around like a crown.''



The doctor choked down a laugh.  He wanted to say

that every woman's hair was like a crown at present, but

there were things no man ventured with David Langston;

those who knew him best, least of any.  So he suggested,

``And her colouring?''



``She was white and rosy, a lovely thing in the dream,''

said the Harvester, ``but something dreadful has

happened.  That's all wiped out now.  She was very pale

when she left the car.''



``Car sick, maybe.''



``Soul sick!'' was the grim reply.



Then Doctor Carey appeared so disturbed the Harvester

noticed it.



``You needn't think I'd be here prating about her if I

wasn't FORCED.  If she had been rosy and well as she was

in the dream, I'd have made my hunt alone and found

her, too.  But when I saw she was sick and in trouble, it

took all the courage out of me, and I broke for help.  She

must be found at once, and when she is you are probably

the first man I'll want.  I am going to put up a pretty

stiff search myself, and if I find her I'll send or get her to

you if I can.  Put her in the best ward you have and

anything money will do----''



The face of the doctor was growing troubled.



``Day coach or Pullman?'' he asked.



``Day.''



``How was she dressed?''



``Small black hat, very plain.  Gray jacket and skirt,

neat as a flower.''



``What you'd call expensively dressed?''



The Harvester hesitated.



``What I'd call carefully dressed, but----but poverty

poor, if you will have it, Doc.''



Doctor Carey's lips closed and then opened in sudden

resolution.



``David, I don't like it,'' he said tersely.



The Harvester met his eye and purposely misunderstood him.



``Neither do I!'' he exclaimed.  ``I hate it!  There is



something wrong with the whole world when a woman

having a face full of purity, intellect, and refinement of

extreme type glances around her like a hunted thing;

when her appearance seems to indicate that she has

starved her body to clothe it.  I know what is in your

mind, Doc, but if I were you I wouldn't put it into words,

and I wouldn't even THINK it.  Has it been your experience

in this world that women not fit to know skimp their

bodies to cover them?  Does a girl of light character and

little brain have the hardihood to advance a foot covered

with a broken shoe?  If I could tell you that she rode in a

Pullman, and wore exquisite clothing, you would be doing

something.  The other side of the picture shuts you up

like a clam, and makes you appear shocked.  Let me tell

you this:  No other woman I ever saw anywhere on God's

footstool had a face of more delicate refinement, eyes of

purer intelligence.  I am of the woods, and while they

don't teach me how to shine in society, they do instil

always and forever the fineness of nature and her ways. 

I have her lessons so well learned they help me more than

anything else to discern the qualities of human nature. 

If you are my friend, and have any faith at all in my

common sense, get up and do something!''



The doctor arose promptly.



``David, I'm an ass,'' he said.  ``Unusually lop-eared,

and blind in the bargain.  But before I ask you to forgive

me, I want you to remember two things:  First, she

did not visit me in my dreams; and, second, I did not see

her in reality.  I had nothing to judge from except what

you said: you seemed reluctant to tell me, and what you

did say was----was----disturbing to a friend of yours. 

I have not the slightest doubt if I had seen her I would

agree with you.  We seldom disagree, David.  Now, will

you forgive me?''



The Harvester suddenly faced a window.  When at

last he turned, ``The offence lies with me,'' he said.  ``l

was hasty.  Are you going to help me?''



``With all my heart!  Go home and work until your

head clears, then come back in the morning.  She did not

come from Chicago for a day.  You've done all I know

to do at present.''



``Thank you,'' said the Harvester.



He went to Betsy and Belshazzar, and slowly drove up

and down the streets until Betsy protested and calmly

turned homeward.  The Harvester smiled ruefully as he

allowed her to proceed.



``Go slow and take it easy,'' he said as they reached the

country.  ``I want to think.''



Betsy stopped at the barn, the white doves took wing,

and Ajax screamed shrilly before the Harvester aroused

in the slightest to anything around him.  Then he looked

at Belshazzar and said emphatically:  ``Now, partner,

don't ever again interfere when I am complying with

the observances of my religion.  Just look what I'd have

missed if I hadn't made good with that order!''

