





CHAPTER XIII



WHEN THE DREAM CAME TRUE



At first the road lay between fertile farms

dotted with shocked wheat, covered with

undulant seas of ripening oats, and forests

of growing corn.  The larks were trailing melody above

the shorn and growing fields, the quail were ingathering

beside the fences, and from the forests on graceful wings

slipped the nighthawks and sailed and soared, dropping

so low that the half moons formed by white spots on

their spread wings showed plainly.



``Why is this country so different from the other side

of the city?'' asked the Girl.



``It is older,'' replied the Harvester, ``and it lies higher. 

This was settled and well cultivated when that was a

swamp.  But as a farming proposition, the money is

in the lowland like your uncle's.  The crops raised there

are enormous compared with the yield of these fields.''



``I see,'' said she.  ``But this is much better to look

at and the air is different.  It lacks a soggy, depressing

quality.''



``I don't allow any air to surpass that of Medicine

Woods,'' said the Harvester, ``by especial arrangement

with the powers that be.''



Then they dipped into a little depression and arose to

cross the railroad and then followed a longer valley

that was ragged and unkempt compared with the road

between cultivated fields.  The Harvester was busy

trying to plan what to do first, and how to do it most

effectively, and working his brain to think if he had

everything the Girl would require for her comfort; so

he drove silently through the deepening shadows.  She

shuddered and awoke him suddenly.  He glanced at

her from the corner of his eye.



Her thoughts had gone on a journey, also, and the

way had been rough, for her face wore a strained

appearance.  The hands lying bare in her lap were tightly

gripped, so that the nails and knuckles appeared blue. 

The Harvester hastily cast around seeking for the cause

of the transformation.  A few minutes ago she had

seemed at ease and comfortable, now she was close open

panic.  Nothing had been said that would disturb her. 

With brain alert he searched for the reason.  Then it

began to come to him.  The unaccustomed silence and

depression of the country might have been the beginning. 

Coming from the city and crowds of people to the gloomy

valley with a man almost a stranger, going she knew not

where, to conditions she knew not what, with the

experiences of the day vivid before her.  The black valley

road was not prepossessing, with its border of green

pools, through which grew swamp bushes and straggling

vines.  The Harvester looked carefully at the road,

and ceased to marvel at the Girl.  But he disliked to let

her know he understood, so he gave one last glance at

those gripped hands and casually held out the lines.



``Will you take these just a second?'' he asked. 

``Don't let them touch your dress.  We must not lose

of our load, because it's mostly things that will make

you more comfortable.''



He arose, and turning, pretended to see that everything

was all right.  Then he resumed his seat and

drove on.



``I am a little ashamed of this stretch through here,''

he said apologetically.  ``I could have managed to have

it cleared and in better shape long ago, but in a way

it yields a snug profit, and so far I've preferred the

money.  The land is not mine, but I could grub out

this growth entirely, instead of taking only what I need.''



``Is there stuff here you use?'' the Girl aroused

herself to ask, and the Harvester saw the look of relief

that crossed her face at the sound of his voice.



``Well I should say yes,'' he laughed.  ``Those bushes,

numerous everywhere, with the hanging yellow-green

balls, those, in bark and root, go into fever medicines. 

They are not so much used now, but sometimes I have

a call, and when I do, I pass the beds on my----on our

land, and come down here and get what is needed. 

That bush,'' he indicated with the whip, ``blooms

exquisitely in the spring.  It is a relative of flowering

dogwood, and the one of its many names I like best is

silky cornel.  Isn't that pretty?''



``Yes,'' she said, ``it is beautiful.''



``I've planted some for you in a hedge along the driveway

so next spring you can gather all you want.  I

think you'll like the odour.  The bark brings more than

true dogwood.  If I get a call from some house that uses

it, I save mine and come down here.  Around the edge

are hop trees, and I realize something from them, and

also the false and true bitter-sweet that run riot here. 

Both of them have pretty leaves, while the berries of the

true hang all winter and the colour is gorgeous.  I've

set your hedge closely with them.  When it has grown

a few months it's going to furnish flowers in the spring, a

million different, wonderful leaves and berries in the

summer, many fruits the birds love in the fall, and bright

berries, queer seed pods, and nuts all winter.''



``You planted it for me?''



``Yes.  I think it will be beautiful in a season or two;

it isn't so bad now.  I hope it will call myriads of birds

to keep you company.  When you cross this stretch of

road hereafter, don't see fetid water and straggling bushes

and vines; just say to yourself, this helps to fill orders!''



``I am perfectly tolerant of it now,'' she said.  ``You

make everything different.  I will come with you and

help collect the roots and barks you want.  Which

bush did you say relieved the poor souls scorching with

fever?''



The Harvester drew on the lines, Betsy swerved to

the edge of the road, and he leaned and broke a branch.



``This one,'' he answered.  ``Buttonbush, because

those balls resemble round buttons.  Aren't they

peculiar?  See how waxy and gracefully cut and set

the leaves are.  Go on, Betsy, get us home before night. 

We appear our best early in the morning, when the sun

tops Medicine Woods and begins to light us up, and in

the evening, just when she drops behind Onabasha back

there, and strikes us with a few level rays.  Will you

take the lines until I open this gate?''



She laid the twig in her lap on the white gloves and

took the lines.  As the gate swung wide, Betsy walked

through and stopped at the usual place.



``Now my girl,'' said the Harvester, ``cross yourself,

lean back, and take your ease.  This side that gate

you are at home.  From here on belongs to us.''



``To you, you mean,'' said the Girl.



``To us, I mean,'' declared the Harvester.  ``Don't

you know that the `worldly goods bestowal' clause in a

marriage ceremony is a partial reality.  It doesn't give

you `all my worldly goods,' but it gives you one third. 

Which will you take, the hill, lake, marsh, or a part of

all of them.''



``Oh, is there water?''



``Did I forget to mention that I was formerly sole

owner and proprietor of the lake of Lost Loons, also a

brook of Singing Water, and many cold springs.  The

lake covers about one third of our land, and my neighbours

would allow me ditch outlet to the river, but they

say I'm too lazy to take it.''



``Lazy!  Do they mean drain your lake into the

river?''



``They do,'' said the Harvester, ``and make the bed

into a cornfield.''



``But you wouldn't?''



She turned to him with confidence.



``I haven't so far, but of course, when you see it,

if you would prefer it in a corn----Let's play a game! 

Turn your head in this direction,'' he indicated with

the whip, ``close your eyes, and open them when I say

ready.''



``All right!''



``Now!'' said the Harvester.



``Oh,'' cried the Girl.  ``Stop!  Please stop!''



They were at the foot of a small levee that ran to the

bridge crossing Singing Water.  On the left lay the valley

through which the stream swept from its hurried rush

down the hill, a marshy thicket of vines, shrubs, and

bushes, the banks impassable with water growth.  Everywhere

flamed foxfire and cardinal flower, thousands of

wild tiger lilies lifted gorgeous orange-red trumpets,

beside pearl-white turtle head and moon daisies, while

all the creek bank was a coral line with the first opening

bloom of big pink mallows.  Rank jewel flower poured

gold from dainty cornucopias and lavender beard-tongue

offered honey to a million bumbling bees; water smart-

weed spread a glowing pink background, and twining

amber dodder topped the marsh in lacy mist with its

delicate white bloom.  Straight before them a white-

sanded road climbed to the bridge and up a gentle hill

between the young hedge of small trees and bushes,

where again flowers and bright colours rioted and led

to the cabin yet invisible.  On the right, the hill, crowned

with gigantic forest trees, sloped to the lake; midway

the building stood, and from it, among scattering trees

all the way to the water's edge, were immense beds of

vivid colour.  Like a scarf of gold flung across the face

of earth waved the misty saffron, and beside the road

running down the hill, in a sunny, open space arose

tree-like specimens of thrifty magenta pokeberry.  Down

the hill crept the masses of colour, changing from dry

soil to water growth.



High around the blue-green surface of the lake waved

lacy heads of wild rice, lower cat-tails, bulrushes, and

marsh grasses; arrowhead lilies lifted spines of pearly

bloom, while yellow water lilies and blue water hyacinths

intermingled; here and there grew a pink stretch of water

smartweed and the dangling gold of jewel flower.  Over

the water, bordering the edge, starry faces of white pond

lilies floated.  Blue flags waved graceful leaves, willows

grew in clumps, and vines clambered everywhere.



Among the growth of the lake shore, duck, coot,

and grebe voices commingled in the last chattering

hastened splash of securing supper before bedtime; crying

killdeers crossed the water, and overhead the nighthawks

massed in circling companies.  Betsy climbed the

hill and at every step the Girl cried, ``Slower! please go

slower!''  With wide eyes she stared around her.



``WHY DIDN'T YOU TELL ME IT WOULD BE LIKE THIS?'' she

demanded in awed tones.



``Have I had opportunity to describe much of

anything?''  asked the Harvester.  ``Besides, I was born

and reared here, and while it has been a garden of bloom

for the past six years only, it always has been a picture;

but one forgets to say much about a sight seen every

day and that requires the work this does.''



``That white mist down there, what is it?'' she

marvelled.



``Pearls grown by the Almighty,'' answered the

Harvester.  ``Flowers that I hope you will love.  They

are like you.  Tall and slender, graceful, pearl white and

pearl pure----those are the arrowhead Lilies.''



``And the wonderful purplish-red there on the bank? 

Oh, I could kneel and pray before colour like that!'



``Pokeberry!'' said the Harvester.  ``Roots bring five

cents a pound.  Good blood purifier.''



``Man!'' cried the Girl.  ``How can you?  I'm not

going to ask what another colour is.  I'll just worship

what I like in silence.''



``Will you forgive me if I tell you what a woman

whose judgment I respect says about that colour?''



``Perhaps!''



``She says, `God proves that He loves it best of all the

tints in His workshop by using it first and most sparingly.' 

Now are you going to punish me by keeping silent?''



``I couldn't if I tried.''

Just then they came upon the bridge crossing

Singing Water, and there was a long view of its

border, rippling bed, and marshy banks; while on

the other hand the lake resembled a richly incrusted

sapphire.



``Is the house close?''



``Just a few rods, at the turn of the drive.''



``Please help me down.  I want to remain here a while. 

I don't care what else there is to see.  Nothing can

equal this.  I wish I could bring down a bed and sleep

here.  I'd like to have a table, and draw and paint. 

I understand now what you mean about the designs

you mentioned.  Why, there must be thousands!  I

can't go on.  I never saw anything so appealing in all

my life.''



Now the Harvester's mother had designed that bridge

and he had built it with much care.  From bark-covered

railings to solid oak floor and comfortable benches

running along the sides it was intended to be a part of

the landscape.



``I'll send Belshazzar to the cabin with the wagon,''

he said, ``so you can see better.''



``But you must not!'' she cried.  ``I can't walk.  I

wouldn't soil these beautiful shoes for anything.''



``Why don't you change them?'' inquired the Harvester.



``I am afraid I forgot everything I had,'' said the Girl.



``There are shoes somewhere in this load.  I thought

of them in getting other things for you, but I had no

idea as to size, and so I told that clerk to-day when she

got your measure to put in every kind you'd need.''



``You are horribly extravagant,'' she said.  ``But if

you have them here, perhaps I could use one pair.''



The Harvester mounted the wagon and hunted until

he found a large box, and opening it on the bench he

disclosed almost every variety of shoe, walking shoe

and slipper, a girl ever owned, as well as sandals and high

overshoes.



``For pity sake!'' cried the Girl.  ``Cover that box! 

You frighten me.  You'll never get them paid for. 

You must take them straight back.''



``Never take anything back,'' said the Harvester. 

`` `Be sure you are right, then go ahead,' is my motto. 

Now I know these are your correct size and that for

differing occasions you will want just such shoes as other

girls have, and here they are.  Simple as life!  I think

these will serve because they are for street wear, yet

they are white inside.''



He produced a pair of canvas walking shoes and kneeling

before her held out his hand.



When he had finished, he loaded the box on the wagon,

gave the hitching strap to Belshazzar, and told him to

lead Betsy to the cabin and hold her until he came. 

Then he turned to the Girl.



``Now,'' he said, ``look as long as you choose.  But

remember that the law gives you part of this and your

lover, which same am I, gives you the remainder, so

you are privileged to come here at any hour as often as

you please.  If you miss anything this evening, you

have all time to come in which to re-examine it.''



``I'd like to live right here on this bridge,'' she said. 

``I wish it had a roof.''



``Roof it to-morrow,'' offered the Harvester.  ``Simple

matter of a few pillars already cut, joists joined, and

some slab shingles left from the cabin.  Anything else

your ladyship can suggest?''



``That you be sensible.''



``I was born that way,'' explained the Harvester,

``and I've cultivated the faculty until I've developed

real genius.  Talking of sense, there never was a proper

marriage in which the man didn't give the woman a

present.  You seem likely to be more appreciative of

this bridge than anything else I have, so right here and

now would be the appropriate place to offer you my

wedding gift.  I didn't have much time, but I couldn't

have found anything more suitable if I'd taken a year.''



He held out a small, white velvet case.



``Doesn't that look as if it were made for a bride?''

he asked.



``It does,'' answered the Girl.  ``But I can't take it. 

You are not doing right.  Marrying as we did, you never

can believe that I love you; maybe it won't ever happen

that I do.  I have no right to accept gifts and expensive

clothing from you.  In the first place, if the love you

ask never comes, there is no possible way in which I can

repay you.  In the second, these things you are offering

are not suitable for life and work in the woods.  In the

third, I think you are being extravagant, and I couldn't

forgive myself if I allowed that.''



``You divide your statements like a preacher, don't

you?'' asked the Harvester ingenuously.  ``Now sit

thee here and gaze on the placid lake and quiet your

troubled spirit, while I demolish your `perfectly good'

arguments.  In the first place, you are now my wife,

and you have a right to take anything I offer, if you

care for it or can use it in any manner.  In the second,

you must recognize a difference in our positions.  What

seems nothing to you means all the world to me, and you

are less than human if you deprive me of the joy of

expressing feelings I am in honour bound to keep in my

heart, by these little material offerings.  In the third

place, I inherited over six hundred acres of land and

water, please observe the water----it is now in evidence

on your left.  All my life I have been taught to be

frugal, economical, and to work.  All I've earned either

has gone back into land, into the bank, or into books,

very plain food, and such clothing as you now see me

wearing.  Just the value of this place as it stands, with

its big trees, its drug crops yielding all the year round,

would be difficult to estimate; and I don't mind telling

you that on the top of that hill there is a gold mine,

and it's mine----ours since four o'clock.''



``A gold mine!''



``Acres and acres of wild ginseng, seven years of age

and ready to harvest.  Do you remember what your few

pounds brought?''



``Why it's worth thousands!''



``Exactly!  For your peace of mind I might add that

all I have done or got is paid for, except what I bought

to-day, and I will write a check for that as soon as the

bill is made out.  My bank account never will feel it

Truly, Ruth, I am not doing or going to do anything

extravagant.  I can't afford to give you diamond necklaces,

yachts, and trips to Europe; but you can have

the contents of this box and a motor boat on the lake,

a horse and carriage, and a trip----say to New York

perfectly well.  Please take it.''



``I wish you wouldn't ask me.  I would be happier

not to.''



``Yes, but I do ask you,'' persisted the Harvester. 

``You are not the only one to be considered.  I have

some rights also, and I'm not so self-effacing that I

won't insist upon them.  From your standpoint I am

almost a stranger.  You have spent no time considering

me in near relations; I realize that.  You feel as if you

were driven here for a refuge, and that is true.  I said

to Belshazzar one day that I must remember that you

had no dream, and had spent no time loving me, and I

do I know how this wedding seems to you, but it's

going to mean something different and better soon,

please God.  I can see your side; now suppose you

take a look at mine.  I did have a dream, it was my

dream, and beyond the sum of any delight I ever

conceived.  On the strength of it I rebuilt my home and

remodelled these premises.  Then I saw you, and from

that day I worked early and late.  I lost you and I

never stopped until I found you; and I would have

courted and won you, but the fates intervened and here

you are!  So it's my delight to court and win you now. 

If you knew the difference between having a dream that

stirred the least fibre of your being and facing the world in

a demand for realization of it, and then finding what you

coveted in the palm of your hand, as it were, you would

know what is in my heart, and why expression of some

kind is necessary to me just now, and why I'll explode

if it is denied.  It will lower the tension, if you will

accept this as a matter of fact; as if you rather expected

and liked it, if you can.''



The Harvester set his finger on the spring.



``Don't!'' she said.  ``I'll never have the courage if

you do.  Give it to me in the case, and let me open it. 

Despite your unanswerable arguments, I am quite sure

that is the only way in which I can take it.''



The Harvester gave her the box.



``My wedding gift!'' she exclaimed, more to herself

than to him.  ``Why should I be the buffet of all the

unkind fates kept in store for a girl my whole life, and

then suddenly be offered home, beautiful gifts, and wonderful

loving kindness by a stranger?''



The Harvester ran his fingers through his crisp hair,

pulled it into a peak, stepped to the seat and sitting on

the railing, he lifted his elbows, tilted his head, and

began a motley outpouring of half-spoken, half-whistled

trills and imploring cries.  There was enough similarity

that the Girl instantly recognized the red bird.  Out

of breath the Harvester dropped to the seat beside her.



``And don't you keep forgetting it!'' he cried.  ``Now

open that box and put on the trinket; because I want

to take you to the cabin when the sun falls level on the

drive.''



She opened the case, exposing a thread of gold that

appeared too slender for the weight of an exquisite

pendant, set with shimmering pearls.



``If you will look down there,'' the Harvester pointed

over the railing to the arrowhead lilies touched with

the fading light, ``you will see that they are similar.''



``They are!'' cried the Girl.  ``How lovely!  Which is

more beautiful I do not know.  And you won't like it

if I say I must not.''



She held the open case toward the Harvester.



`` `Possession is nine points in the law,' '' he quoted. 

``You have taken it already and it is in your hands;

now make the gift perfect for me by putting it on and

saying nothing more.''



``My wedding gift!'' repeated the Girl.  Slowly she

lifted the beautiful ornament and held it in the light. 

``I'm so glad you just force me to take it,'' she said. 

``Any half-normal girl would be delighted.  I do accept

it.  And what's more, I am going to keep and wear it

and my ring at suitable times all my life, in memory

of what you have done to be kind to me on this awful

day.''



``Thank you!'' said the Harvester.  ``That is a flash

of the proper spirit.  Allow me to put it on you.''



``No!'' said the Girl.  ``Not yet!  After a while!  I

want to hold it in my hands, where I can see it!''



``Now there is one other thing,'' said the Harvester. 



``If I had known for any length of time that this day was

coming and bringing you, as most men know when a

girl is to be given into their care, I could have made it

different.  As it is, I've done the best I knew.  All

your after life I hope you will believe this:  Just that if

you missed anything to-day that would have made it

easier for you or more pleasant, the reason was because

of my ignorance of women and the conventions, and lack

of time.  I want you to know and to feel that in my

heart those vows I took were real.  This is undoubtedly


all the marrying I will ever want to do.  I am old-fashioned

in my ways, and deeply imbued with the spirit

of the woods, and that means unending evolution along

the same lines.



``To me you are my revered and beloved wife, my

mate now; and I am sure nothing will make me feel

any different.  This is the day of my marriage to the

only woman I ever have thought of wedding, and to

me it is joy unspeakable.  With other men such a day

ends differently from the close of this with me.  Because

I have done and will continue to do the level best I know

for you, this oration is the prologue to asking you for

one gift to me from you, a wedding gift.  I don't want

it unless you can bestow it ungrudgingly, and truly want

me to have it.  If you can, I will have all from this day

I hope for at the hands of fate.  May I have the gift

I ask of you, Ruth?''



She lifted startled eyes to his face.



``Tell me what it is?'' she breathed.



``It may seem much to you,'' said the Harvester;

``to me it appears only a gracious act, from a wonderful

woman, if you will give me freely, one real kiss.  I've

never had one, save from a Dream Girl, Ruth, and you

will have to make yours pretty good if it is anything

like hers.  You are woman enough to know that most

men crush their brides in their arms and take a thousand. 

I'll put my hands behind me and never move a muscle,

and I won't ask for more, if you will crown my wedding

day with only one touch of your lips.  Will you kiss

me just once, Ruth?''



The Girl lifted a piteous face down which big tears

suddenly rolled.



``Oh Man, you shame me!'' she cried.  ``What

kind of a heart have I that it fails to respond to such

a plea?  Have I been overworked and starved so long

there is no feeling in me?  I don't understand why

I don't take you in my arms and kiss you a hundred

times, but you see I don't.  It doesn't seem as if I ever

could.''



``Never mind,'' said the Harvester gently.  ``It was

only a fancy of mine, bred from my dream and unreasonable,

perhaps.  I am sorry I mentioned it.  The sun is

on the stoop now; I want you to enter your home in

its light.  Come!''



He half lifted her from the bench.  ``I am going to

help you up the drive as I used to assist mother,'' he

said, fighting to keep his voice natural.  ``Clasp your

hands before you and draw your elbows to your sides. 

Now let me take one in each palm, and you will scoot

up this drive as if you were on wheels.''



``But I don't want to `scoot','' she said unsteadily. 

``I must go slowly and not miss anything.''



``On the contrary, you don't want to do any such

thing----you should leave most of it for to-morrow.''



``I had forgotten there would be any to-morrow.  It

seems as if the day would end it and set me adrift

again.''



``You are going to awake in the gold room with the

sun shining on your face in the morning, and it's going

to keep on all your life.  Now if you've got a smile in

your anatomy, bring it to the surface, for just beyond

this tree lies happiness for you.''



His voice was clear and steady now, his confidence

something contagious.  There was a lovely smile on her

face as she looked at him, and stepped into the line of

light crossing the driveway; and then she stopped and

cried, ``Oh lovely!  Lovely!  Lovely!'' over and over. 

Then maybe the Harvester was not glad he had planned,

worked unceasingly, and builded as well as he knew.



The cabin of large, peeled, golden oak logs, oiled to

preserve them, nestled like a big mushroom on the side

of the hill.  Above and behind the building the trees

arose in a green setting.  The roof was stained to their

shades.  The wide veranda was enclosed in screening,

over which wonderful vines climbed in places, and round

it grew ferns and deep-wood plants.  Inside hung big

baskets of wild growth; there was a wide swinging seat,

with a back rest, supported by heavy chains.  There

were chairs and a table of bent saplings and hickory

withes.  Two full stories the building arose, and the

western sun warmed it almost to orange-yellow, while

the graceful vines crept toward the roof.



The Girl looked at the rapidly rising hedge on each

side of her, at the white floor of the drive, and long and

long at the cabin.



``You did all this since February?'' she asked.



``Even to transforming the landscape,'' answered the

Harvester.



``Oh I wish it was not coming night!'' she cried.  ``I

don't want the dark to come, until you have told me the

name of every tree and shrub of that wonderful hedge,

and every plant and vine of the veranda; and oh I

want to follow up the driveway and see that beautiful

little creek--listen to it chuckle and laugh!  Is it

always glad like that?  See the ferns and things that

grow on the other side of it!  Why there are big beds of

them.  And lilies of the valley by the acre!  What is

that yellow around the corner?''



``Never mind that now,'' said the Harvester, guiding

her up the steps, along the gravelled walk to the screen

that he opened, and over a flood of gold light she crossed

the veranda, and entered the door.



``Now here it appears bare,'' said the Harvester,

``because I didn't know what should go on the walls

or what rugs to get or about the windows.  The table,

chairs, and couch I made myself with some help from a

carpenter.  They are solid black walnut and will age

finely.''



``They are beautiful,'' said the Girl, softly touching

the shining table top with her fingers.  ``Please put

the necklace on me now, I have to use my eyes and hands

for other things.''



She held out the box and the Harvester lifted the

pendant and clasped the chain around her neck.  She

glanced at the lustrous pearls and then the fingers of

one hand softly closed over them.  She went through

the long, wide living-room, examining the chairs and

mantel, stopping to touch and exclaim over its array

of half-finished candlesticks.  At the door of his room

she paused.  ``And this?'' she questioned.



``Mine,'' said the Harvester, turning the knob.  ``I'll

give you one peep to satisfy your curiosity, and show

you the location of the bridge over which you came to

me in my dream.  All the remainder is yours.  I reserve

only this.''



``Will the `goblins git me' if I come here?''



``Not goblins, but a man alive; so heed your warning. 

After you have seen it, keep away.''



The floor was cement, three of the walls heavy screening

with mosquito wire inside, the roof slab shingled. 

On the inner wall was a bookcase, below it a desk, at

one side a gun cabinet, at the other a bath in a small

alcove beside a closet.  The room contained two chairs

like those of the veranda, and the bed was a low oak

couch covered with a thick mattress of hemlock twigs,

topped with sweet fern, on which the sun shone all day. 

On a chair at the foot were spread some white sheets,

a blanket, and an oilcloth.  The sun beat in, the wind

drifted through, and one lying on the couch could see

down the bright hill, and sweep the lake to the opposite

bank without lifting the head.  The Harvester drew the

Girl to the bedside.



``Now straight in a line from here,'' he said, ``across

the lake to that big, scraggy oak, every clear night the

moon builds a bridge of molten gold, and once you walked

it, my girl, and came straight to me, alone and unafraid;

and you were gracious and lovely beyond anything a

man ever dreamed of before.  I'll have that to think of

to-night.  Now come see the dining-room, kitchen, and

hand-made sunshine.''



He led her into what had been the front room of the

old cabin, now a large, long dining-room having on each

side wide windows with deep seats.  The fireplace

backwall was against that of the living-room, but here

the mantel was bare.  All the wood-work, chairs, the

dining table, cupboards, and carving table were golden

oak.  Only a few rugs and furnishings and a woman's

touch were required to make it an unusual and beautiful

room.  The kitchen was shining with a white hard-wood

floor, white wood-work, and pale green walls.  It was a

light, airy, sanitary place, supplied with a pump, sink,

hot and cold water faucets, refrigerator, and every

modern convenience possible to the country.



Then the Harvester almost carried the Girl up the

stairs and showed her three large sleeping rooms, empty

and bare save for some packing cases.



``I didn't know about these, so I didn't do anything.

When you find time to plan, tell me what you want, and

I'll make--or buy it.  They are good-sized, cool rooms. 

They all have closets and pipes from the furnace, so they

will be comfortable in winter.  Now there is your place

remaining.  I'll leave you while I stable Betsy and feed

the stock.''



He guided her to the door opening from the living-

room to the east.



``This is the sunshine spot,'' he said.  ``It is bathed

in morning light, and sheltered by afternoon shade. 

Singing Water is across the drive there to talk to you

always.  It comes pelting down so fast it never freezes,

so it makes music all winter, and the birds are so numerous

you'll have to go to bed early for they'll wake you by

dawn.  I noticed this room was going to be full of sunshine

when I built it, and I craved only brightness for

you, so I coaxed all of it to stay that I could.  Every

stroke is the work of my hands, and all of the furniture. 

I hope you will like it.  This is the room of which I've

been telling you, Ruth.  Go in and take possession,

and I'll entreat God and all His ministering angels to

send you sunshine and joy.''



He opened the door, guided her inside, closed it, and

went swiftly to his work.



The Girl stood and looked around her with amazed

eyes.  The floor was pale yellow wood, polished until

it shone like a table top.  The casings, table, chairs,

dressing table, chest of drawers, and bed were solid

curly maple.  The doors were big polished slabs of it,

each containing enough material to veneer all the furniture

in the room.  The walls were of plaster, tinted

yellow, and the windows with yellow shades were

curtained in dainty white.  She could hear the Harvester

carrying the load from the wagon to the front porch, the

clamour of the barn yard; and as she went to the north

window to see the view, a shining peacock strutted down

the walk and went to the Harvester's hand for grain,

while scores of snow-white doves circled over his head. 

She stepped on deep rugs of yellow goat skins, and,

glancing at the windows on either side, she opened the

door.



Outside it lay a porch with a railing, but no roof.

On each post stood a box filled with yellow wood-flowers

and trailing vines of pale green.  A big tree rising through

one corner of the floor supplied the cover.  A gate

opened to a walk leading to the driveway, and on either

side lay a patch of sod, outlined by a deep hedge of

bright gold.  In it saffron, cone-flowers, black-eyed

Susans, golden-rod, wild sunflowers, and jewel flower

grew, and some of it, enough to form a yellow line, was

already in bloom.  Around the porch and down the

walk were beds of yellow violets, pixie moss, and every

tiny gold flower of the woods.  The Girl leaned against

the tree and looked around her and then staggered

inside and dropped on the couch.



``What planning!  What work!'' she sobbed.  ``What

taste!  Why he's a poet!  What wonderful beauty! 

He's an artist with earth for his canvas, and growing

things for colours.''



She lay there staring at the walls, the beautiful wood-

work and furniture, the dressing table with its array of

toilet articles, a low chair before it, and the thick rug

for her feet.  Over and over she looked at everything,

and then closed her eyes and lay quietly, too weary and

overwhelmed to think.  By and by came tapping at

the door, and she sprang up and crossing to the

dressing table straightened her hair and composed

her face.



``Ajax demands to see you,'' cried a gay voice.



The Girl stepped outside.



``Don't be frightened if he screams at you,'' warned

the Harvester as she passed him.  ``He detests a stranger,

and he always cries and sulks.''



It was a question what was in the head of the bird as

he saw the strange looking creature invading his domain,

and he did scream, a wild, high, strident wail that

delighted the Harvester inexpressibly, because it sent the

Girl headlong into his arms.



``Oh, good gracious!'' she cried.  ``Has such a

beautiful bird got a noise in it like that?  Why

I've fed them in parks and I never heard one explode

before.''



Then how the Harvester laughed.



``But you see you are in the woods now, and this is

not a park bird.  It will be the test of your power to see

how soon you can coax him to your hand.''



``How do I work to win him?''



``I am afraid I can't tell you that,'' said the Harvester. 

``I had to invent a plan for myself.  It required a long

time and much petting, and my methods might not

avail for you.  It will interest you to study that out. 

But the member of the family it is positively essential

that you win to a life and death allegiance is Belshazzar. 

If you can make him love you, he will protect you at

every turn.  He will go before you into the forest and

all the crawling, creeping things will get out of his way. 

He will nose around the flowers you want to gather, and

if he growls and the hair on the back of his neck rises,

never forget that you must heed that warning.  A few

times I have not stopped for it, and I always have been

sorry.  So far as anything animate or uncertain footing

is concerned, you are always perfectly safe if you obey

him.  About touching plants and flowers, you must

confine yourself to those you are certain you know,

until I can teach you.  There are gorgeous and wonderfully

attractive things here, but some of them are rank

poison.  You won't handle plants you don't know,

until you learn, Ruth?''



``I will not,'' she promised instantly.



She went to the seat under the porch tree and leaning

against the trunk she studied the hill, and the rippling

course of Singing Water where it turned and curved

before the cabin, and started across the vivid little

marsh toward the lake.  Then she looked at the Harvester. 

He seated himself on the low railing and smiled at

her.



``You are very tired?'' he asked.



``No,'' she said.  ``You are right about the air being

better up here.  It is stimulating instead of depressing.''



``So far as pure air, location, and water are concerned,''

said the Harvester, ``I consider this place ideal.  The

lake is large enough to cool the air and raise sufficient

moisture to dampen it, and too small to make it really

cold and disagreeable.  The slope of the hill gives perfect

drainage.  The heaviest rains do not wet the earth for

more than three hours.  North, south, and west breezes

sweep the cool air from the water to the cabin in summer. 

The same suns warm us here on the winter hillside. 

My violets, spring beauties, anemones, and dutchman's

breeches here are always two weeks ahead of those in

the woods.  I am not afraid of your not liking the location

or the air.  As for the cabin, if you don't care for

that, it's very simple.  I'll transform it into a laboratory

and dry-house, and build you whatever you want,

within my means, over there on the hill just across

Singing Water and facing the valley toward Onabasha. 

That's a perfect location.  The thing that worries me

is what you are going to do for company, especially while

I am away.''



``Don't trouble yourself about anything,'' she said. 

``Just say in your heart, `she is going to be stronger than

she ever has been in her life in this lovely place, and she

has more right now than she ever had or hoped to have.' 

For one thing, I am going to study your books.  I never

have had time before.  While we sewed or embroidered,

mother talked by the hour of the great writers of the

world, told me what they wrote, and how they expressed

themselves, but I got to read very little for myself.''



``Books are my company,'' said the Harvester.



``Do your friends come often?''



``Almost never!  Doc and his wife come most, and

if you look out some day and see a white-haired, bent

old woman, with a face as sweet as dawn, coming up the

bank of Singing Water, that will be my mother's friend,

Granny Moreland, who joins us on the north over there. 

She is frank and brusque, so she says what she thinks

with unmistakable distinctness, but her heart is big and

tender and her philosophy keeps her sweet and kindly

despite the ache of rheumatism and the weight of seventy years.''



``I'd love to have her come,'' said the Girl.  ``Is that

all?''



``Yes.''



``Why?''



``Your favourite word,'' laughed the Harvester.  ``The

reason lies with me, or rather with my mother.  Some

day I will tell you the whole story, and the cause.  I

think now I can encompass it in this.  The place is an

experiment.  When medicinal herbs, roots, and barks

became so scarce that some of the most important were

almost extinct, it occurred to me that it would be a

good idea to stop travelling miles and poaching on the

woods of other people, and turn our land into an herb

garden.  For four years before mother went, and six

since, I've worked with all my might, and results are

beginning to take shape.  While I've been at it, of course,

my neighbours had an inkling of what was going on,

and I've been called a fool, lazy, and a fanatic, because

I did not fell the trees and plow for corn.  You readily

can see I'm a little short of corn ground out there,''

he waved toward the marsh and lake, ``and up there,''

he indicated the steep hill and wood.  ``But somewhere

on this land I've been able to find muck for mallows,

water for flags and willows, shade for ferns, lilies, and

ginseng, rocky, sunny spaces for mullein, and open, fertile

beds for Bouncing Bet----just for examples.  God never

evolved a place better suited for an herb farm; from

woods to water and all that goes between, it is perfect.''



``And indescribably lovely,'' added the Girl.



``Yes, I think it is,'' said the Harvester.  ``But in

the days when I didn't know how it was coming out,

I was sensitive about it; so I kept quiet and worked,

and allowed the other fellow to do the talking.  After

a while the ginseng bed grew a treasure worth guarding,

and I didn't care for any one to know how much I had

or where it was, as a matter of precaution.  Ginseng

and money are synonymous, and I was forced to be away

some of the time.''



``Would any one take it?''



``Certainly!'' said the Harvester.  ``If they knew it

was there, and what it is worth.  Then, as I've told you,

much of the stuff here must not be handled except

by experts, and I didn't want people coming in my

absence and taking risks.  The remainder of my reason

for living so alone is cowardice, pure and simple.''



``Cowardice?  You!  Oh no!''



``Thank you!'' said the Harvester.  ``But it is! 

Some day I'll tell you of a very solemn oath I've had to

keep.  It hasn't been easy.  You wouldn't understand,

at least not now.  If the day ever comes when I think

you will, I'll tell you.  Just now I can express it by

that one word.  I didn't dare fail or I felt I would be

lost as my father was before me.  So I remained away

from the city and its temptations and men of my age,

and worked in the woods until I was tired enough to

drop, read books that helped, tinkered with the carving,

and sometimes I had an idea, and I went into that little

building behind the dry-house, took out my different

herbs, and tried my hand at compounding a new cure

for some of the pains of humanity.  It isn't bad work,

Ruth.  It keeps a fellow at a fairly decent level, and some

good may come of it.  Carey is trying several formulae

for me, and if they work I'll carry them higher.  If

you want money, Girl, I know how to get it for you.''



``Don't you want it?''



``Not one cent more than I've got,'' said the Harvester

emphatically.  ``When any man accumulates more than

he can earn with his own hands, he begins to enrich

himself at the expense of the youth, the sweat, the

blood, the joy of his fellow men.  I can go to the city,

take a look, and see what money does, as a rule, and

it's another thing I'm afraid of.  You will find me a

dreadful coward on those two points.  I don't want

to know society and its ways.  I see what it does to

other men; it would be presumption to reckon myself

stronger.  So I live alone.  As for money, I've watched

the cross cuts and the quick and easy ways to accumulate

it; but I've had something in me that held me to

the slow, sure, clean work of my own hands, and it's

yielded me enough for one, for two even, in a reasonable

degree.  So I've worked, read, compounded, and carved. 

If I couldn't wear myself down enough to sleep by any

other method, I went into the lake, and swam across and

back; and that is guaranteed to put any man to rest,

clean and unashamed.''



``Six years,'' said the Girl softly, as she studied him. 

``I think it has set a mark on you.  I believe I can trace

it.  Your forehead, brow, and eyes bear the lines and

the appearance of all experience, all comprehension,

but your lips are those of a very young lad.  I shouldn't

be surprised if I had that kiss ready for you, and I really

believe I can make it worth while.''



``Oh good Lord!'' cried the Harvester, turning a

backward somersault over the railing and starting in

big bounds up the drive toward the stable.  He passed

around it and into the woods at a rush and a few seconds

later from somewhere on the top of the hill his strong,

deep voice swept down, ``Glory, glory hallelujah!''



He sang it through at the top of his lungs, that

majestic old hymn, but there was no music at all, it was

simply a roar.  By and by he came soberly to the barn

and paused to stroke Betsy's nose.



``Stop chewing grass and listen to me,'' he said.  ``She's

here, Betsy!  She's in our cabin.  She's going to remain,

you can stake your oats on that.  She's going to be the

loveliest and sweetest girl in all the world, and because

you're a beast, I'll tell you something a man never could

know.  Down with your ear, you critter!  She's going

to kiss me, Betsy!  This very night, before I lay me,

her lips meet mine, and maybe you think that won't

be glorious.  I supposed it would be a year, anyway,

but it's now!  Ain't you glad you are an animal, Betsy,

and can keep secrets for a fool man that can't?''



He walked down the driveway, and before the Girl

had a chance to speak, he said, ``I wonder if I had not

better carry those things into your room, and arrange

your bed for you.''



``I can,'' she said.



``Oh no!'' exclaimed the Harvester.  ``You can't lift

the mattress and heavy covers.  Hold the door and tell

me how.''



He laid a big bundle on the floor, opened it, and took

out the shoes.



``Your shoe box is in the closet there.''



``I didn't know what that door was, so I didn't

open it.''



``That is a part of my arrangements for you,'' said

the Harvester.  ``Here is a closet with shelves for your

covers and other things.  They are bare because I

didn't know just what should be put on them.  This

is the shoe box here in the corner; I'll put these in it

now.''



He knelt and in a row set the shoes in the curly maple

box and closed it.



``There you are for all kinds of places and varieties of

weather.  This adjoining is your bathroom.  I put

in towels, soaps; brushes, and everything I could think

of, and there is hot water ready for you----rain water,

too.''



The Girl followed and looked into a shining little

bathroom, with its white porcelain tub and wash bowl,

enamelled wood-work, dainty green walls, and white

curtains and towels.  She could see no accessory she

knew of that was missing, and there were many things

to which she never had been accustomed.  The Harvester

had gone back to the sunshine room, and was kneeling

on the floor beside the bundle.  He began opening

boxes and handing her dresses.



``There are skirt, coat, and waist hangers on the

hooks,'' he said.  ``I only got a few things to start on,

because I didn't know what you would like.  Instead

of being so careful with that dress, why don't you take

it off, and put on a common one?  Then we will have

something to eat, and go to the top of the hill and watch

the moon bridge the lake.''



While she hung the dresses and selected the one to

wear, he placed the mattress, spread the padding and

sheets, and encased the pillow.  Then he bent and pressed

the springs with his hands.



``I think you will find that soft and easy enough for

health,'' he said.  ``All the personal belongings I had

that clerk put up for you are in that chest of drawers

there.  I put the little boxes in the top and went down. 

You can empty and arrange them to-morrow.  Just

hunt out what you will need now.  There should be

everything a girl uses there somewhere.  I told them to

be very careful about that.  If the things are not right

or not to your taste, you can take them back as soon as

you are rested, and they will exchange them for you. 

If there is anything I have missed that you can think

of that you need to-night, tell me and I'll go and get it.''



The Girl turned toward him.



``You couldn't be making sport of me,'' she said,

``but Man!  Can't you see that I don't know what to

do with half you have here?  I never saw such things

closely before.  I don't know what they are for.  I

don't know how to use them.  My mother would have

known, but I do not.  You overwhelm me!  Fifty

times I've tried to tell you that a room of my very own,

such a room as this will be when to-morrow's sun comes

in, and these, and these, and these,'' she turned from

the chest of boxes to the dressing table, bed, closet, and

bath, ``all these for me, and you know absolutely

nothing about me----I get a big lump in my throat,

and the words that do come all seem so meaningless,

I am perfectly ashamed to say them.  Oh Man, why do

you do it?''



``I thought it was about time to spring another `why'

on me,'' said the Harvester.  ``Thank God, I am now

in a position where I can tell you `why'!  I do it because

you are the girl of my dream, my mate by every law of

Heaven and earth.  All men build as well as they know

when the one woman of the universe lays her spell on

them.  I did all this for myself just as a kind of

expression of what it would be in my heart to do if I

could do what I'd like.  Put on the easiest dress you can

find and I will go and set out something to eat.''



She stood with arms high piled with the prettiest

dresses that could be selected hurriedly, the tears running

down her white cheeks and smiled through them at him.



``There wouldn't be any of that liquid amber would

there?'' she asked.



``Quarts!'' cried the Harvester.  ``I'll bring some.

 . . . Does it really hit the spot, Ruth?'' he

questioned as he handed her the glass.



She heaped the dresses on the bed and took it.



``It really does.  I am afraid I am using too much.''



``I don't think it possibly can hurt you.  To-morrow

we will ask Doc.  How soon will you be ready for

lunch?''



``I don't want a bite.''



``You will when you see and smell it,'' said the

Harvester.  ``I am an expert cook.  It's my chiefest

accomplishment.  You should taste the dishes I improvise. 

But there won't be much to-night, because I want you

to see the moon rise over the lake.''



He went away and the Girl removed her dress and

spread it on the couch.  Then she bathed her face and

hands.  When she saw the discoloured cloth, it proved

that she had been painted, and made her very indignant. 

Yet she could not be altogether angry, for that flush

of colour had saved the Harvester from being pitied by

his friend.  She stood a long time before the mirror,

staring at her gaunt, colourless face; then she went

to the dressing table and committed a crime.  She

found a box of cream and rubbed it on for a foundation. 

Then she opened some pink powder, and carefully dusted

her cheeks.



``I am utterly ashamed,'' she said to the image in the

mirror, ``but he has done so much for me, he is so, so----

I don't know a word big enough----that I can't bear him

to see how ghastly I am, how little worth it.  Perhaps

the food, better air, and outdoor exercise will give me

strength and colour soon.  Until it does I'm afraid I'm

going to help out all I can with this.  It is wonderful

how it changes one.  I really appear like a girl instead

of a bony old woman.''



Then she looked over the dresses, selected a pretty

white princesse, slipped it on, and went to the kitchen. 

But the Harvester would not have her there.  He seated

her at the dining table, beside the window overlooking

the lake, lighted a pair of his home-made candles in his

finest sticks, and placed before her bread, butter, cold

meat, milk, and fruit, and together they ate their first

meal in their home.



``If I had known,'' said the Harvester, ``Granny

Moreland is a famous cook.  She is a Southern woman,

and she can fry chicken and make some especial dishes

to surpass any one I ever knew.  She would have been

so pleased to come over and get us an all-right supper.''



``I'd much rather have this, and be by ourselves,'' said

the Girl.



``Well, you can bank on it, I would,'' agreed the

Harvester.  ``For instance, if any one were here, I

might feel restrained about telling you that you are

exactly the beautiful, flushed Dream Girl I have adored

for months, and your dress most becoming.  You are

a picture to blind the eyes of a lonely bachelor, Ruth.''



``Oh why did you say that?'' wailed the Girl.  ``Now

I've got to feel like a sneak or tell you----and I didn't

want you to know.''



``Don't you ever tell me or any one else anything you

don't want to,'' said the Harvester roundly.  ``It's

nobody's business!''



``But I must!  I can't begin with deception.  I was

fool enough to think you wouldn't notice.  Man, they

painted me!  I didn't know they were doing it, but when

it all washed off, I looked so ghastly I almost frightened

myself.  I hunted through the boxes they put up for

you and found some pink powder----''



``But don't all the daintiest women powder these

days, and consider it indispensable?  The clerk said so,

and I've noticed it mentioned in the papers.  I bought

it for you to use.''



``Yes, just powder, but Man, I put on a lot of cold

cream first to stick the powder good and thick.  Oh

I wish I hadn't!''



``Well since you've told it, is your conscience

perfectly at ease?  No you don't!  You sit where you are! 

You are lovely, and if you don't use enough powder to

cover the paleness, until your colour returns, I'll hold

you and put it on.  I know you feel better when you

appear so that every one must admire you.''



``Yes, but I'm a fraud!''



``You are no such thing!'' cried the Harvester hotly. 

``There hasn't a woman in ten thousand got any such

rope of hair.  I have been seeing the papers on the hair

question, too.  No one will believe it's real.  If they

think your hair is false, when it is natural, they won't

be any more fooled when they think your colour is real,

and it isn't.  Very soon it will be and no one need ever

know the difference.  You go on and fix up your level

best.  To see yourself appearing well will make you

ambitious to become so as soon as possible.''



``Harvester-man,'' said the Girl, gazing at him with

wet luminous eyes, ``for the sake of other women, I

could wish that all men had an oath to keep, and had

been reared in the woods.''



``Here is the place we adjourn to the moon,'' cried

the Harvester.  ``I don't know of anything that can cure

a sudden accession of swell head like gazing at the heavens. 

One finds his place among the atoms naturally and

instantaneously with the eyes on the night sky.  Should

you have a wrap?  You should!  The mists from the

lake are cool.  I don't believe there is one among my

orders.  I forgot that.  But upstairs with mother's

clothing there are several shawls and shoulder capes. 

All of them were washed and carefully packed.  Would

you use one, Ruth?''



``Why not give it to me.  Wouldn't she like me to

wear her things better than to have them lying in moth

balls?''



The Harvester looked at her and shook his head,

marvelling.



``I can't tell how pleased she would be,'' he said.



``Where are her belongings?'' asked the Girl.  ``I

could use them to help furnish the house, and it wouldn't

appear so strange to you.''



The Harvester liked that.



``All the washed things are in those boxes upstairs;

also some fine skins I've saved on the chance of wanting

them.  Her dishes are in the bottom of the china closet

there; she was mighty proud of them.  The furniture

and carpets were so old and abused I burned them.  I'll

go bring a wrap.''



He took the candle and climbed the stairs, soon

returning with a little white wool shawl and a big pink

coverlet.



``Got this for her Christmas one time,'' he said.  ``She'd

never had a white one and she thought it was pretty.''



He folded it around the Girl's shoulders and picked

up the coverlet.



``You're never going to take that to the woods!'' she

cried.



``Why not?''



She took it in her hands to find a corner.



``Just as I thought!  It's a genuine Peter Hartman! 

It's one of the things that money can't buy, or, rather,

one that takes a mint of money to own.  They are

heirlooms.  They are not manufactured any more. 

At the art store where I worked they'd give you fifty

dollars for that.  It is not faded or worn a particle. 

It would be lovely in my room; you mustn't take a

treasure like that out of doors.''



``Ruth, are you in earnest?'' demanded the Harvester. 

``I believe there are six of them upstairs.''



``Plutocrat!'' cried the Girl.  ``What colours?''



``More of this pinkish red, blue, and pale green.''



``Famous!  May I have them to help furnish with

to-morrow?''



``Certainly!  Anything you can find, any way on earth

you want it, only in my room.  That is taboo, as I told

you.  What am I going to take to-night?''



``Isn't the rug you had in the woods in the wagon yet? 

Use that!''



``Of course!  The very thing!  Bel, proceed!''



``Are you going to leave the house like this?''



``Why not?''



``Suppose some one breaks in!''



``Nothing worth carrying away, except what you have

on.  No one to get in.  There is a big swamp back of

our woods, marsh in front, we're up here where we can

see the drive and bridge.  There is nothing possible

from any direction.  Never locked the cabin in my life,

except your room, and that was because it was sacred,

not that there was any danger.  Clear the way, Bel!''



``Clear it of what?''



``Katydids, hoptoads, and other carnivorous animals.''



``Now you are making fun of me!  Clear it of what?''



``A coon that might go shuffling across, an opossum,

or a snake going to the lake.  Now are you frightened

so that you will not go?''



``No.  The path is broad and white and surely you

and Bel can take care of me.''



``If you will trust us we can.''



``Well, I am trusting you.''



``You are indeed,'' said the Harvester.  ``Now see

if you think this is pretty.''



He indicated the hill sloping toward the lake.  The

path wound among massive trees, between whose branches

patches of moonlight filtered.  Around the lake shore

and climbing the hill were thickets of bushes.  The

water lay shining in the light, a gentle wind ruffled the

surface in undulant waves, and on the opposite bank

arose the line of big trees.  Under a giant oak widely

branching, on the top of the hill, the Harvester spread

the rug and held one end of it against the tree trunk to

protect the Girl's dress.  Then he sat a little distance

away and began to talk.  He mingled some sense with

a quantity of nonsense, and appreciated every hint of a

laugh he heard.  The day had been no amusing matter

for a girl absolutely alone among strange people and

scenes.  Anything more foreign to her previous environment

or expectations he could not imagine.  So he

talked to prevent her from thinking, and worked for a

laugh as he laboured for bread.



``Now we must go,'' he said at last.  ``If there is the

malaria I strongly suspect in your system, this night air

is none too good for you.  I only wanted you to see the

lake the first night in your new home, and if it won't

shock you, I brought you here because this is my holy

of holies.  Can you guess why I wanted you to come,

Ruth?''



``If I wasn't so stupid with alternate burning and

chills, and so deadened to every proper sensibility, I

suppose I could,'' she answered, ``but I'm not brilliant. 

I don't know, unless it is because you knew it would be

the loveliest place I ever saw.  Surely there is no other

spot in the world quite so beautiful.''



``Then would it seem strange to you,'' asked the

Harvester going to the Girl and gently putting his arms

around her, ``would it seem strange to you, that a woman

who once homed here and thought it the prettiest place

on earth, chose to remain for her eternal sleep, rather

than to rest in a distant city of stranger dead?''



He felt the Girl tremble against him.



``Where is she?''



``Very close,'' said the Harvester.  ``Under this oak. 

She used to say that she had a speaking acquaintance

with every tree on our land, and of them all she loved

this big one the best.  She liked to come here in winter,

and feel the sting of the wind sweeping across the lake,

and in summer this was her place to read and to think. 

So when she slept the unwaking sleep, Ruth, I came

here and made her bed with my own hands, and then

carried her to it, covered her, and she sleeps well.  I

never have regretted her going.  Life did not bring her

joy.  She was very tired.  She used to say that after

her soul had fled, if I would lay her here, perhaps the

big roots would reach down and find her, and from

her frail frame gather slight nourishment and then

her body would live again in talking leaves that would

shelter me in summer and whisper her love in winter. 

Of all Medicine Woods this is the dearest spot to me. 

Can you love it too, Ruth?''



``Oh I can!'' cried the Girl; ``I do now!  Just to see

the place and hear that is enough.  I wish, oh to my

soul I wish----''



``You wish what?'' whispered the Harvester

gently.



``I dare not!  I was wild to think of it.  I would be

ungrateful to ask it.''



``You would be ungracious if you didn't ask anything

that would give me the joy of pleasing you.  How long

is it going to require for you to learn, Ruth, that to make

up for some of the difficulties life has brought you would

give me more happiness than anything else could? 

Tell me now.''



``No!''



He gathered her closer.



``Ruth, there is no reason why you should be actively

unkind to me.  What is it you wish?''



She struggled from his arms and stood alone in white

moonlight, staring across the lake, along the shore, deep

into the perfumed forest, and then at the mound she now

could distinguish under the giant tree.  Suddenly she

went to him and with both shaking hands gripped his

arm.



``My mother!'' she panted.  ``Oh she was a beautiful

woman, delicately reared, and her heart was crushed and

broken.  By the inch she went to a dreadful end I could

not avert or allay, and in poverty and grime I fought

for a way to save her body from further horror, and it's

all so dreadful I thought all feeling in me was dried

and still, but I am not quite calloused yet.  I suffer

it over with every breath.  It is never entirely out of

my mind.  Oh Man, if only you would lift her from the

horrible place she lies, where briers run riot and cattle

trample and the unmerciful sun beats!  Oh if only you'd

lift her from it, and bring her here!  I believe it would

take away some of the horror, the shame, and the heartache. 

I believe I could go to sleep without hearing the

voice of her suffering, if I knew she was lying on this hill,

under your beautiful tree, close the dear mother you

love.  Oh Man, would you----?''



The Harvester crushed the Girl in his arms and

shuddering sobs shook his big frame, and choked his voice.



``Ruth, for God's sake, be quiet!'' he cried.  ``Why I'd

be glad to!  I'll go anywhere you tell me, and bring her,

and she shall rest where the lake murmurs, the trees

shelter, the winds sing, and earth knows the sun only

in long rays of gold light.''



She stared at him with strained face.



``You----you wouldn't!'' she breathed.



``Ruth, child,'' said the Harvester, ``I tell you I'd be

happy.  Look at my side of this!  I'm in search of bands

to bind you to me and to this place.  Could you tell

me a stronger than to have the mother you idolized

lie here for her long sleep?  Why Girl, you can't know

the deep and abiding joy it would give me to bring

her.  I'd feel I had you almost secure.  Where is she

Ruth?''



``In that old unkept cemetery south of Onabasha,

where it costs no money to lay away your loved ones.''



``Close here!  Why I'll go to-morrow!  I supposed

she was in the city.''



She straightened and drew away from him.



``How could I?  I had nothing.  I could not have

paid even her fare and brought her here in the cheapest

box the decency of man would allow him to make if

her doctor had not given me the money I owe.  Now

do you understand why I must earn and pay it myself? 

Save for him, it was charity or her delicate body to

horrors.  Money never can repay him.''



``Ruth, the day you came to Onabasha was she with

you?''



``In the express car,'' said the Girl.



``Where did you go when you left the train shed?''



``Straight to the baggage room, where Uncle Henry

was waiting.  Men brought and put her in his wagon,

and he drove with me to the place and other men lowered

her, and that was all.''



``You poor Girl!'' cried the Harvester.  ``This time

to-morrow night she shall sleep in luxury under this oak,

so help me God!  Ruth, can you spare me? May I

go at once?  I can't rest, myself.''



``You will?'' cried the Girl.  ``You will?''



She was laughing in the moonlight.  ``Oh Man, I

can't ever, ever tell you!''



``Don't try,'' said the Harvester.  ``Call it settled. 

I will start early in the morning.  I know that little

cemetery.  The man whose land it is on can point me

the spot.  She is probably the last one laid there.  Come

now, Ruth.  Go to the room I made for you, and sleep

deeply and in peace.  Will you try to rest?''



``Oh David!'' she exulted.  ``Only think!  Here where

it's clean and cool; beside the lake, where leaves fall gently

and I can come and sit close to her and bring flowers; and

she never will be alone, for your dear mother is here.  Oh

David!''



``It is better.  I can't thank you enough for thinking

of it.  Come now, let me help you.''



He half carried her down the hill.  Then he made the

cabin a glamour of light by putting candles in the sticks

he had carved and placing them everywhere.



``There is a lighting plant in the basement,'' he said,

``but I had not expected to use it until winter, and I

have no acetylene.  Candles were our grandmothers'

lights and they are the best anyway.  Go bathe your

face, Ruth, and wash away all trace of tears.  Put on

the pink powder, and in a few weeks you will have

colour to outdo the wildest rose.  You must be as gay

as you can the remainder of this night.''



``I will!'' cried the Girl.  ``I will!  Oh I didn't know

a thing on earth could make me happy!  I didn't know

I really could be glad.  Oh if the ice in my heart would

melt, and the wall break down, and the girlhood I've

never known would come yet!  Oh David, if it would!''



``Before the Lord it shall!'' vowed the Harvester. 

``It shall come with the fulness of joy right here in

Medicine Woods.  Think it!  Believe it!  Keep it before

you!  Work for it!  Happiness is worth while! 

All of us have a right to it!  It shall be yours and soon.''



``I will try!  I will!'' promised the Girl.  ``I'll go

right now and I'll put on the blessed pink powder so

thickly you'll never know what is under it, and soon it

won't be needed at all.''



She was laughing as she left the room.  The Harvester

restlessly walked the floor a few minutes and then sat

with a notebook and began entering stems.



When the Girl returned, he brought the pillow from her

bed, folded the coverlet, and she lay on them in the big

swing.  He covered her with the white shawl, and while

Singing Water sang its loudest, katydids exulted over

the delightful act of their ancestor, and a million gauze-

winged creatures of night hummed against the screen,

in a voice soft and low he told her in a steady stream,

as he swayed her back and forth, what each sound of the

night was, and how and why it was made all the way

from the rumbling buzz of the June bug to the screech

of the owl and the splash of the bass in the lake.  All

of it, as it appealed to him, was the story of steady

evolution, the natural processes of reproduction, the joy of

life and its battles, and the conquest of the strong in

nature.  At his hands every sound was stripped of terror. 

The leaping bass was exulting in life, the screeching owl

was telling its mate it had found a fat mouse for the

children, the nighthawk was courting, the big bull

frogs booming around the lake were serenading the moon. 

There was not a thing to fear or a voice left with an

unsympathetic note in it.  She was half asleep when at last

he helped her to her room, set a pitcher of frosty, clinking

drink on her table, locked her door and window screens

inside, spread Belshazzar's blanket on her porch, and set

his door wide open, that he might hear if she called, and then

said good night and went back to his memorandum book.



``No bad beginning,'' he muttered softly, ``no bad

beginning, but I'd almost give my right hand if she hadn't

forgotten----''



In her room the exhausted Girl slipped the pins from

her hair and sank on the low chair before the dressing-

table.  She picked up the shining, silver backed brush

and stared at the monogram, R. F. L, entwined on it.



``My soul!'' she exclaimed.  ``WAS HE SO SURE AS THAT? 

Was there ever any other man like him?''



She dropped the brush and with tired hands pushed

back the heavy braids.  Then she arose and going to

the chest of drawers began lifting lids to find a night

robe.  As she searched the boxes she found every dainty,

pretty undergarment a girl ever used and at last the

robes.  She shook out a long white one, slipped into it,

and walked to the bed.  That stood as he had arranged

it, white, clean, and dainty.



``Everything for me!'' she said softly.  ``Everything

for me!  Shall there be nothing for him?  Oh he makes

it easy, easy!''



She stepped to the closet, picked down a lavender

silk kimona and drawing it over her gown she gathered it

around her and opening the bathroom door, she stepped

into a little hall leading to the dining-room.  As she

entered the living-room the Harvester bent over his book. 

Her step was very close when he heard it and turned his

head.  In an instant she touched his shoulders.  The

Harvester dropped the pencil, and palm downward laid

his hands on the table, his promise strong in his heart. 

The Girl slid a shaking palm under his chin, leaned

his head against her breast, and dropped a sweet, tear-wet

face on his.  With all the strength of her frail arms she

gripped him a second, and then gave the kiss, into which

she tried to put all she could find no words to express.


