





CHAPTER IV



A COMMISSION FOR THE SOUTH WIND



The next morning the larks trailed ecstasy all

over the valley, the following day cuckoos were

calling in the thickets, a warm wind swept

from the south and set swollen buds bursting, while

the sun shone, causing the Harvester to rejoice.  Betsy's

white coat was splashed with the mud of the valley road;

the feet of Belshazzar left tracks over lumber piles;

and the Harvester removed his muck-covered shoes at

the door and wore slippers inside.  The skunk cabbage

appeared around the edge of the forest, rank mullein and

thistles lay over the fields in big circles of green, and

even plants of delicate growth were thrusting their

heads through mellowing earth and dead leaves, to reach

light and air.



Then the Harvester took his mattock and began to

dig.  His level best fell so far short of what he felt capable

of doing and desired to accomplish that the following day

he put two more men on the job.  Then the earth did

fly, and so soon as the required space was excavated the

walls were lined with stone and a smooth basement

floor was made of cement.  The night the new home stood,

a skeleton of joists and rafters, gleaming whitely on the

banks of Loon Lake, the Harvester went to the bridge

crossing Singing Water and slowly came up the driveway

to see how the work appeared.  He caught his breath

as he advanced.  He had intended to stake out generous

rooms, but this, compared with the cabin, seemed like

a big hotel.



``I hope I haven't made it so large it will be a burden,''

he soliloquized.  ``It's huge!  But while I am at it I

want to build big enough, and I think I have.''



He stood on the driveway, his arms folded, and looked

at the structure as he occasionally voiced his thoughts.



``The next thing is to lay up the side walls and get

the roof over.  Got to have plenty of help, for those

logs are hewed to fourteen inches square and some of

them are forty feet long.  That's timber!  Grew with

me, too.  Personally acquainted with almost every

tree of it.  We will bed them in cement, use care with

the roof, and if that doesn't make a cool house in the

summer, and a warm one in winter, I'll be disappointed. 

It sets among the trees, and on the hillside just right. 

We must have a wide porch, plenty of flowers, vines,

ferns, and mosses, and when I get everything finished

and she sees it----perhaps it will please her.''



A great horned owl swept down the hill, crossed

the lake, and hooted from the forest of the opposite

bank.  The Harvester thought of his dream and turned.



``Any women walking the water to-night?  Come if

you like,'' he bantered, ``I don't mind in the least.  In 

fact, I'd rather enjoy it.  I'd be so happy if you would

come now and tell me how this appears to you, for it's

all yours.  I'd have enlarged the store-room, dry-houses

and laboratory for myself, but this cabin, never!  The

old one suited me as it was; but for you----I should have

a better home.''



The Harvester glanced from the shining skeleton to

the bridge of gold and back again.



``Where are you to-night?'' he questioned.  ``What

are you doing?  Can't you give me a hint of where to

search for you when this is ready?  I don't know but I

am beginning wrong.  My little brothers of the wood

do differently.  They announce their intentions the

first thing, flaunt their attractions, and display their

strength.  They say aloud, for all the listening world to

hear, what is in their hearts.  They chip, chirp, and sing,

warble, whistle, thrill, scream, and hoot it.  They are

strong on self-expression, and appreciative of their

appearance.  They meet, court, mate, and THEN build their

home together after a mutual plan.  It's a good way,

too!  Lots surer of getting things satisfactory.''



The Harvester sat on a lumber pile and gazed questioningly

at the framework.



``I wish I knew if I am going at things right,'' he said. 

``There are two sides to consider.  If she is in a good

home, and lovingly cared for, it would be proper to court

her and get her promise, if I could----no I'm blest if I'll

be so modest----get her promise, as I said, and let her

wait while I build the cabin.  But if she should be poor,

tired, and neglected, then I ought to have this ready when

I find her, so I could pick her up and bring her to it,

with no more ceremony than the birds.''



The Harvester's clear skin flushed crimson.



``Of course, I don't mean no wedding ceremony,''

he amended.  ``I was thinking of a long time wasted in

preliminaries when in my soul I know I am going to marry

my Dream Girl before I ever have seen her in reality. 

What would be the use in spending much time in courting? 

She is my wife now, by every law of God.  Let

me get a glimpse of her, and I'll prove it.  But I've got

to make tracks, for if she were here, where would I put

her?  I must hurry!''



He went to the work room and began polishing a table

top.  He had bought a chest of tools and was spending

every spare minute on tables, chair seats, and legs.

He had decided to make these first and carve candlesticks

later when he had more time.  Two hours he

worked at the furniture, and then went to bed.  The

following morning he put eggs under several hens that

wanted to set, trimmed his grape-vines, examined the

precious ginseng beds, attended his stock, got breakfast

for Belshazzar and himself, and was ready for work when

the first carpenter arrived.  Laying hewed logs went

speedily, and before the Harvester believed it possible

the big shingles he had ordered were being nailed on the

roof.  Then came the plumber and arranged for the

bathroom, and the furnace man placed the heating pipes. 

The Harvester had intended the cabin to be mostly the

work of his own hands, but when he saw how rapidly

skilled carpenters worked, he changed his mind and

had them finish the living-room, his room, and the

upstairs, and make over the dining-room and kitchen.



Her room he worked on alone, with a little help if

he did not know how to join the different parts.  Every

thing was plain and simple, after plans of his own, but

the Harvester laid floors and made window casings,

seats, and doors of wood that the big factories of Grand

Rapids used in veneering their finest furniture.  When

one of his carpenters pointed out this to him, and

suggested that he sell his lumber to McLean and use

pine flooring from the mills the Harvester laughed

at him.



``I don't say that I could afford to buy burl maple,

walnut, and cherry for wood-work,'' said the Harvester. 

``I could not, but since I have it, you can stake your life

I won't sell it and build my home of cheap, rapidly

decaying wood.  The best I have goes into this cabin

and what remains will do to sell.  I have an idea that when

this is done it is going to appear first rate.  Anyway, it

will be solid enough to last a thousand years, and with

every day of use natural wood grows more beautiful. 

When we get some tables, couches, and chairs made

from the same timber as the casings and the floors, I

think it will be fine.  I want money, but I don't want it

bad enough to part with the BEST of anything I have for

it.  Go carefully and neatly there; it will have to be

changed if you don't.''



So the work progressed rapidly.  When the carpenters

had finished the last stroke on the big veranda

they remained a day more and made flower boxes, and a

swinging couch, and then the greedy Harvester kept

the best man with him a week longer to help on the

furniture.



``Ain't you going to say a word about her, Langston?''

asked this man as they put a mirror-like surface on a

curly maple dressing table top.



``Her!'' ejaculated the Harvester.  ``What do you

mean?''



``I haven't seen you bathe anywhere except in the

lake since I have been here,'' said the carpenter.  ``Do

you want me to think that a porcelain tub, this big

closet, and chest of drawers are for you?''



A wave of crimson swept over the Harvester.



``No, they are not for me,'' he said simply.  ``I don't

want to be any more different from other men than I

can help, although I know that life in the woods, the

rigid training of my mother, and the reading of only

the books that would aid in my work have made me

individual in many of my thoughts and ways.  I suppose

most men, just now, would tell you anything you want

to know.  There is only one thing I can say:  The

best of my soul and brain, the best of my woods and

store-house, the best I can buy with money is not good

enough for her.  That's all.  For myself, I am getting

ready to marry, of course.  I think all normal men do

and that it is a matter of plain common-sense that they

should.  Life with the right woman must be infinitely

broader and better than alone.  Are you married?''



``Yes.  Got a wife and four children.''



``Are you sorry?''



``Sorry!'' the carpenter shrilled the word.  ``Sorry! 

Well that's the best I ever heard!  Am I sorry I married

Nell and got the kids?  Do I look sorry?''



``I am not expecting to be, either,'' said the Harvester

calmly.  ``I think I have done fairly well to stick to my

work and live alone until I am twenty-six.  I have

thought the thing all over and made up my mind.  As

soon as I get this house far enough along that I feel I can

proceed alone I am going to rush the marrying business

just as fast as I can, and let her finish the remainder to

her liking.''



``Well this ought to please her.''



``That's because you find your own work good,''

laughed the Harvester.



``Not altogether!''  The carpenter polished the board

and stood it on end to examine the surface as he talked. 

``Not altogether!  Nothing but good work would suit

you.  I was thinking of the little creek splashing down

the hill to the lake; and that old log hewer said that in

a few more days things here would be a blaze of colour

until fall.''



``Almost all the drug plants and bushes leaf beautifully

and flower brilliantly,'' explained the Harvester. 

``I studied the location suitable to each variety before I

set the beds and planned how to grow plants for continuity 

of bloom, and as much harmony of colour as possible. 

Of course a landscape gardener would tear up some of

it, but seen as a whole it isn't so bad.  Did you ever

notice that in the open, with God's blue overhead and

His green for a background, He can place purple and

yellow, pink, magenta, red, and blue in masses or any

combination you can mention and the brighter the colour

the more you like it?  You don't seem to see or feel that

any grouping clashes; you revel in each wonderful

growth, and luxuriate in the brilliancy of the whole. 

Anyway, this suits me.''



``I guess it will please her, too,'' said the carpenter. 

``After all the pains you've taken, she is a good one if

it doesn't.''



``I'll always have the consolation of having done my

best,'' replied the Harvester.  ``One can't do more! 

Whether she likes it or not depends greatly on the way

she has been reared.''



``You talk as if you didn't know,'' commented the

carpenter.



``You go on with this now,'' said the Harvester hastily. 

``I've got to uncover some beds and dig my year's supply

of skunk cabbage, else folk with asthma and dropsy who

depend on me will be short on relief.  I ought to take

my sweet flag, too, but I'm so hurried now I think I'll

leave it until fall; I do when I can, because the bloom

is so pretty around the lake and the bees simply go wild

over the pollen.  Sometimes I almost think I can detect

it in their honey.  Do you know I've wondered often

if the honey my bees make has medicinal properties

and should be kept separate in different seasons.  In

early spring when the plants and bushes that furnish

the roots and barks of most of the tonics are in bloom,

and the bees gather the pollen, that honey should partake

in a degree of the same properties and be good medicine. 

In the summer it should aid digestion, and in the fall

cure rheumatism and blood disorders.''



``Say you try it!'' urged the carpenter.  ``I want a

lot of the fall kind.  I'm always full of rheumatism by

October.  Exposure, no doubt.''



``Over eating of too much rich food, you mean,''

laughed the Harvester.  ``I'd like to see any man expose

his body to more differing extremes of weather than I do,

and I'm never sick.  It's because I am my own cook

and so I live mostly on fruits, vegetables, bread, milk,

and eggs, a few fish from the lake, a little game once in

a great while or a chicken, and no hot drinks; plenty of

fresh water, air, and continuous work out of doors.  That's

the prescription!  I'd be ashamed to have rheumatism

at your age.  There's food in the cupboard if you grow

hungry.  I am going past one of the neighbours on my

way to see about some work I want her to do.''



The Harvester stopped for lunch, carried food to

Belshazzar, and started straight across country, his

mattock, with a bag rolled around the handle, on his

shoulder.  His feet sank in the damp earth at the foot

of the hill, and he laughed as he leaped across Singing

Water.



``You noisy chatterbox!'' cried the man.  ``The

impetus of coming down the curves of the hill keeps you

talking all the way across this muck bed to the lake. 

With small work I can make you a thing of beauty. 

A few bushes grubbed, a little deepening where you

spread too much, and some more mallows along the

banks will do the trick.  I must attend to you soon.''



``Now what does the boy want?'' laughed a white-

haired old woman, as the Harvester entered the door. 

``Mebby you think I don't know what you're up to! 

I even can hear the hammering and the voices of the men

when the wind is in the south.  I've been wondering

how soon you'd need me.  Out with it!''



``I want you to get a woman and come over and spend

a day with me.  I'll come after you and bring you back. 

I want you to go over mother's bedding and have what

needs it washed.  All I want you to do is to superintend,

and tell me now what I will want from town for your

work.''



``I put away all your mother's bedding that you were

not using, clean as a ribbon.''



``But it has been packed in moth preventives ever

since and out only four times a year to air, as you told

me.  It must smell musty and be yellow.  I want

it fresh and clean.''



``So what I been hearing is true, David?''



``Quite true!'' said the Harvester.



``Whose girl is she, and when are you going to jine

hands?''



The Harvester lifted his clear eyes and hesitated.



``Doc Carey laid you in my arms when you was born,

David.  I tended you 'fore ever your ma did.  All

your life you've been my boy, and I love you same as my

own blood; it won't go no farther if you say so.  I'll

never tell a living soul.  But I'm old and 'til better

weather comes, house bound; and I get mighty lonely. 

I'd like to think about you and her, and plan for you,

and love her as I always did you folks.  Who is she,

David?  Do I know the family?''



``No.  She is a stranger to these parts,'' said the

unhappy Harvester.



``David, is she a nice girl 'at your ma would have

liked?''



``She's the only girl in the world that I'd marry,'' said

the Harvester promptly, glad of a question he could

answer heartily.  ``Yes.  She is gentle, very tender

and----and affectionate,'' he went on so rapidly that

Granny Moreland could not say a word, ``and as soon

as I bring her home you shall come to spend a day and

get acquainted.  I know you will love her!  I'll come

in the morning, then.  I must hurry now.  I am working

double this spring and I'm off for the skunk cabbage

bed to-day.''



``You are working fit to kill, the neighbours say. 

Slavin' like a horse all day, and half the night I see your

lights burning.''



``Do I appear killed?'' laughingly inquired the Harvester.



``You look peart as a struttin' turkey gobbler,'' said

the old woman.  ``Go on with your work!  Work don't

hurt a-body.  Eat a-plenty, sleep all you ort, and you

CAN'T work enough to hurt you.''



``So the neighbours say I'm working now?  New

story, isn't it?  Usually I'm too lazy to make a living,

if I remember.''



``Only to those who don't sense your purceedings,

David.  I always knowed how you grubbed and slaved

an' set over them fearful books o' yours.''



``More interesting than the wildest fiction,'' said the

man.  ``I'm making some medicine for your rheumatism,

Granny.  It is not fully tested yet, but you get ready

for it by cutting out all the salt you can.  I haven't

time to explain this morning, but you remember what I

say, leave out the salt, and when Doc thinks it's safe

I'll bring you something that will make a new woman

of you.''



He went swinging down the road, and Granny Moreland

looked after him.



``While he was talkin','' she muttered, ``I felt full of

information as a flock o' almanacs, but now since he's

gone, 'pears to me I don't know a thing more 'an I did

to start on.''



``Close call,'' the Harvester was thinking.  ``Why

the nation did I admit anything to her?  People may

talk as they please, so long as I don't sanction it, but I

have two or three times.  That's a fool trick.  Suppose

I can't find her?  Maybe she won't look at me if I can. 

Then I'd have started something I couldn't finish. 

And if anybody thinks I'll end this by taking any girl I

can get, if I can't find Her, why they think wrongly. 

Just the girl of my golden dream or no woman at all

for me.  I've lived alone long enough to know how to do

it in comfort.  If I can't find and win her I have no

intention of starting a boarding house.''



The Harvester began to laugh.  `` `I'd rather keep

bachelor's hall in Hell than go to board in Heaven!' ''

he quoted gaily.  ``That's my sentiment too.  If you

can't have what you want, don't have anything.  But

there is no use to become discouraged before I start. 

I haven't begun to hunt her yet.  Until I do, I might as

well believe that she will walk across the bridge and take

possession just as soon as I get the last chair leg polished. 

She might!  She came in the dream, and to come actually

couldn't be any more real.  I'll make a stiff hunt of

it before I give up, if I ever do.  I never yet have made a

complete failure of anything.  But just now I am hunting

skunk cabbage.  It's precisely the time to take it.''



Across the lake, in the swampy woods, close where the

screech owl sang and the girl of the golden dream walked

in the moonlight the Harvester began operations.  He

unrolled the sack, went to one end of the bed and

systematically started a swath across it, lifting every other

plant by the roots.  Flowering time was almost past,

but the bees knew where pollen ripened, and hummed

incessantly over and inside the queer cone-shaped growths

with their hooked beaks.  It almost appeared as if the

sound made inside might be to give outsiders warning

not to poach on occupied territory, for the Harvester

noticed that no bee entered a pre-empted plant.



With skilful hand each stroke brought up a root and

he tossed it to one side.  The plants were vastly peculiar

things.  First they seemed to be a curled leaf with no

flower.  In colour they shaded from yellow to almost

black mahogany, and appeared as if they were a flower

with no leaf.  Closer examination proved there was a

stout leaf with a heavy outside mid-rib, the tip of which

curled over in a beak effect, that wrapped around a

peculiar flower of very disagreeable odour.  The handling

of these plants by the hundred so intensified this

smell the Harvester shook his head.



``I presume you are mostly mine,'' he said to the busy

little workers around him.  ``If there is anything in my

theory of honey having varying medicinal properties

at different seasons, right now mine should be good for

Granny's rheumatism and for nervous and dropsical

people.  I shouldn't think honey flavoured with skunk

cabbage would be fit to eat.  But, of course, it isn't all

this.  There is catkin pollen on the wind, hazel and sassafras

are both in bloom now, and so are several of the

earliest little flowers of the woods.  You can gather

enough of them combined to temper the disagreeable

odour into a racy sweetness, and all the shrub blooms are

good tonics, too, and some of the earthy ones.  I'm

going to try giving some of you empty cases next spring

and analyzing the honey to learn if it isn't good medicine.''



The Harvester straightened and leaned on the mattock

to fill his lungs with fresh air and as he delightedly sniffed

it he commented, ``Nothing else has much of a chance

since I've stirred up the cabbage bed.  I can scent the

catkins plainly, being so close, and as I came here I

could detect the hazel and sassafras all right.''



Above him a peculiar, raucous chattering for an instant

hushed other wood voices.  The Harvester looked

up, laughing gaily.



``So you've decided to announce it to your tribe at

last, have you?'' he inquired.  ``You are waking the

sleepers in their dens to-day?  Well, there's nothing like

waiting until you have a sure thing.  The bluebirds

broke the trail for the feathered folk the twenty-fourth

of February.  The sap oozed from the maples about

the same time for the trees.  The very first skunk cabbage

was up quite a month ago to signal other plants to

come on, and now you are rousing the furred folk.  I'll

write this down in my records----`When the earliest bluebird

sings, when the sap wets the maples, when the

skunk cabbage flowers, and the first striped squirrel

barks, why then, it is spring!' ''



He bent to his task and as he worked closer the water

he noticed sweet-flag leaves waving two inches tall beneath

the surface.



``Great day!'' he cried.  ``There you are making signs,

too!  And right!  Of course!  Nature is always right. 

Just two inches high and it's harvest for you.  I can

use a rake, and dried in the evaporator you bring me ten

cents a pound; to the folks needing a tonic you are worth

a small fortune.  No doubt you cost that by the time

you reach them; but I fear I can't gather you just now. 

My head is a little preoccupied these days.  What

with the cabbage, and now you, and many of the bushes

and trees making signs, with a new cabin to build and

furnish, with a girl to find and win, I'm what you might

call busy.  I've covered my book shelf.  I positively

don't dare look Emerson or Maeterlinck in the face. 

One consolation!  I've got the best of Thoreau in my

head, and if I read Stickeen a few times more I'll be able

to recite that.  There's a man for you, not to mention

the dog!  Bel, where are you?  Would you stick to me

like that?  I think you would.  But you are a big,

strong fellow.  Stickeen was only such a mite of a dog. 

But what a man he followed!  I feel as if I should put

on high-heeled slippers and carry a fan and a lace

handkerchief when I think of him.  And yet, most men

wouldn't consider my job so easy!''



The Harvester rapidly pitched the evil-smelling plants

into big heaps and as he worked he imitated the sounds

around him as closely as he could.  The song sparrow

laughed at him and flew away in disgust when he tried

its notes.  The jay took time to consider, but was not

fooled.  The nut-hatch ran head first down trees, larvae

hunting, and was never a mite deceived.  But the killdeer

on invisible legs, circling the lake shore, replied

instantly; so did the lark soaring above, and the dove

of the elm thicket close beside.  The glittering black

birds flashing over every tree top answered the ``T'check,

t'chee!'' of the Harvester quite as readily as their mates. 



The last time he paused to rest he had studied scents. 

When he straightened again he was occupied with every

voice of earth and air around and above him, and the

notes of singing hens, exultant cocks, the scream of

geese, the quack of ducks, the rasping crescendo of

guineas running wild in the woods, the imperial note of

Ajax sunning on the ridge pole and echoes from all of

them on adjoining and distant farms.



`` `Now I see the full meaning and beauty of that

word sound!' '' quoted the Harvester.  `` `I thank God

for sound.  It always mounts and makes me mount!' ''



He breathed deeply and stood listening, a superb

figure of a man, his lean face glowing with emotion.



``If she could see and hear this, she would come,''

he said softly.  ``She would come and she would love

it as I do.  Any one who understands, and knows how to

translate, cares for this above all else earth has to offer. 

They who do not, fail to read as they run!''



He shifted feet mired in swamp muck, and stood as

if loath to bend again to his task.  He lifted a weighted

mattock and scraped the earth from it, sniffing it delightedly

the while.  A soft south wind freighted with aromatic

odours swept his warm face.  The Harvester

removed his hat and shook his head that the breeze

might thread his thick hair.



``I've a commission for you, South Wind,'' he said

whimsically.  ``Go find my Dream Girl.  Go carry

her this message from me.  Freight your breath with

spicy pollen, sun warmth, and flower nectar.  Fill all

her senses with delight, and then, close to her ear,

whisper it softly, `Your lover is coming!'  Tell her that, O

South Wind!  Carry Araby to her nostrils, Heaven to

her ears, and then whisper and whisper it over and over

until you arouse the passion of earth in her blood.  Tell

her what is rioting in my heart, and brain, and soul this

morning.  Repeat it until she must awake to its meaning,

`Your lover is coming.' ''

