





CHAPTER VI





THORPE'S life-long habit of early rising brought him downstairs

next morning before anybody else in the house, apparently,

was astir.  At all events, he saw no one in either the hall

or the glass vestibule, as he wandered about.  Both doors

were wide open, however, to the mild, damp morning air.

He found on one of the racks a cap that was less uncomfortable

than the others, and sauntered forth to look about him.



His nerves were by no means in so serene a state as his reason

told him they ought to be.  The disquieting impression of bad

dreams hung about him.  The waking hour--always an evil

time for him in these latter days of anxiety--had been this

morning a peculiarly depressing affair.  It had seemed

to him, in the first minutes of reviving consciousness,

that he was a hopelessly ruined and discredited man;

the illusion of disaster had been, indeed, so complete

and vivid that, even now, more than an hour later,

he had not shaken off its effects. 



He applied his mental energies, as he strolled along

the gravel paths, to the task of reassuring himself. 

There were still elements of chance in the game,

of course, but it was easy enough, here in the daylight,

to demonstrate that they had been cut down to a minimum--that

it was nonsense to borrow trouble about them.  He reviewed

the situation in painstaking detail, and at every point

it was all right, or as nearly all right as any human

business could be.  He scolded himself sharply for this

foolish susceptibility to the intimidation of nightmares. 

"Look at Plowden!" he bade his dolorous spirit. 

"See how easy he takes things."



It was undeniable that Lord Plowden took things very

easily indeed.  He had talked with eloquence and feeling

about the miseries and humiliations of a peerage inadequately

endowed with money, but no traces of his sufferings were

visible to Thorpe's observant eye.  The nobleman himself looked

the very image of contented prosperity--handsome, buoyant,

light-hearted, and, withal, the best-groomed man in London. 

And this ancestral home of his--or of his mother's, since he

seemed to insist upon the distinction--where were its signs

of a stinted income? The place was overrun with servants. 

There was a horse which covered a distance of something

like two miles in eight minutes.  Inside and out,

Hadlow House suggested nothing but assured plenty. 

Yet its master told the most unvarying tales of poverty,

and no doubt they were in one sense true.  What he wished

to fix his mind upon, and to draw strength for himself from,

was the gay courage with which these Plowdens behaved

as if they were rich. 



The grounds at the front of the house, hemmed in by

high hedges and trees from what seemed to be a public

road beyond, were fairly spacious, but the sleek decorum

of their arrangement, while it pleased him, was scarcely

interesting.  He liked better to study the house itself,

which in the daylight revealed itself as his ideal

of what a historic English country-house of the minor

class should be.



There had been a period in his youth when architecture

had attracted him greatly as offering a congenial and

lucrative career.  Not much remained to him now of the

classifications and phraseology which he had gone to the trouble

of memorizing, in that far-off time, but he still looked

at buildings with a kind of professional consciousness. 

Hadlow House said intelligible things to him, and he

was pleased with himself for understanding them. 

It was not new in any part, apparently, but there was

nothing pretentious in its antiquity.  It had never

been a castle, or a fortified residence.  No violent

alteration in habits or needs distinguished its present

occupants from its original builders.  It had been

planned and reared as a home for gentle people, at some

not-too-remote date when it was already possible for gentle

people to have homes, without fighting to defend them. 

One could fancy that its calm and infinitely comfortable

history had never been ruffled from that day to this. 

He recalled having heard it mentioned the previous evening

that the house stood upon the site of an old monastery.

No doubt that accounted for its being built in a hollow,

with the ground-floor on the absolute level of the

earth outside.  The monks had always chosen these low-lying

sheltered spots for their cloisters.  Why should they

have done so? he wondered--and then came to a sudden

mental stop, absorbed in a somewhat surprised contemplation

of a new version of himself.  He was becoming literary,

historical, bookish! His mind had begun to throw open again,

to abstract thoughts and musings, its long-closed doors.

He had read and dreamed so much as a lad, in the old

book-shop! For many years that boyhood of eager concern

in the printed page had seemed to him to belong to

somebody else.  Now, all at once, it came back to him as his

own possession; he felt that he could take up books again

where he had dropped them, perhaps even with the old rapt,

intent zest.



Visions rose before him of the magnificent library he

would gather for himself.  And it should be in no wise

for show--the gross ostentation of the unlettered

parvenu--but a genuine library, which should minister

to his own individual culture.  The thought took instant

hold upon his interest.  By that road, his progress to the

goal of gentility would be smooth and simple.  He seemed

not to have reasoned it out to himself in detail before,

but now, at all events, he saw his way clearly enough.

Why should he be tormented with doubts and misgivings

about himself, as if he had come out of the gutter?



Why indeed? He had passed through--and with credit,

too--one of the great public schools of England. 

He had been there on a footing of perfect equality,

so far as he saw, with the sons of aristocratic families

or of great City potentates.  And as to birth, he had

behind him three generations at least of scholarly men,

men who knew the contents, as well as the commercial value,

of the books they handled.



His grandfather had been a man of note in his calling. 

The tradition of Lord Althorp's confidence in him, and of

how he requited it by securing Caxton's "Golden Legend"

for the library of that distinguished collector, under the

very nose of his hot rival, the Duke of Marlborough,

was tenderly cherished as an heirloom in the old shop. 

And Thorpe's father, too, though no such single achievement

crowned his memory, had been the adviser and, as one might say,

the friend of many notable writers and patrons of literature. 

The son of such forbears needed only money to be recognized

by everybody as a gentleman. 



On his mother's side, now that he thought of it,

there was something perhaps better still than a heritage

of librarians' craft and tastes.  His mother's maiden

name was Stormont, and he remembered well enough the

solemnity with which she had always alluded to the fact,

in the course of domestic discussions.  Who the Stormonts

were he could not recall that he had ever learned,

but his mother had been very clear indeed about their

superiority to the usual ruck of people.  He would

ask his sister whether she knew anything about them. 

In the meantime there was no denying that Stormont was

a fine-sounding name.  He reflected that it was his own

middle name--and, on the instant, fancy engraved for him

a card-plate on which appeared the legend--"Mr. Stormont Thorpe."



It was an inspiration! "Joel" he had not used for so many

years that now, after six months' familiarity with it

on his sister's lips, he could not get accustomed to it. 

The colourless and non-committal style of "J. S. Thorpe,"

under which he had lived so long, had been well enough

for the term of his exile--the weary time of obscure toil

and suspense.  But now, in this sunburst of smiling fortune,

when he had achieved the right to a name of distinction--here

it was ready to his hand.  A fleeting question as to

whether he should carry the "J" along as an initial put

itself to his mind.  He decided vigorously against it. 

He had always had a prejudice against men who, in the

transatlantic phrase, parted either their hair or their

names in the middle.



He had made his unheeding way past the house to the

beginning of the avenue of trees, which he remembered

from the previous evening's drive.  To his right, an open

space of roadway led off in the direction of the stables. 

As he hesitated, in momentary doubt which course to take,

the sound of hoofs in the avenue caught his ear,

and he stood still.  In a moment there came into view,

round a curve in the leafy distance, two horses with riders,

advancing at a brisk canter.  Soon he perceived that the

riders were ladies; they drew rein as they approached him,

and then it was to be seen that they were the pair he had

judged to be such close friends last night--Lady Cressage

and the daughter of the house. 



They smiled and nodded down at him, as he lifted his

cap and bowed.  Their cheeks were glowing and their

eyes sparkling with the exhilaration of their ride. 

Even the Hon. Winifred looked comely and distinguished

in his eyes, under the charm of this heightened vivacity. 

She seemed to carry herself better in the saddle than she

did out of it; the sweep of her habit below the stirrup

lent dignity to her figure. 



But her companion, whose big chestnut mount was pacing slowly

toward the stepping-block--how should he bring within the

compass of thought the impressions he had had of her as she

passed? There seemed to have been no memory in his mind

to prepare him for the beauty of the picture she had made. 

Slender, erect, exquisitely-tailored, she had gone by like

some queen in a pageant, gracious yet unapproachable. 

He stared after her, mutely bewildered at the effect she

produced upon him--until he saw that a groom had run from

the stable-yard, and was helping the divinity to dismount. 

The angry thought that he might have done this himself

rose within him--but there followed swiftly enough

the answering conviction that he lacked the courage. 

He did not even advance to proffer his services to the other

young lady, while there was still time.  The truth was,

he admitted ruefully to himself, they unnerved him. 



He had talked freely enough to them, or rather to the company

of which they made part, the previous evening.  There had

been an hour or more, indeed, before the party broke up,

in which he had borne the lion's share of the talk--and

they had appeared as frankly entertained as the others. 

In fact, when he recalled the circle of faces to which he

had addressed his monologue of reminiscences--curious

experiences and adventures in Java and the Argentine,

in Brazil and the Antilles and Mexico and the far West--it

was in the face of Lady Cressage that he seemed to discern

the most genuine interest. 



Why should she frighten him, then, by daylight? The

whimsical theory that the wine at dinner had given him

a spurious courage occurred to him.  He shrugged his

shoulders at it, and, with his hands in his pockets,

turned toward the stables. 



The stable-yard is, from some points of view,

the prettiest thing about Hadlow.  There is a big,

uneven, grass-grown space, in the centre of which,

from a slight mound, springs an aged oak of tremendous

girth and height.  All around this enclosure are buildings

of the same pale yellowish brick as the mansion itself,

but quaintly differing one from another in design and size. 

Stables, carriage-houses, kennels, a laundry, a brewery,

and half a dozen structures the intention of which is

now somewhat uncertain--some flat-topped, some gabled,

others with turrets, or massive grouped chimneys, or overhanging

timbered upper stories--form round this unkempt, shadowed

green a sort of village, with a communal individuality of its own. 



A glance shows its feudal relation to, and dependence

upon, the great house behind which it nestles;

some of the back-kitchens and offices of this

great house, indeed, straggle out till they meet and

merge themselves into this quadrangle.  None the less,

it presents to the enquiring gaze a specific character,

of as old a growth, one might think, as the oak itself. 

Here servants have lived, it may be, since man first learned

the trick of setting his foot on his brother's neck. 

Plainly enough, the monks' servants lived and worked here;

half the buildings on the side nearest the house belong to

their time, and one of them still bears a partially-defaced

coat of arms that must have belonged to an Abbot. 

And when lay lord succeeded cleric, only the garb and

vocabulary of servitude were altered in this square. 

Its population crossed themselves less, and worked much harder,

but they remained in a world of their own, adjacent aud

subject to the world of their masters, yet separated

from it by oh! such countless and unthinkable distances. 



Thorpe sauntered along the side of the stables. 

He counted three men and a boy who visibly belonged

to this department.  The dog-cart of the previous evening

had been run out upon the brick-pavement which drained

the stables, and glistened with expensive smartness now

beneath the sponge of one of the hostlers.  Under cover,

he discerned two other carriages, and there seemed to be

at least half a dozen horses.  The men who, in the half

gloom of the loose-boxes, were busy grooming these

animals made a curious whistling noise as they worked. 

Everybody in the yard touched a forelock to him as he passed. 



From this quaint, old-world enclosure he wandered at

his leisure, through an open gate in the wall at the back,

into the gardens behind the house.  There was not much

in the way of flowers to look at, but he moved about quite

unconscious of any deprivation.  A cluster of greenhouses,

massed against the southern side of the mansion,

attracted his listless fancy, and he walked toward what

appeared to be an entrance to them.  The door was locked,

but he found another further on which opened to his hand. 

The air was very hot and moist inside, and the place was

so filled with broad-leaved, umbrageous tropical plants

that he had to stoop to make his way through to the end. 

The next house had a more tolerable atmosphere, and contained

some blossoms to which he gave momentary attention. 

In the third house, through the glass-door, he could

see a man--evidently a gardener--lifting some pots to a

shelf overhead. 



The thought occurred to him that by entering into

conversation with this man, he might indirectly obtain

a hint as to the usual breakfast-hour at Hadlow.  It was

now nearly ten o'clock, and he was getting very hungry. 

Would they not ring a bell, or sound a gong, or something?

he wondered.  Perhaps there had been some such summons,

and he had not heard it.  It might be the intelligent

thing for him to return to the house, at all events,

and sit in the hall where the servants could see him,

in case the meal was in progress. 



Looking idly through the glass at the gardener, meanwhile,

it suddenly dawned upon him that the face and figure

were familiar.  He stared more intently at the man,

casting about in his memory for a clue to his identity. 

It came to him that the person he had in mind was a

fellow named Gafferson, who had kept an impoverished

and down-at-the-heels sort of hotel and general store on

the road from Belize to Boon Town, in British Honduras. 

Yes, it undoubtedly was Gafferson.  What on earth

was he doing here? Thorpe gave but brief consideration

to this problem.  It was of more immediate importance

to recall the circumstances of his contact with the man. 

He had made Gafferson's poor shanty of an hotel his

headquarters for the better part of a month--the base

of supplies from which he made numerous prospecting

tours into the mountains of the interior.  Had he paid

his bill on leaving? Yes, there was no doubt about that. 

He could even recall a certain pity for the unbusiness-like

scale of charges, and the lack of perception of opportunity,

which characterized the bill in question.  He remembered

now his impression that Gafferson would never do any good. 

It would be interesting to know what kind of an impression he,

in turn, had produced on his thriftless host.  At any rate,

there was no good reason why he should not find out. 

He opened the door and went in. 



The gardener barely looked up from his occupation,

and drew aside to let the newcomer pass with no sign

of a gesture toward his cap.  Thorpe halted, and tried

to look at the pots on the staging as if he knew about

such things. 



"What are you doing?" he asked, in the tentative tone

of one who is in no need of information, but desires

to be affable. 



"Drying off the first lot of gloxinias," answered the other. 

"Some people put 'em on their sides, but I like 'em upright,

close to the glass.  It stands to reason, if you think

about it."



"Why, certainly," said Thorpe, with conviction. 

In his mind he contrasted the independence of Gafferson's

manner with the practised servility of the stable-yard--

and thought that he liked it--and then was not so sure. 

He perceived that there was no recognition of him. 

The gardener, as further desultory conversation about his

work progressed, looked his interlocutor full in the face,

but with a placid, sheep-like gaze which seemed to be entirely

insensible to variations in the human species. 



"How did you ever get back here to England?" Thorpe was

emboldened to ask at last.  In comment upon the other's

stare of puzzled enquiry, he went on: "You're Gafferson,

aren't you? I thought so.  When I last saw you, you were

running a sort of half-way house, t'other side of Belize. 

That was in '90."



Gafferson--a thick-set, squat man of middle age, with a

straggling reddish beard--turned upon him a tranquil but

uninformed eye.  "I suppose you would have been stopping

at Government House," he remarked.  "That was in Sir

Roger Goldsworthy's time.  They used to come out often

to see my flowers.  And so you remembered my name. 

I suppose it was because of the Gaffersoniana hybrids. 

There was a good bit in the papers about them last spring."

Thorpe nodded an assent which it seemed better not to put

into words.  "Well, it beats all," he mused aloud. 

"Why, man, there's gold in those mountains! You had an inside

track on prospecting, placed as you were.  And there's

cocoa--and some day they'll coin money in rubber, too. 

All that country's waiting for is better communications. 

And you were on the spot, and knew all the lay of the

land--and yet here you are back in England, getting so much

a month for messing about in the mud."



He saw swiftly that his reflections had carried him beyond

his earlier limit, and with rapidity decided upon frankness. 

"No, I wasn't in the Governor's outfit at all.  I was

looking for gold then--with occasionally an eye on rubber. 

I stopped at your place.  Don't you remember me? My

name's Thorpe.  I had a beard then.  Why, man, you and one

of your niggers were with me three or four days once,

up on the ridge beyond the Burnt Hills--why, you remember,

the nigger was from San Domingo, and he was forever

bragging about the San Domingo peppers, and saying those

on the mainland hadn't enough strength to make a baby

wrinkle his nose, and you found a pepper coming through

the swamp, and you tipped me the wink, and you handed

that pepper to the nigger, and it damned near killed him. 

Hell! You must remember that!"



"That would have been the Chavica pertusum," said Gafferson,

thoughtfully.  He seemed to rouse himself to an interest in

the story itself with some difficulty.  "Yes--I remember it,"

he admitted, finally.  "I shouldn't have known you though. 

I'm the worst in the world about remembering people.

It seems to be growing on me.  I notice that when I go

up to London to the shows, I don't remember the men

that I had the longest talks with the time before. 

Once you get wrapped up in your flowers, you've got

no room in your head for anything else--that's the way of it."



Thorpe considered him with a ruminating eye.  "So this

is the sort of thing you really like, eh? You'd rather be

doing this, eh? than making your pile in logwood and mahogany

out there, or floating a gold mine?" Gafferson answered

quite simply: "I wasn't the kind to ever make a pile. 

I got led into going out there when I was a youngster,

and there didn't seem to be any good in trying to get back,

but I wasn't making more than a bare living when you

were there, and after that I didn't even do that much. 

It took me a good many years to find out what my

real fancy was.  I hated my hotel and my store,

but I was crazy about my garden.  Finally an American

gentleman came along one day, and he put up at my place,

and he saw that I was as near ruined as they make 'em,

and he says to me, 'You're no good to run a hotel,

nor yet a store, and this aint your country for a cent. 

What you're born for is to grow flowers.  You can't

afford to do it here, because nobody'll pay you for it,

but you gather up your seeds and roots and so on, and come

along with me to Atlanta, Georgia, and I'll put fat on

your bones.'



"That's what he said to me, and I took him at his word,

and I was with him two years, and then I thought I'd like to

come to England, and since then I've worked my way up here,

till now I take a Royal Horticultural medal regular,

and there's a clematis with salmon-coloured bars that'll

be in the market next spring that's named after my master. 

And what could I ask more 'n that?"



"Quite right," said Thorpe.  "What time do they have

breakfast here?"



The gardener's round, phlegmatic, florid countenance had

taken on a mild glow of animation during his narrative. 

It relapsed into lethargy at the advent of this new topic.



"It seems to me they eat at all hours," he said. 

"But if you want to see his Lordship," he went on,

considering, "about noon would be your best time."



"See his Lordship!" repeated Thorpe, with an impatient grin. 

"Why I'm a guest here in the house.  All I want is

something to eat."



"A guest," Gafferson repeated in turn, slowly.  There was

nothing unpleasant in the intonation, and Thorpe's sharp

glance failed to detect any trace of offensive intention

in his companion's fatuous visage.  Yet it seemed to

pass between the two men that Gafferson was surprised,

and that there were abundant grounds for his surprise. 



"Why, yes," said Thorpe, with as much nonchalance as he

could summon, "your master is one of my directors. 

I've taken a fancy to him, and I'm going to make a rich

man of him.  He was keen about my seeing his place here,

and kept urging me to come, and so finally I've got away

over Sunday to oblige him.  By the way--I shall buy an

estate in the country as soon as the right thing offers,

and I shall want to set up no end of gardens and greenhouses

and all that.  I see that I couldn't come to a better

man than you for advice.  I daresay I'll put the whole

arrangement of it in your hands.  You'd like that,

wouldn't you?"



"Whatever his Lordship agrees to," the gardener

replied, sententiously.  He turned to the staging,

and took up one of the pots. 



Thorpe swung on his heel, and moved briskly toward the

further door, which he could see opened upon the lawn. 

He was conscious of annoyance with this moon-faced,

dawdling Gafferson, who had been afforded such a splendid

chance of profiting by an old acquaintanceship--it might even

be called, as things went in Honduras, a friendship--and

who had so clumsily failed to rise to the situation. 

The bitter thought of going back and giving him a half-crown

rose in Thorpe's inventive mind, and he paused for

an instant, his hand on the door-knob, to think it over. 

The gratuity would certainly put Gafferson in his place,

but then the spirit in which it was offered would be wholly

lost on his dull brain.  And moreover, was it so certain

that he would take it? He had not said "sir" once, and he

had talked about medals with the pride of a scientist. 

The rules were overwhelmingly against a gardener rejecting

a tip, of course, but if there was no more than one chance

in twenty of it, Thorpe decided that he could not afford

the risk. 



He quitted the greenhouse with resolution, and directed his

steps toward the front of the mansion.  As he entered the hall,

a remarkably tuneful and resonant chime filled his ears

with novel music.  He looked and saw that a white-capped,

neatly-clad domestic, standing with her back to him beside

the newel-post of the stairs, was beating out the tune

with two padded sticks upon some strips of metal ranged on

a stand of Indian workmanship.  The sound was delightful,

but even more so was the implication that it betokened breakfast. 



With inspiration, he drew forth the half-crown which he

had been fingering in his pocket, and gave it to the girl

as she turned.  "That's the kind of concert I like,"

he declared, bestowing the patronage of a jovial smile upon

her pleased and comely face.  "Show me the way to this

breakfast that you've been serenading about."



Out in the greenhouse, meanwhile, Gafferson continued

to regard blankly the shrivelled, fatty leaves of

the plant he had taken up.  "Thorpe," he said aloud,

as if addressing the tabid gloxinia--"Thorpe--yes--I

remember his initials--J. S. Thorpe.  Now, who's the

man that told me about him? and what was it he told me?"


