





CHAPTER II





"LOUISA, the long and short of it is this," said Thorpe,

half an hour later: "you never did believe in me,

as a sister should do."



He was seated alone with this sister, in a small, low,

rather dismally-appointed room, half-heartedly lighted

by two flickering gasjets.  They sat somewhat apart,

confronting a fireplace, where only the laid materials for

a fire disclosed themselves in the cold grate.  Above the

mantel hung an enlarged photograph of a scowling old man. 

Thorpe's gaze recurred automatically at brief intervals

to this portrait--which somehow produced the effect upon

him of responsibility for the cheerlessness of the room. 

There were other pictures on the walls of which he was

dimly conscious--small, faded, old prints about Dido

and AEneas and Agamemnon, which seemed to be coming back

to him out of the mists of his childhood. 



Vagrant impressions and associations of this childhood

strayed with quaint inconsequence across the field of his

preoccupied mind.  The peculiar odour of the ancient book-shop

on the floor below remained like snuff in his nostrils. 

Somewhere underneath, or in the wainscoting at the side,

he could hear the assiduous gnawing of a rat.  Was it

the same rat, he wondered with a mental grin, that used

to keep him awake nights, in one of the rooms next to this,

with that same foolish noise, when he was a boy?



"I know you always say that," replied Louisa, impassively. 



She was years older than her brother, but, without a trace

of artifice or intention, contrived to look the younger

of the two.  Her thick hair, drawn simply from her temples

into a knot behind, was of that palest brown which

assimilates grey.  Her face, long, plain, masculine in

contour and spirit, conveyed no message as to years. 

Long and spare of figure, she sat upright in her

straight-backed chair, with her large, capable hands

on her knees.



"I believed in you as much as you'd let me," she went on,

indifferently, almost wearily.  "But I don't see that it

mattered to you whether I did or didn't. You went your own

way: you did what you wanted to do.  What had I to do

with it? I don't suppose I even knew what part of the

world you were in more than once in two or three years. 

How should I know whether you were going to succeed,

when I didn't even know what it was you were at? Certainly

you hadn't succeeded here in London--but elsewhere you

might or you might not--how could I tell? And moreover,

I don't feel that I know you very well; you've grown

into something very different from the boy Joel that left

the shop--it must be twenty years ago.  I can only know

about you and your affairs what you tell me."



"But my point is," pursued Thorpe, watching her face with

a curiously intent glance, "you never said to yourself:

'I KNOW he's going to succeed.  I KNOW he'll be a rich

man before he dies.'"



She shook her head dispassionately.  Her manner expressed

fatigued failure to comprehend why he was making so much

of this purposeless point. 



"No--I don't remember ever having said that to myself,"

she admitted, listlessly.  Then a comment upon his words

occurred to her, and she spoke with more animation:

"You don't seem to understand, Joel, that what was very

important to you, didn't occupy me at all.  You were

always talking about getting rich; you kept the idea

before you of sometime, at a stroke, finding yourself

a millionaire.  That's been the idea of your life. 

But what do I know about all that? My work has been

to keep a roof over my head--to keep the little business

from disappearing altogether.  It's been hard enough,

I can tell you, these last few years, with the big

jobbers cutting the hearts out of the small traders. 

I had the invalid husband to support for between three

and four years--a dead weight on me every week--and then

the children to look after, to clothe and educate."



At the last word she hesitated suddenly, and looked

at him.  "Don't think I'm ungrateful"--she went on,

with a troubled effort at a smile--"but I almost wish

you'd never sent me that four hundred pounds at all. 

What it means is that they've had two years at schools

where now I shan't be able to keep them any longer. 

They'll be spoiled for my kind of life--and they won't have

a fair chance for any other.  I don't know what will become

of them."



The profound apprehension in the mother's voice did not

dull the gleam in Thorpe's eyes.  He even began a smile

in the shadows of his unkempt moustache. 



"But when I sent that money, for example, two years ago,

and over," he persisted, doggedly--"and I told you there'd

be more where that came from, and that I stood to pull

off the great event--even then, now, you didn't believe

in your innermost heart that I knew what I was talking about,

did you?"



She frowned with impatience as she turned toward him. 

"For heaven's sake, Joel," she said, sharply--"you become

a bore with that stupid nonsense.  I want to be patient

with you--I do indeed sympathize with you in your

misfortunes--you know that well enough--but you're very

tiresome with that eternal harping on what I believed and

what I didn't believe.  Now, are you going to stop to supper

or not?--because if you are I must send the maid out. 

And there's another thing--would it be of any help to you

to bring your things here from the hotel? You can have

Alfred's room as well as not--till Christmas, at least."



"Supposing I couldn't get my luggage out of the hotel

till I'd settled my bill," suggested Thorpe tentatively,

in a muffled voice. 



The practical woman reflected for an instant. 

"I was thinking," she confessed then, "that it might

be cheaper to leave your things there, and buy what

little you want--I don't imagine, from what I've seen,

that your wardrobe is so very valuable--but no, I suppose

the bill ought to be paid.  Perhaps it can be managed;

how much will it be?"



Thorpe musingly rose to his feet, and strolled over

to her chair.  With his thick hands on his sister's

shoulders he stooped and kissed her on the forehead. 



"You believe in me now, anyway, eh, Lou?" he said,

as he straightened himself behind her. 



The unaccustomed caress--so different in character from

the perfunctory salute with which he had greeted her

on his arrival from foreign parts, six months before--

brought a flush of pleased surprise to her plain face. 

Then a kind of bewilderment crept into the abstracted

gaze she was bending upon the fireless grate. 

Something extraordinary, unaccountable, was in the manner

of her brother.  She recalled that, in truth, he was

more than half a stranger to her.  How could she tell

what wild, uncanny second nature had not grown up in him

under those outlandish tropical skies? He had just told

her that his ruin was absolute--overwhelming--yet there

had been a covert smile in the recesses of his glance. 

Even now, she half felt, half heard, a chuckle from him,

there as he stood behind her!



The swift thought that disaster had shaken his brain

loomed up and possessed her.  She flung herself out

of the chair, and, wheeling, seized its back and drew

it between them as she faced him.  It was with a stare

of frank dismay that she beheld him grinning at her. 



"What"--she began, stammering--"What is the matter, Joel?"



He permitted himself the luxury of smiling blankly

at her for a further moment.  Then he tossed his head,

and laughed abruptly. 



"Sit down, old girl," he adjured her.  "Try and hold

yourself together, now--to hear some different kind of news. 

I've been playing it rather low down on you, for a fact. 

Instead of my being smashed, it's the other way about."



She continued to confront him, with a nervous clasp

upon the chair-back. Her breathing troubled her as she

regarded him, and tried to take in the meaning of his words. 



"Do you mean--you've been lying to me about--about

your Company?" she asked, confusedly. 



"No--no--not at all," he replied, now all genial heartiness. 

"No--what I told you was gospel truth--but I was taking

a rise out of you all the same." He seemed so unaffectedly

pleased by his achievement in kindly duplicity that she

forced an awkward smile to her lips. 



"I don't understand in the least," she said, striving to

remember what he had told her.  "What you said was

that the public had entirely failed to come in--that

there weren't enough applications for shares to pay

flotation expenses--those were your own words.  Of course,

I don't pretend to understand these City matters--but it

IS the case, isn't it, that if people don't subscribe

for the shares of a new company, then the company is a failure?"



"Yes, that may be said to be the case--as a general rule,"

he nodded at her, still beaming. 



"Well, then--of course--I don't understand," she owned. 



"I don't know as you'll understand it much more when I've

explained it to you," he said, seating himself, and motioning

her to the other chair.  "But yes, of course you will. 

You're a business woman.  You know what figures mean. 

And really the whole thing is as simple as A B C. You

remember that I told you----"



"But are you going to stop to supper? I must send Annie

out before the shops close."



"Supper? No--I couldn't eat anything.  I'm too worked

up for that.  I'll get something at the hotel before I

go to bed, if I feel like it.  But say!"--the thought

suddenly struck him--"if you want to come out with me,

I'll blow you off to the swaggerest dinner in London. 

What d'ye say?"



She shook her head.  "I shall have some bread and cheese

and beer at nine.  That's my rule, you know.  I don't

like to break it.  I'm always queer next day if I do. 

But now make haste and tell me--you're really not broken

then? You have really come out well?"



For answer he rose, and drew himself to his full height,

and spread his bulky shoulders backward.  His grey-blue

eyes looked down upon her with a triumphant glow. 



"Broken?" he echoed her word, with emphasis. 

"My dear Louisa, I'm not the sort that gets broken. 

I break other people.  Oh, God, how I shall break them!"



He began pacing up and down on the narrow rug before

the fender, excitedly telling his story to her. 

Sometimes he threw the words over his shoulder;

again he held her absorbed gaze with his.  He took his

hands often from his pockets, to illustrate or enforce

by gestures the meaning of his speech--and then she found

it peculiarly difficult to realize that he was her brother. 



Much of the narrative, rambling and disconnected,

with which he prefaced this story of the day, was vaguely

familiar to her.  He sketched now for her in summary,


and with the sonorous voice of one deeply impressed with the

dramatic values of his declamation, the chronicle of his

wanderings in strange lands--and these he had frequently

told her about before.  Soon she perceived, however,

that he was stringing them together on a new thread. 

One after another, these experiences of his, as he

related them, turned upon the obstacles and fatal pitfalls

which treachery and malice had put in his path.  He seemed,

by his account, to have been a hundred times almost

within touch of the goal.  In China, in the Dutch Indies,

in those remoter parts of Australia which were a waterless

waste when he knew them and might have owned them,

and now were yielding fabulous millions to fellows who

had tricked and swindled him--everywhere he had missed

by just a hair's breadth the golden consummation. 

In the Western hemisphere the tale repeated itself. 

There had been times in the Argentine, in Brazil just before

the Empire fell, in Colorado when the Silver boom was on,

in British Columbia when the first rumours of rich ore

were whispered about--many times when fortune seemed

veritably within his grasp.  But someone had always

played him false.  There was never a friendship for him

which could withstand the temptation of profitable treason. 



But he had hung dauntlessly on.  He had seen one concession

slipping through his fingers, only to strain and tighten

them for a clutch at another.  It did not surprise

his hearer--nor indeed did it particularly attract

her attention--that there was nowhere in this rapid and

comprehensive narrative any allusion to industry of the

wage-earning sort.  Apparently, he had done no work at all,

in the bread-winner's sense of the word.  This was so like

Joel that it was taken for granted in his sister's mind. 

All his voyages and adventures and painful enterprises

had been informed by the desire of the buccaneer--the

passion to reap where others had sown, or, at the worst,

to get something for nothing. 



The discursive story began to narrow and concentrate

itself when at last it reached Mexico.  The sister changed

her position in her chair, and crossed her knees when

Tehuantepec was mentioned.  It was from that place that Joel

had sent her the amazing remittance over two years ago. 

Curiously enough, though, it was at this point in his

narrative that he now became vague as to details. 

There were concessions of rubber forests mentioned,

and the barter of these for other concessions with money

to boot, and varying phases of a chronic trouble about

where the true boundary of Guatemala ran--but she failed

clearly to understand much about it all.  His other

schemes and mishaps she had followed readily enough. 

Somehow when they came to Mexico, however, she saw

everything jumbled and distorted, as through a haze. 

Once or twice she interrupted him to ask questions,

but he seemed to attach such slight importance to her

comprehending these details that she forbore.  Only one

fact was it necessary to grasp about the Mexican episode,

apparently.  When he quitted Tehuantepec, to make his way

straight to London, at the beginning of the year, he left

behind him a rubber plantation which he desired to sell,

and brought with him between six and seven thousand pounds,

with which to pay the expenses of selling it. 

How he had obtained either the plantation or the money

did not seem to have made itself understood.  No doubt,

as his manner indicated when she ventured her enquiries,

it was quite irrelevant to the narrative. 



In Mexico, his experience had been unique, apparently, in that

no villain had appeared on the scene to frustrate his plans. 

He at least mentioned no one who had wronged him there. 

When he came to London, however, there were villains

and to spare.  He moved to the mantel, when he arrived

at this stage of the story, and made clear a space for his

elbow to rest among the little trinkets and photographs

with which it was burdened.  He stood still thereafter,

looking down at her; his voice took on a harsher note. 



Much of this story, also, she knew by heart.  This strange,

bearded, greyish-haired brother of hers had come very often

during the past half-year to the little book-shop, and the

widow's home above it, his misshapen handbag full of papers,

his heart full of rage, hope, grief, ambition, disgust,

confidence--everything but despair.  It was true,

it had never been quite real to her.  He was right in his

suggestion that she had never wholly believed in him. 

She had not been able to take altogether seriously

this clumsy, careworn, shabbily-dressed man who talked

about millions.  It was true that he had sent her four

hundred pounds for the education of her son and daughter;

it was equally true that he had brought with him to London

a sum which any of his ancestors, so far as she knew

about them, would have deemed a fortune, and which he

treated as merely so much oil, with which to lubricate

the machinery of his great enterprise.  She had heard,

at various times, the embittered details of the disappearance

of this money, little by little.  Nearly a quarter of it,

all told, had been appropriated by a sleek old braggart

of a company-promoter, who had cozened Joel into the

belief that London could be best approached through him. 

When at last this wretch was kicked downstairs, the effect

had been only to make room for a fresh lot of bloodsuckers. 

There were so-called advertising agents, so-called journalists,

so-called "men of influence in the City,"--a swarm

of relentless and voracious harpies, who dragged from

him in blackmail nearly the half of what he had left,

before he summoned the courage and decision to shut them out. 



Worse still, in some ways, were the men into whose hands

he stumbled next--a group of City men concerned in the

South African market, who impressed him very favourably

at the outset.  He got to know them by accident, and at the

time when he began to comprehend the necessity of securing

influential support for his scheme.  Everything that he

heard and could learn about them testified to the strength

of their position in the City.  Because they displayed

a certain amiability of manner toward him and his project,

he allowed himself to make sure of their support. 

It grew to be a certainty in his mind that they would see

him through.  He spent a good deal of money in dinners and

suppers in their honour, after they had let him understand

that this form of propitiation was not unpleasant to them. 

They chaffed him about some newspaper paragraphs,

in which he was described as the "Rubber King," with an

affable assumption of amusement, under which he believed

that he detected a genuine respect for his abilities. 



Finally, when he had danced attendance upon them for

the better part of two months, he laid before them,

at the coffee-and-cigars stage of a dinner in a private

room of the Savoy, the details of his proposition. 

They were to form a Syndicate to take over his property,

and place it upon the market; in consideration of their

finding the ready money for this exploitation, they were to

have for themselves two-fifths of the shares in the Company

ultimately to be floated.  They listened to these details,

and to his enthusiastic remarks about the project itself,

with rather perfunctory patience, but committed themselves

that evening to nothing definite.  It took him nearly

a week thereafter to get an answer from any of them. 

Then he learned that, if they took the matter up at all,

it would be upon the basis of the Syndicate receiving

nine-tenths of the shares. 



He conceived the idea, after he had mastered his

original amazement, that they named these preposterous

terms merely because they expected to be beaten down,

and he summoned all his good nature and tact for the task

of haggling with them.  He misunderstood their first

show of impatience at this, and persevered in the face

of their tacit rebuffs.  Then, one day, a couple of them

treated him with overt rudeness, and he, astonished out of

his caution, replied to them in kind.  Suddenly, he could

hardly tell why or how, they were all enemies of his. 

They closed their office doors to him; even their clerks

treated him with contemptuous incivility. 



This blow to his pride enraged and humiliated him,

curiously enough, as no other misadventure of his life

had done. 



Louisa remembered vividly the description he had given to her,

at the time, of this affair.  She had hardly understood why

it should disturb him so profoundly: to her mind, these men

had done nothing so monstrous after all.  But to him,

their offense swallowed up all the other indignities

suffered during the years of his Ishmaelitish wanderings. 

A sombre lust for vengeance upon them took root in his

very soul.  He hated nobody else as he hated them. 

How often she had heard him swear, in solemn vibrating tones,

that to the day of his death his most sacred ambition

should be their punishment, their abasement in the dust

and mire!



And now, all at once, as she looked up at him, where he leant

against the mantel, these vagabond memories of hers took

point and shape.  It was about these very men that he was talking. 



"And think of it!" he was saying, impressively.  "It's magnificent

enough for me to make this great hit--but I don't count it

as anything at all by comparison with the fact that I make it

at their expense.  You remember the fellows I told you about?"

he asked abruptly, deferring to the confused look on her face.



"Yes--you make it out of them," she repeated, in an

uncertain voice.  It occurred to her that she must

have been almost asleep.  "But did I miss anything?

Have you been telling what it is that you have made?"



"No--that you shall have in good time.  You don't seem

to realize it, Louisa.  I can hardly realize it myself. 

I am actually a very rich man.  I can't tell how much

I've got--in fact, it can be almost as much as I like--

half a million pounds, I suppose, at the start, if I want

to make it that much.  Yes--it takes the breath away,

doesn't it? But best of all--a thousand times best of

all--practically every dollar of it comes out of those Kaffir

swine--the very men that tried to rob me, and that have been

trying to ruin me ever since.  I tell you what I wish,

Louise--I wish to God there could only be time enough,

and I'd take it all in half-sovereigns--two millions

of them, or three millions--and just untwist every coin,

one by one, out from among their heart-strings. Oh--but

it'll be all right as it is.  It's enough to make a man

feel religious--to think how those thieves are going

to suffer."



"Well " she said, slowly after reflection, "it all rather

frightens me."



As if the chill in the air of the cheerless room had

suddenly accentuated itself, she arose, took a match-

box from the mantel, and, stooping, lit the fire. 



He looked down at the tall, black-clad figure, bent in stiff

awkwardness over the smoking grate, and his eyes softened. 

Then he took fresh note of the room--the faded,

threadbare carpet, the sparse old furniture that had

seemed ugly to even his uninformed boyish taste,

the dingy walls and begrimed low ceiling--all pathetic

symbols of the bleak life to which she had been condemned. 



"Frightens you?" he queried, with a kind of jovial

tenderness, as she got to her feet; "frightens you,

eh? Why, within a month's time, old lady, you'll be

riding in the Park in your own carriage, with niggers

folding their arms up behind, and you'll be taking

it all as easy and as natural as if you'd been born

in a barouche."



He added, in response to the enquiry of her lifted brows:

"Barouche? That's what we'd call in England a landau."



She stood with a foot upon the fender, her tired,

passive face inclined meditatively, her rusty old black

gown drawn back by one hand from the snapping sparks. 

"No," she said, slowly, joyless resignation mingling with

pride in her voice.  "I was born here over the shop."



"Well, good God! so was I," he commented, lustily. 

"But that's no reason why I shouldn't wind up in Park

Lane--or you either."



She had nothing to say to this, apparently.  After a little,

she seated herself again, drawing her chair closer

to the hearth.  "It's years since I've lit this

fire before the first of November," she remarked,

with the air of defending the action to herself. 



"Oh, we're celebrating," he said, rubbing his hands

over the reluctant blaze.  "Everything goes, tonight!"



Her face, as she looked up at him, betrayed the bewilderment

of her mind.  "You set out to tell me what it was all about,"

she reminded him.  "You see I'm completely in the dark. 

I only hear you say that you've made a great fortune. 

That's all I know.  Or perhaps you've told me as much as you

care to."



"Why, not at all," he reassured her, pulling his own

chair toward him with his foot, and sprawling into it

with a grunt of relief.  "If you'll draw me a glass

of that beer of yours, I'll tell you all about it. 

It's not a thing for everybody to know, not to be breathed

to a human being, for that matter--but you'll enjoy it,

and it'll be safe enough with you."



As she rose, and moved toward a door, he called merrily

after her: "No more beer when that keg runs dry, you know. 

Nothing but champagne!"

