





CHAPTER XXI





IN the noon hour of the following day was enacted the brief

final scene in the drama of the "Rubber Consols corner."



For long weeks, Mr. Stormont Thorpe had given much thought

to this approaching climax of his great adventure--looking

forward to it both as the crowning event of his life,

and as the dawn of a new existence in some novel,

enchanted world.  It was to bring his triumph, and even more,

his release.  It was at once to crown him as a hero

and chieftain among City men, and transfigure him into

a being for whom all City things were an abomination. 

In his waking hours, the conflict between these aims did

not specially force itself upon his attention: he mused upon,

and spun fancies about, either one indifferently,

and they seemed not at all irreconcilable.  But his dreams

were full of warfare,--wearily saturated with strife,

and endless endeavour to do things which could not be done,

and panic-stricken terrors before the shadow of shapeless

calamities,--until he dreaded to go to sleep.  Then he

discovered that an extra two glasses of whiskey-and-water

would solve that particular difficulty, and send him

into prompt, leaden slumber--but the early mornings remained

as torturing as ever.  In the twilight he awoke oppressed

and sick at heart with gloom--and then dozed at intervals

through fantastic new ordeals of anguish and shame and fear,

till it was decently possible to get up. 



Then, indeed, the big cold sponge on his head and spine

scattered these foolish troubles like chaff, and restored

to him his citizenship among the realities.  He dressed

with returning equanimity, and was almost cheerful

by the time he thrust his razor into the hot water. 

Yet increasingly he was conscious of the wear and strain

of it all, and increasingly the date, September twelfth,

loomed before him with a portentous individuality of

its own. 



This day grew to mean so much more to him than had all

the other days of the dead years together that he woke

in the darkness of its opening hours, and did not get

satisfactorily to sleep again.  His vigil, however,

was for the once free from grief.  He drowsily awaited

the morning in vague mental comfort; he had recurring

haphazard indolent glimpses of a protecting fact standing

guard just outside the portals of consciousness--the

fact that the great day was here.  He rose early,

breakfasted well, and walked by the Embankment to the City,

where at ten he had a few words with Semple, and afterward

caused himself to be denied to ordinary callers. 

He paced up and down the Board Room for the better part

of the ensuing two hours, luxuriating in the general sense

of satisfaction in the proximity of the climax, rather than

pretending to himself that he was thinking out its details. 

He had provided in his plans of the day for a visit

from Messrs.  Rostocker and Aronson, which should constitute

the dramatic finale of the "corner," and he looked forward

to this meeting with a certain eagerness of expectation. 

Yet even here he thought broadly of the scene as a whole,

and asked himself no questions about words and phrases. 

It seemed to be taken for granted in his mind that the scene

itself would be theatrically impressive, even spectacular. 



In the event, this long-awaited culmination proved

to be disappointingly flat and commonplace.  It was over

before Thorpe had said any considerable proportion of the

things he saw afterward that he had intended to say. 

The two men came as he had expected they would--

and they bought their way out of the tragic "corner"

at precisely the price he had nominated in his mind. 

But hardly anything else went as he had dimly prefigured it. 



Mr. Rostocker was a yellow-haired man, and Mr. Aronson

was as dark as a Moor, and no physical resemblance of

features or form suggested itself to the comparing eye,

yet Thorpe even now, when they stood brusquely silent

before him, with their carefully-brushed hats pulled

down over their eyes, stuck to it in his own mind

that it was hard to tell them apart.  To the end,

there was something impersonal in his feeling toward them. 

They, for their part, coldly abstained from exhibiting

a sign of feeling about him, good, bad, or indifferent. 



It was the man with the fair hair and little curly flaxen

beard who spoke: "How do you do! I understand that we can

buy eight thousand five hundred Rubber Consols from you

at 'twenty-three.'"



"No--twenty-five," replied Thorpe. 



The dark man spoke: "The jobbers' price is twenty-three."



"To carry over--yes," Thorpe answered.  "But to buy it

is twenty-five."



The two sons of the race which invented mental arithmetic

exchanged an alert glance, and looked at the floor

for an engrossed instant.



"I don't mind telling you," Thorpe interposed upon

their silence, "I put on that extra two pounds because you

got up that story about applying to the Stock Exchange

Committee on a charge of fraud."



"We didn't get up any story," said Rostocker, curtly. 



"You tried to plant it on us," Aronson declared. 



"One of your own Directors put it about.  I thought it

was a fake at the time."



This view of the episode took Thorpe by surprise. 

As it seemed, in passing, to involve a compliment to his

own strategic powers, he accepted it without comment. 

"Well--it is twenty-five, anyway," he told them,

with firmness. 



"Twenty-four," suggested Aronson, after another momentary pause. 



"Not a shilling less than twenty-five," Thorpe insisted,

with quiet doggedness. 



"We can always pay our creditors and let you whistle,"

Rostocker reminded him, laconically. 



"You can do anything you like," was the reply, "except buy

Rubber Consols under twenty-five. It doesn't matter a fig

to me whether you go bankrupt or not.  It would suit me

as well to have you two 'hammered' as to take your money."

Upon the spur of a sudden thought he drew out his watch. 

"In just two minutes' time to a tick, the price will

be thirty."



"Let's be 'hammered' then!" said Aronson to his companion,

with simulated impulsiveness. 



Rostocker was the older and stronger man, and when at last

he spoke it was with the decision of one in authority. 

"It is your game," he said, with grave imperturbability. 

"Eight thousand five hundred at twenty-five. Will you deliver

at the Credit Lyonnais in half an hour?"



Thorpe nodded, impassively.  Then a roving idea of genial

impertinence brought a gleam to his eye.  "If you should

happen to want more Rubber Consols at any time," he said,

with a tentative chuckle, "I could probably let you have

them at a reduced price."



The two received the pleasantry without a smile,

but to Thorpe's astonishment one of them seemed to discern

something in it beside banter.  It was Rostocker who said:

"Perhaps we may make a deal with you," and apparently meant it. 




They went out at this, ignoring ceremony upon their

exit as stolidly as they had done upon their entrance,

and a moment later Thorpe called in the Secretary,

and despatched a messenger to bring Semple from Capel Court. 

The formalities of this final transfer of shares had been

dictated to the former, and he had gone off on the business,

before the Broker arrived. 



Thorpe stood waiting near the door, and held out his hand

with a dramatically significant gesture when the little

Scotchman entered.  "Put her there!" he exclaimed heartily,

with an exuberant reversion to the slang of remote

transatlantic bonhomie. 



"Yeh've done it, then!" said Semple, his sharp face

softening with pleasure at the news.  "Yeh've pulled

it off at twenty-three!"



The other's big countenance yielded itself to a boyish grin. 

"Twenty-FIVE!" he said, and laughed aloud.  "After you

left this morning, it kind o' occurred to me that I'd

raise it a couple of pounds.  I found I was madder about

those pieces in the newspapers than I thought I was,

and so I took an extra seventeen thousand pounds on

that account."



"God above!" Semple ejaculated, with a satisfaction

through which signs of an earlier fright were visible. 

"It was touch-and-go if you didn't lose it all by doing

that! You risked everything, man!"



Thorpe ponderously shrugged his shoulders. 

"Well--I did it, anyhow, and it came off," was his comment. 

Then, straightening himself, he drew a long, long breath,

and beamed down at the little man.  "Think of it! God! It's

actually all over! And NOW perhaps we won't have a drink!

Hell! Let's send out for some champagne!" His finger was

hovering over the bell, when the Broker's dissuading voice

arrested it.  "No, no!" Semple urged.  "I wouldn't touch it. 

It's no fit drink for the daytime--and it's a scandal

in an office.  Your clerks will aye blab it about hither

and yon, and nothing harms a man's reputation more in the City."



"Oh, to hell with the City!" cried Thorpe, joyously. 

"I'm never going to set foot in it again.  Think of that!

I mean it!"



None the less, he abandoned the idea of sending out for wine,

and contented himself with the resources of the cabinet instead. 

After some friendly pressure, Semple consented to join

him in a brandy-and-soda, though he continued to protest

between sips that at such an hour it was an indecent practice. 



"It's the ruin of many a strong man," he moralized,

looking rather pointedly at Thorpe over his glass.  "It's the

principal danger that besets the verra successful man. 

He's too busily occupied to take exercise, and he's

too anxious and worried to get his proper sleep--but he

can always drink! In one sense, I'm not sorry to think

that you're leaving the City."



"Oh, it never hurts me," Thorpe said, indifferently accepting

the direction of the homily.  "I'm as strong as an ox. 

But all the same, I shall be better in every way for

getting out of this hole.  Thank God, I can get off

to Scotland tomorrow.  But I say, Semple, what's the

matter with your visiting me at my place there? I'll

give you the greatest shooting and fishing you ever heard of."



The Broker was thinking of something else.  "What is to be

the precise position of the Company, in the immediate future?"

he asked. 



"Company? What Company?"



Semple smiled grimly.  "Have you already forgotten

that there is such a thing?" he queried, with irony. 

"Why, man, this Company that paid for this verra fine

Board-table," he explained, with his knuckles on its red

baize centre. 



Thorpe laughed amusedly.  "I paid for that out of my

own pocket," he said.  "For that matter everything

about the Company has come out of my pocket----"



"Or gone into it," suggested the other, and they

chuckled together. 



"But no--you're right," Thorpe declared.  "Some thing

ought to be settled about the Company, I suppose. 

Of course I wash my hands of it--but would anybody else

want to go on with it? You see its annual working expenses,

merely for the office and the Board, foot up nearly

3,000 pounds.  I've paid these for this year, but naturally

I won't do it again.  And would it be worth anybody else's

while to do it? Yours, for example?"



"Have you had any explanations with the other Directors?"

the Broker asked, thoughtfully. 



"Explanations--no," Thorpe told him.  "But that's all right. 

The Marquis has been taken care of, and so has Plowden. 

They're game to agree to anything.  And let's see--Kervick

is entirely my man.  That leaves Watkin and Davidson--and

they don't matter.  They're mere guinea-pigs. A few hundreds

apiece would shut them up, if you thought it was worth

while to give them anything at all."



"And about the property,--the rubber plantation,--that

the Company was formed to acquire and develop.  I suppose

there really is such a plantation?"



"Oh, yes, it's all there right enough," Thorpe said, briefly.



"It's no good, though, is it?" the Broker asked,

with affable directness. 



"Between ourselves, it isn't worth a damn," the other

blithely assured him. 



The Scotchman mused with bent brows.  "There ought still

to be money in it," he said, with an air of conviction. 



"By the way," it occurred to Thorpe to mention, "here's

something I didn't understand.  I told Rostocker here,

just as a cheeky kind of joke, that after he and Aronson

had got their eight thousand five hundred, if they

thought they'd like still more shares, I'd let 'em have

'em at a bargain--and he seemed to take it seriously. 

He did for a fact.  Said perhaps he could make a deal

with me."



"Hm-m!" said Semple, reflectively.  "I'll see if he

says anything to me.  Very likely he's spotted some way

of taking the thing over, and reorganizing it, and giving

it another run over the course.  I'll think it out. 

And now I must be off.  Aren't you lunching?"



"No--I'll have the boy bring in some sandwiches,"

Thorpe decided.  "I want my next meal west of Temple Bar

when I get round to it.  I've soured on the City for keeps."



"I wouldn't say that it had been so bad to you, either,"

Semple smilingly suggested, as he turned to the door. 



Thorpe grinned in satisfied comment.  "Hurry back as soon

as you've finally settled with Rostocker and the other fellow,"

he called after him, and began pacing the floor again. 



It was nearly four o'clock when these two men, again together

in the Board Room, and having finished the inspection

of some papers on the desk, sat upright and looked at each

other in tacit recognition that final words were to be spoken. 



"Well, Semple," Thorpe began, after that significant

little pause, "I want to say that I'm damned glad

you've done so well for yourself in this affair. 

You've been as straight as a die to me,--I owe it

as much to you as I do to myself,--and if you don't

think you've got enough even now, I want you to say so."



He had spoken in tones of sincere liking, and the

other answered him in kind.  "I have more than I ever

dreamed of making in a lifetime when I came to London,"

he declared.  "If my father were alive, and heard me

tell him that in one year, out of a single transaction,

I had cleared over sixty-five thousand pounds,

he'd be fit to doubt the existence of a Supreme Being. 

I'm obliged to you for your good words, Thorpe.  It's not

only been profitable to work with you, but it has been

a great education and a great pleasure as well."



Thorpe nodded his appreciation.  "I'm going to ask

a favour of you," he said.  "I want to leave the general

run of my investments and interests here in your hands,

to keep track of I don't want to speculate at all,

in the ordinary meaning of the word.  Even after I bury

a pot of money in non-productive real estate, I shall

have an income of 50,000 pounds at the very least,

and perhaps twice as much.  There's no fun in gambling

when you've got such a bank as that behind you.  But if


there are good, wise changes to be made in investments,

or if things turn up in the way of chances that I ought

to know about, I want to feel that you're on the spot

watching things and doing things in my interest. 

And as it won't be regular broker's work, I shall want

to pay you a stated sum--whatever you think is right."



"That will arrange itself easily enough," said Semple. 

"I shall have the greatest pleasure in caring for whatever

you put in my hands.  And I think I can promise that it

will be none the worse for the keeping."



"I don't need any assurance on that score,"

Thorpe declared, cordially.  "You're the one sterling,

honest man I've known in the City."



It was the Broker's turn to make a little acknowledging bow. 

His eyes gleamed frank satisfaction at being so well understood. 

"I think I see the way that more money can be made out

of the Company," he said, abruptly changing the subject. 

"I've had but a few words with Rostocker about it--but

it's clear to me that he has a plan.  He will be coming

to you with a proposition."



"Well, he won't find me, then," interposed Thorpe,

with a comfortable smile.  "I leave all that to you."



"I suspect that his plan," continued Semple, "is to make

a sub-rosa offer of a few shillings for the majority

of the shares, and reconstitute the Board, and then form

another Company to buy the property and good-will of the old

one at a handsome price.  Now if that would be a good thing

for him to do, it would be a good thing for me to do. 

I shall go over it all carefully, in detail, this evening. 

And I suppose, if I see my way clear before me, than I

may rely upon your good feeling in the matter.  I would

do all the work and assume all the risk, and, let us say,

divide any profits equally--you in turn giving me

a free hand with all your shares, and your influence

with the Directors."



"I'll do better still," Thorpe told him, upon brief reflection. 

"Reconstitute the Board and make Lord Plowden Chairman,--I

don't imagine the Marquis would have the nerve to go on

with it,--and I'll make a free gift of my shares to you

two--half and half.  You'll find him all right to work

with,--if you can only get him up in the morning,--and

I've kind o' promised him something of the sort. 

Does that suit you?" Semple's countenance was thoughtful

rather than enthusiastic.  "I'm more skeptical about

Lords than you are," he observed, "but if he's amenable,

and understands that his part is to do what I tell

him to do, I've no doubt we shall hit it off together."



"Oh, absolutely!" said Thorpe, with confidence. 

"I'll see to it that he behaves like a lamb.  You're to have

an absolutely free hand.  You're to do what you like,--

wind the Company up, or sell it out, or rig it up under

a new name and catch a new set of gudgeons with it,--

whatever you damned please.  When I trust a man, I trust him."



The two friends, their faces brightened and their voices

mellowed by this serene consciousness of their mutual trust

in each other's loyalty and integrity, dwelt no further upon

these halcyon beginnings of a fresh plan for plundering

the public.  They spoke instead on personal topics--of

the possibility of Semple's coming to Scotland during

the autumn, and of the chance of Thorpe's wintering abroad. 

All at once Thorpe found himself disclosing the fact

of his forthcoming marriage, though he did not mention

the name of the lady's father, and under the gracious

stress of this announcement they drank again, and clinked

glasses fervently.  When Semple at last took his leave,

they shook hands with the deep-eyed earnestness of comrades

who have been through battle and faced death together. 



It was not until Thorpe stood alone that the full realizing

sense of what the day meant seemed to come to him. 

Fruition was finally complete: the last winnowing

of the great harvest had been added to the pile. 

Positively nothing remained for him but to enter and enjoy!



He found it curiously difficult to grasp the thought

in its entirety.  He stood the master of unlimited leisure

for the rest of his life, and of power to enrich that life

with everything that money could buy,--but there was

an odd inability to feel about it as he knew he ought to feel. 



Somehow, for some unaccountable reason, an absurd

depression hovered about over his mind, darkening it

with formless shadows.  It was as if he were sorry

that the work was all finished--that there was nothing

more for him to do.  But that was too foolish,

and he tried to thrust it from him.  He said with angry

decision to himself that he had never liked the work;

that it had all been unpleasant and grinding drudgery,

tolerable only as a means to an end; that now this end

had been reached, he wanted never to lay eyes on the City again. 



Let him dwell instead upon the things he did want to lay

eyes upon.  Some travel no doubt he would like, but not

too much; certainly no more than his wife would cheerfully

accept as a minimum.  He desired rather to rest among his

own possessions.  To be lord of the manor at Pellesley Court,

with his own retinue of servants and dependents and tenants,

his own thousands of rich acres, his own splendid old timber,

his own fat stock and fleet horses and abundant covers

and prize kennels--THAT was what most truly appealed

to him.  It was not at all certain that he would hunt;

break-neck adventure in the saddle scarcely attracted him. 

But there was no reason in the world why he should not breed

racing horses, and create for himself a distinguished and

even lofty position on the Turf.  He had never cared much

about races or racing folk himself, but when the Prince

and Lord Rosebery and people like that went in for winning

the Derby, there clearly must be something fascinating in it. 



Then Parliament, of course; he did not waver at all from

his old if vague conception of a seat in Parliament as a

natural part of the outfit of a powerful country magnate. 

And in a hundred other ways men should think of him

as powerful, and look up to him.  He would go to church

every Sunday, and sit in the big Squire's pew. 

He would be a magistrate as a matter of course,

and he would make himself felt on the County Council. 

He would astonish the county by his charities, and in bad

years by the munificence of his reductions in rents. 

Perhaps if there were a particularly bad harvest, he would

decline all over his estate to exact any rent whatever. 

Fancy what a noble sensation that would make! A Duke could

do no more. 



It was very clear to him now that he desired to have children

of his own,--say two at least, a son and a daughter,

or perhaps a son and two daughters: two little girls

would be company for each other.  As he prefigured

these new beings, the son was to exist chiefly for

purposes of distinction and the dignity of heirship,

and the paternal relations with him would be always

somewhat formal, and, though affectionate, unexpansive. 

But the little girls--they would put their arms round

their father's neck, and walk out with him to see the

pigs and the dogs, and be the darlings of his heart. 

He would be an old man by the time they grew up. 



A beatific vision of himself took form in his mind--of

himself growing grey and pleasurably tired, surrounded by

opulence and the demonstrative respect of everybody,

smiling with virtuous content as he strolled along between

his two daughters, miracles of beauty and tenderness,

holding each by a hand. 



The entrance of a clerk broke abruptly upon this daydream. 

He had a telegram in his hand, and Thorpe, rousing himself

with an effort, took the liver-coloured envelope, and looked

blankly at it.  Some weird apprehension seized upon him,

as if he belonged to the peasant class which instinctively

yokes telegrams and calamities together.  He deferred

to this feeling enough to nod dismissal to the clerk,

and then, when he was again alone, slowly opened the message,

and read it:



"Newcastle-on-Tyne, September 12.  Our friend died at Edinboro

this morning.  See you at hotel this evening.--Kervick."





What Thorpe felt at first was that his two daughters

had shrunk from him with swift, terrible aversion:

they vanished, along with every phase of the bright vision,

under a pall of unearthly blackness.  He stood in the centre

of a chill solitude, staring stupidly at the coarse,

soft paper. 



The premonition, then, had justified itself! Something

had told him that the telegram was an evil thing. 

A vaguely superstitious consciousness of being in the presence

of Fate laid hold upon him.  His great day of triumph

had its blood-stain. A victim had been needful--and to

that end poor simple, silly old Tavender was a dead man. 

Thorpe could see him,--an embarrassing cadaver eyed by

strangers who did not know what to do with it,--fatuous

even in death. 



A sudden rage at Kervick flamed up.  He clearly had played

the fool--clumsily over-plying the simpleton with drink

till he had killed him.  The shadow of murder indubitably

hung over the thing.  And then--the crass witlessness

of telegraphing! Already, doubtless, the police of

Edinborough were talking over the wires with Scotland Yard. 

A reference to a death in Edinborough, in a telegram

from Newcastle--it was incredible that this should escape

the eye of the authorities.  Any minute might bring

a detective through that door there--following into the

Board Room with his implacable scent the clue of blood. 

Thorpe's fancy pictured this detective as a momentarily

actual presence--tall, lean, cold-eyed, mysteriously calm

and fatally wise, the omniscient terror of the magazine

short-stories.



He turned faint and sick under a spasm of fright. 

The menace of enquiry became something more than a threat:

he felt it, like the grip of a constable upon his arm. 

Everything would be mercilessly unravelled.  The telegram

of the idiot Kervick would bring the police down upon

him like a pack of beagles.  The beliefs and surmises

of the idiot Gafferson would furnish them with the key

to everything.  He would have his letter from Tavender

to show to the detectives--and the Government's smart

lawyers would ferret out the rest.  The death of

Tavender--they could hardly make him responsible for that;

but it was the dramatic feature of this death which would

inspire them all to dig up everything about the fraud. 

It was this same sensational added element of the death,

too, which would count with a jury.  They were always gross,

sentimental fools, these juries.  They would mix up the death

and the deal in Rubber Consols, and in their fat-headed

confusion would say "Penal Servitude--fourteen years."

Or no, it was the Judge who fixed that.  But the Judges

were fools, too; they were too conceited, too puffed

up with vanity, to take the trouble to understand. 

He groaned aloud in a nightmare of helplessness. 



The sound of his own voice, moaning in his ears,

had a magical effect upon him.  He lifted his head,

gazed about him, and then flushed deeply.  His nerveless

cowardice had all at once become unbelievable to himself.

With a shamed frown he straightened himself, and stood

thus for a long minute, engrossed in the definite

task of chasing these phantoms from his mind. 

Once a manly front was displayed to them, they slunk away

with miraculous facility.  He poured out some brandy,

and sipped it neat, and laughed scornfully, defiantly, aloud. 



He had over half a million--with power and force and

courage enough to do with it what he liked.  He had fought

luck undauntedly, unwearyingly, during all those years when

his hands were empty.  Was he to tremble and turn tail now,

when his hands were full, when he was armoured and weaponed

at every point? He was amazed and hurt, and still more enraged,

at that fit of girlish weakness which had possessed him. 

He could have beaten himself with stripes for it. 

But it could never happen again--never, never!



He told himself that with proud, resolute reiteration,

as he got his hat and stick, and put in his pockets

one or two papers from the desk, and then glanced about

the Board Room for what was, most likely, the last time.

Here he had won his great victory over Fate, here he had

put his enemies under his feet, and if innocent simpletons

had wandered into the company of these foes, it mattered

not a whit to him that they also had been crushed. 

Figuratively, he turned his back upon them now; he left them,

slain and trampled, in the Board Room behind him. 

They no longer concerned him. 



Figuratively, too, as he walked with firmness to the door,

he stepped over the body of old Tavender, upon the threshold,

and bestowed upon it a downward mental glance, and passed on. 

By the time he reached the street, the memory of Tavender

had become the merest shred of a myth.  As he strode on,

it seemed to him that his daughters came again, and took

his hands, and moved lovingly beside him--lovingly and still

more admiringly than before. 

