




CHAPTER X





ON a Sunday afternoon, early in February, Thorpe journeyed

with his niece and nephew from Bern to Montreux. 



The young people, with maps and a guide-book open,

sat close together at the left side of the compartment. 

The girl from time to time rubbed the steam from the window

with a napkin out of the lunch-basket. They both stared

a good deal through this window, with frequent exclamations

of petulance.



"Isn't it too provoking!" cried the girl, turning to her

uncle at last.  "This is where we are now--according

to Baedeker: 'As the train proceeds we enjoy a view

of the Simmen-Thal and Freiburg mountains to the left,

the Moleson being conspicuous.' And look at it! For

all one can see, we might as well be at Redhill."



"It is pretty hard luck," Thorpe assented, passively glancing

past her at the pale, neutral-tinted wall of mist which obscured

the view.  "But hang it all--it must clear up some time. 

Just you have patience, and you'll see some Alps yet."



"Where we're going," the young man interposed, "the head-porter

told me it was always cloudier than anywhere else."



"I don't think that can be so," Thorpe reasoned, languidly,

from his corner.  "It's a great winter resort, I'm told,

and it rather stands to reason, doesn't it? that people

wouldn't flock there if it was so bad as all that."



"The kind of people we've seen travelling in Switzerland,"

said the girl--"they would do anything."



Thorpe smiled, with tolerant good humour.  "Well, you can

comfort yourself with the notion that you'll be coming again. 

The mountains'll stay here, all right," he assured her. 

The young people smiled back at him, and with this he

rearranged his feet in a new posture on the opposite seat,

lighted another cigar, and pillowed his head once more

against the hard, red-plush cushion.  Personally, he did

not in the least resent the failure of the scenery. 



For something more than three months, this purposeless

pleasure-tour had been dragging him about from point

to point, sleeping in strange beds, eating extraordinarily

strange food, transacting the affairs of a sight-seer among

people who spoke strange languages, until he was surfeited

with the unusual.  It had all been extremely interesting,

of course, and deeply improving--but he was getting

tired of talking to nobody but waiters, and still more

so of having nothing to do which he could not as well

leave undone if he chose.  After a few days more of

Switzerland--for they had already gazed with blank faces

at this universal curtain of mist from such different points

of view as Lucerne, Interlaken, and Thun--it was clear

to him that they would, as he phrased it, to himself,

make a break for home.  Unless, indeed, something happened

at Montreux.  Ah, would anything happen at Montreux?

For four days his mind had been automatically reverting

to that question; it lurked continually in the background

of his thoughts, now, as he smoked and idly ruminated,

on his way southward through the fog. 



All the rest of the prolonged trip had been without

any specific motive, so far as he was concerned. 

The youngsters had planned all its routes and halts and

details of time and connections, and he had gone along,

with cheerful placidity, to look at the things they bade

him observe, and to pay the bills.  Perhaps in all things

their tastes had not been his tastes.  He would have liked

more of Paris, he fancied, and less of the small Dutch

and North German towns which they seemed to fancy so much.

Still, the beer was good--and really their happiness,

as a spectacle, had given him more satisfaction than

a thousand miles of boulevards could have done. 



He liked this niece and nephew of his more than he could

ever have imagined himself liking any young people. 

They had been shy with him at the outset--and for the first

week his experiment had been darkened by the belief that,

between themselves, they did not deem him quite good enough. 

He had been wise enough, then, to have it out with the

girl--she was the one to whom he felt it easiest to talk

frankly--and had discovered, to his immense relief,

that they conceived him to be regarding them as encumbrances. 

At breakfast next morning, with tactful geniality, he set

everything right, and thereafter they were all extremely

happy together. 



So far as he could judge, they were very superior

young people, both intellectually and spiritually. 

The girl spoke French, and her brother German,

with what seemed to him remarkable proficiency.

Their young minds were the repositories of an astounding

amount of information: they knew who Charles the Bold was;

they pointed out to their uncle the distinction between

Gothic and Romanesque arches; they explained what was the

matter with the Anabaptists; they told him that the story

of the Bishop and the rats at Bingen was a baseless myth,

and that probably there had never been any such man

as William Tell.  Nor did they get all this out of the

guide-books which they pored over with such zest. 

It was impossible not to see that they were familiar with

large numbers of the subjects that these books discussed,

and that the itinerary which they marked out had reference

to desires and interests that they had cultivated for themselves. 



Julia, upon even first sight, made a much pleasanter

impression than her mother's hesitating description

had prepared him for.  As he came to know her well,

he ceased to remember that there was a question in any mind

as to her being a pretty girl.  There was less colour

in her face than he could have wished.  Her smooth,

pallid skin, almost waxen in texture, had a suggestion

of delicate health which sometimes troubled him a little,

but which appealed to the tenderness in his nature all

the time.  The face was unduly thin, perhaps, but this,

and the wistful glance of the large grey eyes in repose,

made up an effect that Thorpe found touched him a good deal. 

Even when she was in visibly high spirits, the look in these

eyes seemed to him to be laying claim to his protection. 

She could be merry upon occasion, in a gentle and tranquil way,

and as her self-confidence expanded under the shelter

of their growing intimacy, she disclosed to her uncle

plenty of initiative and individuality--but what he felt

in her most was a peculiarly sweet and girlish trustfulness,

which made him like himself more than he had ever

done before.  He could feel that he was at his very

best--a hitherto unsuspected best--when Julia was about. 

He wanted to buy for her everything in the windows upon

which she bestowed the most casual approving glance. 

It was a delight merely to look at her, and to meditate upon

the felicity of being able to do things for so charming

a girl. 



Alfred made a less direct demand upon his uncle's admiration,

but he was a very good fellow all round.  He was big and fair

and muscular, and nothing about him but his spectacles

seemed in Thorpe's mind to be related to his choice of art

as a profession.  That so robust and hearty a young fellow

should wish to put paint on a canvas with small brushes,

was to the uncle an unaccountable thing.  It was almost as

if he had wanted to knit, or do embroidery.  Of the idleness

and impatience of discipline which his mother had seemed

to allege against him, Thorpe failed to detect any signs. 

The young man was never very late in the morning, and,

beside his tireless devotion to the task of hunting up old

pictures in out-of-the-way places, did most of the steward's

work of the party with intelligence and precision. 

He studied the time-tables, audited the hotel-bills, looked

after the luggage, got up the street-maps of towns and

the like, to such good purpose that they never lost a train,

or a bag, or themselves.  Truly, an excellent young man. 

Thorpe noted with especial satisfaction his fine,

kindly big-brother attitude toward his sister Julia--and

it was impossible for him to avoid the conviction that

Louisa was a simpleton not to appreciate such children. 

They did not often allude to their mother; when they did,

it was in language the terms of which seemed more

affectionate than the tone--and Thorpe said often to

himself that he did not blame them.  It was not so much

that they had outgrown their mother's point of view. 

They had never occupied it. 



The journey, so far as Thorpe comprehended its character,

had been shaped with about equal regard for Julia's interest

in the romance of history, and Alfred's more technical

and practical interest in art.  Each had sufficient

sympathy with the tastes of the other, however, to prevent

any tendency to separation.  They took their uncle one

day to see where William the Silent was assassinated,

and the next to observe how Rembrandt's theory of guild

portrait-painting differed from Van der Helst's, with a

common enthusiasm.  He scrutinized with patient loyalty

everything that they indicated to him, and not infrequently

they appeared to like very much the comments he offered. 

These were chiefly of a sprightly nature, and when Julia

laughed over them he felt that she was very near to him indeed. 



Thus they saw Paris together--where Thorpe did relinquish

some of the multiplied glories of the Louvre to sit

in front of a cafe by the Opera House and see the funny

people go past--and thence, by Bruges and Antwerp,

to Holland, where nobody could have imagined there were

as many pictures as Thorpe saw with his own weary eyes. 

There were wonderful old buildings at Lubeck for Julia's

eyes to glisten over, and pictures at Berlin, Dresden,

and Dusseldorf for Alfred. 



The assumption existed that the excursion into the

Thuringenwald to see the memorials of Luther was especially

for the uncle's benefit, and he tried solicitously

to say or look nothing which might invalidate it. 

There were other places in Germany, from Mainz to Munich,

which he remembered best by their different beers. 

They spent Christmas at Vienna, where Julia had heard

that its observance was peculiarly insisted upon, and then

they saw the Tyrol in its heaviest vesture of winter snows,

and beautiful old Basle, where Alfred was crazier

about Holbein than he had been at Munich over Brouwer. 

Thorpe looked very carefully at the paintings of both men,

and felt strengthened in his hopes that when Alfred got

a little older he would see that this picture business

was not the thing for a young gentleman with prospects

to go into. 



It was at Basle that Thorpe received a letter from London

which directly altered the plans of the party.  He had

had several other letters from London which had produced

no such effect.  Through Semple, he had followed in outline

the unobtrusive campaign to secure a Special Settlement,

and had learned that the Stock Exchange Committee,

apparently without opposition, had granted one for the

first week in February. 



Even this news, tremendously important as it was, did not

prompt Thorpe to interfere with the children's projects. 

There was no longer any point in remaining away from London;

there were, indeed, numerous reasons for a prompt return.

But he was loth to deprive the youngsters of that descent

into smiling, sunlit Italy upon which they had so fondly

dwelt in fancy, and after all Semple could do all that was

needful to be done for another month. 



So they went to Basle, and here it was that another kind

of letter came.  It was in a strange hand, at once cramped

and fluttering, which puzzled the recipient a good deal;

it was a long time before even the signature unravelled itself. 

Then he forced himself to decipher it, sentence by sentence,

with a fierce avidity.  It was from General Kervick. 



The next morning Thorpe astonished his young companions

by suggesting an alteration in their route.  In a roundabout

and tentative fashion--in which more suspicious observers

must have detected something shamefaced--he mentioned

that he had always heard a great deal about Montreux as a

winter-resort. The fact that he called it Montroox raised

in Julia's mind a fleeting wonder from whom it could be that

he had heard so much about it, but it occurred to neither

her nor her brother to question his entire good faith.

Their uncle had displayed, hitherto, a most comforting

freedom from discrimination among European towns;

he had, indeed, assured them many times that they were

all one to him.  That he should suddenly turn up now with

a favourite winter-resort of his own selection surprised

them considerably, but, upon reflection, it also pleased them. 

He had humoured all their wishes with such unfailing and

bountiful kindness, that it was a delight to learn that

there was something he wanted to do.  They could not finish

their breakfast till the guide-book had been brought to the table. 



"Oh! How splendid!" Julia had cried then.  "The Castle

of Chillon is there!"



"Why of course!" said Thorpe, complacently. 



They laughed gayly at him for pretending that he had known this,

and he as good-humouredly accepted their banter.  He drew

a serious long breath of relief, however, when their backs

were turned.  It had gone off much better than he had feared. 



Now, on this Sunday afternoon, as the train made its sure-footed

way across the mountains, the thought that he was actually

to alight at Montreux at once fascinated and depressed him. 

He was annoyed with himself for suffering it to get such

a hold upon his mind.  What was there in it, anyway? There

was a big hotel there, and he and his youngsters were to stop

at it, and if he accidentally encountered a certain lady

who was also stopping there--and of course the meeting

would bear upon its face the stamp of pure chance--what of it?



And if he did meet her, thus fortuitously--what would

happen then? No doubt a lady of her social position met

abroad great numbers of people that she had met at home. 

It would not in any way surprise her--this chance encounter

of which he thought so much.  Were there sufficient grounds

for imagining that it would even interest her? He forced

his mind up to this question, as it were, many times,

and invariably it shied and evaded the leap. 



There had been times, at Hadlow House, when Lady Cressage

had seemed supremely indifferent to the fact of his existence,

and there had been other times when it had appeared

manifest that he pleased her--or better, perhaps, that she

was willing to take note of how much she pleased him. 

It must have been apparent to her--this fact that she

produced such an impression upon him.  He reasoned this

out satisfactorily to himself.  These beautiful women,

trained from childhood for the conquest of a rich husband,

must have cultivated an extraordinary delicacy of consciousness,

in such matters.  They must have developed for themselves

what might be called a sixth sense--a power of feeling

in the air what the men about were thinking of them. 

More than once he had caught a glimmer of what he felt to be

the operation of this sense, in the company of Lady Cressage. 

He could not say that it had been discernible in her glance,

or her voice, or her manner, precisely, but he was sure

that he had seen it, somehow. 



But even assuming all this--admitting that in October,

on a wet Sunday, in the tedium of a small country-house party,

she had shown some momentary satisfaction in the idea that

he was profoundly impressed by her--did it at all follow

that in February, amid the distractions of a fashionable

winter-resort, and probably surrounded by hosts of friends,

she would pay any attention to him whatever? The abject

fear that she might not even remember him--might not

know him from Adam when he stood before her--skulked

about in the labyrinths of his mind, but he drove it back

whenever it showed itself.  That would be too ignominious. 



The young people at the other side of the compartment,

forever wiping the window with the napkin, and straining their

eyes to see the invisible, diverted his unsettled attention. 

A new perception of how much he liked them and enjoyed

having them with him, took hold of his thoughts. 

It had not occurred to him before, with any definiteness,

that he would be insupportably lonely when the time came

to part with them. 



Now, when he dwelt upon it, it made him feel sad and old. 



He said to himself at once, with decision, that there

need be no parting at all.  He would take a house

without delay, and they should live with him. 

He could not doubt that this would be agreeable to them;

it would solve every problem for him. 



His fancy sketched out the natural and legitimate

extensions of this project.  There would be, first of all,

a house in town--a furnished house of a modest sort,

having no pretension save to provide a cheerful temporary

shelter for three people who liked one another. 

Here the new household would take shape, and get its

right note of character.  Apparently Louisa would not be

urged to form part of this household.  He said to himself

with frankness that he didn't want her, and there had been

nothing to indicate that her children would pine for her. 

She showed good sense when she said that her place was

in the shop, and in her ancestral home over the shop. 

No doubt there would be a certain awkwardness,

visible to others if not to themselves, about her living

in one part of London and her children in another. 

But here also her good sense would come on;--and, besides,

this furnished house in town would be a mere brief

overture to the real thing--the noble country mansion

he was going to have, with gardens and horses and hounds

and artificial lakes and deer parks and everything. 

Quite within the year he would be able to realize this

consummation of his dreams. 



How these nice young people would revel in such a place--and

how they would worship him for having given it to them for

a home! His heart warmed within him as he thought of this. 

He smiled affectionately at the picture Julia made,

polishing the glass with vehement circular movements

of her slight arm, and then grimacing in comic vexation

at the deadly absence of landscape outside.  Was there

ever a sweeter or more lovable girl in this world? Would

there have to be some older woman to manage the house,

at the beginning? he wondered.  He should like it immensely

if that could be avoided.  Julia looked fragile and

inexperienced--but she would be twenty-one next month. 

Surely that was a mature enough age for the slight

responsibility of presiding over servants who should be

the best that money could buy.  Many girls were married,

and given households of their own to manage, when they

were even younger. 



This reflection raised an obstacle against the smooth-

flowing current of his thoughts.  Supposing that Julia

got the notion of marrying--how miserable that would

make everything.  Very likely she would never do any

such thing; he had observed in her no shadow of a sign

that a thought of matrimony had ever crossed her brain. 

Yet that was a subject upon which, of course, she could

not be asked to give pledges, even to herself. 



Thorpe tried to take a liberal view of this matter. 

He argued to himself that there would be no objection at

all to incorporating Julia's husband into the household,

assuming that she went to the length of taking one,

and that he was a good fellow.  On this latter point,

it was only the barest justice to Julia's tastes and judgment

to take it for granted that he would be a good fellow. 

Yet the uncle felt uneasily that this would alter things

for the worse.  The family party, with that hypothetical

young man in it, could never be quite so innocently

and completely happy as--for instance--the family party

in this compartment had been during these wonderful

three months. 



Mechanically he rubbed the window beside him, and turned

to look out with a certain fixedness--as if he might

chance to catch a glimpse of the bridegroom with whom

Julia would have it in her power to disturb the serenity

of their prospective home.  A steep white cliff,

receding sullenly against the dim grey skyline; a farmhouse

grotesquely low for its size, crouching under big

shelving galleries heaped with snow; an opening in front,

to the right, where vaguely there seemed to be a valley

into which they would descend--he saw these things. 

They remained in his mind afterward as a part of something

else that he saw, with his mental vision, at the same

moment--a strikingly real and vivid presentment of

Lady Cressage, attired as he had seen her in the saddle,

her light hair blown about a little under her hat,

a spot of colour in the exquisite cheek, the cold,

impersonal dignity of a queen in the beautiful profile. 



The picture was so actual for the instant that he uttered

an involuntary exclamation--and then looked hastily round

to see whether his companions had heard it.  Seemingly they

had not; he lolled again upon the comfortless cushion,

and strove to conjure up once more the apparition. 

Nothing satisfactory came of the effort.  Upon consideration,

he grew uncertain as to whether he had seen anything at all. 

At the most it was a kind of half-dream which had visited him. 

He yawned at the thought, and lighted a fresh cigar. 

All at once, his mind had become too indolent to do any

more thinking.  A shapeless impression that there would be

a good many things to think over later on flitted into his

brain and out again. 



"Well, how are the mountains using you, now?" he called

out to his niece. 



"Oh, I could shake them!" she declared.  "Listen to this:

'A view of singular beauty, embracing the greater part

of the Lake of Geneva, and the surrounding mountains,

is suddenly disclosed.' That's where we are now--or

were a minute ago.  You can see that there is some sort

of valley in front of us--but that is all.  If I could

only see one mountain with snow on it----"



"Why, it's all mountains and all snow, when you come

to that," Thorpe insisted, with jocose perversity. 

"You're on mountains yourself, all the time."



"You know what I mean," she retorted.  "I want to see

something like the coloured pictures in the hotels."



"Oh, probably it will be bright sunlight tomorrow,"

he said, for perhaps the twentieth time that day. 



"There--that looks like water!" said Alfred. 

"See? just beyond the village.  Yes, it is water. 

There's your Lake of Geneva, at all events."



"But it isn't the right colour," protested Julia,

peering through the glass.  "It's precisely like everything

else: it's of no colour at all.  And they always paint it

such a lovely blue! Really, uncle, the Swiss Government

ought to return you your money."



"You wait till you see it tomorrow--or next day,"

said the uncle, vaguely.  He closed his eyes, and welcomed

a drowsy mood.  As he went off to sleep, the jolting racket

of the train mellowed itself into a murmur of "tomorrow

or next day, tomorrow or next day," in his ears. 

