





CHAPTER XXVII





THORPE found the Duke of Glastonbury a much more interesting

person to watch and to talk with, both during the dinner

Saturday evening and later, than he had anticipated. 



He was young, and slight of frame, and not at all imposing

in stature, but he bore himself with a certain shy courtliness

of carriage which had a distinction of its own.  His face,

with its little black moustache and large dark eyes,

was fine upon examination, but in some elusively foreign way.

There lingered a foreign note, too, in the way he talked. 

His speech was English enough to the ear, it was true,

but it was the considered English of a book, and its

phrases had a deftness which was hardly native.  He looked,

if not a sad young man, then one conscious always of

sufficient reasons for sadness, but one came, after a time,

to see that the mood beneath was not melancholy.  It had

even its sprightly side, which shone out irregularly in his

glance and talk, from a sober mean of amiable weariness. 



Thorpe knew his extraordinary story--that of a poor tutor,

earning his living in ignorance of the fact that he had a

birthright of any sort, who had been miraculously translated

into the heir, not only to an ancient title but to vast

collateral wealth.  He had been born and reared in France,

and it was there that the heralds of this stupendous change

in his affairs had found him out.  There was a good deal

more to the story, including numerous unsavoury legends

about people now many years dead, and it was impossible

to observe the young Duke and not seem to perceive signs

that he was still nervously conscious of these legends.

The story of his wife--a serene, grey-eyed, rather

silent young person, with a pale face of some beauty,

and with much purity and intellect--was strange enough

to match.  She also had earned her own living, as a private

secretary or type-writing girl, or something of the sort,

and her husband had deliberately chosen her after he had

come into his title.  One might study her very closely,

however, and catch no hint that these facts in any degree

disconcerted her. 



Thorpe studied her a good deal, in a furtive way,

with a curiosity born of his knowledge that the Duke had

preferred her, when he might have married his widowed cousin,

who was now Thorpe's own wife.  How he had come to know this,

he could never have told.  He had breathed it in, somehow,

with the gossip-laden atmosphere of that one London season

of his.  It was patent enough, too, that his wife--his

Edith--had not only liked this ducal youngster very much,

but still entertained toward him a considerable affection. 

She had never dissembled this feeling, and it visibly

informed her glance and manner now, at her own table,

when she turned to speak with him, where he sat at her

right hand.  Thorpe had never dreamed of thinking ill

of his wife's friendship, even when her indifference

to what he thought had been most taken for granted. 

Now that this was all changed, and the amazing new glory

of a lover had enveloped him, he had a distinct delight

in watching the myriad charming phases of her kind manner,

half-sisterly, half-motherly, toward the grave-faced

young man.  It was all a part of the delicious change

which these past few days had wrought in her, this warm

and supple softness of mien, of eye and smile and voice. 



But how the Duke, if really he had had a chance to marry Edith,

could have taken the type-writer instead, baffled speculation. 

Thorpe gave more attention to this problem, during dinner,

than he did to the conversation of the table. 

His exchange of sporadic remarks with the young Duchess

beside him was indeed an openly perfunctory affair,

which left him abundant leisure to contemplate her profile

in silence, while she turned to listen to the general talk,

of which Miss Madden and the Hon. Winifred Plowden bore

the chief burden.  The talk of these ladies interested

him but indifferently, though the frequent laughter

suggested that it was amusing.  He looked from his

wife to the Duchess and back again, in ever-recurring

surprise that the coronet had been carried past Edith. 

And once he looked a long time at his wife and the Duke,

and formulated the theory that she must have refused him. 

No doubt that was why she bad been sympathetically fond

of him ever since, and was being so nice to him now. 

Yes--clearly that was it.  He felt upon this that he also

liked the Duke very much. 



It was by no means so apparent that the Duke liked him. 

Both he and his Duchess, indeed, were scrupulously and even

deferentially polite, but there was a painstaking effect

about it, which, seemingly, they lacked the art altogether

to conceal.  It seemed to Thorpe that the other guests

unconsciously took their cue from this august couple,

and all exposed somewhat the effort their civility

to him involved.  At another time the suspicion of this

would have stung him.  He had only to glance across the

table to where his wife sat now, and it was all right. 

What other people thought of him--how other people

liked or disliked him--was of no earthly importance. 

Whenever he chose to exert himself, he could compel from

them the behaviour that he desired.  It was their dull

inability to read character which prompted them to regard him

as merely a rich outsider who had married Edith Cressage. 

He viewed with a comfortable tolerance this infirmity

of theirs.  When the time came, if he wanted to do so,

he could awaken them to their delusion as by forked lightning

and the burst of thunder. 



The whim came to him, and expanded swiftly into a determination,

to contrive some intimate talk forthwith with the Duke. 

The young man seemed both clever and sensible, and in

a way impressionable as well.  Thorpe thought that he

would probably have some interesting things to say,

but still more he thought of him as a likely listener. 

It would be the easier to detach him from the company,

since the occasion was one of studied informality. 

The Duke did not go about in society, in the ordinary sense

of the word, and he would not have come to High Thorpe

to meet a large party.  He was here as a kinsman and friend

of his hostess for a quiet week; and the few other guests

fitted readily enough into the picture of a family gathering. 

The spirit of domesticity had indeed so obviously descended

upon the little group in the drawing-room, an hour or

so after dinner, that Thorpe felt it quite the natural

thing to put his arm through that of the Duke and lead

him off to his personal smoking-room. He even published

his intention by audibly bidding the Hon. Balder Plowden

to remain with the ladies. 



When the two had seated themselves in soft, low easy-chairs,

and the host had noted with pleasure that his guest had

no effeminate qualms in the matter of large rich cigars,

a brief silence ensued. 



"I am very anxious to get your views on a certain subject,"

Thorpe was inspired to begin, bluntly pushing preliminaries

aside.  "If a man of fortune wishes to do genuine good

with his money, here in England, how should he best go about it?"



The Duke looked up at his questioner, with a sudden flash

of surprise on his dark, mobile face.  He hesitated

a moment, and smiled a little.  "You ask of me the sum of

human wisdom," he said.  "It is the hardest of all problems;

no one solves it."



Thorpe nodded his big head comprehendingly.  "That's all

the more reason why it ought to be solved," he declared,

with slow emphasis. 



The other expressed by look and tone an augmented

consciousness of the unexpected.  "I did not know,"

he remarked cautiously, "that this was a matter in which you

were specially concerned.  It pleases me very much to hear it. 

Even if the solution does not come, it is well to have

as many as possible turning the problem over in their minds."



"Oh, but I'm going to solve it!" Thorpe told him,

with round confidence. 



The Duke pulled contemplatively at his cigar for a little. 

"Do not think me a cynic," he began at last. 

"You are a man of affairs; you have made your own way;

you should be even more free from illusions than I am. 

If you tell me that these good things can be done,

I am the last one to dispute you.  But I have seen near

at hand experiments of exceptional importance, on a very

grand scale, and the result does not encourage me. 

I come to doubt indeed if money has any such power

in these affairs as we think it has--for that matter,

if it has any power at all.  The shifting of money can

always disorganize what is going on at the moment--

change it about and alter it in many ways--but its effect

is only temporary.  As soon as the pressure is released,

the human atoms rearrange themselves as they were before,

and the old conditions return.  I think the only force which

really makes any permanent difference is character--and yet

about even that I am not sure.  The best man I have ever

known--and in many respects the ablest--devoted untold

energy and labour, and much money, too, to the service

of a few thousand people in Somerset, on land of his own,

upon a theory wonderfully elaborated and worked out. 

Perhaps you have heard of Emanuel Torr and his colony,

his System?"



Thorpe shook his head. 



"He had worked tremendously for years at it.  He fell

ill and went away--and in a day all the results of his

labours and outlay were flat on the ground.  The property

is mine now, and it is farmed and managed again in the

ordinary way, and really the people there seem already

to have forgotten that they had a prophet among them. 

The marvelous character of the man--you look in vain

for any sign of an impress that it left upon them. 

I never go there.  I cannot bear those people.  I have

sometimes the feeling that if it were feasible I should

like to oppress them in some way--to hurt them."



"Oh! 'the people' are hogs, right enough," Thorpe commented

genially, "but they ARE 'the people,' and they're

the only tools we've got to work with to make the world go round."



"But if you leave the world alone," objected the Duke,

"it goes round of itself.  And if you don't leave it alone,

it goes round just the same, without any reference whatever

to your exertions.  Some few men are always cleverer

or noisier or more restless than the others, and their

activity produces certain deviations and peculiarities

in their generation.  The record of these--generally

a very faulty and foolish record--we call history. 

We say of these movements in the past that some of them were

good and some were bad.  Our sons very likely will differ

totally from us about which were good and which were bad;

quite possibly, in turn, their sons may agree with us. 

I do not see that it matters.  We cannot treat anything

as final--except that the world goes round.  We appear out

of the darkness at one edge of it; we are carried across

and pitched off into the darkness at the other edge of it. 

We are certain about nothing else."



"Except that some of us have to pay for our ride,

and others don't," put in Thorpe.  The tone in which he

spoke made his meaning so clear that his Grace sat up. 



"Ah, you think we do not pay?" he queried, his countenance

brightening with the animation of debate.  "My dear sir,

we pay more than anyone else.  Our fares are graduated,

just as our death-duties are.  No doubt there are some idle

and stupid, thick-skinned rich fellows, who escape the

ticket-collector. But for each of them there are a thousand

idle poor fellows who do the same.  You, for example,

are a man of large wealth.  I, for my sins, carry upon my

back the burden of a prodigious fortune.  Could we not go

out now, and walk down the road to your nearest village,

and find in the pub.  there a dozen day-labourers happier

than we are? Why--it is Saturday night.  Then I will not

say a dozen, but as many as the tap will hold.  It is not

the beer alone that makes them happy.  Do not think that. 

It is the ability to rest untroubled, the sense that till

Monday they have no more responsibility than a tree-toad.

Does the coming of Sunday make that difference to you

or to me? When night comes, does it mean to us that we

are to sleep off into oblivion all we have done that day,

and begin life afresh next morning? No-o! We are the

tired people; the load is never lifted from our backs. 

Ah, do we not pay indeed!"



"Oh-ho!" ejaculated Thorpe.  He had been listening

with growing astonishment to the other's confession. 

He was still surprised as he spoke, but a note of satisfaction

mounted into his voice as he went on.  "You are unhappy,

too! You are a young man, in excellent health;

you have the wife you want; you understand good tobacco;

you have a son.  That is a great deal--but my God! think

what else you've got.  You're the Duke of Glastonbury--one

of the oldest titles in England.  You're one of the richest

men in the country--the richest in the old peerage,

at any rate, I'm told.  And YOU'RE not happy!"



The other smiled.  "Ah, the terms and forms survive,"

he said, with a kind of pedagogic affability, "after the

substance has disappeared.  The nobleman, the prince,

was a great person in the times when he monopolized wealth. 

It enabled him to monopolize almost everything else

that was pleasant or superb.  He had the arts and the

books and the musicians and the silks and velvets,

and the bath-tubs--everything that made existence

gorgeous--all to himself.  He had war to amuse himself with,

and the seven deadly sins.  The barriers are down now. 

Everything which used to be exclusively the nobleman's

is now within everybody's reach, including the sins. 

And it is not only that others have levelled up to him;

they have levelled him down.  He cannot dress now more

expensively than other people.  Gambling used to be

recognized as one of his normal relaxations, but now,

the higher his rank, the more sharply he is scolded for it. 

Naturally he does not know what to do with himself. 

As an institution, he descends from a period when the only

imaginable use for wealth was to be magnificent with it. 

But now in this business age, where the recognized use

of wealth is to make more wealth, he is so much out of

place that he has even forgotten how to be magnificent. 

There are some illustrated articles in one of the magazines,

giving photographs of the great historic country-houses

of England.  You should see the pictures of the interiors.

The furniture and decorations are precisely what a Brixton

dressmaker would buy, if she suddenly came into some

money."



"All the same," Thorpe stuck to his point, "you are

not happy."



The Duke frowned faintly, as if at the other's persistency. 

Then he shrugged his shoulders and answered in a

lighter tone.  "It hardly amounts to that, I think. 

I confess that there are alleviations to my lot. 

In the opinion of the world I am one of its most fortunate

citizens--and it is not for me to say that the world is

altogether wrong.  The chief point is--I don't know if you

will quite follow me--there are limits to what position

and fortune can give a man.  And so easily they may deprive

him of pleasures which poorer men enjoy! I may be wrong,

but it seems impossible to me that any rich man who has

acres of gardens and vineries and glass can get up the same

affection for it all that the cottager will have for his

little flower-plot, that he tends with his own hands.

One seems outside the realities of life--a mere spectator

at the show."



"Ah, but why not DO things?" Thorpe demanded of him. 

"Why merely stand, as you say, and look on?"



The other leant his head back again.  "Pray what do

you recommend?" he asked almost listlessly. 



"Why--politics, for example."



The Duke nodded, with an air of according to the suggestion

a certain respect.  "Unhappily I am too much of a foreigner,"

he commented.  "I know Englishmen and their affairs

too imperfectly.  Sometime--perhaps."



"And philanthropic work--you don't care about that,"

pursued the other. 



"Oh--we go not so far as that," said his Grace,

with a deprecatory wave of the hands.  "My wife finds

many interests in it, only she would not like to have you

call it philanthropical.  She is London-born, and it

is a great pleasure to her to be of assistance to poorer

young women in London, who have so little done for them

by the community, and can do so little for themselves. 

I am much less skeptical about that particular work,

I may tell you, than about philanthropy in general. 

In fact, I am quite clear that it is doing good.  At least

it is doing a kindness, and that is a pleasant occupation. 

We are really not so idle as one might think.  We work at it

a good deal, my wife and I."



"So am I London-born," Thorpe remarked, with a certain irrelevancy. 

After a moment's pause he turned a sharply enquiring glance

upon his guest.  "This thing that you're doing in London--does

it give you any 'pull' there?" "Pull?" repeated the other helplessly. 



"If there was something you wanted the people of London

to do, would they do it for you because of what you've

been doing for them--or for their girls?"



The Duke looked puzzled for a moment.  "But it isn't

conceivable that I should want London to do anything--

unless it might be to consume its own smoke," he observed. 



"Quite so!" said Thorpe, rising bulkily to his feet,

but signifying by a gesture that his companion was

to remain seated.  He puffed at his cigar till its tip

gleamed angrily through the smoke about him, and moved

a few steps with his hands in his pockets.  "That is

what I wanted to get at.  Now I'm London-born, I've got

the town in my blood.  The Thorpes have been booksellers

there for generations.  The old name is over the old

shop still.  I think I know what Londoners are like;

I ought to.  It's my belief that they don't want gifts. 

They'll take 'em, but it isn't what they want. 

They're a trading people--one of the oldest in the world. 

Commercial traditions, the merchant's pride--these are bred

in their bones.  They don't want something for nothing. 

They like an honest bargain--fair on both sides.  'You help

me and I'll help you.' And it's the only way you can do

anything worth doing."



"Well," said the Duke, passively. 



Thorpe halted, and still with the cigar between his teeth,

looked down at him. 



"I can go into London, and study out the things

that are to be done--that need to be done--and divide

these into two parts, those that belong to private

enterprise and those that ought to be done publicly. 

And I can say to Londoners--not in so many words, mind you,

but in a way the sharper ones will understand: 'Here,

you fellows.  I'll begin doing out of my own pocket one set

of these things, and you in turn must put yourselves at

my back, and stand by me, and put me in a position where I

can make the Government do this other set of things.'

That will appeal to them.  A poor man couldn't lead them

any distance, because he could always be killed by the

cry that he was filling his pockets.  They will believe

in a man whose ambition is to win an earldom and five

thousand a year out of politics, but they will stone

to death the man who merely tries to get a few hundreds

a year out of it for his wife and children.  And a man

like you can't do anything in London, because they can't

see that there's anything you want in return--and besides,

in their hearts, they don't like your class.  Don't forget

it! This is the city that chopped off the king's head!"



"Ah, but this is also the city," retorted the other,

with placid pleasure in his argument, "which decked

itself in banners and ribbons to welcome back the son

of that same king.  And if you think of it, he was rather

a quaint thing in sons, too."



"It was the women did that," Thorpe affirmed with readiness. 

"They get their own way once in a while, when the men are

tired out, and they have their little spell of nonsense

and monkey-shines, but it never lasts long.  Charles II. 

doesn't matter at all--but take my word for it, his father

matters a great deal.  There was a Thorpe among the judges

who voted to behead him.  I am descended in a straight

line from him."



His Grace shrugged his slight shoulders again. 

"It happens that my ancestors had extremely large facilities

for doing unpleasant things, and, God knows, they did

them--but I don't quite see what that goes to prove, now."



"No, you don't grasp the idea," said Thorpe, resignedly. 

After a moment's pause he took the cigar from his lips,

and straightened himself "All the same," he declared roundly,

"I am going to do the trick.  London has been waiting

for an organizer--a leader--for a hundred years.  The right

kind of a man, going the right way to work, can stand

London on its head, as surely as I can burn this cigar. 

And I'm going to have a try at it."



"It is very interesting," remarked the Duke, with vagueness. 

"But--are the ladies waiting for us? And if so, aren't we

keeping them up unconscionably?"



As if in comment upon his words, there was the sound of a

faint rap at the door.  Then it opened, and through the

dense blue haze of the room they saw some shadowed forms

softly indistinct save where the light from the ceiling

outside shone down upon a group of coiffured heads. 

A noise of mingled coughing and laughter specifically

completed the introduction. 



"Oh, I'm--it's unendurable in there," spoke the voice

of the hostess.  "We WERE coming in to smoke with you,"

she called out through the cloud, "since you wouldn't stop

with us."



"Come along!" answered Thorpe, cheerily.  He strode

to the end of the room and raised a window.  From the

same corner he turned on some added lights. 



Under this more effective illumination, the lady of the

house advanced, with Miss Madden and the Hon. Winifred

close behind her.  "Frank has gone to bed," she explained

to the Duke, who had risen.  Then she turned to her husband

a bright-eyed glance: " You don't mind--our coming?"

she asked.



"Mind!" he called out, with robust impressiveness. 

"Mind!" As if to complete the expression of his meaning,

he threw his arm loosely about her, where she stood,

and brought her to his side.  They remained standing thus,

before the fireplace, after the others were all seated. 



"Mr. Thorpe has been outlining to me the most wonderful plans,"

said the Duke, looking from one face to another, with a

reserved smile.  "It seems that philanthropy fails unless

it is combined with very advanced politics.  It is a new

idea to me--but he certainly states it with vigour. 

Do you understand it, Edith?"



"Oh, perfectly," replied the wife, smilingly.  "I am

his first convert.  Behold in me the original disciple."



"The worst of that is," commented Thorpe, with radiant joviality,

"she would subscribe to any other new doctrine of mine

just as readily." He tightened the arm encircling her

by a perceptible trifle.  "Wouldn't you, sweetheart?" he demanded.



She seemed in nowise embarrassed by these overt endearments. 

There was indeed the dimmest suggestion in her face and voice

of a responsive mood.  "Really," she began, with a soft glance,

half-deprecation, half-pride, bent upon the others,

and with thoughtful deliberation,--"really the important

thing is that he should pursue some object--have in view

something that he is determined to master.  Without that,

he is not contented--not at his best.  He should have been

a soldier.  He has a passion for battle in his blood.

And now that he sees something he is eager to do--I am

very glad.  It makes it none the less acceptable that good

is to come from it."



"I still maintain," said Miss Madden, interpolating her words

through the task of lighting a cigarette, and contriving

for them an effect of drollery which appealed to Thorpe

most of all--"I shall always insist, just the same,

that crime was his true vocation."










End 





