





CHAPTER XVII





LORD CHALDON'S instructive little monologue on the subject

of the Hebrew in finance afforded Thorpe a certain pleasure,

which was in its character, perhaps, more social

than intellectual. 



It was both a flattering and striking experience to have

so eminent a man at the side of one's desk, revealing for

one's guidance the secrets of sovereigns and cabinets. 

Great names were mentioned in the course of this

dissertation--mentioned with the authoritative ease of one

who dined with princes and prime ministers--and Thorpe

felt that he shared in the distinction of this familiarity

with the august.  He was in the position of paying a salary

to this courtly old nobleman and statesman, who could tell

him of his own intimate knowledge how Emperors conversed

with one another; how the Pope fidgeted in his ornate-carved

chair when the visitor talked on unwelcome topics;

how a Queen and an opera-bouffe dancer waged an obscure

and envenomed battle for the possession of a counting-house

strong box, and in the outcome a nation was armed

with inferior old muskets instead of modern weapons,

and the girl got the difference expressed in black pearls. 



These reminiscences seemed to alter the atmosphere,

and even the appearance, of the Board Room.  It was

almost as if the apartment itself was becoming historic,

like those chambers they pointed out to the tourist wherein

crowned heads had slept.  The manner of the Marquis lent

itself charmingly to this illusion.  He spoke in a facile,

mellifluous voice, and as fluently as if he had been

at work for a long time preparing a dissertation on

this subject, instead of taking it up now by chance. 

In his tone, in his gestures, in the sustained friendliness

of his facial expressions, there was a palpable desire

to please his auditor--and Thorpe gave more heed to this

than to the thread of the discourse.  The facts that he

heard now about the Jewish masters of international finance

were doubtless surprising and suggestive to a degree,

but somehow they failed to stimulate his imagination. 

Lord Chaldon's statesmanlike discussion of the uses to

which they put this vast power of theirs; his conviction

that on the whole they were beneficent; his dread of

the consequences of any organized attempt to take this

power away from them, and put it into other and less

capable hands--no doubt it was all very clever and wise,

but Thorpe did not care for it. 



At the end he nodded, and, with a lumbering movement,

altered his position in his chair.  The fixed idea

of despoiling Rostocker, Aronson, Ganz, Rothfoere,

Lewis, and Mendel of their last sixpence had been

in no wise affected by this entertaining homily. 

There appeared to be no need of pretending that it

had been.  If he knew anything of men and their manners,

his titled friend would not object to a change of topic. 



"Lord Chaldon," he said abruptly, "we've talked

enough about general matters.  While you're here,

we might as well go into the subject of the Company. 

Our annual meeting is pretty nearly due--but I think

it would be better to have it postponed.  You see,

this extraordinary development of dealing in our shares

on the Stock Exchange has occupied my entire attention. 

There has been no time for arranging the machinery of

operations on our property in Mexico.  It's still there;

it's all right.  But for the time being, the operations

in London are so much more important.  We should have nothing

to tell our shareholders, if we brought them together,

except that their one-pound shares are worth fifteen pounds,

and they know that already."



The Marquis had listened with a shrewdly attentive eye

upon the speaker's face.  The nervous affection of his

eyelids gave him now a minute of blinking leisure in which

to frame his comment.  "I have not heard that my shares

are worth fifteen pounds," he said then, with a direct,

meaning little smile. 



"No," Thorpe laughed, leaning comfortably back in his chair. 

"That's what I want to talk to you about.  You see,

when the Company was started, it was impossible to foresee

that this dealing in our ordinary shares would swamp

everything else.  If things had taken their usual course,

and we had paid our attention to Mexico instead of to

the London Stock Exchange, my deferred vendor's shares,

two thousand of which you hold, would by this time be worth

a good bit.  As it is, unfortunately, they are outside

of the deal.  They have nothing to do with the movement

of the ordinary shares.  But of course you understand

all that."



Lord Chaldon assented by an eloquent nod, at once resigned

and hopeful. 



"Well--that is contrary to all my expectations--and intentions,"

Thorpe resumed.  "I don't want you to suffer by this

unlooked-for change in the shape of things.  You hold

two thousand shares--only by accident they're the wrong

kind of shares.  Very well: I'll make them the right kind

of shares.  I'll have a transfer sent to you tomorrow,

so that you can return those vendor's shares to me,

and in exchange for them I'll give you two thousand

fully-paid ordinary shares.  You can sell these at once,

if you like, or you can hold them on over one more settlement,

whichever you please."



"This is very munificent," remarked Lord Chaldon, after an

instant's self-communion. His tone was extremely gracious,

but he displayed none of the enthusiastic excitement

which Thorpe perceived now that he had looked for. 

The equanimity of Marquises, who were also ex-Ambassadors,

was evidently a deeper-rooted affair than he had supposed. 

This elderly and urbane diplomat took a gift of thirty

thousand pounds as he might have accepted a superior cigar. 



A brief pause ensued, and was ended by another remark

from the nobleman: "I thought for the moment of asking

your advice--on this question of selling," he continued. 

"But it will be put more appropriately, perhaps, in this

way: Let me leave it entirely in your hands.  Whatever you

do will be right.  I know so little of these things--and

you know so much."



Thorpe put out his lips a trifle, and looked away

for an instant in frowning abstraction.  "If it were

put in that way--I think I should sell," he said. 

"It's all right for me to take long chances--it's my

game--but there's no reason why you should risk things. 

But let me put it in still another way," he added,

with the passing gleam of a new thought over the dull

surface of his eye.  "What do you say to our making

the transaction strictly between ourselves? Here are

shares to bearer, in the safe there.  I say that two

thousand of them are yours: that makes them yours. 

I give you my cheque for thirty thousand pounds--here, now,

if you like--and that makes them mine again. 

The business is finished and done with--inside this room. 

Neither of us is to say anything about it to a soul.

Does that meet your views?"



The diplomat pondered the proposition--again with a lengthened

perturbation of the eyelids.  "It would be possible to suggest

a variety of objections, if one were of a sophistical

turn of mind," he said at last, smilingly reflective. 

"Yet I see no really insuperable obstacle in the path."

He thought upon it further, and went on with an enquiring

upward glance directed suddenly at Thorpe: "Is there

likely to be any very unpleasant hubbub in the press--when

it is known that the annual meeting has been postponed?"



Thorpe shook his head with confidence.  "No--you need have

no fear of that.  The press is all right.  It's the talk

of the City, I'm told--the way I've managed the press. 

It isn't often that a man has all three of the papers

walking the same chalk-line."



The Marquis considered these remarks with a puzzled air. 

Then he smiled faintly.  "I'm afraid we're speaking of

different things," he suggested.  "Apparently you refer to

the financial papers.  I had scarcely given them a thought. 

It does not seem to me that I should mind particularly

what they said about me--but I should care a great deal

about the other press--the great public press."



"Oh, what do they know about these things?" said Thorpe, lightly. 

"So far as I can see, they don't know about anything,

unless it gets into the police court, or the divorce court,

or a court of some kind.  They're the funniest sort of

papers I ever saw.  Seems as if they didn't think anything

was safe to be printed until it had been sworn to. 

Why anybody should be afraid of them is more than I can see."



"Nevertheless," persisted his Lordship, blandly, "I should

greatly dislike any public discussion of our Company's affairs. 

I hope it is quite clear that that can be avoided."



"Absolutely!" Thorpe told him, with reassuring energy. 

"Why, discussions don't make themselves.  Somebody has

to kick before anything gets discussed.  And who is to

kick here? The public who hold the shares are not likely

to complain because they've gone up fifteen hundred

or two thousand per cent.  And who else has any interest

in what the Company, as a Company, does?"



"Ah, that is a question which has occurred to me," said Lord

Chaldon, "and I shall be glad if it is already answered. 

The only people likely to 'kick,' as you put it so simply,

would be, I take it, Directors and other officers of the

Company who find themselves holding a class of shares

which does not participate in the present rise.  I speak

with some confidence--because I was in that position myself

until a few minutes ago--and I don't mind confessing

that I had brought myself to contemplate the contingency

of ultimately being compelled to--to 'kick' a little. 

Of course, so far as I am concerned, events have put me

in a diametrically different frame of mind.  If I came

prepared--I won't say to curse, but to--to criticize--I

certainly remain to bless.  But you see my point. 

I of course do not know what you have done as regards

the other members of the Board."



"I don't care about them," said Thorpe, carelessly.  "You are

the one that I wished to bring in on the ground-floor.

The others don't matter.  Of course, I shall do something

for them; they shan't be allowed to make trouble--even

supposing that it would be in their power to make trouble,

which isn't the case.  But it won't be done by any means

on the same scale that--" he paused abruptly, and the two

men tacitly completed his sentence in the glance they exchanged. 



The Marquis of Chaldon rose, and took up his hat and stick. 

"If you will post it to me--in a registered letter--my

town house--please," he remarked, with a charmingly delicate

hesitation over the phrases.  Then he put out his hand: "I

need not say how fully I appreciate your great kindness

to my old friend Fromentin.  It was a noble action--one

I shall always reflect upon with admiration."



"I hope you won't mention it, though," said Thorpe,

as they shook hands; "either that or--or anything else."



"I shall preserve the most guarded--the most diplomatic secrecy,"

his Lordship assured him, as they walked toward the door. 



Thorpe opened this door, and stepped aside, with a half bow,

to facilitate the exit of the Marquis, who bent gracious

acknowledgment of the courtesy.  Then, with an abrupt

start of surprise, the two men straightened themselves. 

Directly in front of them, leaning lightly against the

brass-rail which guarded the entrance to the Board Room,

stood Lord Plowden. 



A certain sense of confusion, unwelcome but inevitable,

visibly enveloped this chance meeting.  The Marquis blinked

very hard as he exchanged a fleeting hand-shake with the

younger nobleman, and murmured some indistinguishable

commonplaces.  Then, with a graceful celerity, which was

more than diplomatic, he disappeared.  Thorpe, with more

difficulty, recovered a sort of stolidity of expression

that might pass for composure.  He in turn gave his

hand to the newcomer, and nodded to him, and achieved a doubtful smile. 



"Come in!" he said, haltingly.  "Where did you drop from?

Glad to see you! How are all your people?"



A moment later the young Viscount was seated in the chair

which the elderly Marquis had vacated.  He presented

therein a figure which, in its way, was perhaps as courtly

as the other had been--but the way was widely different. 

Lord Plowden's fine, lithe form expressed no deference

in its easy postures.  His handsome face was at no

pains to assume conciliatory or ingratiating aspects. 

His brilliant brown eyes sparkled a confident, buoyant gaze

full into the heavy, lethargic countenance of the big man

at the desk. 



"I haven't bothered you before," he said, tossing his

gloves into his hat, and spreading his frock-coat

out by its silk lapels.  He crossed his legs,

and sat back with a comfortable smile.  "I knew you

were awfully busy--and I kept away as long as I could. 

But now--well, the truth is--I'm in rather of a hole. 

I hope you don't mind my coming."



"Why not at all," said Thorpe, laconically.  After a momentary

pause he added: "The Marquis has just been consulting me

about the postponement of the annual meeting.  I suppose

you agree with us--that it would be better to put it off. 

There's really nothing to report.  Of course, you know

more about the situation than he does--between ourselves. 

The shareholders don't want a meeting; it's enough for them

that their shares are worth fifteen or twenty times what they

paid for them.  And certainly WE don't need a meeting,

as things stand now."



"Ah yes--how do things stand now?" asked Lord Plowden, briskly. 



"Well,"--Thorpe eyed his visitor with a moody blankness

of gaze, his chin once more buried in his collar--"well,

everything is going all right, as far as I can see. 

But, of course, these dealings in our shares in the City

have taken up all my time--so that I haven't been able

to give any attention to starting up work in Mexico. 

That being the case, I shall arrange to foot all the

bills for this year's expenses--the rent, the Directors'

fees and clerk-hire and so on--out of my own pocket. 

It comes, all told, to about 2,700 pounds--without

counting my extra 1,000 pounds as Managing Director. 

I don't propose to ask for a penny of that, under the

circumstances--and I'll even pay the other expenses. 

So that the Company isn't losing a penny by our not

getting to work at the development of the property. 

No one could ask anything fairer than that.--And are your

mother and sister quite well?"



"Oh, very well indeed, thanks," replied the other.  He relapsed

abruptly into a silence which was plainly preoccupied. 

Something of the radiant cheerfulness with which his

face had beamed seemed to have faded away. 



"I'm in treaty for a house and a moor in the Highlands"--Thorpe

went on, in a casual tone--"in fact, I'm hesitating between

three or four places that all seem to be pretty good--but I

don't know whether I can get away much before the twentieth. 

I hope you can contrive to come while I'm there. 

I should like it very much if you would bring your mother

and sister--and your brother too.  I have a nephew about

his age--a fine young fellow--who'd be company for him. 

Why can't you say now that you'll all come?"



Lord Plowden emerged from his brown study with the gleam

of some new idea on his face.  "I might bring my sister,"

he said.  "My mother hates Scotland.  She doesn't

go about, either, even in England.  But I daresay Winnie

would enjoy it immensely.  She has a great opinion of you,

you know."



"I only saw her that once," Thorpe remarked. 

Some thought behind his words lent a musing effect

to the tone in which they were uttered.  The brother's

contemplative smile seemed a comment upon this tone. 



"Women are curious creatures," he said.  "They take fancies

and dislikes as swiftly and irresponsibly as cloud-shadows

shift and change on a mountain-side in April.  But I

happen to know that my sister does like you immensely. 

So does my mother," he added, with another little smile.

He continued to regard Thorpe's face, but there was

an increasing uncertainty in his glance.  "You've put

on flesh, haven't you?" he ventured, after a brief pause. 

There was the implication in his voice and manner that he

observed changes which disconcerted him. 



"Not much, I guess," replied the other, carelessly. 

"I've been sticking to the City pretty closely.  That's all. 

There's nothing that a fortnight's rest won't put right. 

I should like it first-rate to have you and your sister come. 

I'll let you know which place I decide upon.  Very likely

you can manage to bring her at the same time that some

other ladies will be there.  I expect Lady Cressage and

Miss Madden, you know."



Lord Plowden stared at his friend.  "Are they back? Have

they returned to England?" he asked, confusedly. 



"Oh, didn't you know?" Thorpe pursued, with an accession

of amiability.  He visibly had pleasure in the disclosure

of the other's ignorance.  "They've been in London for two

or three weeks.  That is, Miss Madden has been taking flying

trips to see cathedrals and so on, but Lady Cressage has

stayed in town.  Their long journeyings have rather done

her up.  "He looked Plowden straight in the eye, and added

with an air of deliberation: "I'm rather anxious about her health."



The nobleman frankly abandoned his efforts to maintain

an undisturbed front.  "You--are--anxious," he repeated,

frowning in displeased wonderment. 



"Why yes--why not?" demanded Thorpe, with a sudden growl

in his voice.  As he covered the handsome Viscount

with his heavy, intent gaze, impulses of wrath stirred

within him.  Why should this fop of a lordling put on

this air of contemptuous incredulity?" What is there

so amazing about that? Why shouldn't I be anxious?"



The peremptory harshness of his manner, and the scowl

on his big, lowering face, brought a sort of self-

control back to the other.  He shrugged his shoulders,

with an attempt at nonchalance.  "Why not indeed!"

he said, as lightly as he could.  With hands on knees,

he bent forward as if to rise.  "But perhaps I'd better

come in another day," he suggested, tentatively. 

"I'm interrupting you."



"No--sit still," Thorpe bade him, and then, with chin

settled more determinedly than ever in his cravat,

sat eyeing him in a long, dour silence. 



Lord Plowden found it impossible to obtain from this massive,

apathetic visage any clue to the thoughts working behind it. 

He chanced to recall the time when he had discussed

with Thorpe the meaning and values of this inscrutable

expression which the latter's countenance could assume. 

It had seemed interesting and even admirable to him

then--but then he had not foreseen the possibility that he

himself might some day confront its adamantine barrier

with a sinking heart.  All at once he could bear this

implacable sphinx-gaze no longer. 



"I'm sure some other day would be better," he urged,

with an open overture to propitiation in his tone. 

"You're not in the mood to be bothered with my affairs today."



"As much today as any other," Thorpe answered him, slowly. 



The other sat suddenly upright--and then upon a moment's

reflection rose to his feet.  "I don't in the least know what

to make of all this," he said, with nervous precipitancy. 

"If I've offended you in any way, say so, and I will

apologize at once.  But treatment of this sort passes

my comprehension."



Thorpe in truth did not himself comprehend it much

more clearly.  Some strange freak of wilfulness impelled

him to pursue this unintelligible persecution. 

"I've said nothing about any offense," he declared,

in a hard, deliberate voice.  "It is your own word. 

All the same--I mention the name of a lady--a lady,

mind you, whom I met under your own roof--and you strike

attitudes and put on airs as if--as if I wasn't good enough!"



"Oh, upon my word, that's all rubbish!" the other broke in. 

"Nothing could have been further from my thoughts,

I assure you.  Quite naturally I was surprised for the

moment at a bit of unexpected news--but that was all. 

I give you my word that was all."



"Very well, then," Thorpe consented grudgingly to mutter. 



He continued his sullen scrutiny of the man standing

before him, noting how the vivacity of his bearing had

deteriorated in these few minutes.  He had cut such a gallant

figure when he entered the room, with his sparkling eye

and smile, his almost jaunty manner, his superior tailor's

plumage--and now he was such a crestfallen and wilted thing!

Remembering their last conversation together--remembering

indeed how full of liking for this young nobleman he

had been when they last met--Thorpe paused to wonder

at the fact that he felt no atom of pity for him now. 

What was his grievance? What had Plowden done to provoke

this savage hostility? Thorpe could not tell.  He knew

only that unnamed forces dragged him forward to hurt

and humiliate his former friend.  Obscurely, no doubt,

there was something about a woman in it.  Plowden had been

an admirer of Lady Cressage.  There was her father's

word for it that if there had been money enough he would

have wished to marry her.  There had been, as well,

the General's hint that if the difficulty of Plowden's

poverty were removed, he might still wish to marry

her--a hint which Thorpe discovered to be rankling

with a sudden new soreness in his mind.  Was that why he

hated Plowden? No--he said to himself that it was not. 

He was going to marry Lady Cressage himself.  Her letter,

signifying delicately her assent to his proposal,

had come to him that very morning--was in his pocket now. 

What did he care about the bye-gone aspirations of

other would-be suitors? And, as for Plowden, he had

not even known of her return to London.  Clearly there

remained no communications of any sort between them. 

It was not at all on her account, he assured himself,

that he had turned against Plowden.  But what other reason

could there be? He observed his visitor's perturbed

and dejected mien with a grim kind of satisfaction--but

still he could not tell why. 



"This is all terribly important to me," the nobleman said,

breaking the unpleasant silence.  His voice was surcharged

with earnestness.  "Apparently you are annoyed with

something--what it may be I can't for the life of me make out. 

All I can say is"--and he broke off with a helpless

gesture which seemed to imply that he feared to say anything. 



Thorpe put out his lips.  "I don't know what you mean,"

he said, brusquely. 



"What I mean"--the other echoed, with bewildered vagueness

of glance.  "I'm all at sea.  I don't in the least grasp

the meaning of anything.  You yourself volunteered

the declaration that you would do great things for me. 

'We are rich men together'--those were your own words. 

I urged you at the time to go slowly--to consider carefully

whether you weren't being too generous.  I myself said

to you that you were ridiculously exaggerating what you

called your obligation to me.  It was you who insisted upon

presenting me with 100,000 shares."



"Well, they are here ready for you," said Thorpe,

with calculated coldness.  "You can have them whenever

you please.  I promised them to you, and set them

aside for you.  You can take them away with you now,

if you like.  What are you kicking up this fuss for,

then? Upon my word!--you come here and suggest to me

that I made promises to you which I've broken!"



Plowden looked hard at him, as he turned over in his mind

the purport of these words.  "I see what you are doing,"

he said then.  "You turn over to me 100,000 vendor's

deferred shares.  Thanks! I have already 1,000 of them. 

I keep them in the same box with my father's Confederate bonds."



"What the hell do you mean?" Thorpe broke in with

explosive warmth, lifting himself in his chair. 



"Oh, come now, Thorpe," Plowden retorted, "let's get

this talk on an intelligent, common-sense footing."

He had regained something of his self-control, and keenly

put forward now to help him all his persuasive graces

of eye and speech.  He seated himself once more. 

"I'm convinced that you want to be good to me. 

Of course you do! If I've seemed here for a minute or two

to think otherwise, it was because I misunderstood things. 

Don't let there be any further misunderstandings! I apologize

for doing you the momentary injustice of suspecting that

you were going to play off the vendor's shares on me. 

Of course you said it--but it was a joke."



"There seems to be a joke somewhere, sure enough,"

said Thorpe, in dryly metallic tones--"but it isn't me

who's the joker.  I told you you should have 100,000

of my 400,000 shares, didn't I? I told you that in so

many words.  Very well, what more do you want? Here

they are for you! I keep my promise to the letter. 

But you--you seem to think you're entitled to make a row. 

What do you mean by it?"



"Just a little word"--interposed Plowden, with strenuous

calmness of utterance--"what you say may be true

enough--yes, I admit it is true as far as it goes. 

But was that what either of us had in our minds at the time?

You know it wasn't! You had just planned a coup on the Stock

Exchange which promised you immense rewards.  I helped

you to pass a bogus allotment through our Board--without

which your coup wouldn't have been worth a farthing. 

You were enthusiastically grateful to me then.  In the

excitement of the moment you promised me a quarter of all

you should make.  'WE ARE BOTH RICH MEN!' I remember those

very words of yours.  They have never been out of my mind. 

We discussed the things that we would each do, when we came

into this wealth.  It was taken for granted in all our

talk that your making money meant also my making money. 

That was the complete understanding--here in London,

and while you were at my house.  You know it as well as I do. 

And I refuse to suppose that you seriously intend to sit

there and pretend that you meant to give me nothing

but an armful of waste paper.  It would be too monstrous!"



Thorpe rapped with his nails on the desk, to point the

force of his rejoinder: "How do you account for the fact,

my Lord"--he gave his words a chillingly scornful precision

of utterance--"that I distinctly mentioned 400,000 vendor's

shares of mine, 100,000 of which I promised to turn

over to you? Those were the specific terms, were they

not? You don't deny it? Then what are you talking about?"



"I account for it in this way"--said Plowden, after a moment's

baffled reflection: "at that time you yourself hadn't

grasped the difference between the two classes of shares. 

You thought the vendor's shares would play a part in

the game.  Ah! I see I've hit the mark! That was the way

of it!--And now here, Thorpe! Let all that's been said

be bye-gones! I don't want any verbal triumph over you. 

You don't want to wrong me--and yourself too--by sticking

to this quibble about vendor's shares.  You intended

to be deuced good to me--and what have I done that you

should round on me now? I haven't bothered you before. 

I came today only because things are particularly rotten,

financially, just now.  And I don't even want to hold

you to a quarter--I leave that entirely to you.

But after all that's been said and done--I put it to you

as one man to another--you are morally bound to help

me out."



"How do you mean?--'all that's been said and done'?"

Thorpe asked the question in some confusion of moods. 

Perhaps it was the ethical force of Lord Plowden's appeal,

perhaps only a recurring sense of his earlier affection for

the man--but for the moment he wavered in his purpose. 



The peer flushed a little, as he looked at the floor,

revolving possible answers to this query.  His ear had been

quick to seize the note of hesitation in Thorpe's tone. 

He strove anxiously to get together considerations which

should tip the fluttering balance definitely his way. 



"Well," he began slowly, "I hardly know how to put it. 

Of course there was, in the first place, the immense

expectation of fortune which you gave me, and which I'm

afraid I've more than lived up to.  And then, of course,

others shared my expectations.  It wasn't a thing

one could very well keep to oneself.  My mother and my

sister--especially my sister--they were wonderfully

excited about it.  You are quite the hero in their eyes. 

And then--you remember that talk we had, in which you said

I could help you--socially, you know.  I did it a little,

just as a start, but of course there's no end to what

could be done.  You've been too busy heretofore, but we

can begin now whenever you like.  I don't mind telling

you--I've had some thoughts of a possible marriage for you. 

In point of blood and connections it would be such a match

as a commoner hasn't made before in my memory--a highly-

cultivated and highly-bred young lady of rank--and

settlements could be made so that a considerable quantity

of land would eventually come to your son.  I needn't

tell you that land stands for much more than money,

if you happen to set your mind on a baronetcy or a peerage. 

Of course--I need scarcely say--I mention this marriage

only as something which may or may not attract you,--it is

quite open to you to prefer another,--but there is hardly

anything of that sort in which I and my connections could

not be of use to you."



Even more by the tone and inflection of these words than

by the phrases themselves, Thorpe divined that he was being

offered the hand of the Hon. Winifred Plowden in marriage. 

He recalled vividly the fact that once the shadow

of some such thought had floated through his own brain;

there had been a moment--it seemed curiously remote, like a

dream-phantom from some previous state of existence--when

he had dwelt with personal interest upon her inheritance

from long lines of noblemen, and her relation to half

the peerage.  Then, swiftly, illogically, he disliked

the brother of this lady more than ever. 



"All that is talking in the air," he said,

with abrupt decision.  "I see nothing in it.  You shall

have your vendor's shares, precisely as I promised you. 

I don't see how you can possibly ask for anything more."

He looked at the other's darkling face for a moment,

and then rose with unwieldy deliberation.  "If you're

so hard up though," he continued, coldly, "I don't mind

doing this much for you.  I'll exchange the thousand

vendor's shares you already hold the ones I gave you

to qualify you at the beginning--for ordinary shares. 

You can sell those for fifteen thousand pounds cash. 

In fact, I'll buy them of you now.  I'll give you a cheque

for the amount.  Do you want it?"



Lord Plowden, red-faced and frowning, hesitated for a

fraction of time.  Then in constrained silence he nodded,

and Thorpe, leaning ponderously over the desk, wrote out

the cheque.  His Lordship took it, folded it up, and put

it in his pocket without immediate comment. 



"Then this is the end of things, is it?" he asked,

after an awkward silence, in a voice he strove in vain

to keep from shaking. 



"What things?" said the other. 



Plowden shrugged his shoulders, framed his lips to utter

something which he decided not to say, and at last turned

on his heel.  "Good day," he called out over his shoulder,

and left the room with a flagrant air of hostility. 



Thorpe, wandering about the apartment, stopped after

a time at the cabinet, and helped himself to a drink. 

The thing most apparent to him was that of set purpose he

had converted a friend into an enemy.  Why had he done

this? He asked himself the question in varying forms,

over his brandy and soda, but no convincing answer came. 

He had done it because he had felt like doing it.  It was

impossible to trace motives further than that. 


