





CHAPTER XVIII





"EDITH will be down in a very few moments," Miss Madden

assured Thorpe that evening, when he entered the drawing-room

of the house she had taken in Grafton Street. 



He looked into her eyes and smiled, as he bowed over the hand

she extended to him.  His glance expressed with forceful

directness his thought: "Ah, then she has told you!"



The complacent consciousness of producing a fine effect

in evening-clothes had given to Mr. Stormont Thorpe

habitually now a mildness of manner, after the dressing hour,

which was lacking to his deportment in the day-time. 

The conventional attire of ceremony, juggled in the hands

of an inspired tailor, had been brought to lend to his

ponderous figure a dignity, and even something of a grace,

which the man within assimilated and made his own. 

It was an equable and rather amiable Thorpe whom people

encountered after nightfall--a gentleman who looked impressive

enough to have powerful performances believed of him,

yet seemed withal an approachable and easy-going person. 

Men who saw him at midnight or later spoke of him to their

womenkind with a certain significant reserve, in which

trained womankind read the suggestion that the "Rubber King"

drank a good deal, and was probably not wholly nice in

his cups. 



This, however, could not be said to render him less

interesting in any eyes.  There was indeed about it

the implication of a generous nature, or at the least

of a blind side--and it is not unpleasant to discover

these attributes in a new man who has made his half-million,

and has, or may have, countless favours to bestow. 



It was as if his tongue instead of his eyes had uttered

the exclamation--"Ah, then she has told you!"--for Miss

Madden took it as having been spoken.  "I'm not disposed

to pretend that I'm overjoyed about it, you know,"

she said to him bluntly, as their hands dropped, and they

stood facing each other.  "If I said I congratulated you,

it would be only the emptiest form.  And I hate empty forms."



"Why should you think that I won't make a good husband?"

Thorpe asked the question with a good-natured if peremptory

frankness which came most readily to him in the presence

of this American lady, herself so outspoken and masterful. 



"I don't know that I specially doubt it," she replied.

"I suppose any man has in him the makings of what is called

a good husband--if the conditions are sufficiently propitious."



"Well then--what's the matter with the conditions?"

he demanded, jocosely. 



Miss Madden shrugged her shoulders slightly.  Thorpe noted

the somewhat luxuriant curves of these splendid shoulders,

and the creamy whiteness of the skin, upon which,

round the full throat, a chain of diamonds lay as upon

satin--and recalled that he had not seen her before in

what he phrased to himself as so much low-necked dress. 

The deep fire-gleam in her broad plaits of hair gave a

wonderful brilliancy to this colouring of brow and throat

and bosom.  He marvelled at himself for discovering only

now that she also was beautiful--and then thrilled with

pride at the thought that henceforth his life might be

passed altogether among beautiful women, radiant in gems

and costly fabrics, who would smile upon him at his command. 



"Oh, I have no wish to be a kill-joy," she protested.

"I'm sure I hope all manner of good results from the--

the experiment."



"I suppose that's what it comes to," he said, meditatively. 

"It's all an experiment.  Every marriage in the world

must be that--neither more nor less."



"With all the experience of the ages against its coming

out right." She had turned to move toward a chair,

but looked now over her shoulder at him.  "Have you ever

seen what seemed to you an absolutely happy marriage

in your life?"



Upon reflection he shook his head.  "I don't recall

one on the spur of the minute," he confessed. 

"Not the kind, I mean, that you read about in books. 

But I've seen plenty where the couple got along together

in a good, easy, comfortable sort of way, without a notion

of any sort of unpleasantness.  It's people who marry

too young who do most of the fighting, I imagine. 

After people have got to a sensible age, and know

what they want and what they can get along without,

why then there's no reason for any trouble.  We don't

start out with any school-boy and school-girl moonshine"



"Oh, there's a good deal to be said for the moonshine,"

she interrupted him, as she sank upon the sofa. 



"Why certainly," he assented, amiably, as he stood looking

down at her.  "The more there is of it, the better--if

it comes naturally, and people know enough to understand

that it is moonshine, and isn't the be-all and end-all

of everything."



"There's a lover for you!" Miss Madden cried, with mirth

and derision mingled in her laugh. 



"Don't you worry about me," he told her.  "I'm a good

enough lover, all right.  And when you come to that,

if Edith is satisfied, I don't precisely see what----"



"What business it is of mine?" she finished the sentence

for him.  "You're entirely right.  As you say,

IF she's satisfied, no one else has anything to do with it."



"But have you got any right to assume that she

isn't satisfied?" he asked her with swift directness--"or

any reason for supposing it?"



Miss Madden shook her head, but the negation seemed qualified

by the whimsical smile she gave him.  "None whatever,"

she said--and on the instant the talk was extinguished

by the entrance of Lady Cressage. 



Thorpe's vision was flooded with the perception of his

rare fortune as he went to meet her.  He took the hand

she offered, and looked into the smile of her greeting,

and could say nothing.  Her beauty had gathered to it

new forces in his eyes--forces which dazzled and

troubled his glance.  The thought that this exquisite

being--this ineffable compound of feeling and fine nerves

and sweet wisdom and wit and loveliness--belonged

to him seemed too vast for the capacity of his mind.

He could not keep himself from trembling a little,

and from diverting to a screen beyond her shoulder

a gaze which he felt to be overtly dimmed and embarrassed. 



"I have kept you waiting," she murmured. 



The soft sound of her voice came to his ears as from

a distance.  It bore an unfamiliar note, upon the strangeness

of which he dwelt for a detached instant.  Then its

meaning broke in upon his consciousness from all sides,

and lighted up his heavy face with the glow of a conqueror's

self-centred smile.  He bent his eyes upon her, and noted

with a controlled exaltation how her glance in turn deferred

to his, and fluttered beneath it, and shrank away. 

He squared his big shoulders and lifted his head. 

Still holding her jewelled hand in his, he turned and led

her toward the sofa.  Halting, he bowed with an exaggerated

genuflection and flourish of his free hand to Miss Madden,

the while he flashed at her a glance at once of challenge

and of deprecation.  Through the sensitized contact of the

other hand, he felt that the woman he held bowed also,

and in his own spirit of confused defiance and entreaty. 

The laugh he gave then seemed to dispel the awkwardness

which had momentarily hung over the mocking salutation. 



Miss Madden laughed too.  "Oh, I surrender," she said. 

"You drag congratulations from me."



Some quality in the tone of this ungracious speech

had the effect of putting the party at its ease. 

Lady Cressage seated herself beside her friend on the sofa,

and gently, abstractedly, patted one of her hands. 

Thorpe remained on his feet, looking down at the pair

with satisfied cheerfulness.  He tool, a slip of paper

from his pocket, to support a statement he was making. 



"I'm forever telling you what a strain the City is on a man

in my position," he said--"and today I had the curiosity

to keep an account of what happened.  Here it is. 

I had thirty callers.  Of those, how many do you suppose

came to see me on my own business? Just eight.  That is

to say, their errands were about investments of mine,

but most of them managed to get in some word about axes

of their own to grind.  All the rest made no pretence

at all of thinking about anybody but themselves. 

I've classified them, one by one, here. 



"First, there were six men who wanted me to take shares

of one sort or another, and I had to more or less listen

to what they tried to make out their companies were like. 

They were none of them any good.  Eight different

fellows came to me with schemes that haven't reached the

company stage.  One had a scheme for getting possession

of a nigger republic in the West Indies by raising

a loan, and then repudiating all the previous loans. 

Another wanted me to buy a paper for him, in which he was

to support all my enterprises.  Another wanted to start

a bank--I apparently to find the money, and he the brains. 

One chap wanted me to finance a theatrical syndicate--he

had a bag full of photographs of an actress all eyes

and teeth and hair,--and another chap had a scheme all

worked out for getting a concession from Spain for one

of the Caroline Islands, and putting up a factory there

for making porpoise-hide leather. 



"Then there were three inventors--let's see, here they

are--one with a coiled wire spring for scissors inside

a pocket-knife, and one with a bottle, the whole top

of which unscrews instead of having a cork or stopper,

and one with an electrical fish-line, a fine wire inside

the silk, you know, which connects with some battery

when a fish bites, and rings a bell, and throws out hooks

in various directions, and does all sorts of things. 



"Well then, there was a man who wanted me to take

the chairmanship of a company, and one who wanted me

to guarantee an overdraft at his bank, and two who

wanted to borrow money on stock, and one parson-fellow

who tried to stick me for a subscription to some Home

or other he said he had for children in the country. 

He was the worst bounder of the lot. 



"Well, there's twenty-seven people--and twenty of them

strangers to me, and not worth a penny to me, and all

trying to get money out of me.  Isn't that a dog's life

for one?"



"I don't know," said Miss Madden, contemplatively. 

"A lady may have twice that number of callers in an

afternoon--quite as great strangers to all intents

and purposes--and not even have the satisfaction of

discovering that they had any object whatever in calling. 

At least your people had some motive: the grey matter

in their brain was working.  And besides, one of them

might have had something to say which you would value. 

I don't think that ever happens among a lady's callers;

does it, Edith?"



Edith smiled, pleasantly and yet a little wistfully,

but said nothing. 



"At any rate," Thorpe went on, with a kind of purpose

gathering in his eyes, "none of those fellows cost

me anything, except in time.  But then I had three callers,

almost in a bunch, and one of them took out of me thirty

thousand pounds, and another fifteen thousand pounds,

and the third--an utter stranger he was--he got an absolute

gratuity of ten thousand pounds, besides my consent

to a sale which, if I had refused it, would have stood

me in perhaps forty or fifty thousand pounds more. 

You ladies may thank your stars you don't have that kind

of callers!"



The sound of these figures in the air brought a constrained

look to the faces of the women.  Seemingly they

confronted a subject which was not to their liking. 

The American, however, after a moment's pause, took it

up in an indifferent manner. 



"You speak of an 'absolute gratuity.' I know nothing

of London City methods--but isn't ten thousand pounds

a gratuity on a rather large scale?"



Thorpe hesitated briefly, then smiled, and, with slow deliberation,

drew up a chair and seated himself before them.  "Perhaps I

don't mind telling you about it," he began, and paused again.

"I had a letter in my mail this morning," he went on at last,

giving a sentimental significance to both tone and glance--"a

letter which changed everything in the world for me,

and made me the proudest and happiest man above ground. 

And I put that letter in my pocket, right here on the left

side--and it's there now, for that matter"--he put his hand

to his breast, as if under the impulse to verify his words

by the production of the missive, and then stopped and flushed. 



The ladies, watching him, seemed by their eyes to condone

the mawkishness of the demonstration which had tempted him. 

There was indeed a kind of approving interest in their

joint regard, which he had not experienced before. 



"I had it in my pocket," he resumed, with an accession

of mellow emotion in his voice, "and none of the callers

ever got my thoughts very far from that letter. 

And one of these was an old man--a French banker who must

be seventy years old, but dyes his hair a kind of purple

black--and it seems that his nephew had got the firm into

a terrible kind of scrape, selling 2,000 of my shares

when he hadn't got them to sell and couldn't get them--and

the old man came to beg me to let him out at present

market figures.  He got Lord Chaldon--he's my Chairman,

you know--to bring him, and introduce him as his friend,

and plead for him--but I don't think all that, by itself,

would have budged me an atom.  But then the old man told

how he was just able to scrape together money enough

to buy the shares he needed, at the ruling price, and he

happened to mention that his niece's marriage portion

would have to be sacrificed.  Well, then, do you know,

that letter in my pocket said something to me....And--well,

that's the story.  The girl' s portion, I wormed it

out of him, was ten thousand...and I struck that much

off the figure that I allowed him to buy his shares,

and save his firm, for....It was all the letter that did it,

mind you!"



He concluded the halting narrative amid a marked silence. 

The ladies looked at him and at each other, but they

seemed surprised out of their facility of comment. 

In this kind of flustered hush, the door was opened and

dinner was announced. 



Miss Madden welcomed the diversion by rising with

ostentatious vigour.  "I will take myself out,"

she declared, with cheerful promptness leading the way. 

Lady Cressage took the arm Thorpe offered her, and gave

no token of comprehending that her wrist was being

caressingly pressed against his side as they moved along. 



At the little table shining in the centre of the dark,

cool dining-room, talk moved idly about among general topics. 

A thunderstorm broke over the town, at an early stage

of the dinner, and the sound of the rushing downpour

through the open windows, and the breath of freshness which

stirred the jaded air, were pleasanter than any speech. 

Thoughts roved intuitively country-ward, where the

long-needed rain would be dowering the landscape with new

life--where the earth at sunrise would be green again,

and buoyant in reawakened energy, and redolent with the

perfumes of sweetest summer.  They spoke of the fields

and the moors with the longing of tired town-folk in August.



"Oh, when I get away"--said Thorpe, fervently,

"it seems to me that I don't want ever to come back. 

These last few weeks have got terribly on my nerve. 

And really--why should I come back? I've been asking

myself the question--more today than ever before. 

Of course everything has been different today.  But if I'm

to get any genuine good out of my--my fortune--I must pull

away from the City altogether sometime--and why not now?

Of course, some important things are still open--and

they have to be watched night and day--but after all,

Semple--that's my Broker--he could do it for me. 

At the most, it won't last more than another six weeks. 

There is a settlement-day next week, the 15th,

and another a fortnight after, on the 29th, and another on

September 12th.  Well, those three days, if they're worked

as I intend they shall be, and nothing unforeseen happens,

will bring in over four hundred thousand pounds,

and close the 'corner' in Rubber Consols for good. 

Then I need never see the City again, thank God! And for

that matter--why, what is six weeks? It's like tomorrow.

I'm going to act as if I were free already.  The rain fills

me full of the country.  Will you both come with me tomorrow

or next day, and see the Pellesley place in Hertfordshire?

By the photographs it's the best thing in the market. 

The newest parts of it are Tudor--and that's what I've

always wanted."



"How unexpected you are!" commented Miss Madden. 

"You are almost the last person I should have looked

to for a sentiment about Tudor foundations."



Thorpe put out his lips a trifle.  "Ah, you don't know me,"

he replied, in a voice milder than his look had promised. 

"Because I'm rough and practical, you mustn't think I don't

know good things when I see them.  Why, all the world

is going to have living proof very soon"--he paused,

and sent a smile surcharged with meaning toward the silent

member of the trio--"living proof that I'm the greatest

judge of perfection in beauty of my time."



He lifted his glass as he spoke, and the ladies accepted

with an inclination of the head, and a touch of the wine at

their lips, his tacit toast.  "Oh, I think I do know you,"

said Celia Madden, calmly discursive.  "Up to a certain point,

you are not so unlike other men.  If people appeal to

your imagination, and do not contradict you, or bore you,

or get in your way, you are capable of being very nice

indeed to them.  But that isn't a very uncommon quality. 

What is uncommon in you--at least that is my reading--is

something which according to circumstances may be nice,

or very much the other way about.  It's something

which stands quite apart from standards of morals

or ethics or the ordinary emotions.  But I don't know,

whether it is desirable for me to enter into this extremely

personal analysis."



"Oh yes, go on," Thorpe urged her.  He watched her face

with an almost excited interest. 



"Well--I should say that you possessed a capacity for

sudden and capricious action in large matters, equally

impatient of reasoning and indifferent to consequences,

which might be very awkward, and even tragic, to people

who happened to annoy you, or stand in your road. 

You have the kind of organization in which, within a second,

without any warning or reason, a passing whim may have worked

itself up into an imperative law--something you must obey."



The man smiled and nodded approvingly: "You've got me

down fine," he said. 



"I talk with a good deal of confidence," she went on,

with a cheerless, ruminative little laugh, "because it

is my own organization that I am describing, too. 

The difference is that I was allowed to exploit my

capacity for mischief very early.  I had my own way

in my teens--my own money, my own power--of course

only of a certain sort, and in a very small place. 

But I know what I did with that power.  I spread trouble

and misery about me--always of course on a small scale. 

Then a group of things happened in a kind of climax--a

very painful climax--and it shook the nonsense out of me. 

My brother and my father died--some other sobering things

happened...and luckily I was still young enough to stop short,

and take stock of myself, and say that there were certain

paths I would never set foot on again--and stick to it. 

But with you--do you see?--power only comes to you when you

are a mature man.  Experiences, no matter how unpleasant

they are, will not change you now.  You will not be

moved by this occurrence or that to distrust yourself,

or reconsider your methods, or form new resolutions. 

Oh no! Power will be terrible in your hands, if people whom

you can injure provoke you to cruel courses----"



"Oh, dear--dear!" broke in Lady Cressage.  "What a distressing

Mrs. Gummidge-Cassandra you are, Celia! Pray stop it!"



"No--she's right enough," said Thorpe, gravely. 

"That's the kind of man I am."



He seemed so profoundly interested in the contemplation

of this portrait which had been drawn of him, that the others

respected his reflective silence.  He sat for some moments,

idly fingering a fork on the table, and staring at a blotch

of vivid red projected through a decanter upon the cloth. 



"It seems to me that's the only kind of man it's

worth while to be," he added at last, still speaking

with thoughtful deliberation.  "There's nothing else

in the world so big as power--strength. If you have that,

you can get everything else.  But if you have it,

and don't use it, then it rusts and decays on your hands. 

It's like a thoroughbred horse.  You can't keep it idle

in the stable.  If you don't exercise it, you lose it."



He appeared to be commenting upon some illustration

which had occurred to his own mind, but was not visible

to his auditors.  While they regarded him, he was prompted

to admit them to his confidence. 



"There was a case of it today," he said, and then paused. 



"Precisely," put in Miss Madden.  "The fact that

some Frenchwoman, of whom you had never heard before,

was going to lose her marriage portion caught your attention,

and on the instant you presented her with $10,000,

an exercise of power which happens to be on the generous

side--but still entirely unreasoning, and not deserving

of any intellectual respect.  And here's the point: if it

had happened that somebody else chanced to produce an

opposite impression upon you, you would have been capable

of taking $50,000 away from him with just as light a heart."



Thorpe's face beamed with repressed amusement.  "As a matter

of fact it was that kind of case I was going to mention. 

I wasn't referring to the girl and her marriage portion. 

A young man came to me today--came into my room all

cock-a-whoop, smiling to himself with the notion that he

had only to name what he wanted, and I would give it

to him--and----"



He stopped abruptly, with a confused little laugh. 

He had been upon the brink of telling about Lord

Plowden's discomfiture, and even now the story itched

upon his tongue.  It cost him an effort to put the

narrative aside, the while he pondered the arguments

which had suddenly reared themselves against publicity. 

When at last he spoke, it was with a glance of conscious

magnanimity toward the lady who had consented to be his wife. 



"Never mind," he said, lightly.  "There wasn't much to it. 

The man annoyed me, somehow--and he didn't get what he came

for--that's all."



"But he was entitled to get it?" asked Celia Madden. 

Thorpe's lips pouted over a reply.  "Well--no," he said,

with a kind of reluctance.  "He got strictly what he was

entitled to--precisely what I had promised him--and he

wrung up his nose at that--and then I actually gave him

15,000 pounds he wasn't entitled to at all."



"I hardly see what it proves, then," Edith Cressage remarked,

and the subject was dropped. 



Some two hours later, Thorpe took his departure. 

It was not until he was getting into the hansom which had

been summoned, that it all at once occurred to him that he

had not for a moment been alone with his betrothed.

Upon reflection, as the cab sped smoothly forward,

this seemed odd to him.  He decided finally that there

was probably some social rule about such things which he

didn't understand.



*  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *



In the drawing-room of the house in Grafton Street

which he had quitted, the two ladies sat with faces

averted from each other, in constrained silence. 



Edith Cressage rose at last, and took a few aimless steps,

with her hands at her hair.  "Well--I'm embarked--fairly

under way!" she said, in clear-cut, almost provocative tones. 



"I don't at all know what to say," her companion replied,

slowly.  "I fancy that you exaggerate my disapproval. 

Perhaps it ought not even to be called disapproval at all. 

It is only that I am puzzled--and a little frightened."



"Oh, I am frightened too," said the other, but with

eagerness rather than trepidation in her voice.  "That is

why I did not give you the signal to leave us alone. 

I couldn't quite get up the nerve for it.  But would you

believe it?--that is one of the charms of the thing. 

There is an excitement about it that exhilarates me. 

To get happiness through terror--you can't understand that,

can you?"



"I'm trying.  I think I'm beginning to understand,"

said Miss Madden, vaguely. 



"Did you ever set yourself to comprehending why Marie

Stuart married Bothwell?" asked Edith, looking down

upon the other with illuminating fixity.  "You have it

all--all there.  Marie got tired of the smooth people,

the usual people.  There was the promise of adventure,

and risk, and peril, and the grand emotions with the big,

dark brute."



"It isn't a happy story--this parallel that you pick out,"

commented Celia, absently. 



"Happy! Pah!" retorted Edith, with spirit.  "Who knows if it

wasn't the only really happy thing in her life? The snobs

and prigs all scold her and preach sermons at her--they did

it in her lifetime: they do it now----"Oh come, I'm neither

a snob nor a prig," put in Celia, looking up in her turn,

and tempering with a smile the energy of her tone--"I

don't blame her for her Bothwell; I don't criticize her. 

I never was even able to mind about her killing Darnley. 

You see I take an extremely liberal view.  One might almost

call it broad.  But if I had been one of her ladies--her

bosom friends--say Catherine Seton--and she had talked

with me about it--I think I should have confessed to some

forebodings--some little misgivings."



"And do you know what she would have said?"

Edith's swift question, put with a glowing face and a

confident voice, had in it the ring of assured triumph. 

"She would have answered you: 'My dearest girl, all my

life I have done what other people told me to do.  In my

childhood I was given in marriage to a criminal idiot. 

In my premature widowhood I was governed by a committee

of scoundrels of both sexes until another criminal

idiot was imposed upon me as a second husband. 

My own personality has never had the gleam of a chance. 

I have never yet done any single thing because I wanted

to do it.  Between first my politician-mother and her band

of tonsured swindlers, and then my cantankerous brother

and his crew of snarling and sour-minded preachers,

and all the court liars and parasites and spies that both

sides surrounded me with, I have lived an existence

that isn't life at all.  I purport to be a woman,

but I have never been suffered to see a genuine man. 

And now here is one--or what I think to be one--and I'm

given to understand that he is a pirate and a murderer

and an unspeakable ruffian generally--but he takes

my fancy, and he has beckoned to me to come to him,

and so you will kindly get me my hat and jacket and gloves.'

That's what she would have said to you, my dear."



"And I"--said Celia, rising after a moment's pause,

and putting her hand upon Edith's arm--"I would have answered,

'Dearest lady, in whatever befalls, I pray you never to forget

that I am to the end your fond and devoted and loyal servant.'"

