
 
 
                    PART II
 
              Neighboring Fields
 
 
 
 
                     I
 
 
     IT is sixteen years since John Bergson died.
His wife now lies beside him, and the white
shaft that marks their graves gleams across the
wheat-fields.  Could he rise from beneath it,
he would not know the country under which he
has been asleep.  The shaggy coat of the prairie,
which they lifted to make him a bed, has van-
ished forever.  From the Norwegian graveyard
one looks out over a vast checker-board, marked
off in squares of wheat and corn; light and
dark, dark and light.  Telephone wires hum
along the white roads, which always run at
right angles.  From the graveyard gate one can
count a dozen gayly painted farmhouses; the
gilded weather-vanes on the big red barns wink
at each other across the green and brown and
yellow fields.  The light steel windmills trem-
ble throughout their frames and tug at their
moorings, as they vibrate in the wind that often
blows from one week's end to another across
that high, active, resolute stretch of country.
 
     The Divide is now thickly populated.  The
rich soil yields heavy harvests; the dry, bracing
climate and the smoothness of the land make
labor easy for men and beasts.  There are few
scenes more gratifying than a spring plowing
in that country, where the furrows of a single
field often lie a mile in length, and the brown
earth, with such a strong, clean smell, and such
a power of growth and fertility in it, yields itself
eagerly to the plow; rolls away from the shear,
not even dimming the brightness of the metal,
with a soft, deep sigh of happiness.  The wheat-
cutting sometimes goes on all night as well as
all day, and in good seasons there are scarcely
men and horses enough to do the harvesting.
The grain is so heavy that it bends toward the
blade and cuts like velvet.
 
     There is something frank and joyous and
young in the open face of the country.  It gives
itself ungrudgingly to the moods of the season,
holding nothing back.  Like the plains of Lom-
bardy, it seems to rise a little to meet the sun.
The air and the earth are curiously mated and
intermingled, as if the one were the breath of
the other.  You feel in the atmosphere the same
tonic, puissant quality that is in the tilth, the
same strength and resoluteness.
 
     One June morning a young man stood at the
gate of the Norwegian graveyard, sharpening
his scythe in strokes unconsciously timed to the
tune he was whistling.  He wore a flannel cap
and duck trousers, and the sleeves of his white
flannel shirt were rolled back to the elbow.
When he was satisfied with the edge of his
blade, he slipped the whetstone into his hip
pocket and began to swing his scythe, still
whistling, but softly, out of respect to the quiet
folk about him.  Unconscious respect, probably,
for he seemed intent upon his own thoughts,
and, like the Gladiator's, they were far away.
He was a splendid figure of a boy, tall and
straight as a young pine tree, with a hand-
some head, and stormy gray eyes, deeply set
under a serious brow.  The space between his
two front teeth, which were unusually far
apart, gave him the proficiency in whistling
for which he was distinguished at college.
(He also played the cornet in the University
band.)
 
     When the grass required his close attention,
or when he had to stoop to cut about a head-
stone, he paused in his lively air,--the "Jewel"
song,--taking it up where he had left it when
his scythe swung free again.  He was not think-
ing about the tired pioneers over whom his
blade glittered.  The old wild country, the
struggle in which his sister was destined to suc-
ceed while so many men broke their hearts and
died, he can scarcely remember.  That is all
among the dim things of childhood and has been
forgotten in the brighter pattern life weaves
to-day, in the bright facts of being captain of
the track team, and holding the interstate
record for the high jump, in the all-suffusing
brightness of being twenty-one.  Yet some-
times, in the pauses of his work, the young man
frowned and looked at the ground with an
intentness which suggested that even twenty-
one might have its problems.
 
     When he had been mowing the better part of
an hour, he heard the rattle of a light cart on
the road behind him.  Supposing that it was
his sister coming back from one of her farms,
he kept on with his work.  The cart stopped at
the gate and a merry contralto voice called,
"Almost through, Emil?"  He dropped his
scythe and went toward the fence, wiping his
face and neck with his handkerchief.  In the
cart sat a young woman who wore driving
gauntlets and a wide shade hat, trimmed with
red poppies.  Her face, too, was rather like a
poppy, round and brown, with rich color in her
cheeks and lips, and her dancing yellow-brown
eyes bubbled with gayety.  The wind was flap-
ping her big hat and teasing a curl of her
chestnut-colored hair.  She shook her head at
the tall youth.
 
     "What time did you get over here?  That's
not much of a job for an athlete.  Here I've
been to town and back.  Alexandra lets you
sleep late.  Oh, I know!  Lou's wife was telling
me about the way she spoils you.  I was going
to give you a lift, if you were done."  She gath-
ered up her reins.
 
     "But I will be, in a minute.  Please wait for
me, Marie," Emil coaxed.  "Alexandra sent me
to mow our lot, but I've done half a dozen
others, you see.  Just wait till I finish off the
Kourdnas'.  By the way, they were Bohemians.
Why aren't they up in the Catholic grave-
yard?"
 
     "Free-thinkers," replied the young woman
laconically.
 
     "Lots of the Bohemian boys at the Univer-
sity are," said Emil, taking up his scythe again.
"What did you ever burn John Huss for, any-
way?  It's made an awful row.  They still jaw
about it in history classes."
 
     "We'd do it right over again, most of us,"
said the young woman hotly.  "Don't they ever
teach you in your history classes that you'd all
be heathen Turks if it hadn't been for the
Bohemians?"
 
     Emil had fallen to mowing.  "Oh, there's no
denying you're a spunky little bunch, you
Czechs," he called back over his shoulder.
 
     Marie Shabata settled herself in her seat
and watched the rhythmical movement of the
young man's long arms, swinging her foot as
if in time to some air that was going through
her mind.  The minutes passed.  Emil mowed
vigorously and Marie sat sunning herself and
watching the long grass fall.  She sat with the
ease that belongs to persons of an essentially
happy nature, who can find a comfortable spot
almost anywhere; who are supple, and quick in
adapting themselves to circumstances.  After a
final swish, Emil snapped the gate and sprang
into the cart, holding his scythe well out over
the wheel.  "There," he sighed.  "I gave old
man Lee a cut or so, too.  Lou's wife needn't
talk.  I never see Lou's scythe over here."
 
     Marie clucked to her horse.  "Oh, you know
Annie!"  She looked at the young man's bare
arms.  "How brown you've got since you came
home.  I wish I had an athlete to mow my
orchard.  I get wet to my knees when I go
down to pick cherries."
 
     "You can have one, any time you want him.
Better wait until after it rains."  Emil squinted
off at the horizon as if he were looking for clouds.
 
     "Will you?  Oh, there's a good boy!"  She
turned her head to him with a quick, bright
smile.  He felt it rather than saw it.  Indeed,
he had looked away with the purpose of not see-
ing it.  "I've been up looking at Angelique's
wedding clothes," Marie went on, "and I'm so
excited I can hardly wait until Sunday.  Ame-
dee will be a handsome bridegroom.  Is any-
body but you going to stand up with him?  Well,
then it will be a handsome wedding party."
She made a droll face at Emil, who flushed.
"Frank," Marie continued, flicking her horse,
"is cranky at me because I loaned his saddle
to Jan Smirka, and I'm terribly afraid he won't
take me to the dance in the evening.  Maybe
the supper will tempt him.  All Angelique's
folks are baking for it, and all Amedee's twenty
cousins.  There will be barrels of beer.  If once
I get Frank to the supper, I'll see that I stay
for the dance.  And by the way, Emil, you
mustn't dance with me but once or twice.  You
must dance with all the French girls.  It hurts
their feelings if you don't.  They think you're
proud because you've been away to school or
something."
 
     Emil sniffed.  "How do you know they think
that?"
 
     "Well, you didn't dance with them much at
Raoul Marcel's party, and I could tell how they
took it by the way they looked at you--and at
me."
 
     "All right," said Emil shortly, studying the
glittering blade of his scythe.
 
     They drove westward toward Norway Creek,
and toward a big white house that stood on a
hill, several miles across the fields.  There were
so many sheds and outbuildings grouped about
it that the place looked not unlike a tiny village.
A stranger, approaching it, could not help notic-
ing the beauty and fruitfulness of the outlying
fields.  There was something individual about
the great farm, a most unusual trimness and
care for detail.  On either side of the road, for a
mile before you reached the foot of the hill,
stood tall osage orange hedges, their glossy
green marking off the yellow fields.  South of
the hill, in a low, sheltered swale, surrounded by
a mulberry hedge, was the orchard, its fruit trees
knee-deep in timothy grass.  Any one there-
abouts would have told you that this was one
of the richest farms on the Divide, and that
the farmer was a woman, Alexandra Bergson.
 
     If you go up the hill and enter Alexandra's
big house, you will find that it is curiously
unfinished and uneven in comfort.  One room
is papered, carpeted, over-furnished; the next
is almost bare.  The pleasantest rooms in the
house are the kitchen--where Alexandra's
three young Swedish girls chatter and cook and
pickle and preserve all summer long--and the
sitting-room, in which Alexandra has brought
together the old homely furniture that the
Bergsons used in their first log house, the fam-
ily portraits, and the few things her mother
brought from Sweden.
 
     When you go out of the house into the flower
garden, there you feel again the order and fine
arrangement manifest all over the great farm;
in the fencing and hedging, in the windbreaks
and sheds, in the symmetrical pasture ponds,
planted with scrub willows to give shade to the
cattle in fly-time.  There is even a white row of
beehives in the orchard, under the walnut trees.
You feel that, properly, Alexandra's house is
the big out-of-doors, and that it is in the soil
that she expresses herself best.
 
 
 
                     II
 
 
     Emil reached home a little past noon, and
when he went into the kitchen Alexandra was
already seated at the head of the long table,
having dinner with her men, as she always did
unless there were visitors.  He slipped into his
empty place at his sister's right.  The three
pretty young Swedish girls who did Alexandra's
housework were cutting pies, refilling coffee-
cups, placing platters of bread and meat and
potatoes upon the red tablecloth, and continu-
ally getting in each other's way between the
table and the stove.  To be sure they always
wasted a good deal of time getting in each other's
way and giggling at each other's mistakes.  But,
as Alexandra had pointedly told her sisters-in-
law, it was to hear them giggle that she kept
three young things in her kitchen; the work she
could do herself, if it were necessary.  These
girls, with their long letters from home, their
finery, and their love-affairs, afforded her a
great deal of entertainment, and they were com-
pany for her when Emil was away at school.
 
     Of the youngest girl, Signa, who has a pretty
figure, mottled pink cheeks, and yellow hair,
Alexandra is very fond, though she keeps a
sharp eye upon her.  Signa is apt to be skittish
at mealtime, when the men are about, and to
spill the coffee or upset the cream.  It is sup-
posed that Nelse Jensen, one of the six men at
the dinner-table, is courting Signa, though he
has been so careful not to commit himself that
no one in the house, least of all Signa, can tell
just how far the matter has progressed.  Nelse
watches her glumly as she waits upon the table,
and in the evening he sits on a bench behind the
stove with his DRAGHARMONIKA, playing mournful
airs and watching her as she goes about her
work.  When Alexandra asked Signa whether
she thought Nelse was in earnest, the poor child
hid her hands under her apron and murmured,
"I don't know, ma'm.  But he scolds me about
everything, like as if he wanted to have me!"
 
     At Alexandra's left sat a very old man, bare-
foot and wearing a long blue blouse, open at the
neck.  His shaggy head is scarcely whiter than
it was sixteen years ago, but his little blue eyes
have become pale and watery, and his ruddy
face is withered, like an apple that has clung
all winter to the tree.  When Ivar lost his land
through mismanagement a dozen years ago,
Alexandra took him in, and he has been a mem-
ber of her household ever since.  He is too old to
work in the fields, but he hitches and unhitches
the work-teams and looks after the health
of the stock.  Sometimes of a winter evening
Alexandra calls him into the sitting-room to
read the Bible aloud to her, for he still reads
very well.  He dislikes human habitations, so
Alexandra has fitted him up a room in the barn,
where he is very comfortable, being near the
horses and, as he says, further from tempta-
tions.  No one has ever found out what his
temptations are.  In cold weather he sits by the
kitchen fire and makes hammocks or mends
harness until it is time to go to bed.  Then he
says his prayers at great length behind the
stove, puts on his buffalo-skin coat and goes
out to his room in the barn.
 
     Alexandra herself has changed very little.
Her figure is fuller, and she has more color.  She
seems sunnier and more vigorous than she did as
a young girl.  But she still has the same calmness
and deliberation of manner, the same clear eyes,
and she still wears her hair in two braids wound
round her head.  It is so curly that fiery ends
escape from the braids and make her head look
like one of the big double sunflowers that fringe
her vegetable garden.  Her face is always tanned
in summer, for her sunbonnet is oftener on her
arm than on her head.  But where her collar
falls away from her neck, or where her sleeves
are pushed back from her wrist, the skin is of
such smoothness and whiteness as none but
Swedish women ever possess; skin with the
freshness of the snow itself.
 
     Alexandra did not talk much at the table,
but she encouraged her men to talk, and she
always listened attentively, even when they
seemed to be talking foolishly.
 
     To-day Barney Flinn, the big red-headed
Irishman who had been with Alexandra for five
years and who was actually her foreman, though
he had no such title, was grumbling about the
new silo she had put up that spring.  It hap-
pened to be the first silo on the Divide, and
Alexandra's neighbors and her men were skep-
tical about it.  "To be sure, if the thing don't
work, we'll have plenty of feed without it,
indeed," Barney conceded.
 
     Nelse Jensen, Signa's gloomy suitor, had his
word.  "Lou, he says he wouldn't have no silo
on his place if you'd give it to him.  He says
the feed outen it gives the stock the bloat.  He
heard of somebody lost four head of horses,
feedin' 'em that stuff."
 
     Alexandra looked down the table from one
to another.  "Well, the only way we can find
out is to try.  Lou and I have different notions
about feeding stock, and that's a good thing.
It's bad if all the members of a family think
alike.  They never get anywhere.  Lou can learn
by my mistakes and I can learn by his.  Isn't
that fair, Barney?"
 
     The Irishman laughed.  He had no love for
Lou, who was always uppish with him and who
said that Alexandra paid her hands too much.
"I've no thought but to give the thing an honest
try, mum.  'T would be only right, after puttin'
so much expense into it.  Maybe Emil will come
out an' have a look at it wid me."  He pushed
back his chair, took his hat from the nail, and
marched out with Emil, who, with his univer-
sity ideas, was supposed to have instigated the
silo.  The other hands followed them, all except
old Ivar.  He had been depressed throughout
the meal and had paid no heed to the talk of
the men, even when they mentioned cornstalk
bloat, upon which he was sure to have opinions.
 
     "Did you want to speak to me, Ivar?" Alex-
andra asked as she rose from the table.  "Come
into the sitting-room."
 
     The old man followed Alexandra, but when
she motioned him to a chair he shook his
head.  She took up her workbasket and waited
for him to speak.  He stood looking at the car-
pet, his bushy head bowed, his hands clasped in
front of him.  Ivar's bandy legs seemed to have
grown shorter with years, and they were com-
pletely misfitted to his broad, thick body and
heavy shoulders.
 
     "Well, Ivar, what is it?" Alexandra asked
after she had waited longer than usual.
 
     Ivar had never learned to speak English and
his Norwegian was quaint and grave, like the
speech of the more old-fashioned people.  He
always addressed Alexandra in terms of the
deepest respect, hoping to set a good example
to the kitchen girls, whom he thought too fam-
iliar in their manners.
 
     "Mistress," he began faintly, without raising
his eyes, "the folk have been looking coldly at
me of late.  You know there has been talk."
 
     "Talk about what, Ivar?"
 
     "About sending me away; to the asylum."
 
     Alexandra put down her sewing-basket.
"Nobody has come to me with such talk," she
said decidedly.  "Why need you listen?  You
know I would never consent to such a thing."
 
     Ivar lifted his shaggy head and looked at her
out of his little eyes.  "They say that you can-
not prevent it if the folk complain of me, if your
brothers complain to the authorities.  They say
that your brothers are afraid--God forbid!--
that I may do you some injury when my spells
are on me.  Mistress, how can any one think
that?--that I could bite the hand that fed
me!"  The tears trickled down on the old man's
beard.
 
     Alexandra frowned.  "Ivar, I wonder at you,
that you should come bothering me with such
nonsense.  I am still running my own house,
and other people have nothing to do with
either you or me.  So long as I am suited with
you, there is nothing to be said."
 
     Ivar pulled a red handkerchief out of the
breast of his blouse and wiped his eyes and
beard.  "But I should not wish you to keep me
if, as they say, it is against your interests, and
if it is hard for you to get hands because I am
here."
 
     Alexandra made an impatient gesture, but
the old man put out his hand and went on
earnestly:--
 
     "Listen, mistress, it is right that you should
take these things into account.  You know that
my spells come from God, and that I would not
harm any living creature.  You believe that
every one should worship God in the way
revealed to him.  But that is not the way of
this country.  The way here is for all to do alike.
I am despised because I do not wear shoes,
because I do not cut my hair, and because I
have visions.  At home, in the old country,
there were many like me, who had been touched
by God, or who had seen things in the grave-
yard at night and were different afterward.  We
thought nothing of it, and let them alone.  But
here, if a man is different in his feet or in his
head, they put him in the asylum.  Look at
Peter Kralik; when he was a boy, drinking out
of a creek, he swallowed a snake, and always
after that he could eat only such food as the
creature liked, for when he ate anything else, it
became enraged and gnawed him.  When he
felt it whipping about in him, he drank alcohol
to stupefy it and get some ease for himself.  He
could work as good as any man, and his head
was clear, but they locked him up for being
different in his stomach.  That is the way; they
have built the asylum for people who are dif-
ferent, and they will not even let us live in the
holes with the badgers.  Only your great pros-
perity has protected me so far.  If you had had
ill-fortune, they would have taken me to Has-
tings long ago."
 
     As Ivar talked, his gloom lifted.  Alexandra
had found that she could often break his fasts
and long penances by talking to him and let-
ting him pour out the thoughts that troubled
him.  Sympathy always cleared his mind, and
ridicule was poison to him.
 
     "There is a great deal in what you say, Ivar.
Like as not they will be wanting to take me to
Hastings because I have built a silo; and then
I may take you with me.  But at present I need
you here.  Only don't come to me again telling
me what people say.  Let people go on talking
as they like, and we will go on living as we
think best.  You have been with me now for
twelve years, and I have gone to you for advice
oftener than I have ever gone to any one.  That
ought to satisfy you."
 
     Ivar bowed humbly.  "Yes, mistress, I shall
not trouble you with their talk again.  And as
for my feet, I have observed your wishes all
these years, though you have never questioned
me; washing them every night, even in winter."
 
     Alexandra laughed.  "Oh, never mind about
your feet, Ivar.  We can remember when half
our neighbors went barefoot in summer.  I ex-
pect old Mrs. Lee would love to slip her shoes
off now sometimes, if she dared.  I'm glad I'm
not Lou's mother-in-law."
 
     Ivar looked about mysteriously and lowered
his voice almost to a whisper.  "You know
what they have over at Lou's house?  A great
white tub, like the stone water-troughs in the
old country, to wash themselves in.  When you
sent me over with the strawberries, they were
all in town but the old woman Lee and the baby.
She took me in and showed me the thing, and
she told me it was impossible to wash yourself
clean in it, because, in so much water, you could
not make a strong suds.  So when they fill it up
and send her in there, she pretends, and makes a
splashing noise.  Then, when they are all asleep,
she washes herself in a little wooden tub she
keeps under her bed."
 
     Alexandra shook with laughter.  "Poor old
Mrs. Lee!  They won't let her wear nightcaps,
either.  Never mind; when she comes to visit
me, she can do all the old things in the old
way, and have as much beer as she wants.
We'll start an asylum for old-time people,
Ivar."
 
     Ivar folded his big handkerchief carefully
and thrust it back into his blouse.  "This is
always the way, mistress.  I come to you sor-
rowing, and you send me away with a light
heart.  And will you be so good as to tell the
Irishman that he is not to work the brown
gelding until the sore on its shoulder is healed?"
 
     "That I will.  Now go and put Emil's mare
to the cart.  I am going to drive up to the north
quarter to meet the man from town who is to
buy my alfalfa hay."
 
 
 
                     III
 
 
     Alexandra was to hear more of Ivar's case,
however.  On Sunday her married brothers
came to dinner.  She had asked them for that
day because Emil, who hated family parties,
would be absent, dancing at Amedee Chevalier's
wedding, up in the French country.  The table
was set for company in the dining-room, where
highly varnished wood and colored glass and
useless pieces of china were conspicuous enough
to satisfy the standards of the new prosperity.
Alexandra had put herself into the hands of the
Hanover furniture dealer, and he had conscien-
tiously done his best to make her dining-room
look like his display window.  She said frankly
that she knew nothing about such things, and
she was willing to be governed by the general
conviction that the more useless and utterly
unusable objects were, the greater their virtue
as ornament.  That seemed reasonable enough.
Since she liked plain things herself, it was all
the more necessary to have jars and punch-
bowls and candlesticks in the company rooms
for people who did appreciate them.  Her
guests liked to see about them these reassuring
emblems of prosperity.
 
     The family party was complete except for
Emil, and Oscar's wife who, in the country
phrase, "was not going anywhere just now."
Oscar sat at the foot of the table and his four
tow-headed little boys, aged from twelve to five,
were ranged at one side.  Neither Oscar nor
Lou has changed much; they have simply, as
Alexandra said of them long ago, grown to be
more and more like themselves.  Lou now looks
the older of the two; his face is thin and shrewd
and wrinkled about the eyes, while Oscar's is
thick and dull.  For all his dullness, however,
Oscar makes more money than his brother,
which adds to Lou's sharpness and uneasiness
and tempts him to make a show.  The trouble
with Lou is that he is tricky, and his neighbors
have found out that, as Ivar says, he has not
a fox's face for nothing.  Politics being the nat-
ural field for such talents, he neglects his farm
to attend conventions and to run for county
offices.
 
     Lou's wife, formerly Annie Lee, has grown to
look curiously like her husband.  Her face has
become longer, sharper, more aggressive.  She
wears her yellow hair in a high pompadour,
and is bedecked with rings and chains and
"beauty pins."  Her tight, high-heeled shoes
give her an awkward walk, and she is always
more or less preoccupied with her clothes.  As
she sat at the table, she kept telling her young-
est daughter to "be careful now, and not drop
anything on mother."
 
     The conversation at the table was all in Eng-
lish.  Oscar's wife, from the malaria district of
Missouri, was ashamed of marrying a foreigner,
and his boys do not understand a word of
Swedish.  Annie and Lou sometimes speak
Swedish at home, but Annie is almost as much
afraid of being "caught" at it as ever her
mother was of being caught barefoot.  Oscar
still has a thick accent, but Lou speaks like
anybody from Iowa.
 
     "When I was in Hastings to attend the con-
vention," he was saying, "I saw the superin-
tendent of the asylum, and I was telling him
about Ivar's symptoms.  He says Ivar's case
is one of the most dangerous kind, and it's
a wonder he hasn't done something violent
before this."
 
     Alexandra laughed good-humoredly.  "Oh,
nonsense, Lou!  The doctors would have us all
crazy if they could.  Ivar's queer, certainly, but
he has more sense than half the hands I hire."
 
     Lou flew at his fried chicken.  "Oh, I guess
the doctor knows his business, Alexandra.  He
was very much surprised when I told him how
you'd put up with Ivar.  He says he's likely to
set fire to the barn any night, or to take after
you and the girls with an axe."
 
     Little Signa, who was waiting on the table,
giggled and fled to the kitchen.  Alexandra's
eyes twinkled.  "That was too much for Signa,
Lou.  We all know that Ivar's perfectly harm-
less.  The girls would as soon expect me to
chase them with an axe."
 
     Lou flushed and signaled to his wife.  "All
the same, the neighbors will be having a say
about it before long.  He may burn anybody's
barn.  It's only necessary for one property-
owner in the township to make complaint, and
he'll be taken up by force.  You'd better send
him yourself and not have any hard feelings."
 
     Alexandra helped one of her little nephews to
gravy.  "Well, Lou, if any of the neighbors try
that, I'll have myself appointed Ivar's guardian
and take the case to court, that's all.  I am
perfectly satisfied with him."
 
     "Pass the preserves, Lou," said Annie in a
warning tone.  She had reasons for not wishing
her husband to cross Alexandra too openly.
"But don't you sort of hate to have people see
him around here, Alexandra?" she went on
with persuasive smoothness.  "He IS a disgrace-
ful object, and you're fixed up so nice now.  It
sort of makes people distant with you, when
they never know when they'll hear him scratch-
ing about.  My girls are afraid as death of him,
aren't you, Milly, dear?"
 
     Milly was fifteen, fat and jolly and pompa-
doured, with a creamy complexion, square
white teeth, and a short upper lip.  She looked
like her grandmother Bergson, and had her
comfortable and comfort-loving nature.  She
grinned at her aunt, with whom she was a great
deal more at ease than she was with her mother.
Alexandra winked a reply.
 
     "Milly needn't be afraid of Ivar.  She's an
especial favorite of his.  In my opinion Ivar has
just as much right to his own way of dressing
and thinking as we have.  But I'll see that he
doesn't bother other people.  I'll keep him at
home, so don't trouble any more about him,
Lou.  I've been wanting to ask you about your
new bathtub.  How does it work?"
 
     Annie came to the fore to give Lou time to
recover himself.  "Oh, it works something
grand!  I can't keep him out of it.  He washes
himself all over three times a week now, and
uses all the hot water.  I think it's weakening
to stay in as long as he does.  You ought to
have one, Alexandra."
 
     "I'm thinking of it.  I might have one put in
the barn for Ivar, if it will ease people's minds.
But before I get a bathtub, I'm going to get a
piano for Milly."
 
     Oscar, at the end of the table, looked up from
his plate.  "What does Milly want of a pianny?
What's the matter with her organ?  She can
make some use of that, and play in church."
 
     Annie looked flustered.  She had begged
Alexandra not to say anything about this plan
before Oscar, who was apt to be jealous of what
his sister did for Lou's children.  Alexandra did
not get on with Oscar's wife at all.  "Milly can
play in church just the same, and she'll still
play on the organ.  But practising on it so
much spoils her touch.  Her teacher says so,"
Annie brought out with spirit.
 
     Oscar rolled his eyes.  "Well, Milly must have
got on pretty good if she's got past the organ.
I know plenty of grown folks that ain't," he
said bluntly.
 
     Annie threw up her chin.  "She has got on
good, and she's going to play for her commence-
ment when she graduates in town next year."
 
     "Yes," said Alexandra firmly, "I think Milly
deserves a piano.  All the girls around here have
been taking lessons for years, but Milly is the
only one of them who can ever play anything
when you ask her.  I'll tell you when I first
thought I would like to give you a piano, Milly,
and that was when you learned that book of
old Swedish songs that your grandfather used
to sing.  He had a sweet tenor voice, and when
he was a young man he loved to sing.  I can
remember hearing him singing with the sailors
down in the shipyard, when I was no bigger
than Stella here," pointing to Annie's younger
daughter.
 
     Milly and Stella both looked through the
door into the sitting-room, where a crayon por-
trait of John Bergson hung on the wall.  Alex-
andra had had it made from a little photograph,
taken for his friends just before he left Sweden;
a slender man of thirty-five, with soft hair curl-
ing about his high forehead, a drooping mus-
tache, and wondering, sad eyes that looked
forward into the distance, as if they already
beheld the New World.
 
     After dinner Lou and Oscar went to the
orchard to pick cherries--they had neither of
them had the patience to grow an orchard of their
own--and Annie went down to gossip with
Alexandra's kitchen girls while they washed the
dishes.  She could always find out more about
Alexandra's domestic economy from the prat-
tling maids than from Alexandra herself, and
what she discovered she used to her own advan-
tage with Lou.  On the Divide, farmers' daugh-
ters no longer went out into service, so Alex-
andra got her girls from Sweden, by paying
their fare over.  They stayed with her until
they married, and were replaced by sisters or
cousins from the old country.
 
     Alexandra took her three nieces into the
flower garden.  She was fond of the little girls,
especially of Milly, who came to spend a week
with her aunt now and then, and read aloud
to her from the old books about the house, or
listened to stories about the early days on the
Divide.  While they were walking among the
flower beds, a buggy drove up the hill and
stopped in front of the gate.  A man got out and
stood talking to the driver.  The little girls
were delighted at the advent of a stranger, some
one from very far away, they knew by his
clothes, his gloves, and the sharp, pointed cut
of his dark beard.  The girls fell behind their
aunt and peeped out at him from among the
castor beans.  The stranger came up to the gate
and stood holding his hat in his hand, smiling,
while Alexandra advanced slowly to meet him.
As she approached he spoke in a low, pleasant
voice.
 
     "Don't you know me, Alexandra?  I would
have known you, anywhere."
 
     Alexandra shaded her eyes with her hand.
Suddenly she took a quick step forward.  "Can
it be!" she exclaimed with feeling; "can it be
that it is Carl Linstrum?  Why, Carl, it is!"
She threw out both her hands and caught his
across the gate.  "Sadie, Milly, run tell your
father and Uncle Oscar that our old friend Carl
Linstrum is here.  Be quick!  Why, Carl, how
did it happen?  I can't believe this!"  Alexan-
dra shook the tears from her eyes and laughed.
 
     The stranger nodded to his driver, dropped
his suitcase inside the fence, and opened the
gate.  "Then you are glad to see me, and you
can put me up overnight?  I couldn't go
through this country without stopping off to
have a look at you.  How little you have
changed!  Do you know, I was sure it would be
like that.  You simply couldn't be different.
How fine you are!"  He stepped back and
looked at her admiringly.
 
     Alexandra blushed and laughed again.  "But
you yourself, Carl--with that beard--how
could I have known you?  You went away a
little boy."  She reached for his suitcase and
when he intercepted her she threw up her
hands.  "You see, I give myself away.  I have
only women come to visit me, and I do not
know how to behave.  Where is your trunk?"
 
     "It's in Hanover.  I can stay only a few days.
I am on my way to the coast."
 
     They started up the path.  "A few days?
After all these years!"  Alexandra shook her
finger at him.  "See this, you have walked into
a trap.  You do not get away so easy."  She put
her hand affectionately on his shoulder.  "You
owe me a visit for the sake of old times.  Why
must you go to the coast at all?"
 
     "Oh, I must!  I am a fortune hunter.  From
Seattle I go on to Alaska."
 
     "Alaska?"  She looked at him in astonish-
ment.  "Are you going to paint the Indians?"
 
     "Paint?" the young man frowned.  "Oh!  I'm
not a painter, Alexandra.  I'm an engraver.  I
have nothing to do with painting."
 
     "But on my parlor wall I have the paint-
ings--"
 
     He interrupted nervously.  "Oh, water-color
sketches--done for amusement.  I sent them to
remind you of me, not because they were good.
What a wonderful place you have made of this,
Alexandra."  He turned and looked back at the
wide, map-like prospect of field and hedge and
pasture.  "I would never have believed it could
be done.  I'm disappointed in my own eye, in
my imagination."
 
     At this moment Lou and Oscar came up the
hill from the orchard.  They did not quicken
their pace when they saw Carl; indeed, they
did not openly look in his direction.  They
advanced distrustfully, and as if they wished
the distance were longer.
 
     Alexandra beckoned to them.  "They think
I am trying to fool them.  Come, boys, it's
Carl Linstrum, our old Carl!"
 
     Lou gave the visitor a quick, sidelong glance
and thrust out his hand.  "Glad to see you."
 
     Oscar followed with "How d' do."  Carl could
not tell whether their offishness came from
unfriendliness or from embarrassment.  He and
Alexandra led the way to the porch.

 
     "Carl," Alexandra explained, "is on his way
to Seattle.  He is going to Alaska."
 
     Oscar studied the visitor's yellow shoes.
"Got business there?" he asked.
 
     Carl laughed.  "Yes, very pressing business.
I'm going there to get rich.  Engraving's a very
interesting profession, but a man never makes
any money at it.  So I'm going to try the gold-
fields."
 
     Alexandra felt that this was a tactful speech,
and Lou looked up with some interest.  "Ever
done anything in that line before?"
 
     "No, but I'm going to join a friend of mine
who went out from New York and has done
well.  He has offered to break me in."
 
     "Turrible cold winters, there, I hear," re-
marked Oscar.  "I thought people went up
there in the spring."
 
     "They do.  But my friend is going to spend
the winter in Seattle and I am to stay with him
there and learn something about prospecting
before we start north next year."
 
     Lou looked skeptical.  "Let's see, how long
have you been away from here?"
 
     "Sixteen years.  You ought to remember
that, Lou, for you were married just after we
went away."
 
     "Going to stay with us some time?" Oscar
asked.
 
     "A few days, if Alexandra can keep me."
 
     "I expect you'll be wanting to see your old
place," Lou observed more cordially.  "You
won't hardly know it.  But there's a few chunks
of your old sod house left.  Alexandra wouldn't
never let Frank Shabata plough over it."
 
     Annie Lee, who, ever since the visitor was
announced, had been touching up her hair and
settling her lace and wishing she had worn
another dress, now emerged with her three
daughters and introduced them.  She was
greatly impressed by Carl's urban appearance,
and in her excitement talked very loud and
threw her head about.  "And you ain't married
yet?  At your age, now!  Think of that!  You'll
have to wait for Milly.  Yes, we've got a boy,
too.  The youngest.  He's at home with his
grandma.  You must come over to see mother
and hear Milly play.  She's the musician of the
family.  She does pyrography, too.  That's
burnt wood, you know.  You wouldn't believe
what she can do with her poker.  Yes, she goes
to school in town, and she is the youngest in
her class by two years."
 
     Milly looked uncomfortable and Carl took
her hand again.  He liked her creamy skin and
happy, innocent eyes, and he could see that her
mother's way of talking distressed her.  "I'm
sure she's a clever little girl," he murmured,
looking at her thoughtfully.  "Let me see--
Ah, it's your mother that she looks like, Alex-
andra.  Mrs. Bergson must have looked just
like this when she was a little girl.  Does Milly
run about over the country as you and Alex-
andra used to, Annie?"
 
     Milly's mother protested.  "Oh, my, no!
Things has changed since we was girls.  Milly
has it very different.  We are going to rent the
place and move into town as soon as the girls
are old enough to go out into company.  A
good many are doing that here now.  Lou is
going into business."
 
     Lou grinned.  "That's what she says.  You
better go get your things on.  Ivar's hitching
up," he added, turning to Annie.
 
     Young farmers seldom address their wives by
name.  It is always "you," or "she."
 
     Having got his wife out of the way, Lou sat
down on the step and began to whittle.  "Well,
what do folks in New York think of William
Jennings Bryan?"  Lou began to bluster, as he
always did when he talked politics.  "We gave
Wall Street a scare in ninety-six, all right,
and we're fixing another to hand them.  Silver
wasn't the only issue," he nodded mysteriously.
"There's a good many things got to be changed.
The West is going to make itself heard."
 
     Carl laughed.  "But, surely, it did do that,
if nothing else."
 
     Lou's thin face reddened up to the roots of his
bristly hair.  "Oh, we've only begun.  We're
waking up to a sense of our responsibilities,
out here, and we ain't afraid, neither.  You
fellows back there must be a tame lot.  If you
had any nerve you'd get together and march
down to Wall Street and blow it up.  Dyna-
mite it, I mean," with a threatening nod.
 
     He was so much in earnest that Carl scarcely
knew how to answer him.  "That would be a
waste of powder.  The same business would go on
in another street.  The street doesn't matter.
But what have you fellows out here got to kick
about?  You have the only safe place there is.
Morgan himself couldn't touch you.  One only
has to drive through this country to see that
you're all as rich as barons."
 
     "We have a good deal more to say than we
had when we were poor," said Lou threateningly.
"We're getting on to a whole lot of things."
 
     As Ivar drove a double carriage up to the
gate, Annie came out in a hat that looked like
the model of a battleship.  Carl rose and took
her down to the carriage, while Lou lingered for
a word with his sister.
 
     "What do you suppose he's come for?" he
asked, jerking his head toward the gate.
 
     "Why, to pay us a visit.  I've been begging
him to for years."
 
     Oscar looked at Alexandra.  "He didn't let
you know he was coming?"
 
     "No. Why should he?  I told him to come at
any time."
 
     Lou shrugged his shoulders.  "He doesn't
seem to have done much for himself.  Wander-
ing around this way!"
 
     Oscar spoke solemnly, as from the depths of
a cavern.  "He never was much account."
 
     Alexandra left them and hurried down to the
gate where Annie was rattling on to Carl about
her new dining-room furniture.  "You must
bring Mr. Linstrum over real soon, only be sure
to telephone me first," she called back, as Carl
helped her into the carriage.  Old Ivar, his white
head bare, stood holding the horses.  Lou came
down the path and climbed into the front seat,
took up the reins, and drove off without saying
anything further to any one.  Oscar picked up
his youngest boy and trudged off down the
road, the other three trotting after him.  Carl,
holding the gate open for Alexandra, began to
laugh.  "Up and coming on the Divide, eh,
Alexandra?" he cried gayly.
 
 
 
                     IV
 
 
     Carl had changed, Alexandra felt, much less
than one might have expected.  He had not
become a trim, self-satisfied city man.  There
was still something homely and wayward and
definitely personal about him.  Even his clothes,
his Norfolk coat and his very high collars, were
a little unconventional.  He seemed to shrink
into himself as he used to do; to hold him-
self away from things, as if he were afraid
of being hurt.  In short, he was more self-con-
scious than a man of thirty-five is expected to
be.  He looked older than his years and not
very strong.  His black hair, which still hung
in a triangle over his pale forehead, was thin at
the crown, and there were fine, relentless lines
about his eyes.  His back, with its high, sharp
shoulders, looked like the back of an over-
worked German professor off on his holiday.
His face was intelligent, sensitive, unhappy.
 
     That evening after supper, Carl and Alex-
andra were sitting by the clump of castor beans
in the middle of the flower garden.  The gravel
paths glittered in the moonlight, and below
them the fields lay white and still.
 
     "Do you know, Alexandra," he was saying,
"I've been thinking how strangely things work
out.  I've been away engraving other men's
pictures, and you've stayed at home and made
your own."  He pointed with his cigar toward
the sleeping landscape.  "How in the world
have you done it?  How have your neighbors
done it?"
 
     "We hadn't any of us much to do with it,
Carl.  The land did it.  It had its little joke.  It
pretended to be poor because nobody knew how
to work it right; and then, all at once, it worked
itself.  It woke up out of its sleep and stretched
itself, and it was so big, so rich, that we sud-
denly found we were rich, just from sitting still.
As for me, you remember when I began to buy
land.  For years after that I was always squeez-
ing and borrowing until I was ashamed to show
my face in the banks.  And then, all at once,
men began to come to me offering to lend me
money--and I didn't need it!  Then I went
ahead and built this house.  I really built it for
Emil.  I want you to see Emil, Carl.  He is so
different from the rest of us!"
 
     "How different?"
 
     "Oh, you'll see!  I'm sure it was to have sons
like Emil, and to give them a chance, that father
left the old country.  It's curious, too; on the
outside Emil is just like an American boy,--he
graduated from the State University in June,
you know,--but underneath he is more Swed-
ish than any of us.  Sometimes he is so like father
that he frightens me; he is so violent in his feel-
ings like that."
 
     "Is he going to farm here with you?"
 
     "He shall do whatever he wants to," Alex-
andra declared warmly.  "He is going to have
a chance, a whole chance; that's what I've
worked for.  Sometimes he talks about studying
law, and sometimes, just lately, he's been talk-
ing about going out into the sand hills and tak-
ing up more land.  He has his sad times, like
father.  But I hope he won't do that.  We have
land enough, at last!"  Alexandra laughed.
 
     "How about Lou and Oscar?  They've done
well, haven't they?"
 
     "Yes, very well; but they are different, and
now that they have farms of their own I do not
see so much of them.  We divided the land
equally when Lou married.  They have their
own way of doing things, and they do not alto-
gether like my way, I am afraid.  Perhaps they
think me too independent.  But I have had to
think for myself a good many years and am not
likely to change.  On the whole, though, we
take as much comfort in each other as most
brothers and sisters do.  And I am very fond of
Lou's oldest daughter."
 
     "I think I liked the old Lou and Oscar better,
and they probably feel the same about me.  I
even, if you can keep a secret,"--Carl leaned
forward and touched her arm, smiling,--"I
even think I liked the old country better.  This
is all very splendid in its way, but there was
something about this country when it was a
wild old beast that has haunted me all these
years.  Now, when I come back to all this milk
and honey, I feel like the old German song, 'Wo
bist du, wo bist du, mein geliebtest Land?'--
Do you ever feel like that, I wonder?"
 
     "Yes, sometimes, when I think about father
and mother and those who are gone; so many
of our old neighbors."  Alexandra paused and
looked up thoughtfully at the stars.  "We can
remember the graveyard when it was wild
prairie, Carl, and now--"
 
     "And now the old story has begun to write
itself over there," said Carl softly.  "Isn't it
queer: there are only two or three human
stories, and they go on repeating themselves as
fiercely as if they had never happened before;
like the larks in this country, that have been
singing the same five notes over for thousands
of years."
 
     "Oh, yes!  The young people, they live so
hard.  And yet I sometimes envy them.  There
is my little neighbor, now; the people who
bought your old place.  I wouldn't have sold it
to any one else, but I was always fond of that
girl.  You must remember her, little Marie
Tovesky, from Omaha, who used to visit here?
When she was eighteen she ran away from the
convent school and got married, crazy child!
She came out here a bride, with her father and
husband.  He had nothing, and the old man
was willing to buy them a place and set them
up.  Your farm took her fancy, and I was glad
to have her so near me.  I've never been sorry,
either.  I even try to get along with Frank on
her account."
 
     "Is Frank her husband?"
 
     "Yes.  He's one of these wild fellows.  Most
Bohemians are good-natured, but Frank thinks
we don't appreciate him here, I guess.  He's jeal-
ous about everything, his farm and his horses
and his pretty wife.  Everybody likes her, just
the same as when she was little.  Sometimes I
go up to the Catholic church with Emil, and
it's funny to see Marie standing there laughing
and shaking hands with people, looking so ex-
cited and gay, with Frank sulking behind her
as if he could eat everybody alive.  Frank's not
a bad neighbor, but to get on with him you've
got to make a fuss over him and act as if you
thought he was a very important person all the
time, and different from other people.  I find it
hard to keep that up from one year's end to
another."
 
     "I shouldn't think you'd be very successful
at that kind of thing, Alexandra."  Carl seemed
to find the idea amusing.
 
     "Well," said Alexandra firmly, "I do the
best I can, on Marie's account.  She has it hard
enough, anyway.  She's too young and pretty
for this sort of life.  We're all ever so much older
and slower.  But she's the kind that won't be
downed easily.  She'll work all day and go to
a Bohemian wedding and dance all night, and
drive the hay wagon for a cross man next morn-
ing.  I could stay by a job, but I never had the go
in me that she has, when I was going my best.
I'll have to take you over to see her to-morrow."
 
     Carl dropped the end of his cigar softly
among the castor beans and sighed.  "Yes, I
suppose I must see the old place.  I'm cow-
ardly about things that remind me of myself.
It took courage to come at all, Alexandra.  I
wouldn't have, if I hadn't wanted to see you
very, very much."
 
     Alexandra looked at him with her calm,
deliberate eyes.  "Why do you dread things
like that, Carl?" she asked earnestly.  "Why
are you dissatisfied with yourself?"
 
     Her visitor winced.  "How direct you are,
Alexandra!  Just like you used to be.  Do I give
myself away so quickly?  Well, you see, for one
thing, there's nothing to look forward to in my
profession.   Wood-engraving is the only thing
I care about, and that had gone out before I
began.  Everything's cheap metal work now-
adays, touching up miserable photographs,
forcing up poor drawings, and spoiling good
ones.  I'm absolutely sick of it all."  Carl
frowned.  "Alexandra, all the way out from
New York I've been planning how I could de-
ceive you and make you think me a very envi-
able fellow, and here I am telling you the
truth the first night.  I waste a lot of time pre-
tending to people, and the joke of it is, I don't
think I ever deceive any one.  There are too
many of my kind; people know us on sight."
 
     Carl paused.  Alexandra pushed her hair
back from her brow with a puzzled, thoughtful
gesture.  "You see," he went on calmly, "mea-
sured by your standards here, I'm a failure.
I couldn't buy even one of your cornfields.
I've enjoyed a great many things, but I've
got nothing to show for it all."
 
     "But you show for it yourself, Carl.  I'd
rather have had your freedom than my land."
 
     Carl shook his head mournfully.  "Freedom
so often means that one isn't needed anywhere.
Here you are an individual, you have a back-
ground of your own, you would be missed.  But
off there in the cities there are thousands of
rolling stones like me.  We are all alike; we
have no ties, we know nobody, we own nothing.
When one of us dies, they scarcely know where
to bury him.  Our landlady and the delicatessen
man are our mourners, and we leave nothing
behind us but a frock-coat and a fiddle, or an
easel, or a typewriter, or whatever tool we got
our living by.  All we have ever managed to
do is to pay our rent, the exorbitant rent that
one has to pay for a few square feet of space
near the heart of things.  We have no house,
no place, no people of our own.  We live in
the streets, in the parks, in the theatres.  We sit
in restaurants and concert halls and look about
at the hundreds of our own kind and shudder."
 
     Alexandra was silent.  She sat looking at the
silver spot the moon made on the surface of the
pond down in the pasture.  He knew that she
understood what he meant.  At last she said
slowly, "And yet I would rather have Emil
grow up like that than like his two brothers.
We pay a high rent, too, though we pay differ-
ently.  We grow hard and heavy here.  We
don't move lightly and easily as you do, and
our minds get stiff.  If the world were no wider
than my cornfields, if there were not something
beside this, I wouldn't feel that it was much
worth while to work.  No, I would rather have
Emil like you than like them.  I felt that as soon
as you came."
 
     "I wonder why you feel like that?" Carl
mused.
 
     "I don't know.  Perhaps I am like Carrie
Jensen, the sister of one of my hired men.  She
had never been out of the cornfields, and a few
years ago she got despondent and said life was
just the same thing over and over, and she
didn't see the use of it.  After she had tried
to kill herself once or twice, her folks got wor-
ried and sent her over to Iowa to visit some
relations.  Ever since she's come back she's
been perfectly cheerful, and she says she's con-
tented to live and work in a world that's so big
and interesting.  She said that anything as big
as the bridges over the Platte and the Missouri
reconciled her.  And it's what goes on in the
world that reconciles me."
 
 
 
                     V
 
 
     Alexandra did not find time to go to her
neighbor's the next day, nor the next.  It was a
busy season on the farm, with the corn-plowing
going on, and even Emil was in the field with a
team and cultivator.  Carl went about over the
farms with Alexandra in the morning, and in
the afternoon and evening they found a great
deal to talk about.  Emil, for all his track prac-
tice, did not stand up under farmwork very
well, and by night he was too tired to talk or
even to practise on his cornet.
 
     On Wednesday morning Carl got up before it
was light, and stole downstairs and out of the
kitchen door just as old Ivar was making his
morning ablutions at the pump.  Carl nodded
to him and hurried up the draw, past the gar-
den, and into the pasture where the milking
cows used to be kept.
 
     The dawn in the east looked like the light
from some great fire that was burning under
the edge of the world.  The color was reflected
in the globules of dew that sheathed the short
gray pasture grass.  Carl walked rapidly until
he came to the crest of the second hill, where
the Bergson pasture joined the one that had
belonged to his father.  There he sat down and
waited for the sun to rise.  It was just there
that he and Alexandra used to do their milking
together, he on his side of the fence, she on hers.
He could remember exactly how she looked
when she came over the close-cropped grass,
her skirts pinned up, her head bare, a bright
tin pail in either hand, and the milky light of the
early morning all about her.  Even as a boy he
used to feel, when he saw her coming with her
free step, her upright head and calm shoulders,
that she looked as if she had walked straight
out of the morning itself.  Since then, when he
had happened to see the sun come up in the
country or on the water, he had often remem-
bered the young Swedish girl and her milking
pails.
 
     Carl sat musing until the sun leaped above
the prairie, and in the grass about him all the
small creatures of day began to tune their tiny
instruments.  Birds and insects without num-
ber began to chirp, to twitter, to snap and
whistle, to make all manner of fresh shrill
noises.  The pasture was flooded with light;
every clump of ironweed and snow-on-the-
mountain threw a long shadow, and the golden
light seemed to be rippling through the curly
grass like the tide racing in.
 
     He crossed the fence into the pasture that
was now the Shabatas' and continued his walk
toward the pond.  He had not gone far, how-
ever, when he discovered that he was not the
only person abroad.  In the draw below, his gun
in his hands, was Emil, advancing cautiously,
with a young woman beside him.  They were
moving softly, keeping close together, and
Carl knew that they expected to find ducks on
the pond.  At the moment when they came in
sight of the bright spot of water, he heard a
whirr of wings and the ducks shot up into the
air.  There was a sharp crack from the gun, and
five of the birds fell to the ground.  Emil and his
companion laughed delightedly, and Emil ran
to pick them up.  When he came back, dangling
the ducks by their feet, Marie held her apron
and he dropped them into it.  As she stood
looking down at them, her face changed.  She
took up one of the birds, a rumpled ball of
feathers with the blood dripping slowly from its
mouth, and looked at the live color that still
burned on its plumage.
 
     As she let it fall, she cried in distress, "Oh,
Emil, why did you?"
 
     "I like that!" the boy exclaimed indignantly.
"Why, Marie, you asked me to come yourself."
 
     ":Yes, yes, I know," she said tearfully, "but I
didn't think.  I hate to see them when they are
first shot.  They were having such a good time,
and we've spoiled it all for them."
 
     Emil gave a rather sore laugh.  "I should say
we had!  I'm not going hunting with you any
more.  You're as bad as Ivar.  Here, let me
take them."  He snatched the ducks out of her
apron.
 
     "Don't be cross, Emil.  Only--Ivar's right
about wild things.  They're too happy to kill.
You can tell just how they felt when they flew
up.  They were scared, but they didn't really
think anything could hurt them.  No, we won't
do that any more."
 
     "All right," Emil assented.  "I'm sorry I
made you feel bad."  As he looked down into
her tearful eyes, there was a curious, sharp
young bitterness in his own.
 
     Carl watched them as they moved slowly
down the draw.  They had not seen him at all.
He had not overheard much of their dialogue,
but he felt the import of it.  It made him, some-
how, unreasonably mournful to find two young
things abroad in the pasture in the early morn-
ing.  He decided that he needed his breakfast.
 
 
 
                     VI
 
 
     At dinner that day Alexandra said she
thought they must really manage to go over to
the Shabatas' that afternoon.  "It's not often I
let three days go by without seeing Marie.  She
will think I have forsaken her, now that my old
friend has come back."
 
     After the men had gone back to work, Alex-
andra put on a white dress and her sun-hat, and
she and Carl set forth across the fields.  "You
see we have kept up the old path, Carl.  It has
been so nice for me to feel that there was a
friend at the other end of it again."
 
     Carl smiled a little ruefully.  "All the same, I
hope it hasn't been QUITE the same."
 
     Alexandra looked at him with surprise.
"Why, no, of course not.  Not the same.  She
could not very well take your place, if that's
what you mean.  I'm friendly with all my
neighbors, I hope.  But Marie is really a com-
panion, some one I can talk to quite frankly.
You wouldn't want me to be more lonely than
I have been, would you?"
 
     Carl laughed and pushed back the triangular
lock of hair with the edge of his hat.  "Of course
I don't.  I ought to be thankful that this path
hasn't been worn by--well, by friends with
more pressing errands than your little Bohe-
mian is likely to have."  He paused to give
Alexandra his hand as she stepped over the stile.
"Are you the least bit disappointed in our com-
ing together again?" he asked abruptly.  "Is it
the way you hoped it would be?"
 
     Alexandra smiled at this.  "Only better.
When I've thought about your coming, I've
sometimes been a little afraid of it.  You have
lived where things move so fast, and every-
thing is slow here; the people slowest of all.  Our
lives are like the years, all made up of weather
and crops and cows.  How you hated cows!"
She shook her head and laughed to herself.
 
     "I didn't when we milked together.  I
walked up to the pasture corners this morning.
I wonder whether I shall ever be able to tell you
all that I was thinking about up there.  It's a
strange thing, Alexandra; I find it easy to be
frank with you about everything under the sun
except--yourself!"

 
     "You are afraid of hurting my feelings, per-
haps."  Alexandra looked at him thoughtfully.
 
     "No, I'm afraid of giving you a shock.
You've seen yourself for so long in the dull
minds of the people about you, that if I were to
tell you how you seem to me, it would startle
you.  But you must see that you astonish me.
You must feel when people admire you."
 
     Alexandra blushed and laughed with some
confusion.  "I felt that you were pleased with
me, if you mean that."
 
     "And you've felt when other people were
pleased with you?" he insisted.
 
     "Well, sometimes.  The men in town, at the
banks and the county offices, seem glad to see
me.  I think, myself, it is more pleasant to
do business with people who are clean and
healthy-looking," she admitted blandly.
 
     Carl gave a little chuckle as he opened the
Shabatas' gate for her.  "Oh, do you?" he
asked dryly.
 
     There was no sign of life about the Shabatas'
house except a big yellow cat, sunning itself on
the kitchen doorstep.
 
     Alexandra took the path that led to the
orchard.  "She often sits there and sews.  I
didn't telephone her we were coming, because I
didn't her to go to work and bake cake
and freeze ice-cream.  She'll always make a
party if you give her the least excuse.  Do you
recognize the apple trees, Carl?"
 
     Linstrum looked about him.  "I wish I had a
dollar for every bucket of water I've carried for
those trees.  Poor father, he was an easy man,
but he was perfectly merciless when it came to
watering the orchard."
 
     "That's one thing I like about Germans;
they make an orchard grow if they can't make
anything else.  I'm so glad these trees belong to
some one who takes comfort in them.  When I
rented this place, the tenants never kept the
orchard up, and Emil and I used to come over
and take care of it ourselves.  It needs mowing
now.  There she is, down in the corner.  Ma-
ria-a-a!" she called.
 
     A recumbent figure started up from the grass
and came running toward them through the
flickering screen of light and shade.
 
     "Look at her!  Isn't she like a little brown
rabbit?" Alexandra laughed.
 
     Maria ran up panting and threw her arms
about Alexandra.  "Oh, I had begun to think
you were not coming at all, maybe.  I knew you
were so busy.  Yes, Emil told me about Mr.
Linstrum being here.  Won't you come up to
the house?"
 
     "Why not sit down there in your corner?
Carl wants to see the orchard.  He kept all
these trees alive for years, watering them with
his own back."
 
     Marie turned to Carl.  "Then I'm thankful
to you, Mr. Linstrum.  We'd never have bought
the place if it hadn't been for this orchard, and
then I wouldn't have had Alexandra, either."
She gave Alexandra's arm a little squeeze as
she walked beside her.  "How nice your dress
smells, Alexandra; you put rosemary leaves in
your chest, like I told you."
 
     She led them to the northwest corner of the
orchard, sheltered on one side by a thick mul-
berry hedge and bordered on the other by a
wheatfield, just beginning to yellow.  In this
corner the ground dipped a little, and the blue-
grass, which the weeds had driven out in the
upper part of the orchard, grew thick and luxu-
riant.  Wild roses were flaming in the tufts of
bunchgrass along the fence.  Under a white
mulberry tree there was an old wagon-seat.
Beside it lay a book and a workbasket.
 
     "You must have the seat, Alexandra.  The
grass would stain your dress," the hostess in-
sisted.  She dropped down on the ground at
Alexandra's side and tucked her feet under her.
Carl sat at a little distance from the two wo-
men, his back to the wheatfield, and watched
them.  Alexandra took off her shade-hat and
threw it on the ground.  Marie picked it up and
played with the white ribbons, twisting them
about her brown fingers as she talked.  They
made a pretty picture in the strong sunlight,
the leafy pattern surrounding them like a net;
the Swedish woman so white and gold, kindly
and amused, but armored in calm, and the alert
brown one, her full lips parted, points of yel-
low light dancing in her eyes as she laughed
and chattered.  Carl had never forgotten little
Marie Tovesky's eyes, and he was glad to have
an opportunity to study them.  The brown
iris, he found, was curiously slashed with yel-
low, the color of sunflower honey, or of old
amber.  In each eye one of these streaks must
have been larger than the others, for the effect
was that of two dancing points of light, two
little yellow bubbles, such as rise in a glass of
champagne.  Sometimes they seemed like the
sparks from a forge.  She seemed so easily ex-
cited, to kindle with a fierce little flame if one
but breathed upon her.  "What a waste," Carl
reflected.  "She ought to be doing all that for
a sweetheart.  How awkwardly things come
about!"
 
     It was not very long before Marie sprang up
out of the grass again.  "Wait a moment.  I
want to show you something."  She ran away
and disappeared behind the low-growing apple
trees.
 
     "What a charming creature," Carl mur-
mured.  "I don't wonder that her husband is
jealous.  But can't she walk? does she always
run?"
 
     Alexandra nodded.  "Always.  I don't see
many people, but I don't believe there are many
like her, anywhere."
 
     Marie came back with a branch she had
broken from an apricot tree, laden with pale-
yellow, pink-cheeked fruit.  She dropped it be-
side Carl.  "Did you plant those, too?  They are
such beautiful little trees."
 
     Carl fingered the blue-green leaves, porous
like blotting-paper and shaped like birch
leaves, hung on waxen red stems.  "Yes, I
think I did.  Are these the circus trees, Alex-
andra?"
 
     "Shall I tell her about them?" Alexandra
asked.  "Sit down like a good girl, Marie, and
don't ruin my poor hat, and I'll tell you a story.
A long time ago, when Carl and I were, say,
sixteen and twelve, a circus came to Hanover
and we went to town in our wagon, with Lou
and Oscar, to see the parade.  We hadn't
money enough to go to the circus.  We followed
the parade out to the circus grounds and hung
around until the show began and the crowd
went inside the tent.  Then Lou was afraid we
looked foolish standing outside in the pasture,
so we went back to Hanover feeling very sad.
There was a man in the streets selling apricots,
and we had never seen any before.  He had
driven down from somewhere up in the French
country, and he was selling them twenty-five
cents a peck.  We had a little money our fathers
had given us for candy, and I bought two pecks
and Carl bought one.  They cheered us a good
deal, and we saved all the seeds and planted
them.  Up to the time Carl went away, they
hadn't borne at all."
 
     "And now he's come back to eat them,"
cried Marie, nodding at Carl.  "That IS a good
story.  I can remember you a little, Mr. Lin-
strum.  I used to see you in Hanover some-
times, when Uncle Joe took me to town.  I re-
member you because you were always buying
pencils and tubes of paint at the drug store.
Once, when my uncle left me at the store, you
drew a lot of little birds and flowers for me on a
piece of wrapping-paper.  I kept them for a long
while.  I thought you were very romantic be-
cause you could draw and had such black eyes."
 
     Carl smiled.  "Yes, I remember that time.
Your uncle bought you some kind of a mechani-
cal toy, a Turkish lady sitting on an ottoman
and smoking a hookah, wasn't it?  And she
turned her head backwards and forwards."
 
     "Oh, yes!  Wasn't she splendid!  I knew well
enough I ought not to tell Uncle Joe I wanted
it, for he had just come back from the saloon
and was feeling good.  You remember how he
laughed?  She tickled him, too.  But when we
got home, my aunt scolded him for buying toys
when she needed so many things.  We wound
our lady up every night, and when she began to
move her head my aunt used to laugh as hard as
any of us.  It was a music-box, you know, and
the Turkish lady played a tune while she
smoked.  That was how she made you feel so
jolly.  As I remember her, she was lovely, and
had a gold crescent on her turban."
 
     Half an hour later, as they were leaving the
house, Carl and Alexandra were met in the path
by a strapping fellow in overalls and a blue
shirt.  He was breathing hard, as if he had been
running, and was muttering to himself.
 
     Marie ran forward, and, taking him by the
arm, gave him a little push toward her guests.
"Frank, this is Mr. Linstrum."
 
     Frank took off his broad straw hat and nod-
ded to Alexandra.  When he spoke to Carl, he
showed a fine set of white teeth.  He was
burned a dull red down to his neckband, and
there was a heavy three-days' stubble on his
face.  Even in his agitation he was handsome,
but he looked a rash and violent man.
 
     Barely saluting the callers, he turned at once
to his wife and began, in an outraged tone, "I
have to leave my team to drive the old woman
Hiller's hogs out-a my wheat.  I go to take dat
old woman to de court if she ain't careful, I tell
you!"
 
     His wife spoke soothingly.  "But, Frank, she
has only her lame boy to help her.  She does the
best she can."
 
     Alexandra looked at the excited man and
offered a suggestion.  "Why don't you go over
there some afternoon and hog-tight her fences?
You'd save time for yourself in the end."
 
     Frank's neck stiffened.  "Not-a-much, I
won't.  I keep my hogs home.  Other peoples
can do like me.  See?  If that Louis can mend
shoes, he can mend fence."
 
     "Maybe," said Alexandra placidly; "but
I've found it sometimes pays to mend other
people's fences.  Good-bye, Marie.  Come to
see me soon."
 
     Alexandra walked firmly down the path and
Carl followed her.
 
     Frank went into the house and threw himself
on the sofa, his face to the wall, his clenched fist
on his hip.  Marie, having seen her guests off,
came in and put her hand coaxingly on his
shoulder.
 
     "Poor Frank!  You've run until you've made
your head ache, now haven't you?  Let me
make you some coffee."
 
     "What else am I to do?" he cried hotly in
Bohemian.  "Am I to let any old woman's hogs
root up my wheat?  Is that what I work myself
to death for?"
 
     "Don't worry about it, Frank.  I'll speak to
Mrs. Hiller again.  But, really, she almost cried
last time they got out, she was so sorry."
 
     Frank bounced over on his other side.
"That's it; you always side with them against
me.  They all know it.  Anybody here feels free
to borrow the mower and break it, or turn their
hogs in on me.  They know you won't care!"
 
     Marie hurried away to make his coffee.
When she came back, he was fast asleep.  She
sat down and looked at him for a long while,
very thoughtfully.  When the kitchen clock
struck six she went out to get supper, closing
the door gently behind her.  She was always
sorry for Frank when he worked himself into
one of these rages, and she was sorry to have
him rough and quarrelsome with his neighbors.
She was perfectly aware that the neighbors had
a good deal to put up with, and that they bore
with Frank for her sake.
 
 
 
                     VII
 
 
     Marie's father, Albert Tovesky, was one
of the more intelligent Bohemians who came
West in the early seventies.  He settled in
Omaha and became a leader and adviser among
his people there.  Marie was his youngest child,
by a second wife, and was the apple of his
eye.  She was barely sixteen, and was in the
graduating class of the Omaha High School,
when Frank Shabata arrived from the old coun-
try and set all the Bohemian girls in a flutter.
He was easily the buck of the beer-gardens,
and on Sunday he was a sight to see, with his
silk hat and tucked shirt and blue frock-coat,
wearing gloves and carrying a little wisp of a
yellow cane.  He was tall and fair, with splendid
teeth and close-cropped yellow curls, and he
wore a slightly disdainful expression, proper for
a young man with high connections, whose
mother had a big farm in the Elbe valley.  There
was often an interesting discontent in his blue
eyes, and every Bohemian girl he met imagined
herself the cause of that unsatisfied expression.
He had a way of drawing out his cambric hand-
kerchief slowly, by one corner, from his breast-
pocket, that was melancholy and romantic in
the extreme.  He took a little flight with each of
the more eligible Bohemian girls, but it was
when he was with little Marie Tovesky that he
drew his handkerchief out most slowly, and,
after he had lit a fresh cigar, dropped the match
most despairingly.  Any one could see, with
half an eye, that his proud heart was bleeding
for somebody.
 
     One Sunday, late in the summer after Marie's
graduation, she met Frank at a Bohemian pic-
nic down the river and went rowing with him all
the afternoon.  When she got home that even-
ing she went straight to her father's room and
told him that she was engaged to Shabata.  Old
Tovesky was having a comfortable pipe before
he went to bed.  When he heard his daughter's
announcement, he first prudently corked his
beer bottle and then leaped to his feet and had
a turn of temper.  He characterized Frank
Shabata by a Bohemian expression which is the
equivalent of stuffed shirt.
 
     "Why don't he go to work like the rest of us
did?  His farm in the Elbe valley, indeed!
Ain't he got plenty brothers and sisters?  It's
his mother's farm, and why don't he stay
at home and help her?  Haven't I seen his
mother out in the morning at five o'clock with
her ladle and her big bucket on wheels, putting
liquid manure on the cabbages?  Don't I know
the look of old Eva Shabata's hands?  Like an
old horse's hoofs they are--and this fellow
wearing gloves and rings!  Engaged, indeed!
You aren't fit to be out of school, and that's
what's the matter with you.  I will send you
off to the Sisters of the Sacred Heart in St.
Louis, and they will teach you some sense,
~I~ guess!"
 
     Accordingly, the very next week, Albert
Tovesky took his daughter, pale and tearful,
down the river to the convent.  But the way to
make Frank want anything was to tell him he
couldn't have it.  He managed to have an in-
terview with Marie before she went away, and
whereas he had been only half in love with her
before, he now persuaded himself that he would
not stop at anything.  Marie took with her to
the convent, under the canvas lining of her
trunk, the results of a laborious and satisfying
morning on Frank's part; no less than a dozen
photographs of himself, taken in a dozen differ-
ent love-lorn attitudes.  There was a little round
photograph for her watch-case, photographs
for her wall and dresser, and even long nar-
row ones to be used as bookmarks.  More than
once the handsome gentleman was torn to
pieces before the French class by an indignant
nun.
 
     Marie pined in the convent for a year, until her
eighteenth birthday was passed.  Then she met
Frank Shabata in the Union Station in St. Louis
and ran away with him.  Old Tovesky forgave his
daughter because there was nothing else to do,
and bought her a farm in the country that she
had loved so well as a child.  Since then her
story had been a part of the history of the
Divide.  She and Frank had been living there
for five years when Carl Linstrum came back to
pay his long deferred visit to Alexandra.  Frank
had, on the whole, done better than one might
have expected.  He had flung himself at the
soil with savage energy.  Once a year he went
to Hastings or to Omaha, on a spree.  He
stayed away for a week or two, and then
came home and worked like a demon.  He did
work; if he felt sorry for himself, that was his
own affair.
 
 
 
                     VIII
 
 
     On the evening of the day of Alexandra's call
at the Shabatas', a heavy rain set in.  Frank sat
up until a late hour reading the Sunday newspa-
pers.  One of the Goulds was getting a divorce,
and Frank took it as a personal affront.  In
printing the story of the young man's mar-
ital troubles, the knowing editor gave a suffi-
ciently colored account of his career, stating
the amount of his income and the manner in
which he was supposed to spend it.  Frank read
English slowly, and the more he read about this
divorce case, the angrier he grew.  At last he
threw down the page with a snort.  He turned
to his farm-hand who was reading the other half
of the paper.
 
     "By God! if I have that young feller in de
hayfield once, I show him someting.  Listen
here what he do wit his money."  And Frank
began the catalogue of the young man's reputed
extravagances.
 
     Marie sighed.  She thought it hard that the
Goulds, for whom she had nothing but good
will, should make her so much trouble.  She
hated to see the Sunday newspapers come into
the house.  Frank was always reading about the
doings of rich people and feeling outraged.  He
had an inexhaustible stock of stories about their
crimes and follies, how they bribed the courts
and shot down their butlers with impunity
whenever they chose.  Frank and Lou Bergson
had very similar ideas, and they were two of the
political agitators of the county.
 
     The next morning broke clear and brilliant,
but Frank said the ground was too wet to
plough, so he took the cart and drove over to
Sainte-Agnes to spend the day at Moses Mar-
cel's saloon.  After he was gone, Marie went out
to the back porch to begin her butter-making.  A
brisk wind had come up and was driving puffy
white clouds across the sky.  The orchard was
sparkling and rippling in the sun.  Marie stood
looking toward it wistfully, her hand on the lid
of the churn, when she heard a sharp ring in the
air, the merry sound of the whetstone on the
scythe.  That invitation decided her.  She ran
into the house, put on a short skirt and a pair of
her husband's boots, caught up a tin pail and
started for the orchard.  Emil had already be-
gun work and was mowing vigorously.  When he
saw her coming, he stopped and wiped his brow.
His yellow canvas leggings and khaki trousers
were splashed to the knees.
 
     "Don't let me disturb you, Emil.  I'm going
to pick cherries.  Isn't everything beautiful
after the rain?  Oh, but I'm glad to get this
place mowed!  When I heard it raining in the
night, I thought maybe you would come and
do it for me to-day.  The wind wakened me.
Didn't it blow dreadfully?  Just smell the wild
roses!  They are always so spicy after a rain.
We never had so many of them in here before.
I suppose it's the wet season.  Will you have to
cut them, too?"
 
     "If I cut the grass, I will," Emil said teas-
ingly.  "What's the matter with you?  What
makes you so flighty?"
 
     "Am I flighty?  I suppose that's the wet sea-
son, too, then.  It's exciting to see everything
growing so fast,--and to get the grass cut!
Please leave the roses till last, if you must cut
them.  Oh, I don't mean all of them, I mean
that low place down by my tree, where there
are so many.  Aren't you splashed!  Look at
the spider-webs all over the grass.  Good-bye.
I'll call you if I see a snake."
 
     She tripped away and Emil stood looking
after her.  In a few moments he heard the cher-
ries dropping smartly into the pail, and he
began to swing his scythe with that long, even
stroke that few American boys ever learn.
Marie picked cherries and sang softly to herself,
stripping one glittering branch after another,
shivering when she caught a shower of rain-
drops on her neck and hair.  And Emil mowed
his way slowly down toward the cherry trees.
 
     That summer the rains had been so many
and opportune that it was almost more than
Shabata and his man could do to keep up with
the corn; the orchard was a neglected wilder-
ness.  All sorts of weeds and herbs and flowers
had grown up there; splotches of wild larkspur,
pale green-and-white spikes of hoarhound,
plantations of wild cotton, tangles of foxtail
and wild wheat.  South of the apricot trees, cor-
nering on the wheatfield, was Frank's alfalfa,
where myriads of white and yellow butterflies
were always fluttering above the purple blos-
soms.  When Emil reached the lower corner by
the hedge, Marie was sitting under her white
mulberry tree, the pailful of cherries beside her,
looking off at the gentle, tireless swelling of the
wheat.
 
     "Emil," she said suddenly--he was mowing
quietly about under the tree so as not to disturb
her--"what religion did the Swedes have away
back, before they were Christians?"
 
     Emil paused and straightened his back.  "I
don't know.  About like the Germans', wasn't it?"
 
     Marie went on as if she had not heard him.
"The Bohemians, you know, were tree wor-
shipers before the missionaries came.  Father
says the people in the mountains still do queer
things, sometimes,--they believe that trees
bring good or bad luck."
 
     Emil looked superior.  "Do they?  Well,
which are the lucky trees?  I'd like to know."
 
     "I don't know all of them, but I know
lindens are.  The old people in the mountains
plant lindens to purify the forest, and to do
away with the spells that come from the old
trees they say have lasted from heathen times.
I'm a good Catholic, but I think I could get
along with caring for trees, if I hadn't anything
else."
 
     "That's a poor saying," said Emil, stooping
over to wipe his hands in the wet grass.
 
     "Why is it?  If I feel that way, I feel that
way.  I like trees because they seem more
resigned to the way they have to live than
other things do.  I feel as if this tree knows
everything I ever think of when I sit here.
When I come back to it, I never have to re-
mind it of anything; I begin just where I left
off."
 
     Emil had nothing to say to this.  He reached
up among the branches and began to pick the
sweet, insipid fruit,--long ivory-colored ber-
ries, tipped with faint pink, like white coral,
that fall to the ground unheeded all summer
through.  He dropped a handful into her lap.
 
     "Do you like Mr. Linstrum?" Marie asked
suddenly.
 
     "Yes.  Don't you?"
 
     "Oh, ever so much; only he seems kind of
staid and school-teachery.  But, of course, he is
older than Frank, even.  I'm sure I don't want
to live to be more than thirty, do you?  Do you
think Alexandra likes him very much?"
 
     "I suppose so.  They were old friends."
 
     "Oh, Emil, you know what I mean!"  Marie
tossed her head impatiently.  "Does she really
care about him?  When she used to tell me
about him, I always wondered whether she
wasn't a little in love with him."
 
     "Who, Alexandra?"  Emil laughed and
thrust his hands into his trousers pockets.
"Alexandra's never been in love, you crazy!"
He laughed again.  "She wouldn't know how
to go about it.  The idea!"
 
     Marie shrugged her shoulders.  "Oh, you
don't know Alexandra as well as you think
you do!  If you had any eyes, you would see
that she is very fond of him.  It would serve
you all right if she walked off with Carl.  I like
him because he appreciates her more than you
do."
 
     Emil frowned.  "What are you talking about,
Marie?  Alexandra's all right.  She and I have
always been good friends.  What more do you
want?  I like to talk to Carl about New York
and what a fellow can do there."
 
     "Oh, Emil!  Surely you are not thinking of
going off there?"
 
     "Why not?  I must go somewhere, mustn't
I?"  The young man took up his scythe and
leaned on it.  "Would you rather I went off in
the sand hills and lived like Ivar?"
 
     Marie's face fell under his brooding gaze.  She
looked down at his wet leggings.  "I'm sure
Alexandra hopes you will stay on here," she
murmured.
 
     "Then Alexandra will be disappointed," the
young man said roughly.  "What do I want to
hang around here for?  Alexandra can run the
farm all right, without me.  I don't want to
stand around and look on.  I want to be doing
something on my own account."
 
     "That's so," Marie sighed.  "There are so
many, many things you can do.  Almost any-
thing you choose."
 
     "And there are so many, many things I can't
do."  Emil echoed her tone sarcastically.  "Some-
times I don't want to do anything at all, and
sometimes I want to pull the four corners of
the Divide together,"--he threw out his arm
and brought it back with a jerk,--"so, like a
table-cloth.  I get tired of seeing men and horses
going up and down, up and down."
 
     Marie looked up at his defiant figure and her
face clouded.  "I wish you weren't so restless,
and didn't get so worked up over things," she
said sadly.
 
     "Thank you," he returned shortly.
 
     She sighed despondently.  "Everything I say
makes you cross, don't it?  And you never used
to be cross to me."
 
     Emil took a step nearer and stood frowning
down at her bent head.  He stood in an attitude
of self-defense, his feet well apart, his hands
clenched and drawn up at his sides, so that the
cords stood out on his bare arms.  "I can't play
with you like a little boy any more," he said
slowly.  "That's what you miss, Marie.  You'll
have to get some other little boy to play with."
He stopped and took a deep breath.  Then he
went on in a low tone, so intense that it was
almost threatening: "Sometimes you seem to
understand perfectly, and then sometimes you
pretend you don't.  You don't help things any
by pretending.  It's then that I want to pull
the corners of the Divide together.  If you
WON'T understand, you know, I could make you!"
 
     Marie clasped her hands and started up from
her seat.  She had grown very pale and her eyes
were shining with excitement and distress.
"But, Emil, if I understand, then all our good
times are over, we can never do nice things to-
gether any more.  We shall have to behave like
Mr. Linstrum.  And, anyhow, there's nothing
to understand!"  She struck the ground with
her little foot fiercely.  "That won't last.  It
will go away, and things will be just as they
used to.  I wish you were a Catholic.  The
Church helps people, indeed it does.  I pray for
you, but that's not the same as if you prayed
yourself."
 
     She spoke rapidly and pleadingly, looked
entreatingly into his face.  Emil stood defiant,
gazing down at her.
 
     "I can't pray to have the things I want," he
said slowly, "and I won't pray not to have
them, not if I'm damned for it."
 
     Marie turned away, wringing her hands.
"Oh, Emil, you won't try!  Then all our good
times are over."
 
     "Yes; over.  I never expect to have any
more."
 
     Emil gripped the hand-holds of his scythe
and began to mow.  Marie took up her cherries
and went slowly toward the house, crying
bitterly.
 
 
 
                     IX
 
 
     On Sunday afternoon, a month after Carl
Linstrum's arrival, he rode with Emil up into
the French country to attend a Catholic fair.
He sat for most of the afternoon in the base-
ment of the church, where the fair was held,
talking to Marie Shabata, or strolled about the
gravel terrace, thrown up on the hillside in
front of the basement doors, where the French
boys were jumping and wrestling and throwing
the discus.  Some of the boys were in their
white baseball suits; they had just come up
from a Sunday practice game down in the ball-
grounds.  Amedee, the newly married, Emil's
best friend, was their pitcher, renowned among
the country towns for his dash and skill.
Amedee was a little fellow, a year younger than
Emil and much more boyish in appearance;
very lithe and active and neatly made, with a
clear brown and white skin, and flashing white
teeth.  The Sainte-Agnes boys were to play the
Hastings nine in a fortnight, and Amedee's
lightning balls were the hope of his team.  The
little Frenchman seemed to get every ounce
there was in him behind the ball as it left his
hand.
 
     "You'd have made the battery at the Univer-
sity for sure, 'Medee," Emil said as they were
walking from the ball-grounds back to the
church on the hill.  "You're pitching better
than you did in the spring."
 
     Amedee grinned.  "Sure!  A married man
don't lose his head no more."  He slapped Emil
on the back as he caught step with him.  "Oh,
Emil, you wanna get married right off quick!
It's the greatest thing ever!"
 
     Emil laughed.  "How am I going to get mar-
ried without any girl?"
 
     Amedee took his arm.  "Pooh!  There are
plenty girls will have you.  You wanna get some
nice French girl, now.  She treat you well;
always be jolly.  See,"--he began checking off
on his fingers,--"there is Severine, and
Alphosen, and Josephine, and Hectorine, and
Louise, and Malvina--why, I could love any
of them girls!  Why don't you get after them?
Are you stuck up, Emil, or is anything the
matter with you?  I never did know a boy
twenty-two years old before that didn't have
no girl.  You wanna be a priest, maybe?  Not-a
for me!"  Amedee swaggered.  "I bring many
good Catholics into this world, I hope, and
that's a way I help the Church."
 
     Emil looked down and patted him on the
shoulder.  "Now you're windy, 'Medee.  You
Frenchies like to brag."
 
     But Amedee had the zeal of the newly mar-
ried, and he was not to be lightly shaken off.
"Honest and true, Emil, don't you want ANY
girl?  Maybe there's some young lady in Lin-
coln, now, very grand,"--Amedee waved his
hand languidly before his face to denote the
fan of heartless beauty,--"and you lost your
heart up there.  Is that it?"
 
     "Maybe," said Emil.
 
     But Amedee saw no appropriate glow in his
friend's face.  "Bah!" he exclaimed in disgust.
"I tell all the French girls to keep 'way from
you.  You gotta rock in there," thumping Emil
on the ribs.
 
     When they reached the terrace at the side of
the church, Amedee, who was excited by his
success on the ball-grounds, challenged Emil
to a jumping-match, though he knew he would
be beaten.  They belted themselves up, and
Raoul Marcel, the choir tenor and Father
Duchesne's pet, and Jean Bordelau, held the
string over which they vaulted.  All the
French boys stood round, cheering and hump-
ing themselves up when Emil or Amedee went
over the wire, as if they were helping in the lift.
Emil stopped at five-feet-five, declaring that
he would spoil his appetite for supper if he
jumped any more.
 
     Angelique, Amedee's pretty bride, as blonde
and fair as her name, who had come out to
watch the match, tossed her head at Emil and
said:--
 
     "'Medee could jump much higher than you
if he were as tall.  And anyhow, he is much more
graceful.  He goes over like a bird, and you
have to hump yourself all up."
 
     "Oh, I do, do I?"  Emil caught her and
kissed her saucy mouth squarely, while she
laughed and struggled and called, "'Medee!
'Medee!"
 
     "There, you see your 'Medee isn't even big
enough to get you away from me.  I could run
away with you right now and he could only sit
down and cry about it.  I'll show you whether
I have to hump myself!"  Laughing and pant-
ing, he picked Angelique up in his arms and
began running about the rectangle with her.
Not until he saw Marie Shabata's tiger eyes
flashing from the gloom of the basement door-
way did he hand the disheveled bride over
to her husband.  "There, go to your graceful;
I haven't the heart to take you away from
him."
 
     Angelique clung to her husband and made
faces at Emil over the white shoulder of
Amedee's ball-shirt.  Emil was greatly amused
at her air of proprietorship and at Amedee's
shameless submission to it.  He was delighted
with his friend's good fortune.  He liked to see
and to think about Amedee's sunny, natural,
happy love.
 
     He and Amedee had ridden and wrestled and
larked together since they were lads of twelve.
On Sundays and holidays they were always
arm in arm.  It seemed strange that now he
should have to hide the thing that Amedee was
so proud of, that the feeling which gave one of
them such happiness should bring the other
such despair.  It was like that when Alexandra
tested her seed-corn in the spring, he mused.
From two ears that had grown side by side, the
grains of one shot up joyfully into the light,
projecting themselves into the future, and the
grains from the other lay still in the earth and
rotted; and nobody knew why.
 
 
 
                     X
 
 
     While Emil and Carl were amusing them-
selves at the fair, Alexandra was at home, busy
with her account-books, which had been ne-
glected of late.  She was almost through with
her figures when she heard a cart drive up to the
gate, and looking out of the window she saw her
two older brothers.  They had seemed to avoid
her ever since Carl Linstrum's arrival, four
weeks ago that day, and she hurried to the
door to welcome them.  She saw at once that
they had come with some very definite purpose.
They followed her stiffly into the sitting-room.
Oscar sat down, but Lou walked over to the
window and remained standing, his hands be-
hind him.
 
     "You are by yourself?" he asked, looking
toward the doorway into the parlor.
 
     "Yes.  Carl and Emil went up to the Catho-
lic fair."
 
     For a few moments neither of the men spoke.
 
     Then Lou came out sharply.  "How soon
does he intend to go away from here?"
 
     "I don't know, Lou.  Not for some time, I
hope."  Alexandra spoke in an even, quiet tone
that often exasperated her brothers.  They felt
that she was trying to be superior with them.
 
     Oscar spoke up grimly.  "We thought we
ought to tell you that people have begun to
talk," he said meaningly.
 
     Alexandra looked at him.  "What about?"
 
     Oscar met her eyes blankly.  "About you,
keeping him here so long.  It looks bad for him
to be hanging on to a woman this way.  People
think you're getting taken in."
 
     Alexandra shut her account-book firmly.
"Boys," she said seriously, "don't let's go on
with this.  We won't come out anywhere.  I
can't take advice on such a matter.  I know you
mean well, but you must not feel responsible for
me in things of this sort.  If we go on with this
talk it will only make hard feeling."
 
     Lou whipped about from the window.  "You
ought to think a little about your family.
You're making us all ridiculous."
 
     "How am I?"
 
     "People are beginning to say you want to
marry the fellow."
 
     "Well, and what is ridiculous about that?"
 
     Lou and Oscar exchanged outraged looks.
"Alexandra!  Can't you see he's just a tramp
and he's after your money?  He wants to be
taken care of, he does!"
 
     "Well, suppose I want to take care of him?
Whose business is it but my own?"
 
     "Don't you know he'd get hold of your property?"
 
     "He'd get hold of what I wished to give him, certainly."
 
     Oscar sat up suddenly and Lou clutched at
his bristly hair.
 
     "Give him?" Lou shouted.  "Our property,
our homestead?"
 
     "I don't know about the homestead," said
Alexandra quietly.  "I know you and Oscar
have always expected that it would be left to
your children, and I'm not sure but what
you're right.  But I'll do exactly as I please
with the rest of my land, boys."
 
     "The rest of your land!" cried Lou, growing
more excited every minute.  "Didn't all the
land come out of the homestead?  It was bought
with money borrowed on the homestead, and
Oscar and me worked ourselves to the bone
paying interest on it."
 
     "Yes, you paid the interest.  But when you
married we made a division of the land, and you
were satisfied.  I've made more on my farms
since I've been alone than when we all worked
together."
 
     "Everything you've made has come out of
the original land that us boys worked for,
hasn't it?  The farms and all that comes out of
them belongs to us as a family."
 
     Alexandra waved her hand impatiently.
"Come now, Lou.  Stick to the facts.  You are
talking nonsense.  Go to the county clerk and
ask him who owns my land, and whether my
titles are good."
 
     Lou turned to his brother.  "This is what
comes of letting a woman meddle in business,"
he said bitterly.  "We ought to have taken
things in our own hands years ago.  But she
liked to run things, and we humored her.  We
thought you had good sense, Alexandra.  We
never thought you'd do anything foolish."
 
     Alexandra rapped impatiently on her desk
with her knuckles.  "Listen, Lou.  Don't talk
wild.  You say you ought to have taken things
into your own hands years ago.  I suppose you
mean before you left home.  But how could you
take hold of what wasn't there?  I've got most
of what I have now since we divided the prop-
erty; I've built it up myself, and it has nothing
to do with you."
 
     Oscar spoke up solemnly.  "The property of a
family really belongs to the men of the family,
no matter about the title.  If anything goes
wrong, it's the men that are held responsible."
 
     "Yes, of course," Lou broke in.  "Everybody
knows that.  Oscar and me have always been
easy-going and we've never made any fuss.
We were willing you should hold the land and
have the good of it, but you got no right to
part with any of it.  We worked in the fields
to pay for the first land you bought, and what-
ever's come out of it has got to be kept in the
family."
 
     Oscar reinforced his brother, his mind fixed
on the one point he could see.  "The property
of a family belongs to the men of the family,
because they are held responsible, and because
they do the work."
 
     Alexandra looked from one to the other, her
eyes full of indignation.  She had been impa-
tient before, but now she was beginning to feel
angry.  "And what about my work?" she asked
in an unsteady voice.
 
     Lou looked at the carpet.  "Oh, now, Alex-
andra, you always took it pretty easy!  Of
course we wanted you to.  You liked to manage
round, and we always humored you.  We realize
you were a great deal of help to us.  There's no
woman anywhere around that knows as much
about business as you do, and we've always
been proud of that, and thought you were
pretty smart.  But, of course, the real work
always fell on us.  Good advice is all right, but
it don't get the weeds out of the corn."
 
     "Maybe not, but it sometimes puts in the
crop, and it sometimes keeps the fields for corn
to grow in," said Alexandra dryly.  "Why,
Lou, I can remember when you and Oscar
wanted to sell this homestead and all the im-
provements to old preacher Ericson for two
thousand dollars.  If I'd consented, you'd have
gone down to the river and scraped along on
poor farms for the rest of your lives.  When I
put in our first field of alfalfa you both opposed
me, just because I first heard about it from a
young man who had been to the University.
You said I was being taken in then, and all the
neighbors said so.  You know as well as I do
that alfalfa has been the salvation of this coun-
try.  You all laughed at me when I said our
land here was about ready for wheat, and I had
to raise three big wheat crops before the neigh-
bors quit putting all their land in corn.  Why, I
remember you cried, Lou, when we put in the
first big wheat-planting, and said everybody
was laughing at us."
 
     Lou turned to Oscar.  "That's the woman of
it; if she tells you to put in a crop, she thinks
she's put it in.  It makes women conceited to
meddle in business.  I shouldn't think you'd
want to remind us how hard you were on us,
Alexandra, after the way you baby Emil."
 
     "Hard on you?  I never meant to be hard.
Conditions were hard.  Maybe I would never
have been very soft, anyhow; but I certainly
didn't choose to be the kind of girl I was.  If
you take even a vine and cut it back again and
again, it grows hard, like a tree."
 
     Lou felt that they were wandering from the
point, and that in digression Alexandra might
unnerve him.  He wiped his forehead with a
jerk of his handkerchief.  "We never doubted
you, Alexandra.  We never questioned any-
thing you did.  You've always had your own
way.  But you can't expect us to sit like stumps
and see you done out of the property by any
loafer who happens along, and making yourself
ridiculous into the bargain."
 
     Oscar rose.  "Yes," he broke in, "every-
body's laughing to see you get took in; at your
age, too.  Everybody knows he's nearly five
years younger than you, and is after your
money.  Why, Alexandra, you are forty years old!"
 
     "All that doesn't concern anybody but Carl
and me.  Go to town and ask your lawyers what
you can do to restrain me from disposing of my
own property.  And I advise you to do what
they tell you; for the authority you can exert
by law is the only influence you will ever have
over me again."  Alexandra rose.  "I think I
would rather not have lived to find out what I
have to-day," she said quietly, closing her desk.
 
     Lou and Oscar looked at each other ques-
tioningly.  There seemed to be nothing to do
but to go, and they walked out.
 
     "You can't do business with women," Oscar
said heavily as he clambered into the cart.
"But anyhow, we've had our say, at last."
 
     Lou scratched his head.  "Talk of that kind
might come too high, you know; but she's apt
to be sensible.  You hadn't ought to said that
about her age, though, Oscar.  I'm afraid that
hurt her feelings; and the worst thing we can do
is to make her sore at us.  She'd marry him out
of contrariness."
 
     "I only meant," said Oscar, "that she is old
enough to know better, and she is.  If she was
going to marry, she ought to done it long ago,
and not go making a fool of herself now."
 
     Lou looked anxious, nevertheless.  "Of
course," he reflected hopefully and incon-
sistently, "Alexandra ain't much like other
women-folks.  Maybe it won't make her sore.
Maybe she'd as soon be forty as not!"
 
 
 
                     XI
 
 
     Emil came home at about half-past seven
o'clock that evening.  Old Ivar met him at the
windmill and took his horse, and the young man
went directly into the house.  He called to his
sister and she answered from her bedroom,
behind the sitting-room, saying that she was
lying down.
 
     Emil went to her door.
 
     "Can I see you for a minute?" he asked.  "I
want to talk to you about something before
Carl comes."
 
     Alexandra rose quickly and came to the door.
"Where is Carl?"
 
     "Lou and Oscar met us and said they wanted
to talk to him, so he rode over to Oscar's with
them.  Are you coming out?" Emil asked
impatiently.
 
     "Yes, sit down.  I'll be dressed in a mo-
ment."
 
     Alexandra closed her door, and Emil sank
down on the old slat lounge and sat with his
head in his hands.  When his sister came out, he
looked up, not knowing whether the interval
had been short or long, and he was surprised to
see that the room had grown quite dark.  That
was just as well; it would be easier to talk if he
were not under the gaze of those clear, deliber-
ate eyes, that saw so far in some directions and
were so blind in others.  Alexandra, too, was
glad of the dusk.  Her face was swollen from
crying.
 
     Emil started up and then sat down again.
"Alexandra," he said slowly, in his deep young
baritone, "I don't want to go away to law
school this fall.  Let me put it off another year.
I want to take a year off and look around.  It's
awfully easy to rush into a profession you don't
really like, and awfully hard to get out of it.
Linstrum and I have been talking about that."
 
     "Very well, Emil.  Only don't go off looking
for land."  She came up and put her hand on his
shoulder.  "I've been wishing you could stay
with me this winter."
 
     "That's just what I don't want to do, Alex-
andra.  I'm restless.  I want to go to a new place.
I want to go down to the City of Mexico to join
one of the University fellows who's at the head
of an electrical plant.  He wrote me he could
give me a little job, enough to pay my way, and
I could look around and see what I want to do.
I want to go as soon as harvest is over.  I guess
Lou and Oscar will be sore about it."
 
     "I suppose they will."  Alexandra sat down
on the lounge beside him.  "They are very
angry with me, Emil.  We have had a quarrel.
They will not come here again."

 
     Emil scarcely heard what she was saying; he
did not notice the sadness of her tone.  He was
thinking about the reckless life he meant to live
in Mexico.
 
     "What about?" he asked absently.
 
     "About Carl Linstrum.  They are afraid I am
going to marry him, and that some of my
property will get away from them."
 
     Emil shrugged his shoulders.  "What non-
sense!" he murmured.  "Just like them."
 
     Alexandra drew back.  "Why nonsense, Emil?"
 
     "Why, you've never thought of such a thing,
have you?  They always have to have something to
fuss about."
 
     "Emil," said his sister slowly, "you ought
not to take things for granted.  Do you agree
with them that I have no right to change my
way of living?"
 
     Emil looked at the outline of his sister's head
in the dim light.  They were sitting close to-
gether and he somehow felt that she could
hear his thoughts.  He was silent for a mo-
ment, and then said in an embarrassed tone,
"Why, no, certainly not.  You ought to do
whatever you want to.  I'll always back you."
 
     "But it would seem a little bit ridiculous to
you if I married Carl?"
 
     Emil fidgeted.  The issue seemed to him too
far-fetched to warrant discussion.  "Why, no.
I should be surprised if you wanted to.  I can't
see exactly why.  But that's none of my busi-
ness.  You ought to do as you please.  Certainly
you ought not to pay any attention to what the
boys say."
 
     Alexandra sighed.  "I had hoped you might
understand, a little, why I do want to.  But I
suppose that's too much to expect.  I've had a
pretty lonely life, Emil.  Besides Marie, Carl is
the only friend I have ever had."
 
     Emil was awake now; a name in her last sen-
tence roused him.  He put out his hand and
took his sister's awkwardly.  "You ought to do
just as you wish, and I think Carl's a fine fel-
low.  He and I would always get on.  I don't
believe any of the things the boys say about
him, honest I don't.  They are suspicious of him
because he's intelligent.  You know their way.
They've been sore at me ever since you let me
go away to college.  They're always trying to
catch me up.  If I were you, I wouldn't pay
any attention to them.  There's nothing to get
upset about.  Carl's a sensible fellow.  He won't
mind them."
 
     "I don't know.  If they talk to him the way
they did to me, I think he'll go away."
 
     Emil grew more and more uneasy.  "Think
so?  Well, Marie said it would serve us all right
if you walked off with him."
 
     "Did she?  Bless her little heart!  SHE would."
Alexandra's voice broke.
 
     Emil began unlacing his leggings.  "Why
don't you talk to her about it?  There's Carl, I
hear his horse.  I guess I'll go upstairs and get
my boots off.  No, I don't want any supper.  We
had supper at five o'clock, at the fair."
 
     Emil was glad to escape and get to his own
room.  He was a little ashamed for his sister,
though he had tried not to show it.  He felt
that there was something indecorous in her
proposal, and she did seem to him somewhat
ridiculous.  There was trouble enough in the
world, he reflected, as he threw himself upon
his bed, without people who were forty years
old imagining they wanted to get married.  In
the darkness and silence Emil was not likely to
think long about Alexandra.  Every image
slipped away but one.  He had seen Marie in
the crowd that afternoon.  She sold candy at the
fair.  WHY had she ever run away with Frank
Shabata, and how could she go on laughing and
working and taking an interest in things?  Why
did she like so many people, and why had she
seemed pleased when all the French and Bohe-
mian boys, and the priest himself, crowded
round her candy stand?  Why did she care
about any one but him?  Why could he never,
never find the thing he looked for in her playful,
affectionate eyes?
 
     Then he fell to imagining that he looked once
more and found it there, and what it would be
like if she loved him,--she who, as Alexandra
said, could give her whole heart.  In that dream
he could lie for hours, as if in a trance.  His spirit
went out of his body and crossed the fields to
Marie Shabata.
 
     At the University dances the girls had often
looked wonderingly at the tall young Swede
with the fine head, leaning against the wall and
frowning, his arms folded, his eyes fixed on the
ceiling or the floor.  All the girls were a little
afraid of him.  He was distinguished-looking,
and not the jollying kind.  They felt that he was
too intense and preoccupied.  There was some-
thing queer about him.  Emil's fraternity
rather prided itself upon its dances, and some-
times he did his duty and danced every dance.
But whether he was on the floor or brooding in a
corner, he was always thinking about Marie
Shabata.  For two years the storm had been
gathering in him.
 
 
 
                     XII
 
 
     Carl came into the sitting-room while Alex-
andra was lighting the lamp.  She looked up at
him as she adjusted the shade.  His sharp shoul-
ders stooped as if he were very tired, his face
was pale, and there were bluish shadows under
his dark eyes.  His anger had burned itself out
and left him sick and disgusted.
 
     "You have seen Lou and Oscar?" Alexandra
asked.
 
     "Yes."  His eyes avoided hers.
 
     Alexandra took a deep breath.  "And now
you are going away.  I thought so."
 
     Carl threw himself into a chair and pushed
the dark lock back from his forehead with his
white, nervous hand.  "What a hopeless posi-
tion you are in, Alexandra!" he exclaimed
feverishly.  "It is your fate to be always sur-
rounded by little men.  And I am no better than
the rest.  I am too little to face the criticism of
even such men as Lou and Oscar.  Yes, I am
going away; to-morrow.  I cannot even ask you
to give me a promise until I have something to
offer you.  I thought, perhaps, I could do that;
but I find I can't."
 
     "What good comes of offering people things
they don't need?" Alexandra asked sadly.  "I
don't need money.  But I have needed you for a
great many years.  I wonder why I have been
permitted to prosper, if it is only to take my
friends away from me."
 
     "I don't deceive myself," Carl said frankly.
"I know that I am going away on my own
account.  I must make the usual effort.  I must
have something to show for myself.  To take
what you would give me, I should have to be
either a very large man or a very small one,
and I am only in the middle class."
 
     Alexandra sighed.  "I have a feeling that if
you go away, you will not come back.  Some-
thing will happen to one of us, or to both.
People have to snatch at happiness when they
can, in this world.  It is always easier to lose
than to find.  What I have is yours, if you care
enough about me to take it."
 
     Carl rose and looked up at the picture of
John Bergson.  "But I can't, my dear, I can't!
I will go North at once.  Instead of idling about
in California all winter, I shall be getting my
bearings up there.  I won't waste another week.
Be patient with me, Alexandra.  Give me a
year!"
 
     "As you will," said Alexandra wearily.  "All
at once, in a single day, I lose everything; and I
do not know why.  Emil, too, is going away."
Carl was still studying John Bergson's face and
Alexandra's eyes followed his.  "Yes," she said,
"if he could have seen all that would come of the
task he gave me, he would have been sorry.  I
hope he does not see me now.  I hope that he is
among the old people of his blood and country,
and that tidings do not reach him from the
New World."


End of Part II
