

 

 

Chapter VIII

 

 

"But," she added, as they started to walk, "we will never know

which one spoke first."

 

But Condy was already worrying.

 

"I don't know, I don't know!" he murmured anxiously.  "Perhaps

we've done an awful thing.  Suppose they aren't happy together

after they're married? I wish we hadn't; I wish we hadn't now.

We've been playing a game of checkers with human souls.  We've an

awful responsibility.  Suppose he kills her some time?"

 

"Fiddlesticks, Condy! And, besides, if we've done wrong with our

matrimonial objects, we've offset it by doing well with our red-

headed coincidence.  How do you know, you may have 'foiled a

villain' with that telegram--prevented a crime?"

 

Condy grinned at the recollection of the incident.

 

"'Fly at once,'" he repeated.  "I guess he's flying yet.  'All is

discovered.' I'd give a dollar and a half--"

 

"If you had it?"

 

"Oh, well, if I had it--to know just what it was we have

discovered."

 

Suddenly Blix caught his arm.

 

"Condy, here they come!"

 

"Who? Who?"

 

"Our objects, Captain Jack and K. D. B."

 

"Of course, of course.  They couldn't stay. The restaurant shuts

up at eight "

 

Blix and Condy had been walking slowly in the direction of Pacific

Street, and K. D. B. and her escort soon overtook them going in

the same direction.  As they passed, the captain was saying:

 

"--jumped on my hatches, and says we'll make it an international

affair.  That didn't--"

 

A passing wagon drowned the sound of his voice.

 

"He was telling her of his adventures!" cried Blix.  "Splendid!

Othello and Desdemona.  They're getting on."

 

"Let's follow them!" exclaimed Condy.

 

"Should we? Wouldn't it be indiscreet?"

 

"No.  We are the arbiters of their fate; we MUST take an

interest."

 

They allowed their objects to get ahead some half a block and then

fell in behind.  There was little danger of their being detected.

The captain and K. D. B. were absorbed in each other.  She had

even taken his arm.

 

"They make a fine-looking couple, really," said Blix.  "Where do

you suppose they are going? To another restaurant?"

 

But this was not the case.  Blix and Condy followed them as far as

Washington Square, where the Geodetic Survey stone stands, and the

enormous flagstaff; and there in front of a commonplace little

house, two doors above the Russian church with its minarets like

inverted balloons K. D. B. and the captain halted.  For a few

moments they conversed in low tones at the gate, then said good-

night, K. D. B. entering the house, the captain bowing with great

deference, his hat in his hand.  Then he turned about, glanced

once or twice at the house, set his hat at an angle, and

disappeared across the square, whistling a tune, his chin in the

air.

 

"Very good, excellent, highly respectable," approved Blix; and

Condy himself fetched a sigh of relief.

 

"Yes, yes, it might have been worse."

 

"We'll never see them again, our 'Matrimonial Objects,'" said

Blix, "and they'll never know about us; but we have brought them

together.  We've started a romance.  Yes, I think we've done a

good day's work.  And now, Condy, I think we had best be thinking

of home ourselves.  I'm just beginning to get most awfully sleepy.

What a day we've had!"

 

A sea fog, or rather THE sea fog--San Francisco's old and

inseparable companion--had gathered by the time they reached the

top of the Washington Street hill.  Everything was wet with it.

The asphalt was like varnished ebony.  Indistinct masses and huge

dim shadows stood for the houses on either side.  From the

eucalyptus trees and the palms the water dripped like rain.  Far

off oceanward, the fog-horn was lowing like a lost gigantic bull.

The gray bulk of a policeman--the light from the street lamp

reflected in his star--loomed up on the corner as they descended

from the car.

 

*    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

 

Condy had intended to call his diver's story "A Submarine

Romance," but Blix had disapproved.

 

"It's too 'Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea,'" she had said.

"You want something much more dignified.  There is that about you,

Condy, you like to be too showy; you don't know when to stop.  But

you have left off red-and-white scarfs, and I am very glad to see

you wearing white shirt-fronts instead of pink ones."

 

"Yes, yes, I thought it would be quieter," he had answered, as

though the idea had come from him.  Blix allowed him to think so.

 

But "A Victory Over Death," as the story was finally called, was a

success.  Condy was too much of a born story-teller not to know

when he had done something distinctly good.  When the story came

back from the typewriter's, with the additional strength that

print lends to fiction, and he had read it over, he could not

repress a sense of jubilation.  The story rang true.

 

"Bully, bully!" he muttered between his teeth as he finished the

last paragraph.  "It's a corker! If it's rejected everywhere, it's

an out-of-sight yarn just the same."

 

And there Condy's enthusiasm in the matter began to dwindle.  The

fine fire which had sustained him during the story s composition

had died out.  He was satisfied with his work.  He had written a

good story, and that was the end of it.  No doubt he would send it

East--to the Centennial Company--to-morrow or the day after--some

time that week.  To mail the manuscript meant quite half an hour's

effort.  He would have to buy stamps for return postage; a letter

would have to be written, a large envelope procured, the accurate

address ascertained.  For the moment his supplement work demanded

his attention.  He put off sending the story from day to day.  His

interest in it had abated.  And for that matter he soon discovered

he had other things to think of.

 

It had been easy to promise Blix that he would no longer gamble at

his club with the other men of his acquaintance; but it was "death

and the devil," as he told himself, to abide by that promise.

More than once in the fortnight following upon his resolution he

had come up to the little flat on the Washington Street hill as to

a place of refuge; and Blix, always pretending that it was all a

huge joke and part of their good times, had brought out the cards

and played with him.  But she knew very well the fight he was

making against the enemy, and how hard it was for him to keep from

the round green tables and group of silent shirt-sleeved men in

the card-rooms of his club.  She looked forward to the time when

Condy would cease to play even with her.  But she was too sensible

and practical a girl to expect him to break a habit of years'

standing in a couple of weeks.  The thing would have to be

accomplished little by little.  At times she had misgivings as to

the honesty of the course she had adopted.  But nowadays, playing

as he did with her only, Condy gambled but two or three evenings

in the week, and then not for more than two hours at a time.

Heretofore hardly an evening that had not seen him at the round

table in his club's card-room, whence he had not risen until long

after midnight.

 

Condy had told young Sargeant that he had "reformed" in the matter

of gambling, and intended to swear off for a few months.

Sargeant, like the thoroughbred he was, never urged him to play

after that, and never spoke of the previous night's game when

Condy was about.  The other men of his "set" were no less

thoughtful, and, though they rallied him a little at first upon

his defection, soon let the matter drop.  Condy told himself that

there were plenty of good people in the world, after all.  Every

one seemed conspiring to make it easy for him, and he swore at

himself for a weak-kneed cad.

 

On a certain Tuesday, about a week after the fishing excursion and

the affair of the "Matrimonial Objects," toward half-past six in

the evening, Condy was in his room, dressing for a dinner

engagement.  Young Sargeant's sister had invited him to be one of

a party who were to dine at the University Club, and later on fill

a box at a charity play, given by amateurs at one of the downtown

theatres.  But as he was washing his linen shirt-studs with his

tooth-brush his eye fell upon a note, in Laurie Flagg's hand-

writing, that lay on his writing-desk, and that he had received

some ten days previous.  Condy turned cold upon the instant,

hurled the tooth-brush across the room, and dropped into a chair

with a groan of despair.  Miss Flagg was giving a theatre party

for the same affair, and he remembered now that he had promised to

join her party as well, forgetting all about the engagement he had

made with Miss Sargeant.  It was impossible at this late hour to

accept either one of the young women's invitations without

offending the other.

 

"Well, I won't go to EITHER, that's all," he vociferated aloud to

the opposite wall.  "I'll send 'em each a wire, and say that I'm

sick or have got to go down to the office, and--and, by George!

I'll go up and see Blix, and we'll read and make things to eat."

 

And no sooner had this alternative occurred to him than it

appeared too fascinating to be resisted.  A weight seemed removed

from his mind.  When it came to that, what amusement would he have

at either affair?

 

"Sit up there with your shirt-front starched like a board," he

blustered, "and your collar throttling you, and smile till your

face is sore, and reel off small talk to a girl whose last name

you can't remember! Do I have any fun, does it do me any good, do

I get ideas for yarns? What do I do it for? I don't know."

 

While speaking he had been kicking off his tight shoes and such of

his full dress as he had already put on, and with a feeling of

enormous relief turned again to his sack suit of tweed.  "Lord,

these feel better!" he exclaimed, as he substituted the loose

business suit for the formal rigidity of his evening dress.  It

was with a sensation of positive luxury that he put on a "soft"

shirt of blue cheviot and his tan walking-shoes.

 

"But no more red scarfs," he declared, as he knotted his black

satin "club" before the mirror.  "She WAS right there." He put his

cigarettes in his pocket, caught up his gloves and stick, clapped

on his hat, and started for the Bessemers' flat with a feeling of

joyous expectancy he had not known for days.

 

Evidently Blix had seen him coming, for she opened the door

herself; and it suited her humor for the moment to treat him as a

peddler or book-agent.

 

"No, no," she said airily, her head in the air as she held the

door.  "No, we don't want any to-day.  We HAVE the biography of

Abraham Lincoln.  Don't want to subscribe to any Home Book of Art.

We're not artistic; we use drapes in our parlors.  Don't want 'The

Wives and Mothers of Great Men.'"

 

But Condy had noticed a couple of young women on the lower steps

of the adjacent flat, quite within ear-shot, and at once he began

in a loud, harsh voice:

 

"Well, y' know, we can't wait for our rent forever; I'm only the

collector, and I've nothing to do with repairs.  Pay your rent

that's three months overdue, and then--

 

But Blix pulled him within the house and clapped to the door.

 

"Condy RIVERS!" she exclaimed, her cheeks flaming, "those are our

neighbors.  They heard every word.  What do you suppose they

think?"

 

"Huh! I'd rather have 'em think I was a rent-collector than a

book-agent.  You began it.  'Evenin', Miss Lady."

 

"'Evenin', Mister Man."

 

But Condy's visit, begun thus gayly, soon developed along much

more serious lines.  After supper, while the light still lasted,

Blix read stories to him while he smoked cigarettes in the bay

window of the dining-room.  But as soon as the light began to go

she put the book aside, and the two took their accustomed places

in the window, and watched the evening burning itself out over the

Golden Gate.

 

It was just warm enough to have one of the windows opened, and for

a long time after the dusk they sat listening to the vague clamor

of the city, lapsing by degrees, till it settled into a measured,

soothing murmur, like the breathing of some vast monster asleep.

Condy's cigarette was a mere red point in the half-darkness.  The

smoke drifted out of the open window in long, blue strata.  At his

elbow Blix was leaning forward, looking down upon the darkening,

drowsing city, her round, strong chin propped upon her hand. She

was just close enough for Candy to catch the sweet, delicious

feminine perfume that came indefinitely from her clothes, her

hair, her neck.  From where Condy sat he could see the silhouette

of her head and shoulders against the dull golden blur of the open

window; her round, high forehead, with the thick yellow hair

rolling back from her temples and ears, her pink, clean cheeks,

her little dark-brown, scintillating eyes, and her firm red mouth,

made all the firmer by the position of her chin upon her hand.  As

ever, her round, strong neck was swathed high and tight in white

satin; but between the topmost fold of the satin and the rose of

one small ear-lobe was a little triangle of white skin, that was

partly her neck and partly her cheek, and that Condy knew should

be softer than down, smoother than satin, warm and sweet and

redolent as new apples.  Condy imagined himself having the right

to lean toward her there and kiss that little spot upon her neck

or her cheek; and as he fancied it, was surprised to find his

breath come suddenly quick, and a barely perceptible qualm, as of

a certain faintness, thrill him to his finger-tips; and then, he

thought, how would it be if he could, without fear of rebuff,

reach out his arm and put it about her trim, firm waist, and draw

her very close to him, till he should feel the satiny coolness of

her smooth cheek against his; till he could sink his face in the

delicious, fragrant confusion of her hair, then turn that face to

his--that face with its strong, calm mouth and sweet, full lips--

the face of this dear young girl of nineteen, and then--

 

"I say--I--shall we--let's read again.  Let's--let's do

something."

 

"Condy, how you frightened me!" exclaimed Blix, with a great

start.  "No, listen: I want to talk to you, to tell you something.

Papum and I have been having some very long and serious talks

since you were last here.  What do you think, I may go away."

 

"The deuce you say!" exclaimed Condy, sitting suddenly upright.

"Where to, in Heaven's name?" he added--"and when? and what for?"

 

"To New York, to study medicine."

 

There was a silence; then Condy exclaimed, waving his hands at

her:

 

"Oh, go right on! Don't mind me.  Little thing like going to New

York--to study medicine.  Of course, that happens every day, a

mere detail.  I presume you'll go back and forth for your meals?"

 

Then Blix began to explain.  It appeared that she had two aunts,

both sisters of her father--one a widow, the other unmarried.  The

widow, a certain Mrs. Kihm, lived in New York, and was wealthy,

and had views on "women's sphere of usefulness." The other, Miss

Bessemer, a little old maid of fifty, Condy had on rare occasions

seen at the flat, where every one called her Aunt Dodd.  She lived

in that vague region of the city known as the Mission, where she

owned a little property.

 

From what Blix told him that evening, Condy learned that Mrs. Kihm

had visited the coast a few winters previous and had taken a great

fancy to Blix.  Even then she had proposed to Mr. Bessemer to take

Blix back to New York with her, and educate her to some woman's

profession; but at that time the old man would not listen to it.

Now it seemed that the opportunity had again presented itself.

 

"She's a dear old lady," Blix said; "not a bit strong-minded, as

you would think, and ever so much cleverer than most men.  She

manages all her property herself.  For the last month she's been

writing again to Papum for me to come on and stay with her three,

or four years.  She hasn't a chick nor a child, and she don't

entertain or go out any, so maybe she feels lonesome.  Of course

if I studied there, Papum wouldn't think of Aunt Kihm--don't you

know--paying for it all.  I wouldn't go if it was that way.  But I

could stay with her and she could make a home for me while I was

there--if I should study--anything--study medicine."

 

"But why!" he exclaimed.  "What do you want to study to be a

doctor for? It isn't as though you had to support yourself."

 

"I know, I know I've not got to support myself.  But why shouldn't

I have a profession just like a man--just like you, Condy? You

stop and think.  It seemed strange to me when I first thought of

it; but I got thinking about it and talking it over with Papum,

and I should LOVE it.  I'd do it, not because I would have to do

it, but because it would interest me.  Condy, you know that I'm

not a bit strong-minded, and that I hate a masculine, unfeminine

girl as much as you do."

 

"But a medical college, Blix! You don't know what you are talking

about."

 

"Yes, I do.  There's a college in New York just for women.  Aunt

Kihm sent me the prospectus, and it's one of the best in the

country.  I don't dream of practicing, you know; at least, I don't

think about that now.  But one must have some occupation; and

isn't studying medicine, Condy, better than piano-playing, or

French courses, or literary classes and Browning circles? Oh, I've

no patience with that kind of girl! And look at the chance I have

now; and Aunt Kihm is such a dear! Think, she writes, I could go

to and from the college in her coupe every day, and I would see

New York; and just being in a big city like that is an education."

 

"You're right, it would be a big thing for you," assented Condy,

"and I like the idea of you studying something.  It would be the

making of such a girl as you, Blix."

 

And then Blix, seeing him thus acquiescent, said:

 

"Well, it's all settled; Papum and I both wrote last night."

 

"When are you going?"

 

"The first week in January."

 

"Well, that's not so AWFULLY soon.  But who will take your place

here? However in the world would your father get along without

you--and Snooky and Howard?"

 

"Aunt Dodd is going to come."

 

"Sudden enough," said Condy, "but it IS a great thing for you,

Blix, and I'm mighty glad for you.  Your future is all cut out for

you now.  Of course your aunt, if she's so fond of you and hasn't

any children, will leave you everything--maybe settle something on

you right away; and you'll marry some one of those New York chaps,

and be great big people before you know it."

 

"The idea, Condy!" she protested.  "No; I'm going there to study

medicine.  Oh, you don't know how enthusiastic I am over the idea!

I've bought some of the first-year books already, and have been

reading them.  Really, Condy, they are even better than 'Many

Inventions.'"

 

"Wish I could get East," muttered Condy gloomily.  Blix forgot her

own good fortune upon the instant.

 

"I do so wish you COULD, Condy!" she exclaimed.  "You are too good

for a Sunday supplement. I know it and YOU know it, and I've heard

ever so many people who have read your stories say the same thing.

You could spend twenty years working as you are now, and at the

end what would you be? Just an assistant editor of a Sunday

supplement, and still in the same place; and worse, you'd come to

be contented with that, and think you were only good for that and

nothing better.  You've got it in you, Condy, to be a great story-

teller.  I believe in you, and I've every confidence in you.  But

just so long as you stay here and are willing to do hack work,

just so long you will be a hack writer.  You must break from it;

you MUST get away.  I know you have a good time here; but there

are so many things better than that and more worth while.  You

ought to make up your mind to get East, and work for that and

nothing else.  I know you want to go, but wanting isn't enough.

Enthusiasm without energy isn't enough.  You have enthusiasm,

Condy; but you MUST have energy.  You must be willing to give up

things; you must make up your mind that you will go East, and then

set your teeth together and do it.  Oh, I LOVE a man that can do

that--make up his mind to a thing and then put it through!"

 

Condy watched her as she talked, her brown-black eyes coruscating,

her cheeks glowing, her small hands curled into round pink fists.

 

"Blix, you're splendid!" he exclaimed; "you're fine! You could put

life into a dead man.  You're the kind of girl that are the making

of men.  By Jove, you'd back a man up, wouldn't you? You'd stand

by him till the last ditch.  Of course," he went on after a pause--

"of course I ought to go to New York.  But, Blix, suppose I went--

well, then what? It isn't as though I had any income of my own,

or rich aunt.  Suppose I didn't find something to do--and the

chances are that I wouldn't for three or four months--what would I

live on in the meanwhile? 'What would the robin do then, poor

thing?' I'm a poor young man, Miss Bessemer, and I've got to eat.

No; my only chance is 'to be discovered' by a magazine or a

publishing house or somebody, and get a bid of some kind."

 

"Well, there is the Centennial Company.  They have taken an

interest in you, Condy.  You must follow that right up and keep

your name before them all the time.  Have you sent them 'A Victory

Over Death' yet?"

 

Condy sat down to his eggs and coffee the next morning in the

hotel, harried with a certain sense of depression and

disappointment for which he could assign no cause.  Nothing seemed

to interest him.  The newspaper was dull.  He could look forward

to no pleasure in his day's work; and what was the matter with the

sun that morning? As he walked down to the office he noted no

cloud in the sky, but the brightness was gone from the day.  He

sat down to his desk and attacked his work, but "copy" would not

come.  The sporting editor and his inane jokes harassed him beyond

expression.  Just the sight of the clipping editor's back was an

irritation.  The office boy was a mere incentive to profanity.

There was no spring in Condy that morning, no elasticity, none of

his natural buoyancy.  As the day wore on, his ennui increased;

his luncheon at the club was tasteless, tobacco had lost its

charm.  He ordered a cocktail in the wine-room, and put it aside

with a wry face.

 

The afternoon was one long tedium.  At every hour he flung his

pencil down, utterly unable to formulate the next sentence of his

article, and, his hands in his pockets, gazed gloomily out of the

window over the wilderness of roofs--grimy, dirty, ugly roofs that

spread out below.  He craved diversion, amusement, excitement.

Something there was that he wanted with all his heart and soul;

yet he was quite unable to say what it was.  Something was gone

from him to-day that he had possessed yesterday, and he knew he

would not regain it on the morrow, nor the next day, nor the day

after that.  What was it? He could not say.  For half an hour he

imagined he was going to be sick.  His mother was not to be at

home that evening, and Condy dined at his club in the hopes of

finding some one with whom he could go to the theatre later on in

the evening.  Sargeant joined him over his coffee and cigarette,

but declined to go with him to the theatre.

 

"Another game on to-night?" asked Condy.

 

"I suppose so," admitted the other.

 

"I guess I'll join you to-night," said Condy. "I've had the blue

devils since morning, and I've got to have something to drive them

off."

 

"Don't let me urge you, you know," returned Sargeant.

 

"Oh, that's all right!" Condy assured him.  "My time's about up,

anyways."

 

An hour later, just as he, Sargeant, and the other men of their

"set" were in the act of going upstairs to the card-rooms, a hall-

boy gave Condy a note, at that moment brought by a messenger, who

was waiting for an answer.  It was from Blix.  She wrote:

 

 

"Don't you want to come up and play cards with me to-night? We

haven't had a game in over a week?"

 

 

"How did she know?" thought Condy to himself--"how could she

tell?" Aloud, he said:

 

"I can't join you fellows, after all.  'Despatch from the managing

editor.' Some special detail or other."

 

For the first time since the previous evening Condy felt his

spirits rise as he set off toward the Washington Street hill.  But

though he and Blix spent as merry an evening as they remembered in

a long time, his nameless, formless irritation returned upon him

almost as soon as he had bidden her good-night.  It stayed with

him all through the week, and told upon his work.  As a result,

three of his articles were thrown out by the editor.

 

"We can't run such rot as that in the paper," the chief had said.

"Can't you give us a story?"

 

"Oh, I've got a kind of a yarn you can run if you like," answered

Condy, his week's depression at its very lowest.

 

"A Victory Over Death" was published in the following Sunday's

supplement of the "Times," with illustrations by one of the staff

artists.  It attracted not the least attention.

 

Just before he went to bed the Sunday evening of its appearance,

Condy read it over again for the last time.

 

"It's a rotten failure," he muttered gloomily as he cast the paper

from him.  "Simple drivel.  I wonder what Blix will think of it.

I wonder if I amount to a hill of beans.  I wonder WHAT she wants

to go East for, anyway."

