
 

 

Chapter VI

 

 

The next day was Saturday, and Blix had planned a walk out to the

Presidio.  But at breakfast, while she was debating whether she

should take with her Howard and Snooky, or "Many Inventions," she

received a note from Condy, sent by special messenger:

 

 

"'All our fun is spoiled,' he wrote.  'I've got ptomaine poisoning

from eating the creamed oysters last night, and am in for a solid

fortnight spent in bed.  Have passed a horrible night.  Can't you

look in at the hotel this afternoon? My mother will be here at the

time.'"

 

 

"Ptomaine poisoning!" The name had an ugly sound, and Condy's use

of the term inferred the doctor's visit.  Blix decided that she

would put off her walk until the afternoon, and call on Mrs.

Rivers at once, and ask how Condy did.

 

She got away from the flat about ten o'clock, but on the steps

outside met Condy dressed as if for bicycling, and smoking a

cigarette.

 

"I've got eleven dollars!" he announced cheerily.

 

"But I thought it was ptomaine poisoning!" she cried with sudden

vexation.

 

"Pshaw! that's what the doctor says.  He's a flapdoodle; nothing

but a kind of a sort of a pain.  It's all gone now.  I'm as fit as

a fiddle--and I've got eleven dollars.  Let's go somewhere and do

something."

 

"But your work?"

 

"They don't expect me.  When I thought I was going to be sick, I

telephoned the office, and they said all right, that they didn't

need me.  Now I've got eleven dollars, and there are three

holidays of perfect weather before us: to-day, to-morrow, and

Monday.  What will we do? What must we do to be saved? Our

matrimonial objects don't materialize till Monday night.  In the

meanwhile, what? Shall we go down to Chinatown--to the restaurant,

or to the water-front again? Maybe the mate on the whaleback would

invite us to lunch.  Or," added Condy, his eye caught by a fresh-

fish peddler who had just turned into the street, "we can go

fishing."

 

"For oysters, perhaps."

 

But the idea had caught Condy's fancy.

 

"Blix!" he exclaimed, "let's go fishing."

 

"Where?"

 

"I don't know.  Where DO people fish around here? Where there's

water, I presume."

 

"No, is it possible?" she asked with deep concern.  "I thought

they fished in their back yards, or in their front parlors

perhaps."

 

"Oh, you be quiet! you're all the time guying me," he answered.

"Let me think--let me think," he went on, frowning heavily,

scouring at his hair.  Suddenly he slapped a thigh.

 

"Come on," he cried, "I've an idea!" He was already half-way down

the steps, when Blix called him back.

 

"Leave it all to me," he assured her; "trust me IMPLICITLY.  Don't

you want to go?" he demanded with abrupt disappointment.

 

"Want to!" she exclaimed.  "Why, it would be the very best kind of

fun, but--"

 

"Well, then, come along."

 

They took a downtown car.

 

"I've got a couple of split bamboo rods," he explained as the car

slid down the terrific grade of the Washington-Street hill.  "I

haven't used 'em in years--not since we lived East; but they're

hand-made, and are tip-top.  I haven't any other kind of tackle;

but it's just as well, because the tackle will all depend upon

where we are going to fish."

 

"Where's that?"

 

"Don't know yet; am going down now to find out."

 

He took her down to the principal dealer in sporting goods on

Market Street.  It was a delicious world, whose atmosphere and

charm were not to be resisted.  There were shot-guns in rows,

their gray barrels looking like so many organ-pipes; sheaves of

fishing-rods, from the four-ounce whisp of the brook-trout up to

the rigid eighteen-ounce lance of the king-salmon and sea-bass;

showcases of wicked revolvers, swelling by calibres into the

thirty-eight and forty-four man-killers of the plainsmen and

Arizona cavalry; hunting knives and dirks, and the slender steel

whips of the fencers; files of Winchesters, sleeping quietly in

their racks, waiting patiently for the signal to speak the one

grim word they knew; swarms of artificial flies of every

conceivable shade, brown, gray, black, gray-brown, gray-black,

with here and there a brisk vermilion note; coils of line, from

the thickness of a pencil, spun to hold the sullen plunges of a

jew-fish off the Catalina Islands, down to the sea-green gossamers

that a vigorous fingerling might snap; hooks, snells, guts,

leaders, gaffs, cartridges, shells, and all the entrancing

munitions of the sportsman, that savored of lonely canons, deer-

licks, mountain streams, quail uplands, and the still reaches of

inlet and marsh grounds, gray and cool in the early autumn dawn.

 

Condy and Blix got the attention of a clerk, and Condy explained.

 

"I want to go fishing--we want to go fishing.  We want some place

where we can go and come in the same day, and we want to catch

fair-sized fish--no minnows."

 

The following half-hour was charming.  Never was there a clerk

more delightful.  It would appear that his one object in life was

that Condy and Blix should catch fish.  The affairs of the nation

stood still while he pondered, suggested, advised, and

deliberated.  He told them where to go, how to get there, what

train to take coming back, and who to ask for when they arrived.

They would have to wait till Monday before going, but could return

long before the fated hour of 7 P.M.

 

"Ask for Richardson," said the clerk; "and here, give him my card.

He'll put you on to the good spots; some places are A-1 to-day,

and to-morrow in the same place you can't kill a single fish."

 

Condy nudged Blix as the Mentor turned away to get his card.

 

"Notice that," he whispered: "KILL a fish.  You don't say 'catch,'

you say 'kill'--technical detail."

 

Then they bought their tackle: a couple of cheap reels, lines,

leaders, sinkers, a book of assorted flies that the delightful

clerk suggested, and a beautiful little tin box painted green, and

stenciled with a gorgeous gold trout upon the lid, in which they

were to keep the pint of salted shrimps to be used as bait in

addition to the flies.  Blix would get these shrimps at a little

market near her home.

 

"But," said the clerk, "you got to get a permit to fish in that

lake.  Have you got a pull with the Water Company? Are you a

stockholder?"

 

Condy's face fell, and Blix gave a little gasp of dismay.  They

looked at each other.  Here was a check, indeed.

 

"Well," said the sublime being in shirt sleeves from behind the

counter, "see what you can do; and if you can't make it, come back

here an' lemmeno, and we'll fix you up in some other place.  But

Lake San Andreas has been bang-up this last week--been some great

kills there; hope to the deuce you can make it."

 

Everything now hinged upon this permit.  It was not until their

expedition had been in doubt that Condy and Blix realized how

alluring had been its prospects.

 

"Oh, I guess you can get a permit," said the clerk soothingly.

"An' if you make any good kills, lemmeno and I'll put it in the

paper.  I'm the editor of the 'Sport-with-Gun-and-Rod' column in

'The Press,'" he added with a flush of pride.

 

Toward the middle of the afternoon Blix, who was waiting at home,

in great suspense, for that very purpose, received another

telegram from Condy:

 

 

"Tension of situation relieved.  Unconditional permission

obtained.  Don't forget the shrimps."

 

 

It had been understood that Condy was to come to the flat on

Sunday afternoon to talk over final arrangements with Blix.  But

as it was, Saturday evening saw him again at the Bessemers.

 

He had been down at his club in the library, writing the last

paragraphs of his diver's story, when, just as he finished,

Sargeant discovered him.

 

"Why, Conny, old man, all alone here? Let's go downstairs and have

a cigar.  Hendricks and George Hands are coming around in half an

hour.  They told me not to let you get away."

 

Condy stirred nervously in his chair.  He knew what that meant.

He had enough money in his pockets to play that night, and in an

instant the enemy was all awake.  The rowel was in his flank

again, and the scourge at his back.  Sargeant stood there, the

well-groomed clubman of thirty; a little cynical perhaps, but a

really good fellow for all that, and undeniably fond of Condy.

But somewhere with the eyes of some second self Condy saw the girl

of nineteen, part child and part woman; saw her goodness, her

fine, sweet feminine strength as it were a dim radiance; "What's a

good man worth, Condy," she had said, "if he's not a strong man?"

 

"I suppose we'll have a game going before midnight," admitted

Sargeant resignedly, smiling good-humoredly nevertheless.

 

Condy set his teeth.  "I'll join you later.  Wait a few moments,"

he said.  He hurried to the office of the club, and sent a

despatch to Blix--the third since morning:

 

 

"Can I come up right away? It's urgent.  Send answer by this

messenger."

 

 

He got his answer within three-quarters of an hour, and left the

club as Hendricks and George Hands arrived by the elevator

entrance.

 

Sitting in the bay window of the dining-room, he told Blix why he

had come.

 

"Oh, you were right!" she told him.  "Always, ALWAYS come, when--

when you feel you must."

 

"It gets so bad sometimes, Blix," he confessed with abject self-

contempt, "that when I can't get some one to play against I'll sit

down and deal dummy hands, and bet on them.  Just the touch of the

cards--just the FEEL of the chips.  Faugh! it's shameful."

 

The day following, Sunday, Condy came to tea as usual; and after

the meal, as soon as the family and Victorine had left the pair

alone in the dining-room, they set about preparing for their

morrow's excursion.  Blix put up their lunch--sandwiches of what

Condy called "devilish" ham, hard-boiled eggs, stuffed olives, and

a bottle of claret.

 

Condy took off his coat and made a great show of stringing the

tackle: winding the lines from the spools on to the reels, and

attaching the sinkers and flies to the leaders, smoking the while,

and scowling fiercely.  He got the lines fearfully and wonderfully

snarled, he caught the hooks in the table-cloth, he lost the

almost invisible gut leaders on the floor and looped the sinkers

on the lines when they should have gone on the leaders.  In the

end Blix had to help him out, disentangling the lines foot by foot

with a patience that seemed to Condy little short of superhuman.

 

At nine o'clock she said decisively:

 

"Do you know what time we must get up in the morning if we are to

have breakfast and get the seven-forty train? Quarter of six by

the latest, and YOU must get up earlier than that, because you're

at the hotel and have further to go.  Come here for breakfast,

and--listen--be here by half-past six--are you LISTENING, Condy?--

and we'll go down to the depot from here.  Don't forget to bring

the rods."

 

"I'll wear my bicycle suit," he said, "and one of those golf

scarfs that wrap around your neck."

 

"No," she declared, "I won't have it.  Wear the oldest clothes

you've got, but look fairly respectable, because we're to go to

Luna's when we get back, remember.  And now go home; you need all

the sleep you can get if you are to get up at six o'clock."

 

Instead of being late, as Blix had feared, Condy was absurdly

ahead of time the next morning.  For a wonder, he had not

forgotten the rods; but he was one tremor of nervousness.  He

would eat no breakfast.

 

"We're going to miss that train," he would announce from time to

time; "I just know it.  Blix, look what time it is.  We ought to

be on the way to the depot now.  Come on; you don't want any more

coffee.  Have you got everything? Did you put the reels in the

lunch-basket?--and the fly-book? Lord, if we should forget the

fly-book!"

 

He managed to get her to the depot over half an hour ahead of

time.  The train had not even backed in, nor the ticket office

opened.

 

"I told you, Condy, I told you," complained Blix, sinking

helplessly upon a bench in the waiting-room.

 

"No--no--no," he answered vaguely, looking nervously about, his

head in the air.  "We're none too soon--have more time to rest

now.  I wonder what track the train leaves from.  I wonder if it

stops at San Bruno.  I wonder how far it is from San Bruno to Lake

San Andreas.  I'm afraid it's going to rain.  Heavens and earth,

Blix, we forgot the shrimps!"

 

"No, NO! Sit down, I've got the shrimps.  Condy, you make me so

nervous I shall scream in a minute."

 

Some three-quarters of an hour later the train had set them down

at San Bruno--nothing more than a road-house, the headquarters for

duck-shooters and fishermen from the city.  However, Blix and

Condy were the only visitors.  Everybody seemed to be especially

nice to them on that wonderful morning.  Even the supercilious

ticket-seller at the San Francisco depot had unbent, and wished

them good luck.  The conductor of the train had shown himself

affable.  The very brakeman had gone out of his way to apprise

them, quite five minutes ahead of time, that "the next stop was

their place." And at San Bruno the proprietor of the road-house

himself hitched up to drive them over to the lake, announcing that

he would call for them at "Richardson's" in time for the evening

train.

 

"And he only asked me four bits for both trips," whispered Condy

to Blix as they jogged along.

 

The country was beautiful.  It was hardly eight o'clock, and the

morning still retained much of the brisk effervescence of the

early dawn.  Great bare, rolling hills of gray-green, thinly

scattered with live-oak, bore back from the road on either hand.

The sky was pale blue.  There was a smell of cows in the air, and

twice they heard an unseen lark singing.  It was very still.  The

old buggy and complacent horse were embalmed in a pungent aroma of

old leather and of stables that was entrancing; and a sweet smell

of grass and sap came to them in occasional long whiffs.  There

was exhilaration in the very thought of being alive on that

odorous, still morning.  The young blood went spanking in the

veins.  Blix's cheeks were ruddy, her little dark-brown eyes

fairly coruscating with pleasure.

 

"Condy, isn't it all splendid?" she suddenly burst out.

 

"I feel regularly bigger," he declared solemnly.  "I could do

anything a morning like this."

 

Then they came to the lake, and to Richardson's, where the farmer

lived who was also the custodian of the lake.  The complacent

horse jogged back, and Condy and Blix set about the serious

business of the day.  Condy had no need to show Richardson the

delightful sporting clerk's card.  The old Yankee--his twang and

dry humor singularly incongruous on that royal morning--was

solicitude itself.  He picked out the best boat on the beach for

them, loaned them his own anchor of railroad iron, indicated

minutely the point on the opposite shore off which the last big

trout had been "killed," and wetted himself to his ankles as he

pushed off the boat.

 

Condy took the oars.  Blix sat in the stern, jointing the rods and

running the lines through the guides.  She even baited the hooks

with the salt shrimp herself, and by nine o'clock they were at

anchor some forty feet off shore, and fishing, according to

Richardson's advice, "a leetle mite off the edge o' the weeds."

 

"If we don't get a bite the whole blessed day," said Condy, as he

paid out his line to the ratchet music of the reel, "we'll have

fun just the same.  Look around--isn't this great?"

 

They were absolutely alone.  The day was young yet.  The lake,

smooth and still as gray silk, widened to the west and south

without so much as a wrinkle to roughen the surface.  Only to the

east, where the sun looked over a shoulder of a higher hill, it

flamed up into a blinding diamond iridescence.  The surrounding

land lay between sky and water, hushed to a Sunday stillness.  Far

off across the lake by Richardson's they heard a dog bark, and the

sound came fine and small and delicate.  At long intervals the

boat stirred with a gentle clap-clapping of the water along its

sides.  From the nearby shore in the growth of manzanita bushes

quail called and clucked comfortably to each other; a bewildered

yellow butterfly danced by over their heads, and slim blue dragon-

flies came and poised on their lines and fishing-rods, bowing

their backs.

 

From his seat in the bow, Condy cast a glance at Blix.  She was

holding her rod in both hands, absorbed, watchful, very intent.

She was as trim as ever, even in the old clothes she had worn for

the occasion.  Her round, strong neck was as usual swathed high

and tight in white, and the huge dog-collar girdled her waist

according to her custom.  She had taken off her hat.  Her yellow

hair rolled back from her round forehead and cool pink cheeks like

a veritable nimbus, and for the fiftieth time Condy remarked the

charming contrast of her small, deep-brown eyes in the midst of

this white satin, yellow hair, white skin, and exquisite pink

cheeks.

 

An hour passed.  Then two.

 

"No fish," murmured Condy, drawing in his line to examine the

bait.  But, as he was fumbling with the flies he was startled by a

sharp exclamation from Blix.

 

"Oh-Condy-I've-got-a-bite!"

 

He looked up just in time to see the tip of her rod twitch,

twitch, twitch.  Then the whole rod arched suddenly, the reel

sang, the line tautened and cut diagonally through the water.

 

"You got him! you got him!" he shouted, palpitating with

excitement.  "And he's a good one!"

 

Blix rose, reeling in as rapidly as was possible, the butt of the

twitching, living rod braced against her belt.  All at once the

rod straightened out again, the strain was released, and the line

began to slant rapidly away from the boat.

 

"He's off!" she cried.

 

"Off, nothing! HE'S GOING TO JUMP.  Look out for him, now!"

 

And then the two watching from the boat, tense and quivering with

the drama of the moment, saw that most inspiriting of sights--the

"break" of a salmon-trout.  Up he went, from a brusque explosion

of ripples and foam--up into the gray of the morning from out the

gray of the water: scales all gleaming, hackles all a-bristle; a

sudden flash of silver, a sweep as of a scimitar in gray smoke,

with a splash, a turmoil, an abrupt burst of troubled sound that

stabbed through the silence of the morning, and in a single

instant dissipated all the placid calm of the previous hours.

 

"Keep the line taut," whispered Condy, gritting his teeth.  "When

he comes toward you, reel him in; an' if he pulls too hard, give

him his head."

 

Blix was breathing fast, her cheeks blazing, her eyes all alight.

 

"Oh," she gasped, "I'm so afraid I'll lose him! Oh, look at that!"

she cried, as the trout darted straight for the bottom, bending

the rod till the tip was submerged.  "Condy, I'll lose him--I know

I shall; you, YOU take the rod!"

 

"Not for a thousand dollars! Steady, there, he's away again! Oh,

talk about SPORT!"

 

Yard by yard Blix reeled in until they began to see the silver

glint of the trout's flanks through the green water.  She brought

him nearer.  Swimming parallel with the boat, he was plainly

visible from his wide-opened mouth--the hook and fly protruding

from his lower jaw--to the red, quivering flanges of the tail.

His sides were faintly speckled, his belly white as chalk.  He was

almost as long as Condy's forearm.

 

"Oh, he's a beauty! Oh, isn't he a beauty!" murmured Condy.  "Now,

careful, careful; bring him up to the boat where I can reach him;

e-easy, Blix.  If he bolts again, let him run."

 

Twice the trout shied from the boat's shadow, and twice, as Blix

gave him his head, the reel sang and hummed like a watch-man's

rattle.  But the third time he came to the surface and turned

slowly on his side, the white belly and one red fin out of the

water, the gills opening and shutting.  He was tired out.  A third

time Blix drew him gently to the boat's side.  Condy reached out

and down into the water till his very shoulder was wet, hooked two

fingers under the distended gills, and with a long, easy movement

of the arm swung him into the boat.

 

Their exultation was that of veritable children.  Condy whooped

like an Apache, throwing his hat into the air; Blix was hardly

articulate, her hands clasped, her hair in disarray, her eyes

swimming with tears of sheer excitement.  They shook each other's

hands; they talked wildly at the same time: they pounded on the

boat's thwarts with their fists; they laughed at their own

absurdity; they looked at the trout again and again, guessed at

his weight, and recalled to each other details of the struggle.

 

"When he broke that time, wasn't it grand?"

 

"And when I first felt him bite! It was so sudden--why, it

actually frightened me.  I never--no, never in my life!" exclaimed

Blix, "was so happy as I am at this moment.  Oh, Condy, to think--

just to THINK!"

 

"Isn't it glory hallelujah?"

 

"Isn't it better than teas, and dancing, and functions?"

 

"Blix--how old are we?"

 

"I don't care how old we are; I think that trout will weigh two

pounds."

 

When they were calm again, they returned to their fishing.  The

morning passed, and it was noon before they were aware of it.  By

half-past twelve Blix had caught three trout, though the first was

by far the heaviest.  Condy had not had so much as a bite.  At one

o'clock they rowed ashore and had lunch under a huge live-oak in a

little amphitheatre of manzanita.

 

Never had a lunch tasted so delicious.  What if the wine was warm

and the stuffed olives oily? What if the pepper for the hard-

boiled eggs had sifted all over the "devilish" ham sandwiches?

What if the eggs themselves had not been sufficiently cooked, and

the corkscrew forgotten? They COULD not be anything else but

inordinately happy, sublimely gay.  Nothing short of actual

tragedy could have marred the joy of that day.

 

But after they were done eating, and Blix had put away the forks

and spoons, and while Condy was stretched upon his back smoking a

cigar, she said to him:

 

"Now, Condy, what do you say to a little game of cards with me?"

 

The cigar dropped from Condy's lips, and he sat suddenly upright,

brushing the fallen leaves from his hair.  Blix had taken a deck

of cards from the lunch-basket, and four rolls of chips wrapped in

tissue paper.  He stared at her in speechless amazement.

 

"What do you say?" she repeated, looking at him and smiling.

 

"Why, Blix!" he exclaimed in amazement, "what do you mean?"

 

"Just what I say.  I want you to play cards with me."

 

"I'll not to do it," he declared, almost coldly.

 

"Listen to me, Condy," answered Blix; and for quite five minutes,

while he interrupted and protested and pshawed and argued, she

talked to him calmly and quietly.

 

"I don't ask you to stop playing, Condy," she said, as she

finished; "I just ask you that when you feel you must play--or--I

mean, when you want to very bad, you will come and play with me,

instead of playing at your club."

 

"But it's absurd, it's preposterous.  I hate to see a girl

gambling--and you of all girls!"

 

"It's no worse for me than it is for you and--well, do you suppose

I would play with any one else? Maybe you think I can't play well

enough to make it interesting for you," she said gayly.  "Is that

it? I can soon show you, Condy Rivers--never mind when I learned

how."

 

"But, Blix, you don't know how often we play, those men and I.

Why, it is almost every--you don't know how often we play."

 

"Condy, whenever you want to play, and will play with ME, no

matter what I've got in hand, I'll stop everything and play with

you."

 

"But why?"

 

"Because I think, Condy, that THIS way perhaps you won't play

quite so often at first; and then little by little perhaps--

perhaps--well, never mind that now.  I want to play; put it that

way.  But I want you to promise me never to play with any one

else--say for six months."

 

And in the end, whipped by a sense of shame, Condy made her the

promise.  They became very gay upon the instant.

 

"Hoh!" exclaimed Condy; "what do YOU know of poker? I think we had

best play old sledge or cassino."

 

Blix had dealt a hand and partitioned the chips.

 

"Straights and flushes BEFORE the draw," she announced calmly.

 

Condy started and stared; then, looking at her askance, picked up

his hand.

 

"It's up to you."

 

"I'll make it five to play."

 

"Five? Very well.  How many cards?"

 

"Three."

 

"I'll take two."

 

"Bet you five more."

 

Blix looked at her hand.  Then, without trace of expression in her

voice or face, said:

 

"There's your five, and I ll raise you five."

 

"Five better."

 

"And five better than that."

 

"Call you."

 

"Full house.  Aces on tens," said Blix, throwing down her cards.

 

"Heavens! they're good as gold," muttered Condy as Blix gathered

in the chips.

 

An hour later she had won all the chips but five.

 

"Now we'll stop and get to fishing again; don't you want to?"

 

He agreed, and she counted the chips.

 

"Condy, you owe me seven dollars and a half," she announced.

 

Condy began to smile.  "Well," he said jocosely, "I'll send you

around a check to-morrow."

 

But at this Blix was cross upon the instant.  "You wouldn't do

that--wouldn't talk that way with one of your friends at the

club!" she exclaimed; "and it's not right to do it with me.

Condy, give me seven dollars and a half.  When you play cards with

me it's just as though it were with another man.  I would have

paid you if you had won."

 

"But I haven't got more than nine dollars.  Who'll pay for the

supper to-night at Luna's, and our railroad fare going home?"

 

"I'll pay."

 

"But I--I can't afford to lose money this way."

 

"Shouldn't have played, then.  I took the same chances as you.

Condy, I want my money."

 

"You--you--why you've regularly flimflammed me."

 

"Will you give me my money?"

 

"Oh, take your money then!"

 

Blix shut the money in her purse, and rose, dusting her dress.

 

"Now," she said--"now that the pastime of card-playing is over, we

will return to the serious business of life, which is the

catching--no, ' KILLING'of lake trout."

 

At five o'clock in the afternoon, Condy pulled up the anchor of

railroad iron and rowed back to Richardson's.  Blix had six trout

to her credit, but Condy's ill-luck had been actually ludicrous.

 

"I can hold a string in the water as long as anybody," he

complained, "but I'd like to have the satisfaction of merely

changing the bait OCCASIONALLY.  I've not had a single bite--not a

nibble, y' know, all day.  Never mind, you got the big trout,

Blix; that first one.  That five minutes was worth the whole day.

It's been glorious, the whole thing.  We'll come down here once a

week right along now."

 

But the one incident that completed the happiness of that

wonderful day occurred just as they were getting out of the boat

on the shore by Richardson's.  In a mud-hole between two rocks

they discovered a tiny striped snake, hardly bigger than a lead

pencil, in the act of swallowing a little green frog, and they

passed a rapt ten minutes in witnessing the progress of this

miniature drama, which culminated happily in the victim's escape,

and triumph of virtue.

 

"That," declared Blix as they climbed into the old buggy which was

to take them to the train, "was the one thing necessary.  That

made the day perfect."

 

They reached the city at dusk, and sent their fish, lunch-basket,

and rods up to the Bessemers' flat by a messenger boy with an

explanatory note for Blix's father.

 

"Now," said Condy, "for Luna's and the matrimonial objects."

