
 

 

Chapter X

 

 

Mum--mar--married! gasped Condy, swallowing something in his

throat.

 

Blix rose to her feet.

 

"Just been MARRIED!" she repeated, a little frightened.  "Why--

why--why; how DELIGHTFUL!"

 

"Yes--yes," mumbled Condy.  "How delightful.  I congratulate you!"

 

"Come in--come back to the station," said the Captain jovially,

"and I'll introduce you to m' wife.  We were married only last

Sunday."

 

"Why, yes--yes, of course, we'd be delighted," vociferated the two

conspirators a little hysterically.

 

"She's a mighty fine little woman," declared the Captain, as he

rolled the door of the boat-house to its place and preceded them

up the gravel walk to the station.

 

"Of course she is," responded Blix.  Behind Captain Jack's back

she fixed Condy with a wide-eyed look, and nudged him fiercely

with an elbow to recall him to himself; for Condy's wits were

scattered like a flock of terrified birds, and he was gazing

blankly at the Captain's coat collar with a vacant, maniacal

smile.

 

"For Heaven's sake, Condy!" she had time to whisper before they

arrived in the hallway of the station.

 

But fortunately they were allowed a minute or so to recover

themselves and prepare for what was coming.  Captain Jack ushered

them into what was either the parlor, office, or sitting-room of

the station, and left them with the words:

 

"Just make yourselves comfortable here, an' I'll go fetch the

little woman."

 

No sooner had he gone than the two turned to each other.

 

"Well!"

 

"WELL!"

 

"We're in for it now."

 

"But we must see it through, Condy; act just as natural as you

can, and we're all right."

 

"But supposing SHE recognizes us!"

 

"Supposing she does--what then.  How ARE they to know that we

wrote the letters?"

 

"Sh, Blix, not so loud! They know by now that THEY didn't."

 

"But it seems that it hasn't made any difference to them; they are

married.  And besides, they wouldn't speak about putting

'personals' in the paper to us.  They would never let anybody know

that."

 

"Do you suppose they could possibly suspect?"

 

"I'm sure they couldn't."

 

"Here they come."

 

"Keep perfectly calm, and we're saved."

 

"Suppose it isn't K. D. B., after all?"

 

But it was, of course, and she recognized them in an instant.  She

and the Captain--the latter all grins--came in from the direction

of the kitchen, K. D. B. wearing a neat blue calico gown and an

apron that was really a marvel of cleanliness and starch.

 

"Kitty!" exclaimed Captain Jack, seized again with an

unexplainable mirth, "here's some young folks come out to see the

place an' I want you to know 'em.  Mr. Rivers, this is m' wife,

Kitty, and--lessee, miss, I don't rightly remember your name."

 

"Bessemer!" exclaimed Condy and Blix in a breath.

 

"Oh!" exclaimed K. D. B., "you were in the restaurant the night

that the Captain and I--I--that is--yes, I'm quite sure I've seen

you before." She turned from one to the other.  beginning to blush

furiously.

 

"Yes, yes, in Luna's restaurant, wasn't it?" said Condy

desperately.  "It seems to me I do just barely remember."

 

"And wasn't the Captain there?" Blix ventured.

 

"I forgot my stick, I remember," continued Condy.  "I came back

for it; and just as I was going out it seems to me I saw you two

at a table near the door."

 

He thought it best to allow their "matrimonial objects" to believe

he had not seen them before.

 

"Yes, yes, we were there," answered K. D. B. tactfully.  "We dine

there almost every Monday night."

 

Blix guessed that K. D. B. would prefer to have the real facts of

the situation ignored, and determined she should have the chance

to change the conversation if she wished.

 

"What a delicious supper one has there!" she said.

 

"Can't say I like Mexican cooking myself," answered K. D. B.,

forgetting that they dined there every Monday night.  "Plain

United States is good enough for me."

 

Suddenly Captain Jack turned abruptly to Condy, exclaiming: "Oh,

you was the chap that called the picture of that schooner a

barkentine."

 

"Yes; WASN'T that a barkentine?" he answered innocently.

 

"Barkentine your EYE!" spluttered the Captain.  "Why, that was a

schooner as plain as a pie plate."

 

But ten minutes later the ordeal was over, and Blix and Condy,

once more breathing easily, were on their walk again.  The Captain

and K. D. B. had even accompanied them to the gate of the station,

and had strenuously urged them to "come in and see them again the

next time they were out that way."

 

"Married!" murmured Condy, putting both hands to his head.  "We've

done it, we've done it now."

 

"Well, what of it?" declared Blix, a little defiantly.  "I think

it's all right.  You can see the Captain is in love with her, and

she with him.  No, we've nothing to reproach ourselves with."

 

"But--but--but so sudden!" whispered Condy, all aghast.  "That's

what makes me faint--the suddenness of it."

 

"It shows how much they are in love, how--how readily they--

adapted themselves to each other.  No, it's all right."

 

"They seemed to like us--actually."

 

"Well, they had better--if they knew the truth.  Without us they

never would have met."

 

"They both asked us to come out and see them again, did you notice

that? Let's do it, Blix," Condy suddenly exclaimed; "let's get to

know them!"

 

"Of course we must.  Wouldn't it be fun to call on them--to get

regularly acquainted with them!"

 

"They might ask us to dinner some time."

 

"And think of the stories he could tell you!"

 

They enthused immediately upon this subject, both talking

excitedly at the same time, going over the details of the

Captain's yarns, recalling the incidents to each other.

 

"Fancy!" exclaimed Condy--"fancy Billy Isham in his pajamas, red

and white stripes, reading Shakespeare from that pulpit on board

the ship, and the other men guying him! Isn't that a SCENE for

you? Can't you just SEE it?

 

"I wonder if the Captain wasn't making all those things up as he

went along.  He don't seem to have any sense of right and wrong at

all.  He might have been lying, Condy."

 

"What difference would that make?"

 

And so they went along in that fine, clear, Western morning, on

the edge of the Continent, both of them young and strong and

vigorous, the Pacific under their eyes, the great clean Trades

blowing in their faces, the smell of the salt sea coming in long

aromatic whiffs to their nostrils.  Young and strong and fresh,

their imaginations thronging with pictures of vigorous action and

adventure, buccaneering, filibustering, and all the swing, the

leap, the rush and gallop, the exuberant, strong life of the

great, uncharted world of Romance.

 

And all unknowingly they were a Romance in themselves.  Cynicism,

old age, and the weariness of all things done had no place in the

world in which they walked.  They still had their illusions, all

the keenness of their sensations, all the vividness of their

impressions.  The simple things of the world, the great, broad,

primal emotions of the race stirred in them.  As they swung along,

going toward the ocean, their brains were almost as empty of

thought or of reflection as those of two fine, clean animals.

They were all for the immediate sensation; they did not think--

they FELT.  The intellect was dormant; they looked at things, they

heard things, they smelled the smell of the sea, and of the

seaweed, of the fat, rank growth of cresses in the salt marshes;

they turned their cheeks to the passing wind, and filled their

mouths and breasts with it.  Their life was sweet to them; every

hour was one glad effervescence.  The fact that the ocean was blue

was a matter for rejoicing.  It was good to be alive on that royal

morning.  Just to be young was an exhilaration; and everything was

young with them--the day was young, the country was young, and the

civilization to which they belonged, teeming there upon the green,

Western fringe of the continent, was young and heady and

tumultuous with the boisterous, red blood of a new race.

 

Condy even forgot, or rather disdained on such a morning as that,

to piece together and rearrange Captain Jack's yarns into story

form.  To look at the sea and the green hills, to watch the pink

on Blix's cheek and her yellow hair blowing across her eyes and

lips, was better than thinking.  Life was better than literature.

To live was better than to read; one live human being was better

than ten thousand Shakespeares; an act was better than a thought.

Why, just to love Blix, to be with her, to see the sweet, clean

flush of her cheek, to know that she was there at his side, and to

have the touch of her elbow as they walked, was better than the

best story, the greatest novel he could ever hope to write.  Life

was better than literature, and love was the best thing in life.

To love Blix and to be near her--what else was worth while? Could

he ever think of finding anything in life sweeter and finer than

this dear young girl of nineteen?

 

Suddenly Condy came to himself with an abrupt start.  What was

this he was thinking--what was this he was telling himself? Love

Blix! He loved Blix! Why, of COURSE he loved her--loved her so,

that with the thought of it there came a great, sudden clutch at

the heart and a strange sense of tenderness, so vague and yet so

great that it eluded speech and all expression.  Love her! Of

course he loved her! He had, all unknowing, loved her even before

this wonderful morning: had loved her that day at the lake, and

that never-to-be-forgotten, delicious afternoon in the Chinese

restaurant; all those long, quiet evenings spent in the window of

the little dining-room, looking down upon the darkening city, he

had loved her.  Why, all his days for the last few months had been

full of the love of her.

 

How else had he been so happy? how else did it come about that

little by little he was withdrawing from the society and influence

of his artificial world, as represented by such men as Sargeant?

how else was he slowly loosening the grip of the one evil and

vicious habit that had clutched him so long? how else was his

ambition stirring? how else was his hitherto aimless enthusiasm

hardening to energy and determination? She had not always so

influenced him.  In the days when they had just known each other,

and met each other in the weekly course of their formal life, it

had not been so, even though they pretended a certain amount of

affection.  He remembered the evening when Blix had brought those

days to an abrupt end, and how at the moment he had told himself

that after all he had never known the real Blix.  Since then, in

the charming, unconventional life they had led, everything had

been changed.  He had come to know her for what she was, to know

her genuine goodness, her sincerity, her contempt of affectations,

her comradeship, her calm, fine strength and unbroken good nature;

and day by day, here a little and there a little, his love for her

had grown so quietly, so evenly, that he had never known it, until

now, behold! it was suddenly come to flower, full and strong--a

flower whose fragrance had suddenly filled all his life and all

his world with its sweetness.

 

Half an hour after leaving the lifeboat station, Condy and Blix

reached the old, red-brick fort, deserted, abandoned, and rime-

incrusted, at the entrance of the Golden Gate.  They turned its

angle, and there rolled the Pacific, a blue floor of shifting

water, stretching out there forever and forever over the curve of

the earth, over the shoulder of the world, with never a sail in

view and never a break from horizon to horizon.

 

They followed down the shore, sometimes upon the old and broken

flume that runs along the seaward face of the hills that rise from

the beach, or sometimes upon the beach itself, stepping from

bowlder to bowlder, or holding along at the edge of the water upon

reaches of white, hard sand.

 

The beach was solitary; not a soul was in sight.  Close at hand,

to landward, great hills, bare and green, shut off the sky; and

here and there the land came tumbling down into the sea in great,

jagged, craggy rocks, knee-deep in swirling foam, and all black

with wet.  The air was full of the prolonged thunder of the surf,

and at intervals sea-birds passed overhead with an occasional

piping cry.  Wreckage was tumbled about here and there; and

innumerable cocoanut shards, huge, brown cups of fuzzy bark, lay

underfoot and in the crevices of the rocks.  They found a jelly-

fish--a pulpy translucent mass; and once even caught a sight of a

seal in the hollow of a breaker, with sleek and shining head, his

barbels bristling, and heard his hoarse croaking bark as he hunted

the off-shore fish.

 

Blix refused to allow Condy to help her in the least.  She was

quite as active and strong as he, and clambered from rock to rock

and over the shattered scantling of the flume with the vigor and

agility of a young boy.  She muddied her shoes to the very tops

scratched her hands, tore her skirt, and even twisted her ankle;

but her little eyes were never so bright, nor was the pink flush

of her cheeks ever more adorable.  And she was never done talking--

a veritable chatterbox.  She saw everything and talked about

everything she saw, quite indifferent as to whether or no Condy

listened.  Now it was a queer bit of seaweed, now it was a group

of gulls clamoring over a dead fish, now a purple starfish, now a

breaker of unusual size.  Her splendid vitality carried her away.

She was excited, alive to her very finger-tips, vibrant to the

least sensation, quivering to the least impression.

 

"Let's get up here and sit down somewhere," said Condy, at length.

 

They left the beach and climbed up the slope of the hills, near a

point where a long arm of land thrust out into the sea and shut

off the wind; a path was there, and they followed it for a few

yards, till they had come to a little amphitheatre surrounded with

blackberry bushes.

 

Here they sat down, Blix settling herself on an old log with a

little sigh of contentment, Condy stretching himself out, a new-

lighted pipe in his teeth, his head resting on the little handbag

he had persistently carried ever since morning.  Then Blix fell

suddenly silent, and for a long time the two sat there without

speaking, absorbed in the enjoyment of looking at the enormous

green hills rolling down to the sea, the breakers thundering at

the beach, the gashed pinnacles of rock, the vast reach of the

Pacific, and the distant prospect of the old fort at the entrance

of the Golden Gate.

 

"We might be a thousand miles away from the city, for all the

looks of it, mightn't we, Condy?" said Blix, after a while.  "And

I'm that HUNGRY! It must be nearly noon."

 

For answer, Condy sat up with profound gravity, and with a great

air of nonchalance opened the handbag, and, instead of shoes took

out, first, a pint bottle of claret, then "devilish" ham

sandwiches in oiled paper, a bottle of stuffed olives, a great bag

of salted almonds, two little tumblers, a paper-covered novel, and

a mouth organ.

 

Blix fairly crowed with delight, clasping her hands upon her

knees, and rocking to and fro where she sat upon the log.

 

"Oh, Condy, and you thought of a LUNCH--you said it was shoes--and

you remembered I loved stuffed olives, too; and a book to read.

What is it--'The Seven Seas.' No, I never WAS so happy.  But the

mouth organ--what's that for?"

 

"To play on.  What did you think--think it was a can-opener?"

 

Blix choked with merriment over his foolery, and Condy added

proudly:

 

"Look there! I made those sandwiches!"

 

They looked as though he had--great, fat chunks of bread, the

crust still on; the "devilish" ham in thick strata between; and,

positively, he had BUTTERED the bread.  But it was all one with

them; they ate as though at a banquet, and Blix even took off her

hat and hung it upon one of the nearby bushes.  Of course Condy

had forgotten a corkscrew.  He tried to dig out the cork of the

claret bottle with his knife, until he had broken both blades and

was about to give up in despair, when Blix, at the end of her

patience, took the bottle from him and pushed in the cork with her

finger.

 

"Wine, music, literature, and feasting," observed Condy.  "We're

getting regularly luxurious, just like Sardine-apalus."

 

But Condy himself had suddenly entered into an atmosphere of

happiness, the like of which he had never known or dreamed of

before.  He loved Blix--he had just discovered it.  He loved her

because she was so genuine, so radiantly fresh and strong; loved

her because she liked the things that he liked, because they two

looked at the world from precisely the same point of view, hating

shams and affectations, happy in the things that were simple and

honest and natural.  He loved her because she liked his books,

appreciating the things therein that he appreciated, liking what

he liked, disapproving of what he condemned.  He loved her because

she was nineteen, and because she was so young and unspoiled and

was happy just because the ocean was blue and the morning fine.

He loved her because she was so pretty, because of the softness of

her yellow hair, because of her round, white forehead and pink

cheeks, because of her little, dark-brown eyes, with that look in

them as if she were just done smiling or just about to smile, one

could not say which; loved her because of her good, firm mouth and

chin, because of her full neck and its high, tight bands of white

satin.  And he loved her because her arms were strong and round,

and because she wore the great dog-collar around her trim, firm-

corseted waist, and because there emanated from her with every

movement a barely perceptible, delicious, feminine odor, that was

in part perfume, but mostly a subtle, vague aroma, charming beyond

words, that came from her mouth, her hair, her neck, her arms, her

whole sweet personality.  And he loved her because she was

herself, because she was Blix, because of that strange, sweet

influence that was disengaged from her in those quiet moments when

she seemed so close to him, when some unnamed, mysterious sixth

sense in him stirred and woke and told him of her goodness, of her

clean purity and womanliness; and that certain, vague tenderness

in him went out toward her, a tenderness not for her only, but for

all the good things of the world; and he felt his nobler side

rousing up and the awakening of the desire to be his better self.

 

Covertly he looked at her, as she sat near him, her yellow hair

rolling and blowing back from her forehead, her hands clasped over

her knee, looking out over the ocean, thoughtful, her eyes wide.

 

She had told him she did not love him.  Condy remembered that

perfectly well.  She was sincere in the matter; she did not love

him.  That subject had been once and for all banished from their

intercourse.  And it was because of that very reason that their

companionship of the last three or four months had been so

charming.  She looked upon him merely as a chum.  She had not

changed in the least from that time until now, whereas he--why,

all his world was new for him that morning! Why, he loved her so,

she had become so dear to him, that the very thought of her made

his heart swell and leap.

 

But he must keep all this to himself.  If he spoke to her, told

her of how he loved her, it would spoil and end their

companionship upon the instant.  They had both agreed upon that;

they had tried the other, and it had worked out.  As lovers they

had wearied of each other; as chums they had been perfectly

congenial, thoroughly and completely happy.

 

Condy set his teeth.  It was a hard situation.  He must choose

between bringing an end to this charming comradeship of theirs, or

else fight back all show of love for her, keep it down and under

hand, and that at a time when every nerve of him quivered like a

smitten harp-string.  It was not in him or in his temperament to

love her calmly, quietly, or at a distance; he wanted the touch of

her hand, the touch of her cool, smooth cheek, the delicious aroma

of her breath in his nostrils her lips against his, her hair and

all its fragrance in his face

 

"Condy, what's the matter?" Blix was looking at him with an

expression of no little concern.  "What are you frowning so about,

and clinching your fists? And you're pale, too.  What's gone

wrong?"

 

He shot a glance at her, and bestirred himself sharply.

 

"Isn't this a jolly little corner?" he said.  "Blix, how long is

it before you go?"

 

"Six weeks from to-morrow."

 

"And you're going to be gone four years--four years! Maybe you

never will come back.  Can't tell what will happen in four years.

Where's the blooming mouth-organ?"

 

But the mouth-organ was full of crumbs.  Condy could not play on

it.  To all his efforts it responded only by gasps, mournfulest

death-rattles, and lamentable wails.  Condy hurled it into the

sea.

 

"Well, where's the blooming book, then?" he demanded.  "You're

sitting on it, Blix.  Here, read something in it.  Open it

anywhere."

 

"No; you read to me."

 

"I will not.  Haven't I done enough? Didn't I buy the book and get

the lunch, and make the sandwiches, and pay the car-fare? I think

this expedition will cost me pretty near three dollars before

we're through with the day.  No; the least you can do is to read

to me.  Here, we'll match for it."

 

Condy drew a dime from his pocket, and Blix a quarter from her

purse.

 

"You're matching me," she said.

 

Condy tossed the coin and lost, and Blix said, as he picked up the

book:

 

"For a man that has such unvarying bad luck as you, gambling is

just simple madness.  You and I have never played a game of poker

yet that I've not won every cent of money you had."

 

"Yes; and what are you doing with it all?"

 

"Spending it," she returned loftily; "gloves and veils and lace

pins--all kinds of things."

 

But Condy knew the way she spoke that this was not true.

 

For the next hour or so he read to her from "The Seven Seas,"

while the afternoon passed, the wind stirring the chaparral and

blackberry bushes in the hollows of the huge, bare hills, the surf

rolling and grumbling on the beach below, the sea-birds wheeling

overhead.  Blix listened intently, but Condy could not have told

of what he was reading.  Living was better than reading, life was

better than literature, and his new-found love for her was poetry

enough for him.  He read so that he might not talk to her or look

at her, for it seemed to him at times as though some second self

in him would speak and betray him in spite of his best efforts.

Never before in all his life had he been so happy; never before

had he been so troubled.  He began to jumble the lines and words

as he read, over-running periods, even turning two pages at once.

 

"What a splendid line!" Blix exclaimed.

 

"What line--what--what are you talking about? Blix, let's always

remember to-day.  Let's make a promise, no matter what happens or

where we are, let's always write to each other on the anniversary

of to-day.  What do you say?"

 

"Yes; I'll promise--and you--"

 

"I'll promise faithfully.  Oh, I'll never forget to-day nor--yes,

yes, I'll promise--why, to-day--Blix--where's that damn book

gone?"

 

"Condy!"

 

"Well, I can't find the book.  You're sitting on it again.

Confound the book, anyway! Let's walk some more."

 

"We've a long ways to go if we're to get home in time for supper.

Let's go to Luna's for supper."

 

"I never saw such a girl as you to think of ways for spending

money.  What kind of a purse-proud plutocrat do you think I am?

I've only seventy-five cents left.  How much have you got?"

 

Blix had fifty-five cents in her purse, and they had a grave

council over their finances.  They had just enough for car-fare

and two "suppers Mexican," with ten cents left over."

 

"That's for Richard's tip," said Blix.

 

"That's for my CIGAR," he retorted.

 

"You made ME give him fifty cents.  You said it was the least I

could offer him--noblesse oblige."

 

"Well, then, I COULDN'T offer him a dime, don't you see? I'll tell

him we are broke this time."

 

They started home, not as they had come, but climbing the hill and

going across a breezy open down, radiant with blue iris, wild

heliotrope, yellow poppies, and even a violet here and there.  A

little further on they gained one of the roads of the Reservation,

red earth smooth as a billiard table; and just at an angle where

the road made a sharp elbow and trended cityward, they paused for

a moment and looked down and back at the superb view of the ocean,

the vast half-moon of land, and the rolling hills in the

foreground tumbling down toward the beach and all spangled with

wild flowers.

 

Some fifteen minutes later they reached the golf-links.

 

"We can go across the links," said Condy, "and strike any number

of car lines on the other side."

 

They left the road and struck across the links, Condy smoking his

new-lighted pipe.  But as they came around the edge of a long line

of eucalyptus trees near the teeing ground, a warning voice

suddenly called out:

 

"Fore!"

 

Condy and Blix looked up sharply, and there in a group not twenty

feet away, in tweeds and "knickers," in smart, short golfing

skirts and plaid cloaks, they saw young Sargeant and his sister,

two other girls whom they knew as members of the fashionable

"set," and Jack Carter in the act of swinging his driving iron.

