





	BLIX


		by Frank Norris


 

 

Chapter I

 

 

IT had just struck nine from the cuckoo clock that hung over the

mantelpiece in the dining-room, when Victorine brought in the

halved watermelon and set it in front of Mr. Bessemer's plate.

Then she went down to the front door for the damp, twisted roll of

the Sunday morning's paper, and came back and rang the breakfast-

bell for the second time.

 

As the family still hesitated to appear, she went to the bay

window at the end of the room, and stood there for a moment

looking out.  The view was wonderful.  The Bessemers lived upon

the Washington Street hill, almost at its very summit, in a flat

in the third story of the building.  The contractor had been

clever enough to reverse the position of kitchen and dining-room,

so that the latter room was at the rear of the house.  From its

window one could command a sweep of San Francisco Bay and the

Contra Costa shore, from Mount Diablo, along past Oakland,

Berkeley, Sausalito, and Mount Tamalpais, out to the Golden Gate,

the Presidio, the ocean, and even--on very clear days--to the

Farrallone islands.

 

For some time Victorine stood looking down at the great expanse of

land and sea, then faced about with an impatient exclamation.

 

On Sundays all the week-day regime of the family was deranged, and

breakfast was a movable feast, to be had any time after seven or

before half-past nine.  As Victorine was pouring the ice-water,

Mr. Bessemer himself came in, and addressed himself at once to his

meal, without so much as a thought of waiting for the others.

 

He was a little round man.  He wore a skull-cap to keep his bald

spot warm, and read his paper through a reading-glass.  The

expression of his face, wrinkled and bearded, the eyes shadowed by

enormous gray eyebrows, was that of an amiable gorilla.

 

Bessemer was one of those men who seem entirely disassociated from

their families.  Only on rare and intense occasions did his

paternal spirit or instincts assert themselves.  At table he

talked but little.  Though devotedly fond of his eldest daughter,

she was a puzzle and a stranger to him.  His interests and hers

were absolutely dissimilar.  The children he seldom spoke to but

to reprove; while Howard, the son, the ten-year-old and terrible

infant of the household, he always referred to as "that boy."

 

He was an abstracted, self-centred old man, with but two hobbies--

homoeopathy and the mechanism of clocks.  But he had a strange way

of talking to himself in a low voice, keeping up a running, half-

whispered comment upon his own doings and actions; as, for

instance, upon this occasion: "Nine o'clock--the clock's a little

fast.  I think I'll wind my watch.  No, I've forgotten my watch.

Watermelon this morning, eh? Where's a knife? I'll have a little

salt.  Victorine's forgot the spoons--ha, here's a spoon! No, it's

a knife I want."

 

After he had finished his watermelon, and while Victorine was

pouring his coffee, the two children came in, scrambling to their

places, and drumming on the table with their knife-handles.

 

The son and heir, Howard, was very much a boy.  He played baseball

too well to be a very good boy, and for the sake of his own self-

respect maintained an attitude of perpetual revolt against his

older sister, who, as much as possible, took the place of the

mother, long since dead.  Under her supervision, Howard blacked

his own shoes every morning before breakfast, changed his

underclothes twice a week, and was dissuaded from playing with the

dentist's son who lived three doors below and who had St. Vitus'

dance.

 

His little sister was much more tractable.  She had been

christened Alberta, and was called Snooky.  She promised to be

pretty when she grew up, but was at this time in that distressing

transitional stage between twelve and fifteen; was long-legged,

and endowed with all the awkwardness of a colt.  Her shoes were

still innocent of heels; but on those occasions when she was

allowed to wear her tiny first pair of corsets she was exalted to

an almost celestial pitch of silent ecstasy.  The clasp of the

miniature stays around her small body was like the embrace of a

little lover, and awoke in her ideas that were as vague, as

immature and unformed as the straight little figure itself.

 

When Snooky and Howard had seated themselves, but one chair--at

the end of the breakfast-table, opposite Mr. Bessemer--remained

vacant.

 

"Is your sister--is Miss Travis going to have her breakfast now?

Is she got up yet?" inquired Victorine of Howard and Snooky, as

she pushed the cream pitcher out of Howard's reach.  It was

significant of Mr. Bessemer's relations with his family that

Victorine did not address her question to him.

 

"Yes, yes, she's coming," said both the children, speaking

together; and Howard added: "Here she comes now."

 

Travis Bessemer came in.  Even in San Francisco, where all women

are more or less beautiful, Travis passed for a beautiful girl.

She was young, but tall as most men, and solidly, almost heavily

built.  Her shoulders were broad, her chest was deep, her neck

round and firm.  She radiated health; there were exuberance and

vitality in the very touch of her foot upon the carpet, and there

was that cleanliness about her, that freshness, that suggested a

recent plunge in the surf and a "constitutional" along the beach.

One felt that here was stamina, good physical force, and fine

animal vigor.  Her arms were large, her wrists were large, and her

fingers did not taper.  Her hair was of a brown so light as to be

almost yellow.  In fact, it would be safer to call it yellow from

the start--not golden nor flaxen, but plain, honest yellow.  The

skin of her face was clean and white, except where it flushed to a

most charming pink upon her smooth, cool cheeks.  Her lips were

full and red, her chin very round and a little salient.  Curiously

enough, her eyes were small--small, but of the deepest, deepest

brown, and always twinkling and alight, as though she were just

ready to smile or had just done smiling, one could not say which.

And nothing could have been more delightful than these sloe-brown,

glinting little eyes of hers set off by her white skin and yellow

hair.

 

She impressed one as being a very normal girl: nothing morbid

about her, nothing nervous or false or overwrought.  You did not

expect to find her introspective.  You felt sure that her mental

life was not at all the result of thoughts and reflections

germinating from within, but rather of impressions and sensations

that came to her from without.  There was nothing extraordinary

about Travis.  She never had her vagaries, was not moody--

depressed one day and exalted the next.  She was just a good,

sweet, natural, healthy-minded, healthy-bodied girl, honest,

strong, self-reliant, and good-tempered.

 

Though she was not yet dressed for church, there was style in her

to the pointed tips of her patent-leather slippers.  She wore a

heavy black overskirt that rustled in delicious fashion over the

colored silk skirt beneath, and a white shirt-waist, striped

black, and starched to a rattling stiffness.  Her neck was swathed

tight and high with a broad ribbon of white satin, while around

her waist, in place of a belt, she wore the huge dog-collar of a

St. Bernard--a chic little idea which was all her own, and of

which she was very proud.

 

She was as trig and trim and crisp as a crack yacht: not a pin was

loose, not a seam that did not fall in its precise right line; and

with every movement there emanated from her a barely perceptible

delicious feminine odor--an odor that was in part perfume, but

mostly a subtle, vague smell, charming beyond words, that came

from her hair, her neck, her arms--her whole sweet personality.

She was nineteen years old.

 

She sat down to breakfast and ate heartily, though with her

attention divided between Howard--who was atrociously bad, as

usual of a Sunday morning--and her father's plate.  Mr. Bessemer

was as like as not to leave the table without any breakfast at all

unless his fruit, chops, and coffee were actually thrust under his

nose.

 

"Papum," she called, speaking clear and distinct, as though to the

deaf, "there's your coffee there at your elbow; be careful, you'll

tip it over.  Victorine, push his cup further on the table.  Is it

strong enough for you, Papum'"

 

"Eh? Ah, yes--yes--yes," murmured the old man, looking vaguely

about him; "coffee, to be sure"--and he emptied the cup at a

single draught, hardly knowing whether it was coffee or tea.  "Now

I'll take a roll," he continued, in a monotonous murmur.  "Where

are the rolls? Here they are.  Hot rolls are bad for my digestion--

I ought to eat bread.  I think I eat too much.  Where's my place

in the paper?--always lose my place in the paper.  Clever

editorials this fellow Eastman writes, unbiassed by party

prejudice--unbiassed--unbiassed." His voice died to a whisper.

 

The breakfast proceeded, Travis supervising everything that went

forward, even giving directions to Victorine as to the hour for

serving dinner.  It was while she was talking to Victorine as to

this matter that Snooky began to whine.

 

"Stop!"

 

"And tell Maggie," pursued Travis, "to fricassee her chicken, and

not to have it too well done--"

 

"Sto-o-op!" whined Snooky again.

 

"And leave the heart out for Papum.  He likes the heart--"

 

"Sto-o-op!"

 

"Unbiassed by prejudice," murmured Mr. Bessemer, "vigorous and to

the point.  I'll have another roll."

 

"Pa, make Howard stop!"

 

"Howard!" exclaimed Travis; "what is it now?"

 

"Howard's squirting watermelon-seeds at me," whined Snooky, "and

Pa won't make him stop."

 

"Oh, I didn't so!" vociferated Howard.  "I only held one between

my fingers, and it just kind of shot out."

 

"You'll come upstairs with me in just five minutes," announced

Travis, "and get ready for Sunday-school."

 

Howard knew that his older sister's decisions were as the laws of

the Persians, and found means to finish his breakfast within the

specified time, though not without protest.  Once upstairs,

however, the usual Sunday morning drama of despatching him to

Sunday-school in presentable condition was enacted.  At every

moment his voice could be heard uplifted in shrill expostulation

and debate.  No, his hands were clean enough, and he didn't see

why he had to wear that little old pink tie; and, oh! his new

shoes were too tight and hurt his sore toe; and he wouldn't, he

wouldn't--no, not if he were killed for it, change his shirt.  Not

for a moment did Travis lose her temper with him.  But "very

well," she declared at length, "the next time she saw that little

Miner girl she would tell her that he had said she was his beau-

heart. NOW would he hold still while she brushed his hair?"

 

At a few minutes before eleven Travis and her father went to

church.  They were Episcopalians, and for time out of mind had

rented a half-pew in the church of their denomination on

California Street, not far from Chinatown.  By noon the family

reassembled.  at dinner-table, where Mr. Bessemer ate his chicken-

heart--after Travis had thrice reminded him of it--and expressed

himself as to the sermon and the minister's theology: sometimes to

his daughter and sometimes to himself.

 

After dinner Howard and Snooky foregathered in the nursery with

their beloved lead soldiers; Travis went to her room to write

letters; and Mr. Bessemer sat in the bay window of the dining-room

reading the paper from end to end.

 

At five Travis bestirred herself.  It was Victorine's afternoon

out.  Travis set the table, spreading a cover of blue denim edged

with white braid, which showed off the silver and the set of

delft--her great and never-ending joy--to great effect.  Then she

tied her apron about her, and went into the kitchen to make the

mayonnaise dressing for the potato salad, to slice the ham, and to

help the cook (a most inefficient Irish person, taken on only for

that month during the absence of the family's beloved and

venerated Sing Wo) in the matter of preparing the Sunday evening

tea.

 

Tea was had at half-past five.  Never in the history of the family

had its menu varied: cold ham, potato salad, pork and beans,

canned fruit, chocolate, and the inevitable pitcher of ice-water.

 

In the absence of Victorine, Maggie waited on the table, very

uncomfortable in her one good dress and stiff white apron.  She

stood off from the table, making awkward dabs at it from time to

time.  In her excess of deference she developed a clumsiness that

was beyond all expression.  She passed the plates upon the wrong

side, and remembered herself with a broken apology at inopportune

moments.  She dropped a spoon, she spilled the ice-water.  She

handled the delft cups and platters with an exaggerated

solicitude, as though they were glass bombs.  She brushed the

crumbs into their laps instead of into the crumb-tray, and at

last, when she had sat even Travis' placid nerves in a jangle, was

dismissed to the kitchen, and retired with a gasp of unspeakable

relief.

 

Suddenly there came a prolonged trilling of the electric bell, and

Howard flashed a grin at Travis.  Snooky jumped up and pushed

back, crying out: "I'll go! I'll go!"

 

Mr. Bessemer glanced nervously at Travis.  "That's Mr. Rivers,

isn't it, daughter?" Travis smiled.  "Well, I think I'll--I think

I'd better--" he began.

 

"No," said Travis, "I don't want you to, Papum; you sit right

where you are.  How absurd!"

 

The old man dropped obediently back into his seat.

 

"That's all right, Maggie," said Travis as the cook reappeared

from the pantry.  "Snooky went."

 

"Huh!" exclaimed Howard, his grin widening.  "Huh!"

 

And remember one thing, Howard," remarked Travis calmly, "don't

you ever again ask Mr. Rivers for a nickel to put in your bank."

 

Mr. Bessemer roused up.  "Did that boy do that?" he inquired

sharply of Travis.

 

"Well, well, he won't do it again," said Travis soothingly.  The

old man glared for an instant at Howard, who shifted uneasily in

his seat.  But meanwhile Snooky had clambered down to the outside

door, and before anything further could be said young Rivers came

into the dining-room.

