 

 

 

Chapter II

 

 

FOR some reason, never made sufficiently clear, Rivers' parents

had handicapped him from the baptismal font with the prenomen of

Conde, which, however, upon Anglo-Saxon tongues, had been promptly

modified to Condy, or even, among his familiar and intimate

friends, to Conny.  Asked as to his birthplace--for no Californian

assumes that his neighbor is born in the State--Condy was wont to

reply that he was "bawn 'n' rais'" in Chicago; "but," he always

added, "I couldn't help that, you know." His people had come West

in the early eighties, just in time to bury the father in alien

soil.  Condy was an only child.  He was educated at the State

University, had a finishing year at Yale, and a few months after

his return home was taken on the staff of the San Francisco "Daily

Times" as an associate editor of its Sunday supplement.  For Condy

had developed a taste and talent in the matter of writing.  Short

stories were his mania.  He had begun by an inoculation of the

Kipling virus, had suffered an almost fatal attack of Harding

Davis, and had even been affected by Maupassant.  He "went in" for

accuracy of detail; held that if one wrote a story involving

firemen one should have, or seem to have, every detail of the

department at his fingers' ends, and should "bring in" to the tale

all manner of technical names and cant phrases.

 

Much of his work on the Sunday supplement of "The Times" was of

the hack order--special articles, write-ups, and interviews.

About once a month, however, he wrote a short story, and of late,

now that he was convalescing from Maupassant and had begun to be

somewhat himself, these stories had improved in quality, and one

or two had even been copied in the Eastern journals.  He earned

$100 a month.

 

When Snooky had let him in, Rivers dashed up the stairs of the

Bessemers' flat, two at a time, tossed his stick into a porcelain

cane-rack in the hall, wrenched off his overcoat with a single

movement, and precipitated himself, panting, into the dining-room,

tugging at his gloves.

 

He was twenty-eight years old--nearly ten years older than Travis;

tall and somewhat lean; his face smooth-shaven and pink all over,

as if he had just given it a violent rubbing with a crash towel.

Unlike most writing folk, he dressed himself according to

prevailing custom.  But Condy overdid the matter.  His scarfs and

cravats were too bright, his colored shirt-bosoms were too broadly

barred, his waistcoats too extreme.  Even Travis, as she rose to

his abrupt entrance? told herself that of a Sunday evening a pink

shirt and scarlet tie were a combination hardly to be forgiven.

 

Condy shook her hand in both of his, then rushed over to Mr.

Bessemer, exclaiming between breaths: "Don't get up, sir--don't

THINK of it! Heavens! I'm disgustingly late.  You're all through.

My watch--this beastly watch of mine--I can't imagine how I came

to be so late.  You did quite right not to wait."

 

Then as his morbidly keen observation caught a certain look of

blankness on Travis' face, and his rapid glance noted no vacant

chair at table, he gave a quick gasp of dismay.

 

"Heavens and earth! didn't you EXPECT me?" he cried.  "I thought

you said--I thought--I must have forgotten--I must have got it

mixed up somehow.  What a hideous mistake, what a blunder! What a

fool I am!"

 

He dropped into a chair against the wall and mopped his forehead

with a blue-bordered handkerchief.

 

"Well, what difference does it make, Condy?" said Travis quietly.

"I'll put another place for you."

 

"No, no!" he vociferated, jumping up.  "I won't hear of it, I

won't permit it! You'll think I did it on purpose!"

 

Travis ignored his interference, and made a place for him opposite

the children, and had Maggie make some more chocolate.

 

Condy meanwhile covered himself with opprobrium.

 

"And all this trouble--I always make trouble everywhere I go.

Always a round man in a square hole, or a square man in a round

hole."

 

He got up and sat down again, crossed and recrossed his legs,

picked up little ornaments from the mantelpiece, and replaced them

without consciousness of what they were, and finally broke the

crystal of his watch as he was resetting it by the cuckoo clock.

 

"Hello!" he exclaimed suddenly, "where did you get that clock?

Where did you get that clock? That's new to me.  Where did that

come from?"

 

"That cuckoo clock?" inquired Travis, with a stare.  "Condy

Rivers, you've been here and in this room at least twice a week

for the last year and a half, and that clock, and no other, has

always hung there."

 

But already Condy had forgotten or lost interest in the clock.

 

"Is that so? is that so?" he murmured absent-mindedly, seating

himself at the table.

 

Mr. Bessemer was murmuring: "That clock's a little fast.  I can

not make that clock keep time.  Victorine has lost the key.  I

have to wind it with a monkey-wrench.  Now I'll try some more

beans.  Maggie has put in too much pepper.  I'll have to have a

new key made to-morrow."

 

"Hey? Yes--yes.  Is that so?" answered Condy Rivers, bewildered,

wishing to be polite, yet unable to follow the old man's

mutterings.

 

"He's not talking to you," remarked Travis, without lowering her

voice.  "You know how Papum goes on.  He won't hear a word you

say.  Well, I read your story in this morning's 'Times.'"

 

A few moments later, while Travers and Condy were still discussing

this story, Mr. Bessemer rose.  "Well, Mr. Rivers," he announced,

"I guess I'll say good-night.  Come, Snooky."

 

"Yes, take her with you, Papum," said Travis.  "She'll go to sleep

on the lounge here if you don't.  Howard, have you got your

lessons for to-morrow?"

 

It appeared that he had not.  Snooky whined to stay up a little

longer, but at last consented to go with her father.  They all

bade Condy good-night and took themselves away, Howard lingering a

moment in the door in the hope of the nickel he dared not ask for.

Maggie reappeared to clear away the table.

 

"Let's go in the parlor," suggested Travis, rising.  "Don't you

want to?"

 

The parlor was the front room overlooking the street, and was

reached by the long hall that ran the whole length of the flat,

passing by the door of each one of its eight rooms in turn.

 

Travis preceded Condy, and turned up one of the burners in colored

globe of the little brass chandelier.

 

The parlor was a small affair, peopled by a family of chairs and

sofas robed in white drugget.  A gold-and-white effect had been

striven for throughout the room.  The walls had been tinted

instead of papered, and bunches of hand-painted pink flowers tied

up with blue ribbons straggled from one corner of the ceiling.

Across one angle of the room straddled a brass easel upholding a

crayon portrait of Travis at the age of nine, "enlarged from a

photograph." A yellow drape ornamented one corner of the frame,

while another drape of blue depended from one end of the

mantelpiece.

 

The piano, upon which nobody ever played, balanced the easel in an

opposite corner.  Over the mantelpiece hung in a gilded frame a

steel engraving of Priscilla and John Alden; and on the mantel

itself two bisque figures of an Italian fisher boy and girl kept

company with the clock, a huge timepiece, set in a red plush

palette, that never was known to go.  But at the right of the

fireplace, and balancing the tuft of pampa-grass to the left, was

an inverted section of a sewer-pipe painted blue and decorated

with daisies.  Into it was thrust a sheaf of cat-tails, gilded,

and tied with a pink ribbon.

 

Travis dropped upon the shrouded sofa, and Condy set himself

carefully down on one of the frail chairs with its spindling

golden legs, and they began to talk.

 

Condy had taken her to the theatre the Monday night of that week,

as had been his custom ever since he had known her well, and there

was something left for them to say on that subject.  But in ten

minutes they had exhausted it.  An engagement of a girl known to

both of them had just been announced.  Condy brought that up, and

kept conversation going for another twenty minutes, and then

filled in what threatened to be a gap by telling her stories of

the society reporters, and how they got inside news by listening

to telephone party wires for days at a time.  Travis' condemnation

of this occupied another five or ten minutes; and so what with

this and with that they reached nine o'clock.  Then decidedly the

evening began to drag.  It was too early to go.  Condy could find

no good excuse for takng himself away, and, though Travis was

good-natured enough, and met him more than half-way, their talk

lapsed, and lapsed, and lapsed.  The breaks became more numerous

and lasted longer.  Condy began to wonder if he was boring her.

No sooner had the suspicion entered his head than it hardened into

a certainty, and at once what little fluency and freshness he yet

retained forsook him on the spot.  What made matters worse was his

recollection of other evenings that of late he had failed in

precisely the same manner.  Even while he struggled to save the

situation Condy was wondering if they two were talked out--if they

had lost charm for each other.  Did he not know Travis through and

through by now--her opinions, her ideas, her convictions? Was

there any more freshness in her for him? Was their little

flirtation of the last eighteen months, charming as it had been,

about to end?  Had they played out the play, had they come to the

end of each other's resources? He had never considered the

possibility of this before, but all at once as he looked at

Travis--looked fairly into her little brown-black eyes--it was

borne in upon him that she was thinking precisely the same thing.

 

Condy Rivers had met Travis at a dance a year and a half before

this, and, because she was so very pretty, so unaffected, and so

good-natured, had found means to see her three or four times a

week ever since.  They two "went out" not a little in San

Francisco society, and had been in a measure identified with what

was known as the Younger Set; though Travis was too young to come

out, and Rivers too old to feel very much at home with girls of

twenty and boys of eighteen.

 

They had known each other in the conventional way (as

conventionality goes in San Francisco); during the season Rivers

took her to the theatres Monday nights, and called regularly

Wednesdays and Sundays.  Then they met at dances, and managed to

be invited to the same houses for teas and dinners.  They had

flirted rather desperately, and at times Condy even told himself

that he loved this girl so much younger than he--this girl with

the smiling eyes and robust figure and yellow hair, who was so

frank, so straightforward, and so wonderfully pretty.

 

But evidently they had come to the last move in the game, and as

Condy reflected that after all he had never known the real Travis,

that the girl whom he told himself he knew through and through was

only the Travis of dinner parties and afternoon functions, he was

suddenly surprised to experience a sudden qualm of deep and

genuine regret.  He had never been NEAR to her, after all.  They

were as far apart as when they had first met.  And yet he knew

enough of her to know that she was "worth while." He had had

experience--all the experience he wanted--with other older women

and girls of society.  They were sophisticated, they were all a

little tired, they had run the gamut of amusements--in a word,

they were jaded.  But Travis, this girl of nineteen, who was not

yet even a debutante, had been fresh and unspoiled, had been new

and strong and young.

 

"Of course, you may call it what you like.  He was nothing more

nor less than intoxicated--yes, drunk."

 

"Hah! who--what--wh--what are you talking about?" gasped Condy

sitting bolt upright.

 

"Jack Carter," answered Travis.  "No," she added.  shaking her

head at him helplessly, "he hasn't been listening to a word.  I'm

talking about Jack Carter and the 'Saturday Evening' last night."

 

"No, no, I haven't heard.  Forgive me; I was thinking--thinking of

something else.  Who was drunk?"

 

Travis paused a moment, settling her side-combs in her hair; then:

 

"If you will try to listen, I'll tell it all over again, because

it's serious with me, and I'm going to take a very decided stand

about it.  You know," she went on--"you know what the 'Saturday

Evening' is.  Plenty of the girls who are not 'out' belong, and a

good many of last year's debutantes come, as well as the older

girls of three or four seasons' standing.  You could call it

representative couldn't you? Well, they always serve punch; and

you know yourself that you have seen men there who have taken more

than they should."

 

"Yes, yes," admitted Condy.  "I know Carter and the two Catlin

boys always do."

 

"It gets pretty bad sometimes, doesn't it?" she said.

 

"It does, it does--and it's shameful.  But most of the girls--

MOST of them don't seem to mind."

 

Miss Bessemer stiffened a bit.  "There are one or two girls that

do," she said quietly.  "Frank Catlin had the decency to go home

last night," she continued; "and his brother wasn't any worse than

usual.  But Jack Carter must have been drinking before he came.

He was very bad indeed--as bad," she said between her teeth, "as

he could be and yet walk straight.  As you say, most of the girls

don't mind.  They say, 'It's only Johnnie Carter; what do you

expect?' But one of the girls--you know her, Laurie Flagg--cut a

dance with him last night and told him exactly why.  Of course,

Carter was furious.  He was sober enough to think he had been

insulted; and what do you suppose he did?"

 

"What? what?" exclaimed Condy, breathless, leaning toward her.

 

"Went about the halls and dressing-rooms circulating some dirty

little lie about Laurie.  Actually trying to--to"--Travis

hesitated--"to make a scandal about her."

 

Condy bounded in his seat.  "Beast, cad, swine!" he exclaimed.

 

"I didn't think," said Travis, "that Carter would so much as dare

to ask me to dance with him--"

 

"Did he? did--did--"

 

"Wait," she interrupted.  "So I wasn't at all prepared for what

happened.  During the german, before I knew it, there he was in

front of me.  It was a break, and he wanted it.  I hadn't time to

think.  The only idea I had was that if I refused him he might

tell some dirty little lie about me.  I was all confused--mixed

up.  I felt just as though it were a snake that I had to humor to

get rid of.  I gave him the break."

 

Condy sat speechless.  Suddenly he arose.

 

"Well, now, let's see," he began, speaking rapidly, his hands

twisting and untwisting till the knuckles cracked.  "Now, let's

see.  You leave it to me.  I know Carter.  He's going to be at a

stag dinner where I am invited to-morrow night, and I--I--"

 

"No, you won't, Condy," said Travis placidly.  "You'll pay no

attention to it, and I'll tell you why.  Suppose you should make a

scene with Mr. Carter--I don't know how men settle these things.

Well, it would be told in all the clubs and in all the newspaper

offices that two men had quarreled over a girl; and my name is

mentioned, discussed, and handed around from one crowd of men to

another, from one club to another; and then, of course, the papers

take it up.  By that time Mr. Carter will have told his side of

the story and invented another dirty little lie, and I'm the one

who suffers the most in the end.  And remember, Condy, that I

haven't any mother in such an affair, not even an older sister.

No, we'll just let the matter drop.  It would be more dignified,

anyhow.  Only I have made up my mind what I am going to do."

 

"What's that?"

 

"I'm not coming out.  If that's the sort of thing one has to put

up with in society"--Travis drew a little line on the sofa at her

side with her finger-tip--"I am going to--stop--right--there.

It's not"--Miss Bessemer stiffened again--"that I'm afraid of Jack

Carter and his dirty stories; I simply don't want to know the kind

of people who have made Jack Carter possible.  The other girls

don't mind it, nor many men besides you, Condy; and I'm not going

to be associated with people who take it as a joke for a man to

come to a function drunk.  And as for having a good time, I'll

find my amusements somewhere else.  I'll ride a wheel, take long

walks, study something.  But as for leading the life of a society

girl--no! And whether I have a good time or not, I'll keep my own

self-respect.  At least I'll never have to dance with a drunken

man.  I won't have to humiliate myself like that a second time."

 

"But I presume you will still continue to go out somewhere,"

protested Condy Rivers.

 

She shook her head.

 

"I have thought it all over, and I've talked about it with Papum.

There's no half way about it.  The only way to stop is to stop

short.  Just this afternoon I've regretted three functions for

next week, and I shall resign from the 'Saturday Evening.' Oh,

it's not the Jack Carter affair alone!" she exclaimed; "the whole

thing tires me.  Mind, Condy," she exclaimed, "I'm not going to

break with it because I have any 'purpose in life,' or that sort

of thing.  I want to have a good time, and I'm going to see if I

can't have it in my own way.  If the kind of thing that makes Jack

Carter possible is conventionality, then I'm done with

conventionality for good.  I am going to try, from this time on,

to be just as true to myself as I can be.  I am going to be

sincere, and not pretend to like people and things that I don't

like; and I'm going to do the things that I like to do--just so

long as they are the things a good girl can do.  See, Condy?"

 

"You're fine," murmured Condy breathless.  "You're fine as gold,

Travis, and I--I love you all the better for it."

 

"Ah, NOW!" exclaimed Travis, with a brusque movement, "there's

mother thing we must talk about.  No more foolishness between us.

We've had a jolly little flirtation, I know, and it's been good

fun while it lasted.  I know you like me, and you know that I like

you; but as for loving each other, you know we don't.  Yes, you

say that you love me and that I'm the only girl.  That's part of

the game.  I can play it"--her little eyes began to dance--"quite

as well as you.  But it's playing with something that's quite too

serious to be played with--after all, isn't it, now? It's

insincere, and, as I tell you, from now on I'm going to be as true

and as sincere and as honest as I can."

 

"But I tell you that I DO love you," protested Condy, trying to

make the words ring true.

 

Travis looked about the room an instant as if in deliberation;

then abruptly: "Ah! what am I going to DO with such a boy as you

are, after all--a great big, overgrown boy? Condy Rivers, look at

me straight in the eye.  Tell me, do you honestly love me? You

know what I mean when I say 'love.' Do you love me?"

 

"No, I don't!" he exclaimed blankly, as though he had just

discovered the fact.

 

"There!" declared Travis--"and I don't love you." They both began

to laugh.

 

"Now," added Travis, "we don't need to have the burden and trouble

of keeping up the pretences any more.  We understand each other,

don't we?"

 

"This is queer enough," said Condy drolly.

 

"But isn't it an improvement?"

 

Condy scoured his head.

 

"Tell me the truth," she insisted; "YOU be sincere."

 

"I do believe it is.  Why--why--Travis by Jingo! Travis, I think

I'm going to like you better than ever now."

 

"Never mind.  Is it an agreement?"

 

"What is?"

 

"That we don't pretend to love each other any more?"

 

"All right--yes--you're right; because the moment I began to love

you I should like you so much less."

 

She put out her hand.  "That's an agreement, then."

 

Condy took her hand in his.  "Yes, it's an agreement." But when,

as had been his custom, he made as though to kiss her hand, Travis

drew it quickly away.

 

"No! no!" she said firmly, smiling for all that--"no more

foolishness."

 

"But--but," he protested, "it's not so radical as that, is it?

You're not going to overturn such time-worn, time-honored customs

as that? Why, this is a regular rebellion."

 

"No, sire," quoted Travis, trying not to laugh, "it is a

revolution."

