 

 

 

Chapter IX

 

 

The old-fashioned Union Street cable car, with its low,

comfortable outside seats, put Blix and Condy down just inside the

Presidio Government Reservation.  Condy asked a direction of a

sentry nursing his Krag-Jorgensen at the terminus of the track,

and then with Blix set off down the long board walk through the

tunnel of overhanging evergreens.

 

The day could not have been more desirable.  It was a little after

ten of a Monday morning, Condy's weekly holiday.  The air was

neither cool nor warm, effervescent merely, brisk and full of the

smell of grass and of the sea.  The sky was a speckless sheen of

pale blue.  To their right, and not far off, was the bay, blue as

indigo.  Alcatraz seemed close at hand; beyond was the enormous

green, red, and purple pyramid of Tamalpais climbing out of the

water, head and shoulders above the little foothills, and looking

out to the sea and to the west.

 

The Reservation itself was delightful.  There were rows of the

officers' houses, all alike, drawn up in lines like an assembly of

the staff; there were huge barracks, most like college

dormitories; and on their porches enlisted men in shirt sleeves

and overalls were cleaning saddles, and polishing the brass of

head-stalls and bridles, whistling the while or smoking corn-cob

pipes.  Here on the parade-ground a soldier, his coat and vest

removed, was batting grounders and flies to a half-dozen of his

fellows.  Over by the stables, strings of horses, all of the same

color, were being curried and cleaned.  A young lieutenant upon a

bicycle spun silently past.  An officer came from his front gate,

his coat unbuttoned and a briar in his teeth.  The walks and roads

were flanked with lines of black-painted cannon-balls; inverted

pieces of abandoned ordnance stood at corners.  From a distance

came the mellow snarling of a bugle.

 

Blix and Condy had planned a long walk for that day.  They were to

go out through the Presidio Reservation, past the barracks and

officers' quarters, and on to the old fort at the Golden Gate.

Here they would turn and follow the shore-line for a way, then

strike inland across the hills for a short half-mile, and regain

the city and the street-car lines by way of the golf-links.  Condy

had insisted upon wearing his bicycle outfit for the occasion,

and, moreover, carried a little satchel, which, he said, contained

a pair of shoes.

 

But Blix was as sweet as a rose that morning, all in tailor-made

black but for the inevitable bands of white satin wrapped high and

tight about her neck.  The St. Bernard dog-collar did duty as a

belt.  She had disdained a veil, and her yellow hair was already

blowing about her smooth pink cheeks.  She walked at his side, her

step as firm and solid as his own, her round, strong arms

swinging, her little brown eyes shining with good spirits and

vigor, and the pure, clean animal joy of being alive on that fine

cool Western morning.  She talked almost incessantly.  She was

positively garrulous.  She talked about the fine day that it was,

about the queer new forage caps of the soldiers, about the bare

green hills of the Reservation, about the little cemetery they

passed just beyond the limits of the barracks, about a rabbit she

saw, and about the quail they both heard whistling and calling in

the hollows under the bushes.

 

Condy walked at her side in silence, yet no less happy than she,

smoking his pipe and casting occasional glances at a great ship--a

four-master that was being towed out toward the Golden Gate.  At

every moment and at every turn they noted things that interested

them, and to which they called each other's attention.

 

"Look, Blix!"

 

"Oh, Condy, look at that!"

 

They were soon out of the miniature city of the Post, and held on

down through the low reach of tules and sand-dunes that stretch

between the barracks and the old red fort.

 

"Look, Condy!" said Blix.  "What's that building down there on the

shore of the bay--the one with the flagstaff?"

 

"I think that must be the lifeboat station."

 

"I wonder if we could go down and visit it.  I think it would be

good fun."

 

"Idea!" exclaimed Condy.

 

The station was close at hand.  To reach it they had but to leave

the crazy board walk that led on toward the fort, and cross a few

hundred yards of sand-dune.  Condy opened the gate that broke the

line of evergreen hedge around the little two-story house, and

promptly unchained a veritable pandemonium of dogs.

 

Inside, the place was not without a certain charm of its own.  A

brick wall, bordered with shells, led to the front of the station,

which gave directly upon the bay; a little well-kept lawn opened

to right and left, and six or eight gaily-painted old rowboats

were set about, half filled with loam in which fuchsias,

geraniums, and mignonettes were flowering.  A cat or two dozed

upon the window-sills in the sun.  Upon a sort of porch overhead,

two of the crew paced up and down in a manner that at once

suggested the poop.  Here and there was a gleam of highly polished

red copper or brass trimmings.  The bay was within two steps of

the front door, while a little further down the beach was the

house where the surf-boat was kept, and the long runway leading

down from it to the water.  Condy rapped loudly at the front door.

It was opened by Captain Jack.

 

Captain Jack, and no other; only now he wore a blue sweater and a

leather-visored cap, with the letters U. S. L. B. S. around the

band.

 

Not an instant was given them for preparation.  The thing had

happened with the abruptness of a transformation scene at a

theatre.  Condy's knock had evoked a situation.  Speech was

stricken from their mouths.  For a moment they were bereft even of

action, and stood there on the threshold, staring open-mouthed and

open-eyed at the sudden reappearance of their "matrimonial

object." Condy was literally dumb; in the end it was Blix who

tided them over the crisis.

 

"We were just going by--just taking a walk," she explained, "and

we thought we'd like to see the station.  Is it all right? Can we

look around?"

 

"Why, of course," assented the Captain with great cordiality.

"Come right in.  This is visitors' day.  You just happened to hit

it--only it's mighty few visitors we ever have," he added.

 

While Condy was registering for himself and Blix, they managed to

exchange a lightning glance.  It was evident the Captain did not

recognize them.  The situation readjusted itself, even promised to

be of extraordinary interest.  And for that matter it made little

difference whether the captain remembered them or not.

 

"No, we don't get many visitors," the Captain went on, as he led

them out of the station and down the small gravel walk to the

house where the surf-boat was kept.  "This is a quiet station.

People don't fetch out this way very often, and we're not called

out very often, either.  We're an inside post, you see, and

usually we don't get a call unless the sea's so high that the

Cliff House station can't launch their boat.  So, you see, we

don't go out much, but when we DO, it means business with a great

big B.  Now, this here, you see," continued the Captain, rolling

back the sliding doors of the house, "is the surf-boat.  By the

way, let's see; I ain't just caught your names yet."

 

"Well, my name's Rivers," said Condy, "and this is Miss Bessemer.

We're both from the city."

 

"Happy to know you, sir; happy to know you, miss," he returned,

pulling off his cap.  "My name's Hoskins, but you can just call me

Captain Jack.  I'm so used to it that I don't kind of answer to

the other.  Well, now, Miss Bessemer, this here's the surf-boat;

she's self-rightin', self-bailin', she can't capsize, and if I was

to tell you how many thousands of dollars she cost, you wouldn't

believe me."

 

Condy and Blix spent a delightful half-hour in the boat-house

while Captain Jack explained and illustrated, and told them

anecdotes of wrecks, escapes, and rescues till they held their

breaths like ten-year-olds.

 

It did not take Condy long to know that he had discovered what the

story-teller so often tells of but so seldom finds, and what, for

want of a better name, he elects to call "a character."

 

Captain Jack had been everywhere, had seen everything, and had

done most of the things worth doing, including a great many things

that he had far better have left undone.  But on this latter point

the Captain seemed to be innocently and completely devoid of a

moral sense of right and wrong.  It was quite evident that he saw

no matter for conscience in the smuggling of Chinamen across the,

Canadian border at thirty dollars a head--a venture in which he

had had the assistance of the prodigal son of an American divine

of international renown.  The trade to Peruvian insurgents of

condemned rifles was to be regretted only because the ring

manipulating it was broken up.  The appropriation of a schooner in

the harbor of Callao was a story in itself; while the robbery of

thirty thousand dollars' worth of sea-otter skins from a Russian

trading-post in Alaska, accomplished chiefly through the agency of

a barrel of rum manufactured from sugar-cane, was a veritable

achievement.

 

He had been born, so he told them, in Winchester, in England, and--

Heaven save the mark!--had been brought up with a view of taking

orders.  For some time he was a choir boy in the great Winchester

Cathedral; then, while yet a lad, had gone to sea.  He had been

boat-steerer on a New Bedford whaler, and struck his first whale

when only sixteen.  He had filibustered down to Chili; had acted

as ice pilot on an Arctic relief expedition; had captained a crew

of Chinamen shark-fishing in Magdalena Bay, and had been nearly

murdered by his men; had been a deep-sea diver, and had burst his

ear-drums at the business, so that now he could blow tobacco smoke

out of his ears; he had been shipwrecked in the Gilberts, fought

with the Seris on the lower California Islands, sold champagne--

made from rock candy, effervescent salts, and Reisling wine--to

the Coreans, had dreamed of "holding up" a Cunard liner, and had

ridden on the Strand in a hansom with William Ewart Gladstone.

But the one thing of which he was proud, the one picture of his

life he most delighted to recall, was himself as manager of a

negro minstrel troupe, in a hired drum-major's uniform, marching

down the streets of Sacramento at the head of the brass band in

burnt cork and regimentals.

 

"The star of the troupe," he told them, "was the lady with the

iron jore.  We busted in Stockton, and she gave me her diamonds to

pawn.  I pawned 'em, and kept back something in the hand for

myself and hooked it to San Francisco.  Strike me straight if she

didn't follow me, that iron-jored piece; met me one day in front

of the Bush Street Theatre, and horsewhipped me properly.  Now,

just think of that"--and he laughed as though it was the best kind

of a joke.

 

"But," hazarded Blix, "don't you find it rather dull out here--

lonesome? I should think you would want to have some one with you

to keep you company--to--to do your cooking for you?"

 

But Condy, ignoring her diplomacy and thinking only of possible

stories, blundered off upon another track.

 

"Yes," he said, "you've led such a life of action, I should think

this station would be pretty dull for you.  How did you happen to

choose it?"

 

"Well, you see, answered the Captain, leaning against the smooth

white flank of the surf-boat, his hands in his pockets, "I'm lying

low just now.  I got into a scrape down at Libertad, in Mexico,

that made talk, and I'm waiting for that to die down some.  You

see, it was this way."

 

Mindful of their experience with the mate of the whaleback, Condy

and Blix were all attention in an instant.  Blix sat down upon an

upturned box, her elbows on her knees, leaning forward, her little

eyes fixed and shining with interest and expectation; Condy, the

story-teller all alive and vibrant in him, stood at her elbow,

smoking cigarette after cigarette, his fingers dancing with

excitement and animation as the Captain spoke.

 

And then it was that Condy and Blix, in that isolated station, the

bay lapping at the shore within ear-shot, in that atmosphere

redolent of paint and oakum and of seaweed decaying upon the beach

outside, first heard the story of "In Defiance of Authority."

 

Captain Jack began it with his experience as a restaurant keeper

during the boom days in Seattle, Washington.  He told them how he

was the cashier of a dining-saloon whose daily net profits

exceeded eight hundred dollars; how its proprietor suddenly died,

and how he, Captain Jack, continued the management of the

restaurant pending a settlement of the proprietor's affairs and an

appearance of heirs; how in the confusion and excitement of the

boom no settlement was ever made; and how, no heirs appearing, he

assumed charge of the establishment himself, paying bills, making

contracts, and signing notes, until he came to consider the

business and all its enormous profits as his own; and how at last,

when the restaurant was burned, he found himself some forty

thousand dollars "ahead of the game."

 

Then he told them of the strange club of the place, called "The

Exiles," made up chiefly of "younger sons" of English and British-

Canadian families, every member possessed of a "past" more or less

disreputable; men who had left their country for their country's

good, and for their family's peace of mind--adventurers,

wanderers, soldiers of fortune, gentlemen-vagabonds, men of

hyphenated names and even noble birth, whose appellations were

avowedly aliases.  He told them of his meeting with Billy Isham,

one of the club's directors, and of the happy-go-lucky, reckless,

unpractical character of the man; of their acquaintance, intimacy,

and subsequent partnership; of how the filibustering project was

started with Captain Jack's forty thousand, and the never-to-be-

forgotten interview in San Francisco with Senora Estrada, the

agent of the insurgents; of the incident of her calling-card--how

she tore it in two and gave one-half to Isham; of their

outfitting, and the broken sextant that was to cause their

ultimate discomfiture and disaster, and of the voyage to the

rendezvous on a Panama liner.

 

"Strike me!" continued Captain Jack, "you should have seen Billy

Isham on that Panama dough-dish; a passenger ship she was, and

Billy was the life of her from stem to stern-post.  There was a

church pulpit aboard that they were taking down to Mazatlan for

some chapel or other, and this here pulpit was lashed on deck aft.

Well, Billy had been most kinds of a fool in his life, and among

others a play-actor; called himself Gaston Maundeville, and was

clean daft on his knowledge of Shakespeare and his own power of

interpretin' the hidden meanin' of the lines.  I ain't never going

to forgit the day he gave us Portia's speech.  We were just under

the tropic, and the day was a scorcher.  There was mostly men folk

aboard, and we lay around the deck in our pajamas, while Billy--

Gaston Maundeville, dressed in striped red and white pajamas--clum

up in that bally pulpit, with the ship's Shakespeare in his hands,

an' let us have--'The quality o' mercy isn't strained; it droppeth

as the genteel dew from heavun.' Laugh, I tell you I was sore with

it.  Lord, how we guyed him! An' the more we guyed and the more we

laughed, the more serious he got and the madder he grew.  He said

he was interpretin' the hidden meanin' of the lines."

 

And so the Captain ran through that wild, fiery tale--of fighting

and loving, buccaneering and conspiring; mandolins tinkling,

knives clicking; oaths mingling with sonnets, and spilled wine

with spilled blood.  He told them of Isham's knife duel with the

Mexican lieutenant, their left wrists lashed together; of the

"battle of the thirty" in the pitch dark of the Custom House

cellar; of Senora Estrada's love for Isham; and all the roll and

plunge of action that make up the story of "In Defiance of

Authority."

 

At the end, Blix's little eyes were snapping like sparks; Condy's

face was flaming, his hands were cold, and he was shifting his

weight from foot to foot, like an excited thoroughbred horse.

 

"Heavens and earth, what a yarn!" he exclaimed almost in a

whisper.

 

Blix drew a long, tremulous breath and sat back upon the upturned

box, looking around her as though she had but that moment been

awakened.

 

"Yes, sir," said the Captain, rolling a cigarette.  "Yes, sir,

those were great days.  Get down there around the line in those

little, out-o'-the-way republics along the South American coast,

and things happen to you.  You hold a man's life in the crook of

your forefinger, an' nothing's done by halves.  If you hate a man,

you lay awake nights biting your mattress, just thinking how you

hate him; an' if you love a woman--good Lord, how you do LOVE

her!"

 

"But--but!" exclaimed Condy, "I don't see how you can want to do

anything else.  Why, you're living sixty to the minute when you're

playing a game like that!"

 

"Oh, I ain't dead yet!" answered the Captain.  "I got a few

schemes left that I could get fun out of."

 

"How can you wait a minute!" exclaimed Blix breathlessly.  "Why

don't you get a ship right away--to-morrow--and go right off on

some other adventure?"

 

"Well, I can't just now," returned the Captain, blowing the smoke

from his cigarette through his ears.  "There's a good many

reasons; one of 'em is that I've just been married."

