

 

 

Chapter XIII

 

 

A week passed; then another.  The year was coming to a close.  In

ten days Blix would be gone.  Letters had been received from Aunt

Kihm, and also an exquisite black leather traveling-case, a

present to her niece, full of cut-glass bottles, ebony-backed

brushes, and shell combs.  Blix was to leave on the second day of

January.  In the meanwhile she had been reading far into her

first-year text-books, underscoring and annotating, studying for

hours upon such subjects as she did not understand, so that she

might get hold of her work the readier when it came to class-room

routine and lectures.  Hers was a temperament admirably suited to

the study she had chosen--self-reliant, cool, and robust.

 

But it was not easy for her to go.  Never before had Blix been

away from her home; never for longer than a week had she been

separated from her father, nor from Howard and Snooky.  That huge

city upon the Atlantic seaboard, with its vast, fierce life, where

beat the heart of the nation, and where beyond Aunt Kihm she knew

no friend, filled Blix with a vague sense of terror and of

oppression.  She was going out into a new life, a life of work and

of study, a harsher life than she had yet known.  Her father, her

friends, her home--all these were to be left behind.  It was not

surprising that Blix should be daunted at the prospect of so great

a change in her life, now so close at hand.  But if the tears did

start at times, no one ever saw them fall, and with a courage that

was all her own Blix watched the last days of the year trooping

past and the approach of the New Year that was to begin the new

life.

 

But Condy was thoroughly unhappy.  Those wonderful three months

were at an end.  Blix was going.  In less than a week now she

would be gone.  He would see the last of her.  Then what? He

pictured himself--when he had said good-by to her and the train

had lessened to a smoky blur in the distance--facing about, facing

the life that must then begin for him, returning to the city

alone, picking up the routine again.  There would be nothing to

look forward to then; he would not see Blix in the afternoon;

would not sit with her in the evening in the little dining-room of

the flat overlooking the city and the bay; would not wake in the

morning with the consciousness that before the sun would set he

would see her again, be with her, and hear the sound of her voice.

The months that were to follow would be one long ache, one long,

harsh, colorless grind without her.  How was he to get through

that first evening that he must pass alone? And she did not care

for him.  Condy at last knew this to be so.  Even the poor solace

of knowing that she, too, was unhappy was denied him.  She had

never loved him, and never would.  He was a chum to her, nothing

more.  Condy was too clear-headed to deceive himself upon this

point.  The time was come for her to go away, and she had given

him no sign, no cue.

 

The last days passed; Blix's trunk was packed, her half section

engaged, her ticket bought.  They said good-by to the old places

they had come to know so well--Chinatown, the Golden Balcony, the

water-front, the lake of San Andreas, Telegraph Hill, and Luna's--

and had bade farewell to Riccardo and to old Richardson.  They had

left K. D. B. and Captain Jack until the last day.  Blix was to go

on the second of January.  On New Year's Day she and Condy were to

take their last walk, were to go out to the lifeboat station, and

then on around the shore to the little amphitheatre of blackberry

bushes--where they had promised always to write one another on the

anniversary of their first visit--and then for the last time climb

the hill, and go across the breezy downs to the city.

 

Then came the last day of the old year, the last day but one that

they would be together.  They spent it in a long ramble along the

water-front, following the line of the shipping even as far as

Meiggs's Wharf.  They had come back to the flat for supper, and

afterward, as soon as the family had left them alone, had settled

themselves in the bay window to watch the New Year in.

 

The little dining-room was dark, but for the indistinct blur of

light that came in through the window--a light that was a mingling

of the afterglow, the new-risen moon, and the faint haze that the

city threw off into the sky from its street lamps and electrics.

From where they sat they could look down, almost as from a tower,

into the city's streets.  Here a corner came into view; further on

a great puff of green foliage--palms and pines side by side--over-

looked a wall.  Here a street was visible for almost its entire

length, like a stream of asphalt flowing down the pitch of the

hill, dammed on either side by rows upon rows of houses; while

further on the vague confusion of roofs and facades opened out

around a patch of green lawn, the garden of some larger residence.

 

As they looked and watched, the afterglow caught window after

window, till all that quarter of the city seemed to stare up at

them from a thousand ruddy eyes.  The windows seemed infinite in

number, the streets endless in their complications: yet everything

was deserted.  At this hour the streets were empty, and would

remain so until daylight.  Not a soul was stirring; no face looked

from any of those myriads of glowing windows; no footfall

disturbed the silence of those asphalt streets.  There, almost

within call behind those windows, shut off from those empty

streets, a thousand human lives were teeming, each the centre of

its own circle of thoughts and words and actions; and yet the

solitude was profound, the desolation complete.  the stillness

unbroken by a single echo.

 

The night--the last night of the old year--was fine; the white,

clear light from a moon they could not see grew wide and clear

over the city, as the last gleam of the sunset faded.  It was just

warm enough for the window to be open, and for nearly three hours

Condy and Blix sat looking down upon the city in these last

moments of the passing year, feeling upon their faces an

occasional touch of the breeze, that carried with it the smell of

trees and flowers from the gardens below them, and the faint fine

taint of the ocean from far out beyond the Heads.  But the scene

was not in reality silent.  At times when they listened intently,

especially when they closed their eyes, there came to them a

subdued, steady bourdon, profound, unceasing, a vast, numb murmur,

like no other sound in all the gamut of nature--the sound of a

city at night, the hum of a great, conglomerate life, wrought out

there from moment to moment under the stars and under the moon,

while the last hours of the old year dropped quietly away.

 

A star fell.

 

Sitting in the window, the two noticed it at once, and Condy

stirred for the first time in fifteen minutes.

 

"That was a very long one," he said, in a low voice.  "Blix, you

must write to me--we must write each other often."

 

"Oh, yes," she answered.  "We must not forget each other; we have

had too good a time for that."

 

"Four years is a long time," he went on.  "Lots can happen in four

years.  Wonder what I'll be doing at the end of four years? We've

had a pleasant time while it lasted, Blix."

 

"Haven't we?" she said, her chin on her hand, the moonlight

shining in her little, dark-brown eyes.

 

Well, he was going to lose her.  He had found out that he loved

her only in time to feel the wrench of parting from her all the

more keenly.  What was he to do with himself after she was gone?

What could he turn to in order to fill up the great emptiness that

her going would leave in his daily life? And was she never to know

how dear she was to him? Why not speak to her, why not tell her

that he loved her? But Condy knew that Blix did not love him, and

the knowledge of that must keep him silent; he must hug his secret

to him, like the Spartan boy with his stolen fox, no matter how

grievously it hurt him to do so.  He and Blix had lived through

two months of rarest, most untroubled happiness, with hardly more

self-consciousness than two young and healthy boys.  To bring that

troublous, disquieting element of love between them--unrequited

love, of all things--would be a folly.  She would tell him--must

in all honesty tell him that she did not love him, and all their

delicious camaraderie would end in a "scene." Condy, above

everything, wished to look back on those two months, after she had

gone, without being able to remember therein one single note that

jarred.  If the memory of her was all that he was to have, he

resolved that at least that memory should be perfect.

 

And the love of her had made a man of him--he could not forget

that; had given to him just the strength that made it possible for

him to keep that resolute, grim silence now.  In those two months

he had grown five years; he was more masculine, more virile.  The

very set of his mouth was different; between the eye-brows the

cleft had deepened; his voice itself vibrated to a heavier note.

No, no; so long as he should live, he, man grown as he was, could

never forget this girl of nineteen who had come into his life so

quietly, so unexpectedly, who had influenced it so irresistibly

and so unmistakably for its betterment, and who had passed out of

it with the passing of the year.

 

For a few moments Condy had been absent-mindedly snapping the lid

of his cigarette case, while he thought; now he selected a

cigarette, returned the case to his pocket, and fumbled for a

match.  But the little gun-metal case he carried was empty.  Blix

rose and groped for a moment upon the mantel-shelf, then returned

and handed him a match, and stood over him while he scraped it

under the arm of the chair wherein he sat.  Even when his

cigarette was lighted she still stood there, looking at him, the

fingers of her hands clasped in front of her, her hair, one side

of her cheek, her chin, and sweet, round neck outlined by the

faint blur of light that came from the open window.  Then quietly

she said:

 

"Well, Condy?"

 

"Well, Blix?"

 

"Just 'well'?" she repeated.  "Is that all? Is that all you have

to say to me?"

 

He gave a great start.

 

"Blix!" he exclaimed.

 

"Is that all? And you are going to let me go away from you for so

long, and say nothing more than that to me? You think you have

been so careful, think you have kept your secret so close! Condy,

don't you suppose I know? Do you suppose women are so blind? No,

you don't need to tell me; I know--I've known it--oh, for weeks!"

 

"You know--know--know what?" he exclaimed, breathless.

 

"That you have been pretending that you did not love me.  I know

that you do love me--I know you have been trying to keep it from

me for fear it would spoil our good times, and because we had made

up our minds to be chums, and have 'no more foolishness.' Once--in

those days when we first knew each other--I knew you did not love

me when you said you did; but now, since--oh, since that afternoon

in the Chinese restaurant, remember?--I've known that you did love

me, although you pretended you didn't.  It was the pretence I

wanted to be rid of; I wanted to be rid of it when you said you

loved me and didn't, and I want to be rid of it now when YOU

pretend not to love me and I KNOW you do," and Blix leaned back

her head as she spoke that "know," looking at him from under her

lids, a smile upon her lips.  "It's the pretence that I won't

have," she added.  "We must be sincere with each other, you and

I."

 

"Blix, do YOU love ME?"

 

Condy had risen to his feet, his breath was coming quick, his

cigarette was flung away, and his hands opened and shut swiftly.

 

"Oh, Blixy, little girl, do YOU love ME?"

 

They stood there for a moment in the half dark, facing one

another, their hearts beating, their breath failing them in the

tension of the instant.  There in that room, high above the city,

a little climax had come swiftly to a head, a crisis in two lives

had suddenly developed.  The moment that had been in preparation

for the last few months, the last few years, the last few

centuries, behold! it had arrived.

 

"Blix, do you love me?"

 

Suddenly it was the New Year.  Somewhere close at hand a chorus of

chiming church bells sang together.  Far off in the direction of

the wharves, where the great ocean steamships lay, came the glad,

sonorous shouting of a whistle; from a nearby street a bugle

called aloud.  And then from point to point, from street to roof

top, and from roof to spire, the vague murmur of many sounds grew

and spread and widened, slowly, grandly; that profound and steady

bourdon, as of an invisible organ swelling, deepening, and

expanding to the full male diapason of the city aroused and

signaling the advent of another year.

 

And they heard it, they two heard it, standing there face to face,

looking into each other's eyes, that unanswered question yet

between them, the question that had come to them with the turning

of the year.  It was the old year yet when Condy had asked that

question.  In that moment's pause, while Blix hesitated to answer

him, the New Year had come.  And while the huge, vast note of the

city swelled and vibrated, she still kept silent.  But only for a

moment.  Then she came closer to him, and put a hand on each of

his shoulders.

 

"Happy New Year, dear," she said.

 

*  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *

 

On New Year's Day, the last day they were to be together, Blix and

Condy took "their walk," as they had come to call it--the walk

that included the lifeboat station, the Golden Gate, the ocean

beach beyond the old fort, the green, bare, flower-starred hills

and downs, and the smooth levels of the golf links.  Blix had been

busy with the last details of her packing, and they did not get

started until toward two in the afternoon.

 

"Strike me!" exclaimed Captain Jack, as Blix informed him that she

had come to say good-by.  "Why, ain't this very sudden-like, Miss

Bessemer? Hey, Kitty, come in here.  Here's Miss Bessemer come to

say good-by; going to New York to-morrow."

 

"We'll regularly be lonesome without you, miss," said K. D. B., as

she came into the front room, bringing with her a brisk, pungent

odor of boiled vegetables.  "New York--such a town as it must be!

It was called Manhattan at first, you know, and was settled by the

Dutch."

 

Evidently K. D. B. had reached the N's.

 

With such deftness as she possessed, Blix tried to turn the

conversation upon the first meeting of the retired sea captain and

the one-time costume reader, but all to no purpose.  The

"Matrimonial Objects" were perhaps a little ashamed of their

"personals" by now, and neither Blix nor Condy were ever to hear

their version of the meeting in the back dining-room of Luna's

Mexican restaurant.  Captain Jack was, in fact, anxious to change

the subject.

 

"Any news of the yarn yet?" he suddenly inquired of Condy "What do

those Eastern publishin' people think of Our Mug and Billy Isham

and the whiskey schooner?"

 

Condy had received the rejected manuscript of "In Defiance of

Authority" that morning, accompanied by a letter from the

Centennial Company.

 

"Well," he said in answer, "they're not, as you might say, falling

over themselves trying to see who'll be the first to print it.

It's been returned."

 

"The devil you say!" responded the Captain.  "Well, that's kind of

disappointin' to you, ain't it?"

 

"But," Blix hastened to add, "we're not at all discouraged.  We're

going to send it off again right away."

 

Then she said good-by to them.

 

"I dunno as you'll see me here when you come back, miss," said the

Captain, at the gate, his arm around K. D. B. "I've got to

schemin' again.  Do you know," he added, in a low, confidential

tone, "that all the mines in California send their clean-ups and

gold bricks down to the Selby smeltin' works once every week? They

send 'em to San Francisco first, and they are taken up to Selby's

Wednesday afternoons on a little stern-wheel steamer called the

"Monticello." All them bricks are in a box--dumped in like so much

coal--and that box sets just under the wheel-house, for'ard.  How

much money do you suppose them bricks represent? Well, I'll tell

you; last week they represented seven hundred and eighty thousand

dollars.  Well, now, I got a chart of the bay near Vallejo; the

channel's all right, but there are mudflats that run out from

shore three miles.  Enough water for a whitehall, but not enough

for--well, for the patrol boat, for instance.  Two or three slick

boys, of a foggy night--of course, I'm not in that kind of game,

but strike! it would be a deal now, wouldn't it?"

 

"Don't you believe him, miss," put in K. D. B. "He's just talking

to show off."

 

"I think your scheme of holding up a Cunard liner," said Condy,

with great earnestness, "is more feasible.  You could lay across

her course and fly a distress signal.  She'd have to heave to."

 

"Yes, I been thinkin' o' that; but look here--what's to prevent

the liner taking right after your schooner after you've got the

stuff aboard--just followin' you right around an' findin' out

where you land?"

 

"She'd be under contract to carry Government mails," contradicted

Condy.  "She couldn't do that.  You'd leave her mails aboard for

just that reason.  You wouldn't rob her of her mails; just so long

as she was carrying government mails she couldn't stop."

 

The Captain clapped his palm down upon the gate-post.

 

"Strike me straight! I never thought of that."

