

 

 

Chapter V

 

 

Condy began his week's work for the supplement behindhand.

Naturally he overslept himself Tuesday morning, and, not having

any change in his pockets, was obliged to walk down to the office.

He arrived late, to find the compositors already fretting for

copy.  His editor promptly asked for the whaleback stuff, and

Condy was forced into promising it within a half-hour.  It was out

of the question to write the article according to his own idea in

so short a time; so Condy faked the stuff from the exchange

clipping, after all.  His description of the boat and his comments

upon her mission--taken largely at second hand--served only to

fill space in the paper.  They were lacking both in interest and

in point.  There were no illustrations.  The article was a

failure.

 

But Condy redeemed himself by a witty interview later in the week

with an emotional actress, and by a solemn article compiled after

an hour's reading in Lafcadio Hearn and the Encyclopedia--on the

"Industrial Renaissance in Japan."

 

But the idea of the diver's story came back to him again and

again, and Thursday night after supper he went down to his club,

and hid himself at a corner desk in the library, and, in a burst

of enthusiasm, wrote out some two thousand words of it.  In order

to get the "technical details," upon which he set such store, he

consulted the Encyclopedias again, and "worked in" a number of

unfamiliar phrases and odd-sounding names.  He was so proud of the

result that he felt he could not wait until the tale was finished

and in print to try its effect.  He wanted appreciation and

encouragement upon the instant.  He thought of Blix.

 

"She saw the point in Morrowbie Jukes' description of the slope of

the sandhill," he told himself; and the next moment had resolved

to go up and see her the next evening, and read to her what he had

written.

 

This was on Thursday.  All through that week Blix had kept much to

herself, and for the first time in two years had begun to spend

every evening at home.  In the morning of each day she helped

Victorine with the upstairs work, making the beds, putting the

rooms to rights; or consulted with the butcher's and grocer's boys

at the head of the back stairs, or chaffered with urbane and

smiling Chinamen with their balanced vegetable baskets.  She knew

the house and its management at her fingers' ends, and supervised

everything that went forward.  Laurie Flagg coming to call upon

her, on Wednesday afternoon, to remonstrate upon her sudden

defection, found her in the act of tacking up a curtain across the

pantry window.

 

But Blix had the afternoons and evenings almost entirely to

herself.  These hours, heretofore taken up with functions and the

discharge of obligations, dragged not a little during the week

that followed upon her declaration of independence.  Wednesday

afternoon, however, was warm and fine, and she went to the Park

with Snooky.  Without looking for it or even expecting it, Blix

came across a little Japanese tea-house, or rather a tiny Japanese

garden, set with almost toy Japanese houses and pavilions, where

tea was served and thin sweetish wafers for five cents.  Blix and

Snooky went in.  There was nobody about but the Japanese serving

woman.  Snooky was in raptures, and Blix spent a delightful half-

hour there, drinking Japanese tea, and feeding the wafers to the

carp and gold-fish in the tiny pond immediately below where she

sat.  A Chinaman, evidently of the merchant class, came in, with a

Chinese woman following.  As he took his place and the Japanese

girl came up to get his order, Blix overheard him say in English:

"Bring tea for-um leddy."

 

"He had to speak in English to her," she whispered; "isn't that

splendid! Did you notice that, Snooky?"

 

On the way home Blix was wondering how she should pass her

evening.  She was to have made one of a theatre party where Jack

Carter was to be present.  Then she suddenly remembered "Morrowbie

Jukes," "The Return of Imri," and "Krishna Mulvaney." She

continued on past her home, downtown, and returned late for supper

with "Plain Tales" and "Many Inventions."

 

Toward half-past eight there came a titter of the electric bell.

At the moment Blix was in the upper chamber of the house of

Suddhoo, quaking with exquisite horror at the Seal-cutter's magic.

She looked up quickly as the bell rang.  It was not Condy Rivers'

touch.  She swiftly reflected that it was Wednesday night, and

that she might probably expect Frank Catlin.  He was a fair

specimen of the Younger Set, a sort of modified Jack Carter, and

called upon her about once a fortnight.  No doubt he would hint

darkly as to his riotous living during the past few days and refer

to his diet of bromo-seltzers.  He would be slangy, familiar, call

her by her first name as many times as he dared, discuss the last

dance of the Saturday cotillion, and try to make her laugh over

Carter's drunkenness.  Blix knew the type.  Catlin was hardly out

of college; but the older girls, even the young women of twenty-

five or six, encouraged and petted these youngsters, driven to the

alternative by the absolute dearth of older men.

 

"I'm not at home, Victorine," announced Blix, intercepting the

maid in the hall.  It chanced that it was not Frank Catlin, but

another boy of precisely the same breed; and Blix returned to

Suddhoo, Mrs. Hawksbee, and Mulvaney with a little cuddling

movement of satisfaction.

 

"There is only one thing I regret about this," she said to Condy

Rivers on the Friday night of that week; "that is, that I never

thought of doing it before." Then suddenly she put up her hand to

shield her eyes, as though from an intense light, turning away her

head abruptly.

 

"I say, what is it? What--what's the matter?" he exclaimed.

 

Blix peeped at him fearfully from between her fingers.  "He's got

it on," she whispered--"that awful crimson scarf."

 

"Hoh!" said Condy, touching his scarf nervously, "it's--it's very

swell.  Is it too loud?" he asked uneasily.

 

Blix put her fingers in her ears; then:

 

"Condy, you're a nice, amiable young man, and, if you're not

brilliant, you're good and kind to your aged mother; but your

scarfs and neckties are simply impossible."

 

"Well, look at this room!" he shouted--they were in the parlor.

"You needn't talk about bad taste.  Those drapes--oh-h! those

drapes!! Yellow, s'help me! And those bisque figures that you get

with every pound of tea you buy; and this, this, THIS," he

whimpered, waving his hands at the decorated sewer-pipe with its

gilded cat-tails.  "Oh, speak to me of this; speak to me of art;

speak to me of aesthetics.  Cat-tails, GILDED.  Of course, why not

GILDED!" He wrung his hands.  "'Somewhere people are happy.

Somewhere little children are at play--'"

 

"Oh, hush!" she interrupted.  "I know it's bad; but we've always

had it so, and I won't have it abused.  Let's go into the dining-

room, anyway.  We'll sit in there after this.  We've always been

stiff and constrained in here."

 

They went out into the dining-room, and drew up a couple of arm-

chairs into the bay window, and sat there looking out.  Blix had

not yet lighted the gas--it was hardly dark enough for that; and

for upward of ten minutes they sat and watched the evening

dropping into night.

 

Below them the hill fell away so abruptly that the roofs of the

nearest houses were almost at their feet; and beyond these the

city tumbled raggedly down to meet the bay in a confused, vague

mass of roofs, cornices, cupolas, and chimneys, blurred and

indistinct in the twilight, but here and there pierced by a new-

lighted street lamp.  Then came the bay.  To the east they could

see Goat Island, and the fleet of sailing-ships anchored off the

water-front; while directly in their line of vision the island of

Alcatraz, with its triple crown of forts, started from the surface

of the water.  Beyond was the Contra Costa shore, a vast streak of

purple against the sky.  The eye followed its sky-line westward

till it climbed, climbed, climbed up a long slope that suddenly

leaped heavenward with the crest of Tamalpais, purple and still,

looking always to the sunset like a great watching sphinx.  Then,

further on, the slope seemed to break like the breaking of an

advancing billow, and go tumbling, crumbling downward to meet the

Golden Gate--the narrow inlet of green tide-water with its

flanking Presidio.  But, further than this, the eye was stayed.

Further than this there was nothing, nothing but a vast,

illimitable plain of green--the open Pacific.  But at this hour

the color of the scene was its greatest charm.  It glowed with all

the sombre radiance of a cathedral.  Everything was seen through a

haze of purple--from the low green hills in the Presidio

Reservation to the faint red mass of Mount Diablo shrugging its

rugged shoulder over the Contra Costa foot-hills.  As the evening

faded, the west burned down to a dull red glow that overlaid the

blue of the bay with a sheen of ruddy gold.  The foot-hills of the

opposite shore, Diablo, and at last even Tamalpais, resolved

themselves in the velvet gray of the sky.  Outlines were lost.

Only the masses remained, and these soon began to blend into one

another.  The sky, and land, and the city's huddled roofs were

one.  Only the sheen of dull gold remained, piercing the single

vast mass of purple like the blade of a golden sword.

 

"There's a ship!" said Blix in a low tone.

 

A four-master was dropping quietly through the Golden Gate,

swimming on that sheen of gold, a mere shadow, specked with lights

red and green.  In a few moments her bows were shut from sight by

the old fort at the Gate.  Then her red light vanished, then the

mainmast.  She was gone.  By midnight she would be out of sight of

land, rolling on the swell of the lonely ocean under the moon's

white eye.

 

Condy and Blix sat quiet and without speech, not caring to break

the charm of the evening.  For quite five minutes they sat thus,

watching the stars light one by one, and the immense gray night

settle and broaden and widen from mountain-top to horizon.  They

did not feel the necessity of making conversation.  There was no

constraint in their silence now.

 

Gently, and a little at a time, Condy turned his head and looked

at Blix.  There was just light enough to see.  She was leaning

back in her chair, her hands fallen into her lap, her head back

and a little to one side.  As usual, she was in black; but now it

was some sort of dinner-gown that left her arms and neck bare.

The line of the chin and the throat and the sweet round curve of

the shoulder had in it something indescribable--something that was

related to music, and that eluded speech.  Her hair was nothing

more than a warm colored mist without form or outline.  The sloe-

brown of her little eyes and the flush of her cheek were mere

inferences--like the faintest stars that are never visible when

looked at directly; and it seemed to him that there was disengaged

from her something for which there was no name; something that

appealed to a mysterious sixth sense--a sense that only stirred at

such quiet moments as this; something that was now a dim, sweet

radiance, now a faint aroma, and now again a mere essence, an

influence, an impression--nothing more.  It seemed to him as if

her sweet, clean purity and womanliness took a form of its own

which his accustomed senses were too gross to perceive.  Only a

certain vague tenderness in him went out to meet and receive this

impalpable presence; a tenderness not for her only, but for all

the good things of the world.  Often he had experienced the same

feeling when listening to music.  Her sweetness, her goodness,

appealed to what he guessed must be the noblest in him.  And she

was only nineteen.  Suddenly his heart swelled, the ache came to

his throat and the smart to his eyes.

 

"Blixy," he said, just above a whisper; "Blixy, wish I was a

better sort of chap."

 

"That's the beginning of being better, isn't it, Condy?" she

answered, turning toward him, her chin on her hand.

 

"It does seem a pity," he went on, "that when you WANT to do the

right, straight thing, and be clean and fine, that you can't just

BE it, and have it over with.  It's the keeping it up that's the

grind."

 

"But it's the keeping it up, Condy, that makes you WORTH BEING

GOOD when you finally get to be good; don't you think? It's the

keeping it up that makes you strong; and then when you get to be

good you can make your goodness count.  What's a good man if he's

weak?--if his goodness is better than he is himself? It's the good

man who is strong--as strong as his goodness, and who can make his

goodness count--who is the right kind of man.  That's what I

think."

 

There's something in that, there's something in that." Then, after

a pause: "I played Monday night, after all, Blix, after promising

I wouldn't."

 

For a time she did not answer, and when she spoke, she spoke

quietly: "Well--I'm glad you told me"; and after a little she

added, "Can't you stop, Condy?"

 

"Why, yes--yes, of course--I--oh, Blix, sometimes I don't know!

You can't understand! How could a girl understand the power of it?

Other things, I don't say; but when it comes to gambling, there

seems to be another me that does precisely as he chooses, whether

I will or not.  But I'm going to do my best.  I haven't played

since, although there was plenty of chance.  You see, this card

business is only a part of this club life, this city life--like

drinking and--other vices of men.  If I didn't have to lead the

life, or if I didn't go with that crowd--Sargeant and the rest of

those men--it would be different; easier, maybe."

 

"But a man ought to be strong enough to be himself and master of

himself anywhere.  Condy, IS there anything in the world better or

finer than a strong man?"

 

"Not unless it is a good woman, Blix."

 

"I suppose I look at it from a woman's point of view; but for me a

STRONG man--strong in everything--is the grandest thing in the

world.  Women love strong men, Condy.  They can forgive a strong

man almost anything."

 

Condy did not immediately answer, and in the interval an idea

occurred to Blix that at once hardened into a determination.  But

she said nothing at the moment.  The spell of the sunset was gone

and they had evidently reached the end of that subject of their

talk.  Blix rose to light the gas.  Will you promise me one thing,

Condy?" she said.  "Don't if you don't want to.  But will you

promise me that you will tell me whenever you do play?"

 

"That I'll promise you!" exclaimed Condy; "and I'll keep that,

too."

 

"And now, let's hear the story--or what you've done of it."

 

They drew up to the dining-room table with its cover of blue denim

edged with white cord, and Condy unrolled his manuscript and read

through what he had written.  She approved, and, as he had

foreseen, "caught on" to every one of his points.  He was almost

ready to burst into cheers when she said:

 

"Any one reading that would almost believe you had been a diver

yourself, or at least had lived with divers.  Those little details

count, don't they? Condy, I've an idea.  See what you think of it.

Instead of having the story end with his leaving her down there

and going away, do it this way.  Let him leave her there, and then

go back after a long time when he gets to be an old man.  Fix it

up some way to make it natural.  Have him go down to see her and

never come up again, see? And leave the reader in doubt as to

whether it was an accident or whether he did it on purpose."

 

Condy choked back a whoop and smote his knee.  "Blix, you're the

eighth wonder! Magnificent--glorious! Say!"--he fixed her with a

glance of curiosity--"you ought to take to story-writing

yourself."

 

"No, no," she retorted significantly.  "I'll just stay with my

singing and be content with that.  But remember that story don't

go to 'The Times' supplement.  At least not until you have tried

it East--with the Centennial Company, at any rate."

 

"Well, I guess NOT!" snorted Condy.  "Why, this is going to be one

of the best yarns I ever wrote."

 

A little later on he inquired with sudden concern: "Have you got

anything to eat in the house?"

 

"I never saw such a man!" declared Blix; "you are always hungry."

 

"I love to eat," he protested.

 

"Well, we'll make some creamed oysters; how would that do?"

suggested Blix.

 

Condy rolled his eyes.  "Oh, speak to me of creamed oysters!"

Then, with abrupt solemnity: "Blix, I never in my life had as many

oysters as I could eat."

 

She made the creamed oysters in the kitchen over the gas-stove,

and they ate them there--Condy sitting on the washboard of the

sink, his plate in his lap.

 

Condy had a way of catching up in his hands whatever happened to

be nearest him, and, while still continuing to talk, examining it

with apparent deep interest.  Just now it happened to be the

morning's paper that Victorine had left on the table.  For five

minutes Condy had been picking it up and laying it down, frowning

abstractedly at it during the pauses in the conversation.

Suddenly he became aware of what it was, and instantly read aloud

the first item that caught his glance:

 

"'Personal.--Young woman, thirty-one, good housekeeper, desires

acquaintance respectable middle-aged gentleman.  Object,

matrimony.  Address K. D. B., this office.'--Hum!" he commented,

"nothing equivocal about K. D. B.; has the heroism to call herself

young at thirty-one.  I'll bet she IS a good housekeeper.  Right

to the point.  If K. D. B. don't see what she wants, she asks for

it."

 

"I wonder," mused Blix, "what kind of people they are who put

personals in the papers.  K. D. B., for instance; who is she, and

what is she like?"

 

"They're not tough," Condy assured her.  "I see 'em often down at

'The Times' office.  They are usually a plain, matter-of-fact

sort, quite conscientious, you know; generally middle-aged--or

thirty-one; outgrown their youthful follies and illusions, and

want to settle down."

 

"Read some more," urged Blix.  Condy went on.

 

"'Bachelor, good habits, twenty-five, affectionate disposition,

accomplishments, money, desires acquaintance pretty, refined girl.

Object, matrimony.  McB., this office.'"

 

"No, I don't like McB.," said Blix.  "He's too--ornamental,

somehow."

 

"He wouldn't do for K. D. B., would he?"

 

"Oh, my, no! He'd make her very unhappy."

 

"'Widower, two children, home-loving disposition, desires

introduction to good, honest woman to make home for his children.

Matrimony, if suitable.  B. P. T., Box A, this office.'"

 

"He's not for K. D. B., that's flat," declared Blix; "the idea,

'matrimony if suitable'--patronizing enough! I know just what kind

of an old man B. P. T. is.  I know he would want K. D. B. to warm

his slippers, and would be fretful and grumpy.  B. P. T., just an

abbreviation of bumptious.  No, he can't have her."

 

Condy read the next two or three to himself, despite her protests.

 

"Condy, don't be mean! Read them to--"

 

"Ah!" he exclaimed, "here's one for K. D. B.  Behold, the

bridegroom cometh! Listen."

 

"'Bachelor, thirty-nine, sober and industrious, retired sea

captain, desires acquaintance respectable young woman, good house-

keeper and manager.  Object, matrimony.  Address Captain Jack,

office this paper."

 

"I know he's got a wooden leg!" cried Blix.  "Can't you just see

it sticking out between the lines? And he lives all alone

somewhere down near the bay with a parrot--"

 

"And makes a glass of grog every night."

 

"And smokes a long clay pipe."

 

"But he chews tobacco."

 

"Yes, isn't it a pity he will chew that nasty, smelly tobacco? But

K. D. B. will break him of that."

 

"Oh, is he for K. D. B.?"

 

"Sent by Providence!" declared Blix.  "They were born for each

other.  Just see, K. D. B. is a good housekeeper, and wants a

respectable middle-aged gentleman.  Captain Jack is a respectable

middle-aged gentleman, and wants a good housekeeper.  Oh, and

besides, I can read between the lines! I just feel they would be

congenial.  If they know what's best for themselves, they would

write to each other right away."

 

"But wouldn't you love to be there and see them meet!" exclaimed

Condy.

 

"Can't we fix it up some way," said Blix, "to bring these two

together--to help them out in some way?"

 

Condy smote the table and jumped to his feet.

 

"Write to 'em!" he shouted.  "Write to K. D. B. and sign it

Captain Jack, and write to Captain Jack--"

 

"And sign it K. D. B.," she interrupted, catching his idea.

 

"And have him tell her, and her tell him," he added, "to meet at

some place; and then we can go to that place and hide, and watch."

 

"But how will we know them? How would they know each other?

They've never met."

 

"We'll tell them both to wear a kind of flower.  Then we can know

them, and they can know each other.  Of course as soon as they

began to talk they would find out they hadn't written."

 

"But they wouldn't care."

 

"No--they want to meet each other.  They would be thankful to us

for bringing them together."

 

"Won't it be the greatest fun?"

 

"Fun! Why, it will be a regular drama.  Only we are running the

show, and everything is real.  Let's get at it!"

 

Blix ran into her room and returned with writing material.  Condy

looked at the note-paper critically.  "This kind's too swell.  K.

D. B. wouldn't use Irish linen--never! Here, this is better,

glazed with blue lines and a flying bird stamped in the corner.

Now I'll write for the Captain, and you write for K. D. B."

 

"But where will we have them meet?"

 

This was a point.  They considered the Chinese restaurant, the

Plaza, Lotta's fountain, the Mechanics' Library, and even the

cathedral over in the Mexican quarter, but arrived at no decision.

 

"Did you ever hear of Luna's restaurant?" said Condy.  "By Jove,

it's just the place! It's the restaurant where you get Mexican

dinners; right in the heart of the Latin quarter; quiet little

old-fashioned place, below the level of the street, respectable as

a tomb.  I was there just once.  We'll have 'em meet there at

seven in the evening.  No one is there at that hour.  The place

isn't patronized much, and it shuts up at eight.  You and I can go

there and have dinner at six, say, and watch for them to come."

 

Then they set to work at their letters.

 

"Now," said Condy, "we must have these sound perfectly natural,

because if either of these people smell the smallest kind of a

rat, you won't catch 'em.  You must write not as YOU would write,

but as you think THEY would.  This is an art, a kind of fiction,

don't you see? We must imagine a certain character, and write a

letter consistent with that character.  Then it'll sound natural.

Now, K. D. B.  Well, K. D. B., she's prim.  Let's have her prim,

and proud of using correct, precise, 'elegant' language.  I guess

she wears mits, and believes in cremation.  Let's have her believe

in cremation.  And Captain Jack; oh! he's got a terrible voice,

like this, ROW-ROW-ROW see? and whiskers, very fierce; and he

says, 'Belay there!' and 'Avast!' and is very grandiloquent and

orotund and gallant when it comes to women.  Oh, he's the devil of

a man when it comes to women, is Captain Jack!"

 

After countless trials and failures, they evolved the two

following missives, which Condy posted that night:

 

 

"Captain Jack.

 

"SIR:--I have perused with entire satisfaction your personal in

'The Times.' I should like to know more of you.  I read between

the lines, and my perception ineradicably convinces me that you

are honest and respectable.  I do not believe I should compromise

my self-esteem at all in granting you an interview.  I shall be at

Luna's restaurant at seven precisely, next Monday eve, and will

bear a bunch of white marguerites.  Will you likewise, and wear a

marguerite in your lapel?

 

"Trusting this will find you in health, I am

 

                "Respectfully yours,

 

                                   "K. D. B."

 

 

 

"Miss K. D. B.

 

"DEAR MISS:--From the modest and retiring description of your

qualities and character, I am led to believe that I will find in

you an agreeable life companion.  Will you not accord me the great

favor of a personal interview? I shall esteem it a high honor.  I

will be at Luna's Mexican restaurant at seven of the clock P.M. on

Monday evening next.  May I express the fervent hope that you also

will be there? I name the locality because it is quiet and

respectable.  I shall wear a white marguerite in my buttonhole.

Will you also carry a bunch of the same flower?

 

                 "Yours to command,

 

                             "CAPTAIN JACK."

 

 

So great was her interest in the affair that Blix even went out

with Condy while he mailed the letters in the nearest box, for he

was quite capable of forgetting the whole matter as soon as he was

out of the house.

 

"Now let it work!" she exclaimed as the iron flap clanked down

upon the disappearing envelopes.  But Condy was suddenly smitten

with nameless misgiving.  "Now we've done it! now we've done it!"

he cried aghast.  "I wish we hadn't.  We're in a fine fix now."

 

Still uneasy, he saw Blix back to the flat, and bade her good-by

at the door.

 

But before she went to bed that night, Blix sought out her father,

who was still sitting up tinkering with the cuckoo clock, which he

had taken all to pieces under the pretext that it was out of order

and went too fast.

 

"Papum," said Blix, sitting down on the rug before him, "did you

ever--when you were a pioneer, when you first came out here in the

fifties--did you ever play poker?"

 

"I--oh, well! it was the only amusement the miners had for a long

time."

 

"I want you to teach me."

 

The old man let the clock fall into his lap and stared.  But Blix

explained her reasons.

