 

 

 

Chapter III

 

 

Although Monday was practically a holiday for the Sunday-

supplement staff of "The Times," Condy Rivers made a point to get

down to the office betimes the next morning.  There were reasons

why a certain article descriptive of a great whaleback steamer

taking on grain for famine-stricken India should be written that

day, and Rivers wanted his afternoon free in order to go to Laurie

Flagg's coming-out tea.

 

But as he came into his room at "The Times" office, which he

shared with the exchange and sporting editors, and settled himself

at his desk, he suddenly remembered that, under the new order of

things, he need not expect to see Travis at the Flaggs'.

 

"Well," he muttered, "maybe it doesn't make so much difference,

after all.  She was a corking fine girl, but--might as well admit

it--the play is played out.  Of course, I don't love her--any more

whan she loves me.  I'll see less and less of her now.  It's

inevitable, and after a while we'll hardly even meet.  In a way,

it's a pity; but, of course, one has to be sensible about these

things....Well, this whaleback now."

 

He rang up the Chamber of Commerce, and found out that the "City

of Everett," which was the whaleback's name, was at the Mission

Street wharf.  This made it possible for him to write the article

in two ways.  He either could fake his copy from a clipping on the

subject which the exchange editor had laid on his desk, or he

could go down in person to the wharf, interview the captain, and

inspect the craft for himself.  The former was the short and easy

method.  The latter was more troublesome, but would result in a

far more interesting article.

 

Condy debated the subject a few minutes, then decided to go down

to the wharf.  San Francisco's water-front was always interesting,

and he might get hold of a photograph of the whaleback.  All at

once the "idea" of the article struck him, the certain underlying

notion that would give importance and weight to the mere details

and descriptions.  Condy's enthusiasm flared up in an instant.

 

"By Jove!" he exclaimed; "by Jove!"

 

He clapped on his hat wrong side foremost, crammed a sheaf of

copy-paper into his pocket, and was on the street again in another

moment.  Then it occurred to him that he had forgotten to call at

his club that morning for his mail, as was his custom, on the way

to the office.  He looked at his watch.  It was early yet, and his

club was but two blocks' distance.  He decided that he would get

his letters at the club, and read them on the way down to the

wharf.

 

For Condy had joined a certain San Francisco club of artists,

journalists, musicians, and professional men that is one of the

institutions of the city, and, in fact, famous throughout the

United States.  He was one of the younger members, but was popular

and well liked, and on more than one occasion had materially

contributed to the fun of the club's "low jinks."

 

In his box this morning he found one letter that he told himself

he must read upon the instant.  It bore upon the envelope the name

of a New York publishing house to whom Condy had sent a collection

of his short stories about a month before.  He took the letter

into the "round window" of the club, overlooking the street, and

tore it open excitedly.  The fact that he had received a letter

from the firm without the return of his manuscript seemed a good

omen.  This was what he read:

 

Conde Rivers, Esq., Bohemian Club, San Francisco, Cal.

 

DEAR SIR: We return to you by this mail the manuscript of your

stories, which we do not consider as available for publication at

the present moment.  We would say, however, that we find in

several of them indications of a quite unusual order of merit.

The best-selling book just now is the short novel--say thirty

thousand words--of action and adventure.  Judging from the stories

of your collection, we suspect that your talent lies in this

direction, and we would suggest that you write such a novel and

submit the same to us.

             Very respectfully,

                    THE CENTENNIAL CO.,

                                  New York.

 

Condy shoved the letter into his pocket and collapsed limply into

his chair.

 

"What's the good of trying to do anything anyhow!" he muttered,

looking gloomily down into the street.  "My level is just the

hack-work of a local Sunday supplement, and I am a fool to think

of anything else."

 

His enthusiasm in the matter of the "City of Everett" was cold and

dead in a moment.  He could see no possibilities in the subject

whatever.  His "idea" of a few minutes previous seemed ridiculous

and overwrought.  He would go back to the office and grind out his

copy from the exchange editor's clipping.

 

Just then his eye was caught by a familiar figure in trim, well-

fitting black halted on the opposite corner waiting for the

passage of a cable car.  It was Travis Bessemer.  No one but she

could carry off such rigorous simplicity in the matter of dress so

well: black skirt, black Russian blouse, tiny black bonnet and

black veil, white kids with black stitching.  Simplicity itself.

Yet the style of her, as Condy Rivers told himself, flew up and

hit you in the face; and her figure--was there anything more

perfect? and the soft pretty effect of her yellow hair seen

through the veil--could anything be more fetching? and her smart

carriage and the fling of her fine broad shoulders, and--no, it

was no use; Condy had to run down to speak to her.

 

"Come, come!" she said as he pretended to jostle against her on

the curbstone without noticing her; "you had best go to work.

Loafing at ten o'clock on the street corners--the idea!"

 

"It IS not--it can not be--and yet it is--it is SHE," he

burlesqued; "and after all these years!" Then in his natural

voice: "Hello T.B."

 

"Hello, C.R."

 

"Where are you going?'

 

"Home.  I've just run down for half an hour to have the head of my

banjo tightened."

 

"If I put you on the car, will you expect me to pay your car-

fare?"

 

Condy Rivers, I've long since got over the idea of ever expecting

you to have any change concealed about your person."

 

"Huh! no, it all goes for theatre tickets, and flowers, and boxes

of candy for a certain girl I know.  But"--and he glared at her

significantly--"no more foolishness."

 

She laughed.  "What are you 'on' this morning, Condy?"

 

Condy told her as they started to walk toward Kearney Street.

 

But why DON'T you go to the dock and see the vessel, if you can

make a better article that way?"

 

"Oh, what's the good! The Centennial people have turned down my

stories."

 

She commiserated him for this; then suddenly exclaimed:

 

"No, you must go down to the dock! You ought to, Condy Oh, I tell

you, let me go down with you!"

 

In an instant Condy leaped to the notion.  "Splendid! splendid! no

reason why you shouldn't!" he exclaimed.  And within fifteen

minutes the two were treading the wharves and quays of the city's

water-front.

 

Ships innumerable nuzzled at the endless line of docks, mast

overspiring mast, and bowsprit overlapping bowsprit, till the eye

was bewildered, as if by the confusion of branches in a leafless

forest.  In the distance the mass of rigging resolved itself into

a solid gray blur against the sky.  The great hulks, green and

black and slate gray, laid themselves along the docks, straining

leisurely at their mammoth chains, their flanks opened, their

cargoes, as it were their entrails, spewed out in a wild disarray

of crate and bale and box.  Sailors and stevedores swarmed them

like vermin.  Trucks rolled along the wharves like peals of

ordnance, the horse-hoofs beating the boards like heavy drum-taps.

Chains clanked, a ship's dog barked incessantly from a

companionway, ropes creaked in complaining pulleys, blocks

rattled, hoisting-engines coughed and strangled, while all the air

was redolent of oakum, of pitch, of paint, of spices, of ripe

fruit, of clean cool lumber, of coffee, of tar, of bilge, and the

brisk, nimble odor of the sea.

 

Travis was delighted, her little brown eyes snapping, her cheeks

flushing, as she drank in the scene.

 

"To think," she cried, "where all these ships have come from! Look

at their names; aren't they perfect? Just the names, see: the

'Mary Baker,' Hull; and the 'Anandale,' Liverpool; and the 'Two

Sisters,' Calcutta, and see that one they're calking, the

'Montevideo,' Callao; and there, look! look! the very one you're

looking for, the 'City of Everett,' San Francisco."

 

The whaleback, an immense tube of steel plates, lay at her wharf,

sucking in entire harvests of wheat from the San Joaquin valley--

harvests that were to feed strangely clad skeletons on the

southern slopes of the Himalaya foot-hills.  Travis and Condy

edged their way among piles of wheat-bags, dodging drays and

rumbling trucks, and finally brought up at the after gangplank,

where a sailor halted them.  Condy exhibited his reporter's badge.

 

"I represent 'The Times,'" he said, with profound solemnity, "and

I want to see the officer in charge."

 

The sailor fell back upon the instant.

 

"Power of the press," whispered Condy to Travis as the two gained

the deck.

 

A second sailor directed them to the mate, whom they found in the

chart-room, engaged, singularly enough, in trimming the leaves of

a scraggly geranium.

 

Condy explained his mission with flattering allusions to the

whaleback and the novelty of the construction.  The mate--an old

man with a patriarchal beard--softened at once, asked them into

his own cabin aft, and even brought out a camp-stool for Travis,

brushing it with his sleeve before setting it down.

 

While Condy was interviewing the old fellow, Travis was examining,

with the interest of a child, the details of the cabin: the rack-

like bunk, the washstand, ingeniously constructed so as to shut

into the bulkhead when not in use, the alarm-clock screwed to the

wall, and the array of photographs thrust into the mirror between

frame and glass.  One, an old daguerreotype, particularly caught

her fancy.  It was the portrait of a very beautiful girl, wearing

the old-fashioned side curls and high comb of a half-century

previous.  The old mate noticed the attention she paid to it, and,

as soon as he had done giving information to Condy, turned and

nodded to Travis, and said quietly: "She was pretty, wasn't she?"

 

"Oh, very! answered Travis, without looking away.

 

There was a silence.  Then the mate, his eyes wide and thoughtful,

said with a long breath:

 

"And she was just about your age, miss, when I saw her; and you

favor her, too."

 

Condy and Travis held their breaths in attention.  There in the

cabin of that curious nondescript whaleback they had come suddenly

to the edge of a romance--a romance that had been lived through

before they were born.  Then Travis said in a low voice, and

sweetly

 

"She died?"

 

"Before I ever set eyes on her, miss.  That is, MAYBE she died.  I

sometimes think--fact is, I really believe she's alive yet, and

waiting for me." He hesitated awkwardly.  "I dunno," he said

pulling his beard.  "I don't usually tell that story to strange

folk, but you remind me so of her that I guess I will."

 

Condy sat down on the edge of the bunk, and the mate seated

himself on the plush settle opposite the door, his elbows on his

knees, his eyes fixed on a patch of bright sunlight upon the deck

outside.

 

"I began life," he said, "as a deep-sea diver--began pretty young,

too.  I first put on the armor when I was twenty, nothing but a

lad; but I could take the pressure up to seventy pounds even then.

One of my very first dives was off Trincomalee, on the coast of

Ceylon.  A mail packet had gone down in a squall with all on

board.  Six of the bodies had come up and had been recovered, but

the seventh hadn't.  It was the body of the daughter of the

governor of the island, a beautiful young girl of nineteen, whom

everybody loved.  I was sent for to go down and bring the body up.

Well, I went down.  The packet lay in a hundred feet of water, and

that's a wonder deep dive.  I had to go down twice.  The first

time I couldn't find anything, though I went all through the

berth-deck.  I came up to the wrecking-float and reported that I

had seen nothing.  There were a lot of men there belonging to the

wrecking gang, and some correspondents of London papers.  But they

would have it that she was below, and had me go down again.  I

did, and this time I found her."

 

The mate paused a moment

 

"I'll have to tell you," he went on, "that when a body don't come

to the surface it will stand or sit in a perfectly natural

position until a current or movement of the water around touches

it.  When that happens--well, you'd say the body was alive; and

old divers have a superstition--no, it AIN'T just a superstition,

I believe it's so--that drowned people really don't die till they

come to the surface, and the air touches them.  We say that the

drowned who don't come up still have some sort of life of their

own way down there in all that green water...some kind of

life...surely...surely.  When I went down the second time, I came

across the door of what I thought at first was the linen-closet.

But it turned out to be a little stateroom.  I opened it.  There

was the girl.  She was sitting on the sofa opposite the door, with

a little hat on her head, and holding a satchel in her lap, just

as if she was ready to go ashore.  Her eyes were wide open, and

she was looking right at me and smiling.  It didn't seem terrible

or ghastly in the least.  She seemed very sweet.  When I opened

the door it set the water in motion, and she got up and dropped

the satchel, and came toward me smiling and holding out her arms.

 

"I stepped back quick and shut the door, and sat down in one of

the saloon chairs to fetch my breath, for it had given me a start.

The next thing to do was to send her up.  But I began to think.

She seemed so pretty as she was.  What was the use of bringing her

up--up there on the wrecking float with that crowd of men--up

where the air would get at her, and where they would put her in

the ground along o' the worms? If I left her there she'd always be

sweet and pretty--always be nineteen; and I remembered what old

divers said about drowned people living just so long as they

stayed below.  You see, I was only a lad then, and things like

that impress you when you're young.  Well, I signaled to be hauled

up.  They asked me on the float if I'd seen anything, and I said

no.  That was all there was to the affair.  They never raised the

ship, and in a little while it was all forgotten.

 

"But I never forgot it, and I always remembered her, way down

there in all that still green water, waiting there in that little

state-room for me to come back and open the door.  And I've growed

to be an old man remembering her; but she's always stayed just as

she was the first day I saw her, when she came toward me smiling

and holding out her arms.  She's always stayed young and fresh and

pretty.  I never saw her but that once.  Only afterward I got her

picture from a native woman of Trincomalee who was house-keeper at

the Residency where the governor of the island lived.  Somehow I

never could care for other women after that, and I ain't never

married for that reason."

 

"No, no, of course not! exclaimed Travis, in a low voice as the

old fellow paused.

 

"Fine, fine; oh, fine as gold!" murmured Condy, under his breath.

 

"Well," said the mate, getting up and rubbing his knee, "that's

the story.  Now you know all about that picture.  Will you have a

glass of Madeira, miss?"

 

He got out a bottle of wine bearing the genuine Funchal label and

filled three tiny glasses.  Travis pushed up her veil, and she and

Condy rose.

 

"This is to HER," said Travis gravely.

 

"Thank you, miss," answered the mate, and the three drank in

silence.

 

As Travis and Condy were going down the gangplank they met the

captain of the whaleback coming up.

 

"I saw you in there talking to old McPherson," he explained.  "Did

you get what you wanted from him?"

 

"More, more!" exclaimed Condy.

 

"My hand in the fire, he told you that yarn about the girl who was

drowned off Trincomalee.  Of course, I knew it.  The old boy's

wits are turned on that subject.  He WILL have it that the body

hasn't decomposed in all this time.  Good seaman enough, and a

first-class navigator, but he's soft in that one spot."

