 

 

 

Chapter IV

 

 

"Oh, but the STORY of it!" exclaimed Condy as he and Travis

regained the wharf--"the story of it! Isn't it a ripper.  Isn't it

a corker! His leaving her that way, and never caring for any other

girl afterward."

 

"And so original," she commented, quite as enthusiastic as he.

 

"Original?--why, it's new as paint! It's--it's--Travis, I'll make

a story out of this that will be copied in every paper between the

two oceans."

 

They were so interested in the mate's story that they forgot to

take a car, and walked up Clay Street talking it over, suggesting,

rearranging, and embellishing; and Condy was astonished and

delighted to note that she "caught on" to the idea as quickly as

he, and knew the telling points and what details to leave out.

 

"And I'll make a bang-up article out of the whaleback herself,"

declared Condy.  The "idea" of the article had returned to him,

and all his enthusiasm with it.

 

"And look here, he said, showing her the letter from the

Centennial Company.  "They turned down my book, but see what they

say.

 

"Quite an unusual order of merit!" cried Travis.  "Why, that's

fine! Why didn't you show this to me before?--and asking you like

this to write them a novel of adventure! What MORE can you want?

Oh!" she exclaimed impatiently, "that's so like you; you would

tell everybody about your reverses, and carry on about them

yourself, but never say a word when you get a little boom.  Have

you an idea for a thirty-thousand-word novel? Wouldn't that

diver's story do?"

 

"No, there's not enough in that for thirty thousand words.  I

haven't any idea at all--never wrote a story of adventure--never

wrote anything longer than six thousand words.  But I'll keep my

eye open for something that will do.  By the way--by Jove! Travis,

where are we?"

 

They looked briskly around them, and the bustling, breezy water-

front faded from their recollections.  They were in a world of

narrow streets, of galleries and overhanging balconies.  Craziest

structures, riddled and honeycombed with stairways and passages,

shut out the sky, though here and there rose a building of

extraordinary richness and most elaborate ornamentation.  Color

was everywhere.  A thousand little notes of green and yellow, of

vermilion and sky blue, assaulted the eye.  Here it was a doorway,

here a vivid glint of cloth or hanging, here a huge scarlet sign

lettered with gold, and here a kaleidoscopic effect in the

garments of a passer-by.  Directly opposite, and two stories above

their heads, a sort of huge "loggia," one blaze of gilding and

crude vermilions, opened in the gray cement of a crumbling facade,

like a sudden burst of flame.  Gigantic pot-bellied lanterns of

red and gold swung from its ceiling, while along its railing stood

a row of pots--brass, ruddy bronze, and blue porcelain--from which

were growing red saffron, purple, pink, and golden tulips without

number.  The air was vibrant with unfamiliar noises.  From one of

the balconies near at hand, though unseen, a gong, a pipe, and

some kind of stringed instrument wailed and thundered in unison.

There was a vast shuffling of padded soles and a continuous

interchange of singsong monosyllables, high-pitched and staccato,

while from every hand rose the strange aromas of the East--

sandalwood, punk, incense, oil, and the smell of mysterious

cookery.

 

"Chinatown!" exclaimed Travis.  "I hadn't the faintest idea we had

come up so far.  Condy Rivers, do you know what time it is?" She

pointed a white kid finger through the doorway of a drug-store,

where, amid lacquer boxes and bronze urns of herbs and dried

seeds, a round Seth Thomas marked half-past two.

 

"And your lunch?" cried Condy.  "Great heavens! I never thought."

 

"It's too late to get any at home.  Never mind; I'll go somewhere

and have a cup of tea."

 

"Why not get a package of Chinese tea, now that you're down here,

and take it home with you?"

 

"Or drink it here."

 

"Where?"

 

"In one of the restaurants.  There wouldn't be a soul there at

this hour.  I know they serve tea any time.  Condy, let's try it.

Wouldn't it be fun?"

 

Condy smote his thigh.  "Fun!" he vociferated; "fun! It is--by

Jove--it would be HEAVENLY! Wait a moment.  I'll tell you what we

will do.  Tea won't be enough.  We'll go down to Kearney Street,

or to the market, and get some crackers to go with it."

 

They hurried back to the California market, a few blocks distant,

and bought some crackers and a wedge of new cheese.  On the way

back to Chinatown Travis stopped at a music store on Kearney

Street to get her banjo, which she had left to have its head

tightened; and thus burdened they regained the "town," Condy

grieving audibly at having to carry "brown-paper bundles through

the street."

 

"First catch your restaurant," said Travis as they turned into

Dupont Street with its thronging coolies and swarming, gayly clad

children.  But they had not far to seek.

 

"Here you are!" suddenly exclaimed Condy, halting in front of a

wholesale tea-house bearing a sign in Chinese and English.  "Come

on, Travis!"

 

They ascended two flights of a broad, brass-bound staircase

leading up from the ground floor, and gained the restaurant on the

top story of the building.  As Travis had foretold, it was

deserted.  She clasped her gloved hands gayly, crying: "Isn't it

delightful! We've the whole place to ourselves."

 

The restaurant ran the whole depth of the building, and was

finished off at either extremity with a gilded balcony, one

overlooking Dupont Street and the other the old Plaza.  Enormous

screens of gilded ebony, intricately carved and set with colored

glass panes, divided the room into three, and one of these

divisions, in the rear part, from which they could step out upon

the balcony that commanded the view of the Plaza, they elected as

their own.

 

It was charming.  At their backs they had the huge, fantastic

screen, brave and fine with its coat of gold.  In front, through

the glass-paned valves of a pair of folding doors, they could see

the roofs of the houses beyond the Plaza, and beyond these the

blue of the bay with its anchored ships, and even beyond this the

faint purple of the Oakland shore.  On either side of these doors,

in deep alcoves, were divans with mattings and head-rests for

opium smokers.  The walls were painted blue and hung with vertical

Cantonese legends in red and silver, while all around the sides of

the room small ebony tables alternated with ebony stools, each

inlaid with a slab of mottled marble.  A chandelier, all a-glitter

with tinsel, swung from the centre of the ceiling over a huge

round table of mahogany.

 

And not a soul was there to disturb them.  Below them, out there

around the old Plaza, the city drummed through its work with a

lazy, soothing rumble.  Nearer at hand, Chinatown sent up the

vague murmur of the life of the Orient.  In the direction of the

Mexican quarter, the bell of the cathedral knolled at intervals.

The sky was without a cloud and the afternoon was warm.

 

Condy was inarticulate with the joy of what he called their

"discovery." He got up and sat down.  He went out into the other

room and came back again.  He dragged up a couple of the marble-

seated stools to the table.  He took off his hat, lighted a

cigarette, let it go out, lighted it again, and burned his

fingers.  He opened and closed the folding-doors, pushed the table

into a better light, and finally brought Travis out upon the

balcony to show her the "points of historical interest" in and

around the Plaza.

 

"There's the Stevenson memorial ship in the centre, see; and right

there, where the flagstaff is, General Baker made the funeral

oration over the body of Terry.  Broderick killed him in a duel--

or was it Terry killed Broderick? I forget which.  Anyhow, right

opposite, where that pawnshop is, is where the Overland stages

used to start in '49.  And every other building that fronts on the

Plaza, even this one we're in now, used to be a gambling-house in

bonanza times; and, see, over yonder is the Morgue and the City

Prison."

 

They turned back into the room, and a great, fat Chinaman brought

them tea on Condy's order.  But besides tea, he brought dried

almonds, pickled watermelon rinds, candied quince, and "China

nuts."

 

Travis cut the cheese into cubes with Condy's penknife, and

arranged the cubes in geometric figures upon the crackers.

 

"But, Condy," she complained, "why in the world did you get so

many crackers? There's hundreds of them here--enough to feed a

regiment.  Why didn't you ask me?"

 

"Huh! what? what? I don't know.  What's the matter with the

crackers? You were dickering with the cheese, and the man said,

'How many crackers?' I didn't know.  I said, 'Oh, give me a

quarter's worth!'"

 

"And we couldn't possibly have eaten ten cents' worth! Oh, Condy,

you are--you are--But never mind, here's your tea.  I wonder if

this green, pasty stuff is good."

 

They found that it was, but so sweet that it made their tea taste

bitter.  The watermelon rinds were flat to their Western palates,

but the dried almonds were a great success.  Then Condy promptly

got the hiccoughs from drinking his tea too fast, and fretted up

and down the room like a chicken with the pip till Travis grew

faint and weak with laughter.

 

"Oh, well," he exclaimed aggrievedly--"laugh, that's right! I

don't laugh.  It isn't such fun when you've got 'em yoursel'--

HULP."

 

"But sit down, for goodness' sake! You make me so nervous.  You

can't walk them off.  Sit down and hold your breath while you

count nine.  Condy, I'm going to take off my gloves and veil.

What do you think?"

 

"Sure, of course; and I'll have a cigarette.  Do you mind if I

smoke?"

 

"Well, what's that in your hand now?"

 

"By Jove, I have been smoking! I--I beg your pardon.  I'm a

regular stable boy.  I'll throw it away."

 

Travis caught his wrist.  "What nonsense! I would have told you

before if I'd minded."

 

"But it's gone out!" he exclaimed.  "I'll have another."

 

As he reached into his pocket for his case, his hand encountered a

paper-covered volume.  and he drew it out in some perplexity.

 

"Now, how in the wide world did that book come in my pocket?" he

muttered, frowning.  "What have I been carrying it around for?

I've forgotten.  I declare I have."

 

"What book is it?"

 

"Hey? book?...h'm," he murmured, staring.

 

Travis pounded on the table.  "Wake up, Condy, I'm talking to

you," she called.

 

"It's 'Life's Handicap,'" he answered, with a start; "but why and

but why have I--"

 

"What's it about? I never heard of it," she declared.

 

"You never heard of 'Life's Handicap'?" he shouted; "you never

heard--you never--you mean to say you never heard--but here, this

won't do.  Sit right still, and I'll read you one of these yarns

before you're another minute older.  Any one of them--open the

book at random.  Here we are--'The Strange Ride of Morrowbie

Jukes'; and it's a stem-winder, too."

 

And then for the first time in her life, there in that airy,

golden Chinese restaurant, in the city from which he hasted to

flee, Travis Bessemer fell under the charm of the little

spectacled colonial, to whose song we all must listen and to whose

pipe we all must dance.

 

There was one "point" in the story of Jukes' strange ride that

Condy prided himself upon having discovered.  So far as he knew,

all critics had overlooked it.  It is where Jukes is describing

the man-trap of the City of the Dead who are alive, and mentions

that the slope of the inclosing sandhills was "about forty-five

degrees." Jukes was a civil engineer, and Condy held that it was a

capital bit of realism on the part of the author to have him speak

of the pitch of the hills in just such technical terms.  At first

he thought he would call Travis' attention to this bit of


cleverness; but as he read he abruptly changed his mind.  He would

see if she would find it out for herself.  It would be a test of

her quickness, he told himself; almost an unfair test, because the

point was extremely subtle and could easily be ignored by the most

experienced of fiction readers.  He read steadily on, working

himself into a positive excitement as he approached the passage.

He came to it and read it through without any emphasis, almost

slurring over it in his eagerness to be perfectly fair.  But as he

began to read the next paragraph, Travis, her little eyes

sparkling with interest and attention, exclaimed:

 

"Just as an engineer would describe it.  Isn't that good!"

 

"Glory hallelujah!" cried Condy, slamming down the book joyfully.

"Travis, you are one in a thousand!"

 

"What--what is it?' she inquired blankly.

 

"Never mind, never mind; you're a wonder, that's all"--and he

finished the tale without further explanation.  Then, while he

smoked another cigarette and she drank another cup of tea, he read

to her "The Return of Imri" and the "Incarnation of Krishna

Mulvaney." He found her an easy and enrapt convert to the little

Englishman's creed, and for himself tasted the intense delight of

revealing to another an appreciation of a literature hitherto

ignored.

 

"Isn't he strong!" cried Travis.  "Just a LITTLE better than Marie

Corelli and the Duchess!"

 

"And to think of having all those stories to read! You haven't

read any of them yet?"

 

"Not a one.  I've been reading only the novels we take up in the

Wednesday class."

 

"Lord!" muttered Condy.

 

Condy's spirits had been steadily rising since the incident aboard

the whaleback.  The exhilaration of the water-front, his delight

over the story he was to make out of the old mate's yarn,

Chinatown, the charming unconventionality of their lunch in the

Chinese restaurant, the sparkling serenity of the afternoon, and

the joy of discovering Travis' appreciation of his adored and

venerated author, had put him into a mood bordering close upon

hilarity.

 

"The next event upon our interesting programme," he announced,

"will be a banjosephine obligato in A-sia minor, by that justly

renowned impresario, Signor Conde Tin-pani Rivers, specially

engaged for this performance; with a pleasing and pan-hellenic

song-and-dance turn by Miss Travis Bessemer, the infant

phenomenon, otherwise known as 'Babby Bessie.'"

 

"You're not going to play that banjo here?" said Travis, as he

stripped away the canvas covering.

 

"Order in the gallery!" cried Condy, beginning to tune up.  Then

in a rapid, professional monotone: "Ladies-and-gentlemen - with -

your - kind - permission - I - will - endeavor - to - give - you -

an - imitation - of - a - Carolina - coon - song"--and without

more ado, singing the words to a rattling, catchy accompaniment,

swung off into--

 

 

    "F--or MY gal's a high-born leddy,

    SHE'S brack, but not too shady."

 

 

He did not sing loud, and the clack and snarl of the banjo carried

hardly further than the adjoining room; but there was no one to

hear, and, as he went along, even Travis began to hum the words,

but at that, Condy stopped abruptly, laid the instrument across

his knees with exaggerated solicitude, and said deliberately:

 

"Travis, you are a good, sweet girl, and what you lack in beauty

you make up in amiability, and I've no doubt you are kind to your

aged father; but you--can--not--sing."

 

Travis was cross in a moment, all the more so because Condy had

spoken the exact truth.  It was quite impossible for her to carry

a tune half a dozen bars without entangling herself in as many

different keys.  What voice she had was not absolutely bad; but as

she persisted in singing in spite of Condy's guying, he put back

his head and began a mournful and lugubrious howling.

 

"Ho!" she exclaimed, grabbing the banjo from his knees, "if I

can't sing, I can play better than some smart people."

 

"Yes, by note," rallied Condy, as Travis executed a banjo "piece"

of no little intricacy.  "That's just like a machine--like a hand-

piano.

 

"Order in the gallery!" she retorted, without pausing in her

playing.  She finished with a great flourish and gazed at him in

triumph, only to find him pretending a profound slumber.  "O--o--

o!" she remarked between her teeth, "I just hate you, Condy

Rivers."

 

"There are others," he returned airily.

 

"Talk about slang."

 

"NOW what will we do?" he cried.  "Let's DO something.  Suppose we

break something--just for fun."

 

Then suddenly the gayety went out of his face, and he started up

and clapped his hand to his head with a gasp of dismay.  "Great

Heavens!" he exclaimed.

 

"Condy," cried Travis in alarm, "what is it"'

 

"The Tea!" he vociferated.  "Laurie Flagg's Tea.  I ought to be

there--right this minute."

 

Travis fetched a sigh of relief.  "Is that all?"

 

"All!" he retorted.  "All! Why, it's past four now--and I'd

forgotten every last thing." Then suddenlly falling calm again,

and quietly resuming his seat: "I don't see as it makes any

difference.  I won't go, that's all.  Push those almonds here,

will you, Miss Lady?--But we aren't DOING anything," he exclaimed,

with a brusque return of exuberance.  "Let's do things.  What'll

we do? Think of something.  Is there anything we can break?" Then,

without any transition, he vaulted upon the table and began to

declaim, with tremendous gestures:

 

 

  "There once was a beast called an Ounce,

   Who went with a spring and a bounce.

     His head was as flat

     As the head of a cat,

   This quadrupetantical Ounce,

          ---tical Ounce,

   This quadrupetantical Ounce.

 

  "You'd think from his name he was small,

   But that was not like him at all.

     He weighed, I'll be bound,

     Three or four hundred pound,

   And he looked most uncommonly tall,

          --monly tall,

   And he looked most uncommonly tall."

 

 

"Bravo! bravo!" cried Travis, pounding on the table.  "Hear, hear--

none, Brutus, none."

 

Condy sat down on the table and swung his legs But during the next

few moments, while they were eating the last of their cheese, his

good spirits fell rapidly away from him.  He heaved a sigh, and

thrust both hands gloomily into his pockets.

 

"Cheese, Condy?" asked Travis.

 

He shook his head with a dark frown, muttering: "No cheese, no

cheese."

 

"What's wrong, Condy--what's the matter?" asked Travis, with

concern.

 

For some time he would not tell her, answering all her inquiries

by closing his eyes and putting his chin in the air, nodding his

head in knowing fashion.

 

"But what is it?"

 

"You don't respect me," he muttered; and for a long time this was

all that could be got from him.  No, no, she did not respect him;

no, she did not take him seriously.

 

"But of course I do.  Why don't I? Condy Rivers, what's got into

you NOW?"

 

"No, no; I know it.  I can tell.  You don't take me seriously.

You don't respect me."

 

"But why?"

 

"Make a blooming buffoon of myself," he mumbled tragically.

 

In great distress Travis labored to contradict him.  Why, they had

just been having a good time, that was all.  Why, she had been

just as silly as he.  Condy caught at the word.

 

"Silly! There.  I knew it.  I told you.  I'm silly.  I'm a

buffoon.--But haven't we had a great afternoon?" he added, with a

sudden grin.

 

"I never remember," announced Travis emphatically, "when I've had

a better time than I've had to-day; and I know just why it's been

such a success."

 

"Why, then?"

 

"Because we've had no foolishness.  We've just been ourselves, and

haven't pretended we were in love with each other when we are not.

Condy, let's do this lots."

 

"Do what?"

 

"Go round to queer little, interesting little places.  We've had a

glorious time to-day, haven't we?--and we haven't been talked out

once.

 

"As we were last night, for instance," he hazarded.

 

"I THOUGHT you felt it, the same as I did.  It WAS a bit awful

wasn't it?"

 

"It was."

 

"From now on, let's make a resolution.  I know you've had a good

time to-day.  Haven't you had a better time than if you had gone

to the Tea?'"

 

"Well, RATHER.  I don't know when I've had a better, jollier

afternoon."

 

"Well, now, we're going to try to have lots more good times, but

just as chums.  We've tried the other, and it failed.  Now be

sincere; didn't it fail?"

 

"It worked out.  It DID work out."

 

"Now from this time on, no more foolishness.  We'll just be

chums."

 

"Chums it is.  No more foolishness."

 

"The moment you begin to pretend you're in love with me, it will

spoil everything.  It's funny," said Travis, drawing on her

gloves.  "We're doing a funny thing, Condy.  With ninety-nine

people out of one hundred, this little affair would have been all

ended after our 'explanation' of last night--confessing, as we

did, that we didn't love each other.  Most couples would have

'drifted apart'; but here we are, planning to be chums, and have

good times in our own original, unconventional way--and we can do

it, too.  There, there, he's a thousand miles away.  He's not

heard a single word I've said.  Condy, are you listening to me?"

 

"Blix," he murmured, staring at her vaguely.  "Blix--you look that

way; I don't know, look kind of blix.  Don't you feel sort of

blix?" he inquired anxiously.

 

"Blix?"

 

He smote the table with his palm.  "Capital!" he cried; "sounds

bully, and snappy, and crisp, and bright, and sort of sudden.

Sounds--don't you know, THIS way?"--and he snapped his fingers.

"Don't you see what I mean? Blix, that's who you are.  You've

always been Blix, and I've just found it out.  Blix," he added,

listening to the sound of the name.  "Blix, Blix.  Yes, yes;

that's your name."

 

"Blix?" she repeated; "but why Blix?"

 

"Why not?"

 

"I don't know why not."

 

"Well, then," he declared, as though that settled the question.

They made ready to go, as it was growing late.

 

"Will you tie that for me, Condy," she asked, rising and turning

the back of her head toward him, the ends of the veil held under

her fingers.  "Not too tight.  Condy, don't pull it so tight.

There, there, that will do.  Have you everything that belongs to

you? I know you'll go away and leave something here.  There's your

cigarette case, and your book, and of course the banjo."

 

As if warned by a mysterious instinct, the fat Chinaman made his

appearance in the outer room.  Condy put his fingers into his vest

pocket, then dropped back upon his stool with a suppressed

exclamation of horror.

 

"Condy!" exclaimed Blix in alarm, "are you sick?"--for he had

turned a positive white.

 

"I haven't a cent of money," he murmured faintly.  "I spent my

last quarter for those beastly crackers.  What's to be done? What

is to be done? I'll--I'll leave him my watch.  Yes, that's the

only thing."

 

Blix calmly took out her purse.  "I expected it," she said

resignedly.  "I knew this would happen sooner or later, and I

always have been prepared.  How much is it, John?" she asked of

the Chinaman.

 

"Hefahdollah."

 

"I'll never be able to look you in the face again," protested

Condy.  "I'll pay you back to-night.  I will! I'll send it up by a

messenger boy."

 

"Then you WOULD be a buffoon."

 

"Don't!" he exclaimed.  "Don't, it humiliates me to the dust."

 

"Oh, come along and don't be so absurd.  It must be after five."

 

Half-way down the brass-bound stairs, he clapped his hand to his

head with a start.

 

"And NOW what is it?" she inquired meekly.

 

"Forgotten, forgotten!" he exclaimed.  "I knew I would forget

something."

 

"I knew it, you mean."

 

He ran back, and returned with the great bag of crackers, and

thrust it into her hands.  "Here, here, take these.  We mustn't

leave these," he declared earnestly.  "It would be a shameful

waste of money;" and in spite of all her protests, he insisted

upon taking the crackers along.

 

"I wonder," said Blix, as the two skirted the Plaza, going down to

Kearney Street; "I wonder if I ought to ask him to supper?"

 

"Ask who--me?--how funny to--"

 

"I wonder if we are talked out--if it would spoil the day?"

 

"Anyhow, I'm going to have supper at the Club; and I've got to

write my article some time to-night."

 

Blix fixed him with a swift glance of genuine concern.  "Don't

play to-night, Condy," she said, with a sudden gravity.

 

"Fat lot I can play! What money have I got to play with?"

 

"You might get some somewheres.  But, anyhow, promise me you won't

play."

 

"Well, of course I'll promise.  How can I, if I haven't any money?

And besides, I've got my whaleback stuff to write.  I'll have

supper at the Club, and go up in the library and grind out copy

for a while."

 

"Condy," said Blix, "I think that diver's story is almost too good

for 'The Times.' Why don't you write it and send it East? Send it

to the Centennial Company, why don't you? They've paid some

attention to you now, and it would keep your name in their minds

if you sent the story to them, even if they didn't publish it.

Why don't you think of that?"

 

"Fine--great idea! I'll do that.  Only I'll have to write it out

of business hours.  It will be extra work."

 

"Never mind, you do it; and," she added, as he put her on the

cable car, "keep your mind on that thirty-thousand-word story of

adventure.  Good-by, Condy; haven't we had the jolliest day that

ever was?"

 

"Couldn't have been better.  Good-by, Blix."

 

Condy returned to his club., It was about six o'clock. In response

to his question, the hall-boy told him that Tracy Sargeant had

arrived a few moments previous, and had been asking for him.

 

The Saturday of the week before, Condy had made an engagement with

young Sargeant to have supper together that night, and perhaps go

to the theatre afterward.  And now at the sight of Sargeant in the

"round window" of the main room, buried in the file of the "Gil

Blas," Condy was pleased to note that neither of them had

forgotten the matter.

 

Sargeant greeted him with extreme cordiality as he came up, and at

once proposed a drink.  Sargeant was a sleek, well-groomed, well-

looking fellow of thirty, just beginning to show the effects of a

certain amount of dissipation in the little puffs under the eyes

and the faint blueness of the temples.  The sudden death of his

father for which event Sargeant was still mourning, had left him

in such position that his monthly income was about five times as

large as Condy's salary.  The two had supper together, and

Sargeant proposed the theatre.

 

"No, no; I've got to work to-night," asserted Condy.

 

After dinner, while they were smoking their cigars in a window of

the main room, one of the hall-boys came up and touched Condy on

the arm.

 

"Mr. Eckert, and Mr. Hendricks, and Mr. George Hands, and several

other of those gentlemen are up in the card-room, and are asking

for you and Mr. Sargeant."

 

"Why, I didn't know the boys were here! They've got a game going,

Condy.  Let's go up and get in.  Shall we?"

 

Condy remembered that he had no money.  "I'm flat broke, Tracy,"

he announced, for he knew Sargeant well enough to make the

confession without wincing.  "No, I'll not get in; but I'll go up

and watch you a few minutes."

 

They ascended to the card-room, where the air was heavy and acrid

with cigar smoke, and where the silence was broken only by the

click of poker-chips.  At the end of twenty minutes Condy was

playing, having borrowed enough money of Sargeant to start him in

the game.

 

Unusually talkative and restless, he had suddenly hardened and

stiffened to a repressed, tense calm; speechless, almost rigid in

his chair.  Excitable under even ordinary circumstances, his every

faculty was now keyed to its highest pitch.  The nervous strain

upon him was like the stretching and tightening of harp-strings,

too taut to quiver.  The color left his face, and the moisture

fled his lips.  His projected article, his promise to Blix, all

the jollity of the afternoon, all thought of time or place, faded

away as the one indomitable, evil passion of the man leaped into

life within him, and lashed and roweled him with excitement.  His

world resolved itself to a round green table, columns of tri-

colored chips, and five ever-changing cards that came and went and

came again before his tired eyes like the changing, weaving colors

of the kaleidoscope.  Midnight struck, then one o'clock, then two,

three, and four.  Still his passion rode him like a hag, spurring

the jaded body, rousing up the wearied brain.

 

Finally, at half-past four, at a time when Condy was precisely

where he had started, neither winner nor loser by so much as a

dime, a round of Jack-pots was declared, and the game broke up.

Condy walked home to the uptown hotel where he lived with his

mother, and went to bed as the first milk-wagons began to make

their appearance and the newsboys to cry the morning papers.

 

Then, as his tired eyes closed at last, occurred that strange

trick of picture-making that the overtaxed brain plays upon the

retina.  A swift series of pictures of the day's doings began to

whirl THROUGH rather than BEFORE the pupils of his shut eyes.

Condy saw again a brief vision of the street, and Blix upon the

corner waiting to cross; then it was the gay, brisk confusion of

the water-front, the old mate's cabin aboard the whaleback,

Chinatown, and a loop of vermilion cloth over a gallery rail, the

golden balcony, the glint of the Stevenson ship upon the green

Plaza, Blix playing the banjo, the delightful and picturesque

confusion of the deserted Chinese restaurant; Blix again, turning

her head for him to fasten her veil, holding the ends with her

white-kid fingers; Blix once more, walking at his side with her

trim black skirt, her round little turban hat, her yellow hair,

and her small dark, dancing eyes.

 

Then, suddenly, he remembered the promise he had made her in the

matter of playing that night.  He winced sharply at this, and the

remembrance of his fault harried and harassed him.  In spite of

himself, he felt contemptible.  Yet he had broken his promises to

her in this very matter of playing before--before that day of

their visit to the Chinese restaurant--and had felt no great qualm

of self-reproach.  Had their relations changed? Rather the reverse

for they had done with "foolishness."

 

"Never worried me before," muttered Condy, as he punched up his

pillow--"never worried me before.  Why should it worry me now--

worry me like the devil;--and she caught on to that 'point' about

the slope of forty-five degrees."

 