 

 

 

Chapter XIV

 

 

Blix and Condy went on; on along the narrow road upon the edge of

the salt marshes and tules that lay between the station and the

Golden Gate; on to the Golden Gate itself, and around the old

grime-incrusted fort to the ocean shore, with its reaches of hard,

white sand, where the bowlders lay tumbled and the surf grumbled

incessantly.

 

The world seemed very far away from them here on the shores of the

Pacific, on that first afternoon of the New Year.  They were

supremely happy, and they sufficed to themselves.  Condy had

forgotten all about the next day, when he must say good-by to

Blix.

 

It did not seem possible, it was not within the bounds of

possibility, that she was to go away--that they two were to be

separated.  And for that matter, to-morrow was to-morrow.  It was

twenty-four hours away.  The present moment was sufficient.

 

The persistence with which they clung to the immediate moment,

their happiness in living only in the present, had brought about a

rather curious condition of things between them.

 

In their love for each other there was no thought of marriage;

they were too much occupied with the joy of being together at that

particular instant to think of the future.  They loved each other,

and that was enough.  They did not look ahead further than the

following day, and then but furtively, and only in order that

their morrow's parting might intensify their happiness of to-day.

That New Year's Day was to be the end of everything.  Blix was

going; she and Condy would never see each other again.  The

thought of marriage--with its certain responsibilities, its

duties, its gravity, its vague, troublous seriousness, its

inevitable disappointments--was even a little distasteful to them.

Their romance had been hitherto without a flaw; they had been

genuinely happy in little things.  It was as well that it should

end that day, in all its pristine sweetness, unsullied by a single

bitter moment, undimmed by the cloud of a single disillusion or

disappointment.  Whatever chanced to them in later years, they

could at least cherish this one memory of a pure, unselfish

affection, young and unstained and almost without thought of sex,

come and gone on the very threshold of their lives.  This was the

end, they both understood.  They were glad that it was to be so.

They did not even speak again of writing to each other.

 

They found once more the little semicircle of blackberry bushes

and the fallen log, half-way up the hill above the shore, and sat

there a while, looking down upon the long green rollers, marching

incessantly toward the beach, and there breaking in a prolonged

explosion of solid green water and flying spume.  And their glance

followed their succeeding ranks further and further out to sea,

till the multitude blended into the mass--the vast, green,

shifting mass that drew the eye on and on, to the abrupt, fine

line of the horizon.

 

There was no detail in the scene.  There was nothing but the great

reach of the ocean floor, the unbroken plane of blue sky, and the

bare green slope of land--three immensities, gigantic, vast,

primordial.  It was no place for trival ideas and thoughts of

little things.  The mind harked back unconsciously to the broad,

simpler, basic emotions, the fundamental instincts of the race.

The huge spaces of earth and air and water carried with them a

feeling of kindly but enormous force--elemental force, fresh,

untutored, new, and young.  There was buoyancy in it; a fine,

breathless sense of uplifting and exhilaration; a sensation as of

bigness and a return to the homely, human, natural life, to the

primitive old impulses, irresistible, changeless, and unhampered;

old as the ocean, stable as the hills, vast as the unplumbed

depths of the sky.

 

Condy and Blix sat still, listening, looking, and watching--the

intellect drowsy and numb; the emotions, the senses, all alive and

brimming to the surface.  Vaguely they felt the influence of the

moment.  Something was preparing for them.  From the lowest,

untouched depths in the hearts of each of them something was

rising steadily to consciousness and the light of day.  There is

no name for such things, no name for the mystery that spans the

interval between man and woman--the mystery that bears no relation

to their love for each other, but that is something better than

love, and whose coming savors of the miraculous.

 

The afternoon had waned and the sun had begun to set when Blix

rose.

 

"We should be going, Condy," she told him.

 

They started up the hill, and Condy said: "I feel as though I had

been somehow asleep with my eyes wide open.  What a glorious

sunset! It seems to me as though I were living double every

minute; and oh! Blix, isn't it the greatest thing in the world to

love each other as we do?"

 

They had come to the top of the hill by now, and went on across

the open, breezy downs, all starred with blue iris and wild

heliotrope.  Blix drew his arm about her waist, and laid her cheek

upon his shoulder with a little caressing motion.

 

"And I do love you, dear," she said--"love you with all my heart.

And it's for always, too; I know that.  I've been a girl until

within the last three or four days--just a girl, dearest; not very

serious, I'm afraid, and not caring for anything else beyond, what

was happening close around me--don't you understand? But since

I've found out how much I loved you and knew that you loved me--

why, everything is changed for me.  I'm not the same, I enjoy

things that I never thought of enjoying before, and I feel so--oh,

LARGER, don't you know?--and stronger, and so much more serious.

Just a little while ago I was only nineteen, but I think, dear,

that by loving you I have become--all of a sudden and without

knowing it--a woman."

 

A little trembling ran through her with the words.  She stopped

and put both arms around his neck, her head tipped back, her eyes

half closed, her sweet yellow hair rolling from her forehead.  Her

whole dear being radiated with that sweet, clean perfume that

seemed to come alike from her clothes, her neck, her arms, her

hair, and mouth--the delicious, almost divine, feminine aroma that

was part of herself.

 

"You do love me, Condy, don't you, just as I love you?"

 

Such words as he could think of seemed pitifully inadequate.  For

answer he could only hold her the closer.  She understood.  Her

eyes closed slowly, and her face drew nearer to his.  Just above a

whisper, she said:

 

"I love you, dear!"

 

"I love you, Blix!"

 

And they kissed each other then upon the mouth.

 

Meanwhile the sun had been setting.  Such a sunset! The whole

world, the three great spaces of sea and land and sky, were

incarnadined with the glory of it.  The ocean floor was a blinding

red radiance, the hills were amethyst, the sky one gigantic opal,

and they two seemed poised in the midst of all the chaotic glory

of a primitive world.  It was New Year's Day; the earth was new,

the year was new, and their love was new and strong.  Everything

was before them.  There was no longer any past, no longer any

present.  Regrets and memories had no place in their new world.

It was Hope, Hope, Hope, that sang to them and called to them and

smote into life the new keen blood of them.

 

Then suddenly came the miracle, like the flashing out of a new

star, whose radiance they felt but could not see, like a burst of

music whose harmony they felt but could not hear.  And as they

stood there alone in all that simple glory of sky and earth and

sea, they knew all in an instant that THEY WERE FOR EACH OTHER,

forever and forever, for better or for worse, till death should

them part.  Into their romance, into their world of little things,

their joys of the moment, their happiness of the hour, had

suddenly descended a great and lasting joy, the happiness of the

great, grave issues of life--a happiness so deep, so intense, as

to thrill them with a sense of solemnity and wonder.  Instead of

being the end, that New Year's Day was but the beginning--the

beginning of their real romance.  All the fine, virile, masculine

energy of him was aroused and rampant.  All her sweet, strong

womanliness had been suddenly deepened and broadened.  In fine, he

had become a man, and she woman.  Youth, life, and the love of man

and woman, the strength of the hills, the depth of the ocean, and

the beauty of the sky at sunset; that was what the New Year had

brought to them.

 

*  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *

 

"It's good-by, dear, isn't it?" said Blix.

 

But Condy would not have it so.

 

"No, no," he told her; "no, Blix; no matter how often we separate

after this wonderful New Year's Day, no matter how far we are

apart, WE two shall never, never say good-by."

 

"Oh, you're right, you're right!" she answered, the tears

beginning to shine in her little dark-brown eyes.  "No; so long as

we love each other, nothing matters.  There's no such thing as

distance for us, is there? Just think, you will be here on the

shores of the Pacific, and I on the shores of the Atlantic, but

the whole continent can't come between US."

 

"And we'll be together again, Blix," he said; "and it won't be

very long now.  Just give me time--a few years now."

 

"But so long as we love each other, TIME won't matter either."

 

"What are the tears for, Blixy?" he asked, pressing his

handkerchief to her cheek.

 

"Because this is the saddest and happiest day of my life," she

answered.  Then she pulled from him with a little laugh, adding:

"Look, Condy, you've dropped your letter.  You pulled it out just

now with your handkerchief."

 

As Condy picked it up, she noted the name of the Centennial

Company upon the corner.

 

"It's the letter I got with the manuscript of the novel when they

sent it back," he explained.

 

"What did they say?"

 

"Oh, the usual thing.  I haven't read it yet.  Here's what they

say." He opened it and read:

 

 

"We return to you herewith the MS. of your novel, 'In Defiance of

Authority,' and regret that our reader does not recommend it as

available for publication at present.  We have, however, followed

your work with considerable interest, and have read a story by

you, copied in one of our exchanges, under the title, 'A Victory

Over Death,' which we would have been glad to publish ourselves,

had you given us the chance.

 

"Would you consider the offer of the assistant editorship of our

QUARTERLY, a literary and critical pamphlet, that we publish in

New York, and with which we presume you are familiar? We do not

believe there would be any difficulty in the matter of financial

arrangements.  In case you should decide to come on, we inclose R.

R. passes via the A. T. & S. F., C. & A., and New York Central.

"Very truly,

 

             "THE CENTENNIAL PUBLISHING COMPANY,

                                      "NEW YORK."

 

 

The two exchanged glances.  But Blix was too excited to speak, and

could only give vent to a little, quivering, choking sigh.  The

letter was a veritable god from the machine, the one thing lacking

to complete their happiness.

 

"I don't know how this looks to you," Condy began, trying to be

calm, "but it seems to me that this is--that this--this--"

 

But what they said then they could never afterward remember.  The

golden haze of the sunset somehow got into their recollection of

the moment, and they could only recall the fact that they had been

gayer in that moment than ever before in all their lives.

 

Perhaps as gay as they ever were to be again.  They began to know

the difference between gayety and happiness.  That New Year's Day,

that sunset, marked for them an end and a beginning.  It was the

end of their gay, irresponsible, hour-to-hour life of the past

three months; and it was the beginning of a new life, whose

possibilities of sorrow and of trouble, of pleasure and of

happiness, were greater than aught they had yet experienced.  They

knew this--they felt it instinctively, as with a common impulse

they turned and looked back upon the glowing earth and sea and

sky, the breaking surf, the beach, the distant, rime-incrusted,

ancient fort--all that scene that to their eyes stood for the

dear, free, careless companionship of those last few months.

Their new-found happiness was not without its sadness already.

All was over now; their solitary walks, the long, still evenings

in the little dining-room overlooking the sleeping city, their

excursions to Luna's, their afternoons spent in the golden Chinese

balcony, their mornings on the lake, calm and still and hot.

Forever and forever they had said good-by to that life.  Already

the sunset was losing its glory.

 

Then, with one last look, they turned about and set their faces

from it to the new life, to the East, where lay the Nation.  Out

beyond the purple bulwarks of the Sierras, far off, the great,

grim world went clashing through its grooves--the world that now

they were to know, the world that called to them, and woke them,

and roused them.  Their little gayeties were done; the life of

little things was all behind.  Now for the future.  The sterner

note had struck--work was to be done; that, too, the New Year had

brought to them--work for each of them, work and the world of men.

 

For a moment they shrank from it, loth to take the first step

beyond the confines of the garden wherein they had lived so

joyously and learned to love each other; and as they stood there,

facing the gray and darkening Eastern sky, their backs forever

turned to the sunset, Blix drew closer to him, putting her hand in

his, looking a little timidly into his eyes.  But his arm was

around her, and the strong young force that looked into her eyes

from his gave her courage.

 

"A happy New Year, dear," she said.

 

"A very, very happy New Year, Blix," he answered.

 

 

 

 

[The End]

