
 

 

Chapter VII

 

 

Luna's Mexican restaurant has no address.  It is on no particular

street, at no particular corner; even its habitues, its most

enthusiastic devotees, are unable to locate it upon demand.  It is

"over there in the quarter," "not far from the cathedral there."

One could find it if one started out with that intent; but to

direct another there--no, that is out of the question.  It CAN be

reached by following the alleys of Chinatown.  You will come out

of the last alley--the one where the slave girls are--upon the

edge of the Mexican quarter, and by going straight forward a block

or two and by keeping a sharp lookout to right and left you will

hit upon it.  It is always to be searched for.  Always to be

discovered.

 

On that particular Monday evening Blix and Condy arrived at Luna's

some fifteen minutes before seven.  Condy had lost himself and all

sense of direction in the strange streets of the quarter, and they

were on the very brink of despair when Blix discovered the sign

upon an opposite corner.

 

As Condy had foretold, they had the place to themselves.  They

went into the back room with its one mirror, six tables, and

astonishing curtains of Nottingham lace; and the waiter, whose

name was Richard or Riccardo, according to taste, began to

officiate at the solemn rites of the "supper Mexican." Condy and

Blix ate with their eyes continually wandering to the door; and as

the FRIJOLES were being served, started simultaneously and

exchanged glances.

 

A man wearing two marguerites in the lapel of his coat had entered

abruptly, and sat down to a table close at hand.

 

Condy drew a breath of suppressed excitement.

 

"There he is," he whispered--"Captain Jack!"

 

They looked at the newcomer with furtive anxiety, and told

themselves that they were disappointed.  For a retired sea captain

he was desperately commonplace.  His hair was red, he was younger

than they had expected, and, worst of all, he did look tough.

 

"Oh, poor K. D. B.!" sighed Blix, shaking her head.  "He'll never

do, I'm afraid.  Perhaps he has a good heart, though; red-headed

people are SOMETIMES affectionate."

 

"They are impulsive," hazarded Condy.

 

As he spoke the words, a second man entered the little room.  He,

too, sat down at a nearby table.  He, too, ordered the "supper

Mexican." He, too, wore marguerites in his buttonhole.

 

"Death and destruction!" gasped Condy, turning pale.

 

Blix collapsed helplessly in her chair, her hands dropping in her

lap.  They stared at each other in utter confusion.

 

"Here's a how-do-you-do," murmured Condy, pretending to strip a

TAMALE that Richard had just set before him.  But Blix had pushed

hers aside.

 

"What does it mean?" whispered Condy across the table.  "In

Heaven's name, what does it mean?"

 

"It can only mean one thing," Blix declared; "one of them is the

captain, and one is a coincidence.  Anybody might wear a

marguerite; we ought to have thought of that."

 

"But which is which?"

 

"If K. D. B. should come now!"

 

"But the last man looks more like the captain."

 

The last man was a sturdy, broad-shouldered fellow, who might have

been forty.  His heavy mustache was just touched with gray, and he

did have a certain vaguely "sober and industrious" appearance.

But the difference between the two men was slight, after all; the

red-headed man could easily have been a sea captain, and he

certainly was over thirty-five.

 

"Which? which? which?--how can we tell? We might think of some way

to get rid of the coincidence, if we could only tell which the

coincidence was.  We owe it to K. D. B. In a way, Condy, it's our

duty.  We brought her here, or we are going to, and we ought to

help her all we can; and she may be here at any moment.  What time

is it now?"

 

"Five minutes after seven.  But, Blix, I should think the right

one--the captain--would be all put out himself by seeing another

chap here wearing marguerites.  Does either one of 'em seem put

out to you? Look.  I should think the captain, whichever one he

is, would kind of GLARE at the coincidence."

 

Stealthily they studied the two men for a moment.

 

"No, no," murmured Blix, "you can't tell.  Neither of them seems

to glare much.  Oh, Condy"--her voice dropped to a faint whisper.

"The red-headed one has put his hat on a chair, just behind him,

notice? Do you suppose if you stood up you could see inside?"

 

"What good would that do?"

 

"He might have his initials inside the crown, or his whole name

even; and you could see if he had a 'captain' before it."

 

Condy made a pretence of rising to get a match in a ribbed,

truncated cone of china that stood upon an adjacent table, and

Blix held her breath as he glanced down into the depths of the

hat.  He resumed his seat.

 

"Only initials," he breathed--"W. J. A.  It might be Jack, that

J., and it might be Joe, or Jeremiah, or Joshua; and even if he

was a captain he might not use the title.  We're no better off

than we were before."

 

"And K. D. B. may come at any moment.  Maybe she has come already

and looked through the windows, and saw TWO men with marguerites

and went away.  She'd be just that timid.  What can we do?"

 

"Wait a minute, look here," murmured Condy.  "I've an idea. I'LL

find out which the captain is.  You see that picture, that chromo,

on the wall opposite?"

 

Blix looked as he indicated.  The picture was a gorgeously colored

lithograph of a pilot-boat, schooner-rigged, all sails set,

dashing bravely through seas of emerald green color.

 

"You mean that schooner?" asked Blix.

 

"That schooner, exactly.  Now, listen.  You ask me in a loud voice

what kind of a boat that is; and when I answer, you keep your eye

on the two men."

 

"Why, what are you going to do?"

 

"You'll see.  Try it now; we've no time to lose."

 

Blix shifted in her seat and cleared her throat.  Then:

 

"What a pretty boat that is up there, that picture on the wall.

See over there, on the wall opposite? Do you notice it? Isn't she

pretty? Condy, tell me what kind of a boat is that?"

 

Condy turned about in his place with great deliberation, fixed the

picture with a judicial eye, and announced decisively:

 

"That?--why, that's a BARKENTINE."

 

Condy had no need to wait for Blix's report.  The demonstration

came far too quickly for that.  The red-headed man at his loud

declaration merely   glanced in the direction of the chromo and

returned to his enchellados.  But he of the black mustache

followed Condy's glance, noted the picture of which he spoke, and

snorted contemptuously.  They even heard him mutter beneath his

mustache:

 

"BARKENTINE your eye!"

 

"No doubt as to which is the captain now," whispered Condy so soon

as the other had removed from him a glance of withering scorn.

 

They could hardly restrain their gayety; but their gravity

promptly returned when Blix kicked Condy's foot under the table

and murmured: "He's looking at his watch, the captain is.  K. D.

B. isn't here yet, and the red-headed man, the coincidence, is.

We MUST get rid of him.  Condy, can't you think of something?"

 

"Well, he won't go till he's through his supper, you can depend

upon that.  If he's here when K. D. B. arrives, it will spoil

everything.  She wouldn't stay a moment.  She wouldn't even come

in."

 

"Isn't it disappointing? And I had so counted upon bringing these

two together! And Captain Jack is a nice man!"

 

"You can see that with one hand tied behind you," whispered Condy.

"The other chap's tough."

 

"Looks just like the kind of man to get into jail sooner or

later."

 

"Maybe he's into some mischief now; you never can tell.  And the

Mexican quarter of San Francisco is just the place for 'affairs.'

I'll warrant he's got PALS."

 

"Well, here he is--that's the main point--just keeping those

people apart, spoiling a whole romance.  Maybe ruining their

lives.  It's QUITE possible; really it is.  Just stop and think.

This is a positive crisis we're looking at now."

 

"Can't we get rid of him SOMEHOW?"

 

"O-oh!" whispered Blix, all at once, in a quiver of excitement.

"There is a way, if we'd ever have the courage to do it.  It might

work; and if it didn't, he'd never know the difference, never

would suspect us.  Oh! but we wouldn't dare."

 

"What? what? In Heaven's name what is it, Blix?"

 

"We wouldn't dare--we couldn't.  Oh! but it would be such--"

 

"K. D. B. may come in that door at any second."

 

"I'm half afraid, but all the same--Condy, let me have a pencil."

She dashed off a couple of lines on the back of the bill of fare,

and her hand trembled like a leaf as she handed him what she had

written.

 

"Send him--the red-headed man--that telegram.  There's an office

just two doors below here, next the drug-store.  I saw it as we

came by.  You know his initials: remember, you saw them in his

hat.  W. J. A., Luna's restaurant.  That's all you want."

 

"Lord," muttered Condy, as he gazed upon what Blix had written.

 

"Do you dare?" she whispered, with a little hysterical shudder.

 

"If it failed we've nothing to lose."

 

"And K. D. B. is coming nearer every instant!"

 

"But would he go--that is, at once?"

 

"We can only try.  You won't be gone a hundred seconds.  You can

leave me here that length of time.  Quick, Condy; decide one way

or the other.  It's getting desperate."

 

Condy reached for his hat.

 

"Give me some money, then," he said.  "You won all of mine "

 

A few moments later he was back again and the two sat, pretending

to eat their chili peppers, their hearts in their throats, hardly

daring to raise their eyes from their plates.  Condy was actually

sick with excitement, and all but tipped the seltzer bottle to the

floor when a messenger boy appeared in the outer room.  The boy

and the proprietor held a conference over the counter.  Then

Richard appeared between the portieres of Nottingham lace, the

telegram in his hand and the boy at his heels.

 

Evidently Richard knew the red-headed man, for he crossed over to

him at once with the words:

 

"I guess this is for you, Mr. Atkins?"

 

He handed him the despatch and retired.  The red-headed man signed

the receipt; the boy departed.  Blix and Condy heard the sound of

torn paper as the red-headed man opened the telegram.

 

Ten seconds passed, then fifteen, then twenty.  There was a

silence.  Condy dared to steal a glance at the red-headed man's

reflection in the mirror.  He was studying the despatch, frowning

horribly.  He put it away in his pocket, took it out again with a

fierce movement of impatience, and consulted it a second time.

His "supper Mexican" remained untasted before him; Condy and Blix

heard him breathing loud through his nose.  That he was profoundly

agitated, they could not doubt for a single moment.  All at once a

little panic terror seemed to take possession of him.  He rose,

seized his hat, jammed it over his ears, slapped a half-dollar

upon the table, and strode from the restaurant.

 

This is what the read-headed man had read in the despatch; this is

what Blix had written:

 

 

"ALL IS DISCOVERED.  FLY AT ONCE."

 

 

And never in all their subsequent rambles about the city did Blix

or Condy set eyes upon the red-headed man again, nor did Luna's

restaurant, where he seemed to have been a habitue, ever afterward

know his presence.  He disappeared; he was swallowed up.  He had

left the restaurant, true.  Had he also left that neighborhood?

Had he fled the city, the State, the country even? What skeleton

in the red-headed man's closet had those six words called to life

and the light of day.  Had they frightened him forth to spend the

rest of his days fleeing from an unnamed, unknown avenger--a

veritable wandering Jew? What mystery had they touched upon there

in the bald, bare back room of the Quarter's restaurant? What dark

door had they opened, what red-headed phantom had they evoked? Had

they broken up a plot, thwarted a conspiracy, prevented a crime?

They never knew.  One thing only was certain.  The red-headed man

had had a past.

 

Meanwhile the minutes were passing, and K. D. B. still failed to

appear.  Captain Jack was visibly growing impatient, anxious.  By

now he had come to the fiery liqueur called mescal.  He was nearly

through his supper.  At every moment he consulted his watch and

fixed the outside door with a scowl.  It was already twenty

minutes after seven.

 

"I know the red-headed man spoiled it, after all," murmured Blix.

"K. D. B. saw the two of them in here and was frightened."

 

"We could send Captain Jack a telegram from her," suggested Condy.

"I'm ready for anything now."

 

"What could you say?"

 

"Oh, that she couldn't come.  Make another appointment."

 

"He'd be offended with her.  He'd never make another appointment.

Sea captains are always so punctilious, y' know."

 

Richard brought them their coffee and kirsch, and Condy showed

Blix how to burn a lump of sugar and sweeten the coffee with

syrup.  But they were disappointed.  Captain Jack was getting

ready to leave.  K. D. B. had evidently broken the appointment.

 

Then all at once she appeared.

 

They knew it upon the instant by a brisk opening and shutting of

the street door, and by a sudden alertness on the part of Captain

Jack, which he immediately followed by a quite inexplicable move.

The street door in the outside room had hardly closed before his

hand shot to his coat lapel and tore out the two marguerites.

 

The action was instinctive; Blix knew it for such immediately.

The retired captain had not premeditated it.  He had not seen the

face of the newcomer.  She had not time to come into the back

room, or even to close the street door.  But the instant that the

captain had recognized a bunch of white marguerites in her belt he

had, without knowing why, been moved to conceal his identity.

 

"He's afraid," whispered Blix.  "Positively, I believe he's

afraid.  How absolutely stupid men are!"

 

But meanwhile, K. D. B., the looked-for, the planned-for and

intrigued-for; the object of so much diplomacy, such delicate

manoeuvring; the pivot upon which all plans were to turn, the

storm-centre round which so many conflicting currents revolved,

and for whose benefit the peace of mind of the red-headed man had

been forever broken up--had entered the room.

 

"Why, she's PRETTY!" was Blix's first smothered exclamation, as if

she had expected a harridan.

 

K. D. B. looked like a servant-girl of the better sort, and was

really very neatly dressed.  She was small, little even.  She had

snappy black eyes, a resolute mouth, and a general air of being

very quiet, very matter-of-fact and complacent.  She would be

disturbed at nothing, excited at nothing; Blix was sure of that.

She was placid, but it was the placidity not of the absence of

emotion, but of emotion disdained.  Not the placidity of the

mollusk, but that of a mature and contemplative cat.

 

Quietly she sat down at a corner table, quietly she removed her

veil and gloves, and quietly she took in the room and its three

occupants.

 

Condy and Blix glued their eyes upon their coffee cups like guilty

conspirators; but a crash of falling crockery called their

attention to the captain's table.

 

Captain Jack was in a tremor.  Hitherto he had acted the role of a

sane and sensible gentleman of middle age, master of himself and

of the situation.  The entrance of K. D. B. had evidently reduced

him to a semi-idiotic condition.  He enlarged himself; he eased

his neck in his collar with a rotary movement of head and

shoulders.  He frowned terribly at trifling objects in corners of

the room.  He cleared his throat till the glassware jingled.  He

pulled at his mustache.  He perspired, fumed, fretted, and was

suddenly seized with an insane desire to laugh.  Once only he

caught the eye of K. D. B., calmly sitting in her corner, picking

daintily at her fish, whereupon he immediately overturned the

vinegar and pepper casters upon the floor.  Just so might have

behaved an overgrown puppy in the presence of a sleepy,

unperturbed chessy-cat, dozing by the fire.

 

"He ought to be shaken," murmured Blix at the end of her patience.

"Does he think SHE is going to make the first move?"

 

"Ha, ah'm!" thundered the captain, clearing his throat for the

twentieth time, twirling his mustache, and burying his scarlet

face in an enormous pocket handkerchief.

 

Five minutes passed and he was still in his place.  From time to

time K. D. B. fixed him with a quiet, deliberate look, and resumed

her delicate picking.

 

"Do you think she knows it's he, now that he's taken off his

marguerites?" whispered Condy.

 

"Know it?--of course she does! Do you think women are absolutely

BLIND, or so imbecile as men are? And, then, if she didn't think

it was he, she'd go away.  And she's so really pretty, too.  He

ought to thank his stars alive.  Think what a fright she might

have been! She doesn't LOOK thirty-one."

 

"Huh!" returned Condy.  "As long as she SAID she was thirty-one,

you can bet everything you have that she is; that's as true as

revealed religion."

 

"Well, it's something to have seen the kind of people who write

the personals," said Blix.  "I had always imagined that they were

kind of tough."

 

"You see they are not," he answered.  "I told you they were not.

Maybe, however, we have been exceptionally fortunate.  At any

rate, these are respectable enough."

 

"Not the least doubt about that.  But why don't he do something,

that captain?" mourned Blix.  "Why WILL he act like such a ninny?"

 

"He's waiting for us to go," said Condy; "I'm sure of it.  They'll

never meet so long as we're here.  Let's go and give 'em a chance.

If you leave the two alone here, one or the other will HAVE to

speak.  The suspense would become too terrible.  It would be as

though they were on a desert island."

 

"But I wanted to SEE them meet," she protested.

 

"You wouldn't hear what they said."

 

"But we'd never know if they did meet, and oh--and WHO spoke

first?"

 

"She'll speak first," declared Condy.

 

"Never!" returned Blix, in an indignant whisper.

 

"I tell you what.  We could go and then come back in five minutes.

I'll forget my stick here.  Savvy?"

 

"You would probably do it anyhow," she told him.

 

They decided this would be the better course.  They got together

their things, and Condy neglected his stick, hanging upon a hook

on the wall.

 

At the counter in the outside room, Blix, to the stupefaction of

Richard, the waiter, paid the bill.  But as she was moving toward

the door, Condy called her back.

 

"Remember the waiter," he said severely, while Richard grinned and

bobbed.  "Fifty cents is the very least you could tip him."

Richard actually protested, but Condy was firm, and insisted upon

a half-dollar tip.

 

"Noblesse oblige," he declared with vast solemnity.

 

They walked as far as the cathedral, listened for a moment to the

bell striking the hour of eight; then as they remembered that the

restaurant closed at that time, hurried back and entered the

outside room in feigned perturbation.

 

"Did I, could I have possibly left my stick here?" exclaimed Condy

to Richard, who was untying his apron behind the counter.  But

Richard had not noticed.

 

"I think I must have left it back here where we were sitting."

 

Condy stepped into the back room, Blix following.  They got his

stick and returned to the outside room.

 

"Yes, yes, I did leave it," he said, as he showed it to Richard.

I'm always leaving that stick wherever I go."

 

"Come again," said Richard, as he bowed them out of the door.

 

On the curb outside Condy and Blix shook hands and congratulated

each other on the success of all their labors.  In the back room,

seated at the same table, a bunch of wilting marguerites between

them, they had seen their "matrimonial objects" conferring

earnestly together, absorbed in the business of getting

acquainted.

 

Blix heaved a great sigh of relief and satisfaction, exclaiming:

 

"At last K. D. B. and Captain Jack have met!"

 