 

 

 

Chapter XII

 

 

But did Blix care for him?

 

In the retired corner of his club, shut off by the Japanese

screen, or going up and down the city to and from his work, or

sitting with her in the bay window of the little dining-room

looking down upon the city, blurred in the twilight or radiant

with the sunset, Condy asked himself the question.  A score of

times each day he came to a final, definite, negative decision;

and a score of times reopened the whole subject.  Beyond the fact

that Blix had enjoyed herself in his company during the last

months, Condy could find no sign or trace of encouragement; and

for that matter he told himself that the indications pointed

rather in the other direction.  She had no compunction in leaving

him to go away to New York, perhaps never to return.  In less than

a month now all their companionship was to end, and he would

probably see the last of her.

 

He dared not let her know that at last he had really come to love

her--that it was no pretence now; for he knew that with such

declaration their "good times" would end even before she should go

away.  But every day; every hour that they were together made it

harder for him to keep himself within bounds.

 

What with this trouble on his mind and the grim determination with

which he held to his work, Condy changed rapidly.  Blix had

steadied him, and a certain earnestness and seriousness of

purpose, a certain STRENGTH he had not known before, came swiftly

into being.

 

Was Blix to go away, leave him, perhaps for all time, and not know

how much he cared? Would he speak before she went? Condy did not

know.  It was a question that circumstances would help him to

decide.  He would not speak, so he resolved, unless he was sure

that she cared herself; and if she did, she herself would give him

a cue, a hint whereon to speak.  But days went by, the time set

for Blix's departure drew nearer and nearer, and yet she gave him

not the slightest sign.

 

These two interests had now absorbed his entire life for the

moment--his love for Blix, and his novel.  Little by little "In

Defiance of Authority" took shape.  The boom restaurant and the

club of the exiles were disposed of, Billy Isham began to come to

the front, the filibustering expedition and Senora Estrada (with

her torn calling card) had been introduced, and the expedition was

ready to put to sea.  But here a new difficulty was encountered.

 

"What do I know about ships?" Condy confessed to Blix.  "If Billy

Isham is going to command a filibustering schooner, I've got to

know something about a schooner--appear to, anyhow.  I've got to

know nautical lingo, the real thing, you know.  I don't believe a

REAL sailor ever in his life said 'belay there,' or 'avast.' We'll

have to go out and see Captain Jack; get some more technical

detail."

 

This move was productive of the most delightful results.  Captain

Jack was all on fire with interest the moment that Condy and Blix

told him of the idea.

 

"An' you're going to put Billy Isham in a book.  Well, strike me

straight, that's a snorkin' good idea.  I've always said that all

Billy needed was a ticket seller an' an advance agent, an' he was

a whole show in himself."

 

"We're going to send it East," said Blix, "as soon as it's

finished, and have it published."

 

"Well, it ought to make prime readin', Miss; an' that's a good

fetchin' title, 'In Defiance of Authority.'"

 

Regularly Wednesday and Sunday afternoons, Blix and Condy came out

to the lifeboat station.  Captain Jack received them in sweater

and visored cap, and ushered them into the front room.

 

"Well, how's the yarn getting on?" Captain Jack would ask.

 

Then Condy would read the last chapter while the Captain paced the

floor, frowning heavily, smoking cigars, listening to every word.

Condy told the story in the first person, as if Billy Isham's

partner were narrating scenes and events in which he himself had

moved.  Condy called this protagonist "Burke Cassowan," and was

rather proud of the name.  But the captain would none of it.

Cassowan, the protagonist, was simply "Our Mug."

 

"Now," Condy would say, notebook in hand, "now, Cap., we've got

down to Mazatlan.  Now I want to sort of organize the expedition

in this next chapter."

 

"I see, I see," Captain Jack would exclaim, interested at once.

"Wait a bit till I take off my shoes.  I can think better with my

shoes off"; and having removed his shoes, he would begin to pace

the room in his stocking feet, puffing fiercely on his cigar as he

warmed to the tale, blowing the smoke out through either ear,

gesturing savagely, his face flushed and his eyes kindling.

 

"Well, now, lessee.  First thing Our Mug does when he gets to

Mazatlan is to communicate his arrival to Senora Estrada--

telegraphs, you know; and, by the way, have him use a cipher."

 

"What kind of cipher?"

 

"Count three letters on from the right letter, see.  If you were

spelling 'boat,' for instance, you would begin with an E, the

third letter after B; then R for the O, being the third letter

from O.  So you'd spell 'boat,' ERDW; and Senora Estrada knows

when she gets that despatch that she must count three letters BACK

from each letter to get the right ones.  Take now such a cipher

word as ULIOH.  That means RIFLE.  Count three letters back from

each letter of ULIOH, and it'll spell RIFLE.  You can make up a

lot of despatches like that, just to have the thing look natural;

savvy?"

 

"Out of sight!" muttered Condy, making a note.

 

"Then Our Mug and Billy Isham start getting a crew.  And Our Mug,

he buys the sextant there in Mazatlan--the sextant, that got out

of order and spoiled everything.  Or, no; don't have it a sextant;

have it a quadrant--an old-fashioned, ebony quadrant.  Have Billy

Isham buy it because it was cheap."

 

"How did it get out of order, Captain Jack?" inquired Blix.  "That

would be a good technical detail, wouldn't it, Condy?"

 

"Well, it's like this.  Our Mug an' Billy get a schooner that's so

bally small that they have to do their cooking in the cabin;

quadrant's on a rack over the stove, and the heat warps the

joints, so when Our Mug takes his observation he gets fifty miles

off his course and raises the land where the government forces are

watching for him."

 

"And here's another point, Cap.," said Condy.  "We ought to work

some kind of a treasure into this yarn; can't you think up

something new and original in the way of a treasure? I don't want

the old game of a buried chest of money.  Let's have him get track

of something that's worth a fortune--something novel."

 

"Yes, yes; I see the idea," answered the Captain, striding over

the floor with great thuds of his stockinged feet.  "Now, lessee;

let me think," he began, rubbing all his hair the wrong way.  "We

want something new and queer, something that ain't ever been

written up before.  I tell you what! Here it is! Have Our Mug get

wind of a little river schooner that sunk fifty years before his

time in one of the big South American rivers, during a flood--I

heard of this myself.  Schooner went down and was buried twenty

feet under mud and sand; and since that time--you know how the big

rivers act--the whole blessed course of the river has changed at

that point, and the schooner is on dry land, or rather twenty feet

under it, and as sound as the day she was chartered."

 

"Well?"

 

"Well, have it that when she sank she had aboard of her a cargo of

five hundred cases of whiskey, prime stuff, seven thousand quart

bottles, sealed up tight as drums.  Now Our Mug--nor Billy Isham

either--they ain't born yesterday.  No, sir; they're right next to

themselves! They figure this way.  This here whiskey's been kept

fifty years without being moved.  Now, what do you suppose seven

thousand quart bottles of fifty-year-old whiskey would be worth?

Why, twenty dollars a quart wouldn't be too fancy.  So there you

are; there's your treasure.  Our Mug and Billy Isham have only got

to dig through twenty feet of sand to pick up a hundred thousand

dollars, IF THEY CAN FIND THE SCHOONER."

 

Blix clapped her hands with a little cry of delight, and Condy

smote a knee, exclaiming:

 

"By Jove! that's as good as Loudon Dodds' opium ship! Why, Cap.,

you're a treasure in yourself for a fellow looking for stories."

 

Then after the notes were taken and the story talked over, Captain

Jack, especially if the day happened to be Sunday, would insist

upon their staying to dinner--boiled beef and cabbage.  smoking

coffee and pickles--that K. D. B. served in the little, brick-

paved kitchen in the back of the station.  The crew messed in

their quarters overhead.

 

K. D. B. herself was not uninteresting.  Her respectability

incased her like armor plate, and she never laughed without

putting three fingers to her lips.  She told them that she had at

one time been a "costume reader."

 

"A costume reader?"

 

"Yes; reading extracts from celebrated authors in the appropriate

costume of the character.  It used to pay very well, and it was

very refined.  I used to do 'In a Balcony,' by Mister Browning,

and 'Laska,' the same evening! and it always made a hit.  I'd do

'In a Balcony' first, and I'd put on a Louis-Quinze-the-fifteenth

gown and wig-to-match over a female cowboy outfit.  When I'd

finished 'In a Balcony,' I'd do an exit, and shunt the gown and

wig-to-match, and come on as 'Laska,' with thunder noises off.  It

was one of the strongest effects in my repertoire, and it always

got me a curtain call."

 

And Captain Jack would wag his head and murmur:

 

"Extraordinary! extraordinary!"

 

Blix and Condy soon noted that upon the occasion of each one of

their visits, K. D. B. found means to entertain them at great

length with long discussions upon certain subjects of curiously

diversified character.  Upon their first visit she elected to talk

upon the Alps mountains.  The Sunday following it was

bacteriology; on the next Wednesday it was crystals; while for two

hours during their next visit to the station, Condy and Blix were

obliged to listen to K. D. B.'s interminable discourse on the

origin, history, and development of the kingdom of Denmark.  Condy

was dumfounded.

 

"I never met such a person, man or woman, in all my life.  Talk

about education! Why, I think she knows everything!"

 

"In Defiance of Authority" soon began to make good progress, but

Condy, once launched upon technical navigation, must have Captain

Jack at his elbow continually, to keep him from foundering.  In

some sea novel he remembered to have come across the expression

"garboard streak," and from the context guessed it was to be

applied to a detail of a vessel's construction.  In an unguarded

moment he had written that his schooner's name "was painted in

showy gilt letters upon her garboard streak."

 

"What's the garboard streak, Condy?" Blix had asked, when he had

read the chapter to her.

 

"That's where they paint her name," he declared promptly.  "I

don't know exactly, but I like the sound of it."

 

But the next day, when he was reading this same chapter to Captain

Jack, the latter suddenly interrupted with an exclamation as of

acute physical anguish.

 

"What's that? Read that last over again," he demanded.

 

"'When they had come within a few boat's lengths,'" read Condy,

"'they were able to read the schooner's name, painted in showy

gilt letters upon her garboard streak.'"

 

"My God!" gasped the Captain, clasping his head.  Then, with a

shout: "Garboard streak! garboard streak? Don't you know that the

garboard streak is the last plank next the keel? You mean counter,

not garboard streak.  That regularly graveled me, that did!"

 

They stayed to dinner with the couple that afternoon, and for half

an hour afterward K. D. B. told them of the wonders of the caves

of Elephantis.  One would have believed that she had actually been

at the place.  But when she changed the subject to the science of

fortification, Blix could no longer restrain herself.

 

"But it is really wonderful that you should know all these things!

Where did you find time to study so much?"

 

"One must have an education," returned K. D. B. primly.

 

But Condy had caught sight of a half-filled book-shelf against the

opposite wall, and had been suddenly smitten with an inspiration.

On a leaf of his notebook he wrote: "Try her on the G's and H's,"

and found means to show it furtively to Blix.  But Blix was

puzzled, and at the earliest opportunity Condy himself said to the

retired costume reader:

 

"Speaking of fortifications, Mrs. Hoskins, Gibraltar now--that's a

wonderful rock, isn't it?"

 

"Rock!" she queried.  "I thought it was an island."

 

"Oh, no; it's a fortress.  They have a castle there--a castle,

something like--well, like the old Schloss at Heidelberg.  Did you

ever hear about or read about Heidelberg University?"

 

But K. D. B. was all abroad now.  Gibraltar and Heidelberg were

unknown subjects to her, as were also inoculation, Japan, and

Kosciusko.  Above the G's she was sound; below that point her

ignorance was benighted.

 

"But what is it, Condy?" demanded Blix, as soon as they were

alone.

 

"I've the idea," he answered, chuckling.  "Wait till after Sunday

to see if I'm right; then I'll tell you.  It's a dollar to a paper

dime, K. D. B. will have something for us by Sunday, beginning

with an I."

 

And she had.  It was Internal Revenue.

 

"Right! right!" Condy shouted gleefully, as he and Blix were on

their way home.  "I knew it.  She's done with Ash--Bol, Bol--Car,

and all those, and has worked through Cod--Dem, and Dem--Eve.

She's down to Hor--Kin now, and she'll go through the whole lot

before she's done--Kin--Mag, Mag--Mot, Mot--Pal, and all the

rest."

 

"The Encyclopaedia?"

 

"Don't you see it? No wonder she didn't know beans about

Gibraltar! She hadn't come to the G's by then."

 

"She's reading the Encyclopaedia."

 

"And she gets the volumes on the instahnent plan, don't you see?

Reads the leading articles, and then springs 'em on us.  To know

things and talk about em, that's her idea of being cultured.  'One

must have an education.' Do you remember her saying that' Oh, our

matrimonial objects are panning out beyond all expectation!"

 

What a delicious, never-to-be-forgotten month it was for those

two! There in the midst of life they were as much alone as upon a

tropic island.  Blix had deliberately freed herself from a world

that had grown distasteful to her; Condy little by little had

dropped away from his place among the men and the women of his

acquaintance, and the two came and went together, living in a

little world of their own creation, happy in each other's society,

living only in the present, and asking nothing better than to be

left alone and to their own devices.

 

They saw each other every day.  In the morning from nine till

twelve, and in the afternoon until three, Condy worked away upon

his novel, but not an evening passed that did not see him and Blix

in the dining-room of the little flat.  Thursdays and Sunday

afternoons they visited the life-boat station, and at other times

prowled about the unfrequented corners of the city, now passing an

afternoon along the water front, watching the departure of a China

steamer or the loading of the great, steel wheat ships; now

climbing the ladder-like streets of Telegraph Hill, or revisiting

the Plaza, Chinatown, and the restaurant; or taking long walks in

the Presidio Reservation, watching cavalry and artillery drills;

or sitting for hours on the rocks by the seashore, watching the

ceaseless roll and plunge of the surf, the wheeling sea-birds, and

the sleek-headed seals hunting the offshore fish, happy for a

half-hour when they surprised one with his prey in his teeth.

 

One day, some three weeks before the end of the year, toward two


in the afternoon, Condy sat in his usual corner of the club,

behind the screen, writing rapidly.  His coat was off and the

stump of a cigar was between his teeth.  At his elbow was the

rectangular block of his manuscript.  During the last week the

story had run from him with a facility that had surprised and

delighted him; words came to him without effort, ranging

themselves into line with the promptitude of well-drilled

soldiery; sentences and paragraphs marched down the clean-swept

spaces of his paper, like companies and platoons defiling upon

review; his chapters were brigades that he marshaled at will,

falling them in one behind the other, each preceded by its

chapter-head, like an officer in the space between two divisions.

In the guise of a commander-in-chief sitting his horse upon an

eminence that overlooked the field of operations, Condy at last

took in the entire situation at a glance, and, with the force and

precision of a machine, marched his forces straight to the goal he

had set for himself so long a time before.

 

Then at length he took a fresh penful of ink, squared his elbows,

drew closer to the desk.  and with a single swift spurt of the pen

wrote the last line of his novel, dropping the pen upon the

instant and pressing the blotter over the words as though setting

a seal of approval upon the completed task.

 

"There!" he muttered, between his teeth; "I've done for YOU!"

 

That same afternoon he read the last chapter to Blix, and she

helped him to prepare the manuscript for expressage.  She insisted

that it should go off that very day, and herself wrote the

directions upon the outside wrapper.  Then the two went down

together to the Wells Fargo office, and "In Defiance of Authority"

was sent on its journey across the continent.

 

"Now," she said, as they came out of the express office and stood

for a moment upon the steps, "now there's nothing to do but wait

for the Centennial Company.  I do so hope we'll get their answer

before I go away.  They OUGHT to take it.  It's just what they

asked for.  Don't you think they'll take it, Condy?"

 

"Oh, bother that!" answered Condy.  "I don't care whether they

take it or not.  How long now is it before you go, Blix?"

