




APPENDIX B

Heidelberg Castle



Heidelberg Castle must have been very beautiful before

the French battered and bruised and scorched it two hundred

years ago.  The stone is brown, with a pinkish tint,

and does not seem to stain easily.  The dainty and elaborate

ornamentation upon its two chief fronts is as delicately

carved as if it had been intended for the interior of a

drawing-room rather than for the outside of a house. 

Many fruit and flower clusters, human heads and grim

projecting lions' heads are still as perfect in every detail

as if they were new.  But the statues which are ranked

between the windows have suffered.  These are life-size

statues of old-time emperors, electors, and similar

grandees, clad in mail and bearing ponderous swords. 

Some have lost an arm, some a head, and one poor fellow

is chopped off at the middle.  There is a saying that if

a stranger will pass over the drawbridge and walk across

the court to the castle front without saying anything,

he can made a wish and it will be fulfilled.  But they

say that the truth of this thing has never had a chance

to be proved, for the reason that before any stranger can

walk from the drawbridge to the appointed place, the beauty

of the palace front will extort an exclamation of delight from

him. 



A ruin must be rightly situated, to be effective. 

This one could not have been better placed.  It stands

upon a commanding elevation, it is buried in green words,

there is no level ground about it, but, on the contrary,

there are wooded terraces upon terraces, and one looks

down through shining leaves into profound chasms and

abysses where twilight reigns and the sun cannot intrude. 

Nature knows how to garnish a ruin to get the best effect. 

One of these old towers is split down the middle, and one

half has tumbled aside.  It tumbled in such a way as to

establish itself in a picturesque attitude.  Then all it

lacked was a fitting drapery, and Nature has furnished that;

she has robed the rugged mass in flowers and verdure,

and made it a charm to the eye.  The standing half

exposes its arched and cavernous rooms to you, like open,

toothless mouths; there, too, the vines and flowers have

done their work of grace.  The rear portion of the tower

has not been neglected, either, but is clothed with a

clinging garment of polished ivy which hides the wounds

and stains of time.  Even the top is not left bare, but is

crowned with a flourishing group of trees and shrubs. 

Misfortune has done for this old tower what it has done

for the human character sometimes--improved it. 



A gentleman remarked, one day, that it might have been

fine to live in the castle in the day of its prime,

but that we had one advantage which its vanished

inhabitants lacked--the advantage of having a charming

ruin to visit and muse over.  But that was a hasty idea. 

Those people had the advantage of US.  They had the fine

castle to live in, and they could cross the Rhine valley

and muse over the stately ruin of Trifels besides. 

The Trifels people, in their day, five hundred years ago,

could go and muse over majestic ruins that have vanished,

now, to the last stone.  There have always been ruins,

no doubt; and there have always been pensive people to sigh

over them, and asses to scratch upon them their names

and the important date of their visit.  Within a hundred

years after Adam left Eden, the guide probably gave

the usual general flourish with his hand and said: "Place

where the animals were named, ladies and gentlemen;

place where the tree of the forbidden fruit stood;

exact spot where Adam and Eve first met; and here,

ladies and gentlemen, adorned and hallowed by the names

and addresses of three generations of tourists, we have

the crumbling remains of Cain's altar--fine old ruin!"

Then, no doubt, he taxed them a shekel apiece and let

them go. 



An illumination of Heidelberg Castle is one of the

sights of Europe.  The Castle's picturesque shape;

its commanding situation, midway up the steep and

wooded mountainside; its vast size--these features combine

to make an illumination a most effective spectacle. 

It is necessarily an expensive show, and consequently

rather infrequent.  Therefore whenever one of these exhibitions

is to take place, the news goes about in the papers and

Heidelberg is sure to be full of people on that night. 

I and my agent had one of these opportunities, and improved it. 



About half past seven on the appointed evening we

crossed the lower bridge, with some American students,

in a pouring rain, and started up the road which borders

the Neunheim side of the river.  This roadway was densely

packed with carriages and foot-passengers; the former

of all ages, and the latter of all ages and both sexes. 

This black and solid mass was struggling painfully onward,

through the slop, the darkness, and the deluge. 

We waded along for three-quarters of a mile, and finally

took up a position in an unsheltered beer-garden directly

opposite the Castle.  We could not SEE the Castle--or

anything else, for that matter--but we could dimly

discern the outlines of the mountain over the way,

through the pervading blackness, and knew whereabouts

the Castle was located.  We stood on one of the hundred

benches in the garden, under our umbrellas; the other

ninety-nine were occupied by standing men and women,

and they also had umbrellas.  All the region round about,

and up and down the river-road, was a dense wilderness of

humanity hidden under an unbroken pavement of carriage tops

and umbrellas.  Thus we stood during two drenching hours. 

No rain fell on my head, but the converging whalebone

points of a dozen neighboring umbrellas poured little

cooling steams of water down my neck, and sometimes into

my ears, and thus kept me from getting hot and impatient. 

I had the rheumatism, too, and had heard that this was

good for it.  Afterward, however, I was led to believe

that the water treatment is NOT good for rheumatism. 

There were even little girls in that dreadful place. 

A men held one in his arms, just in front of me, for as much

as an hour, with umbrella-drippings soaking into her clothing

all the time. 



In the circumstances, two hours was a good while for us

to have to wait, but when the illumination did at last come,

we felt repaid.  It came unexpectedly, of course--things

always do, that have been long looked and longed for. 

With a perfectly breath-taking suddenness several mast

sheaves of varicolored rockets were vomited skyward out

of the black throats of the Castle towers, accompanied by

a thundering crash of sound, and instantly every detail of

the prodigious ruin stood revealed against the mountainside

and glowing with an almost intolerable splendor of fire

and color.  For some little time the whole building was

a blinding crimson mass, the towers continued to spout

thick columns of rockets aloft, and overhead the sky

was radiant with arrowy bolts which clove their way to

the zenith, paused, curved gracefully downward, then burst

into brilliant fountain-sprays of richly colored sparks. 

The red fires died slowly down, within the Castle,

and presently the shell grew nearly black outside;

the angry glare that shone out through the broken arches

and innumerable sashless windows, now, reproduced the

aspect which the Castle must have borne in the old time

when the French spoilers saw the monster bonfire which

they had made there fading and spoiling toward extinction. 



While we still gazed and enjoyed, the ruin was suddenly

enveloped in rolling and rumbling volumes of vaporous

green fire; then in dazzling purple ones; then a mixture

of many colors followed, then drowned the great fabric

in its blended splendors.  Meantime the nearest bridge

had been illuminated, and from several rafts anchored

in the river, meteor showers of rockets, Roman candles,

bombs, serpents, and Catharine wheels were being discharged

in wasteful profusion into the sky--a marvelous sight indeed

to a person as little used to such spectacles as I was. 

For a while the whole region about us seemed as bright as day,

and yet the rain was falling in torrents all the time. 

The evening's entertainment presently closed, and we

joined the innumerable caravan of half-drowned strangers,

and waded home again. 



The Castle grounds are very ample and very beautiful;

and as they joined the Hotel grounds, with no fences

to climb, but only some nobly shaded stone stairways

to descend, we spent a part of nearly every day in

idling through their smooth walks and leafy groves. 

There was an attractive spot among the trees where were

a great many wooden tables and benches; and there one could

sit in the shade and pretend to sip at his foamy beaker

of beer while he inspected the crowd.  I say pretend,

because I only pretended to sip, without really sipping. 

That is the polite way; but when you are ready to go,

you empty the beaker at a draught.  There was a brass band,

and it furnished excellent music every afternoon. 

Sometimes so many people came that every seat was occupied,

every table filled.  And never a rough in the assemblace--all

nicely dressed fathers and mothers, young gentlemen

and ladies and children; and plenty of university

students and glittering officers; with here and there

a gray professor, or a peaceful old lady with her knitting;

and always a sprinkling of gawky foreigners. 

Everybody had his glass of beer before him, or his cup

of coffee, or his bottle of wine, or his hot cutlet

and potatoes; young ladies chatted, or fanned themselves,

or wrought at their crocheting or embroidering;

the students fed sugar to their dogs, or discussed duels,

or illustrated new fencing tricks with their little canes;

and everywhere was comfort and enjoyment, and everywhere

peace and good-will to men.  The trees were jubilant

with birds, and the paths with rollicking children. 

One could have a seat in that place and plenty of music,

any afternoon, for about eight cents, or a family ticket

for the season for two dollars. 



For a change, when you wanted one, you could stroll

to the Castle, and burrow among its dungeons, or climb

about its ruined towers, or visit its interior shows--the

great Heidelberg Tun, for instance.  Everybody has heard

of the great Heidelberg Tun, and most people have seen it,

no doubt.  It is a wine-cask as big as a cottage, and some

traditions say it holds eighteen thousand bottles, and other

traditions say it holds eighteen hundred million barrels. 

I think it likely that one of these statements is

a mistake, and the other is a lie.  However, the mere

matter of capacity is a thing of no sort of consequence,

since the cask is empty, and indeed has always been empty,

history says.  An empty cask the size of a cathedral could

excite but little emotion in me.  I do not see any wisdom

in building a monster cask to hoard up emptiness in,

when you can get a better quality, outside, any day,

free of expense.  What could this cask have been

built for? The more one studies over that, the more

uncertain and unhappy he becomes.  Some historians say

that thirty couples, some say thirty thousand couples,

can dance on the head of this cask at the same time. 

Even this does not seem to me to account for the building

of it.  It does not even throw light on it.  A profound

and scholarly Englishman--a specialist--who had made

the great Heidelberg Tun his sole study for fifteen years,

told me he had at last satisfied himself that the ancients

built it to make German cream in.  He said that the average

German cow yielded from one to two and half teaspoons of milk,

when she was not worked in the plow or the hay-wagon

more than eighteen or nineteen hours a day.  This milk

was very sweet and good, and a beautiful transparent

bluish tint; but in order to get cream from it in the

most economical way, a peculiar process was necessary. 

Now he believed that the habit of the ancients was to collect

several milkings in a teacup, pour it into the Great Tun,

fill up with water, and then skim off the cream from

time to time as the needs of the German Empire demanded. 



This began to look reasonable.  It certainly began

to account for the German cream which I had encountered

and marveled over in so many hotels and restaurants. 

But a thought struck me--



"Why did not each ancient dairyman take his own teacup

of milk and his own cask of water, and mix them,

without making a government matter of it?'



"Where could he get a cask large enough to contain

the right proportion of water?"



Very true.  It was plain that the Englishman had studied

the matter from all sides.  Still I thought I might catch

him on one point; so I asked him why the modern empire

did not make the nation's cream in the Heidelberg Tun,

instead of leaving it to rot away unused.  But he answered

as one prepared--



"A patient and diligent examination of the modern German cream

had satisfied me that they do not use the Great Tun now,

because they have got a BIGGER one hid away somewhere. 

Either that is the case or they empty the spring milkings

into the mountain torrents and then skim the Rhine

all summer."



There is a museum of antiquities in the Castle, and among

its most treasured relics are ancient manuscripts connected

with German history.  There are hundreds of these,

and their dates stretch back through many centuries. 

One of them is a decree signed and sealed by the hand

of a successor of Charlemagne, in the year 896. 

A signature made by a hand which vanished out of this life

near a thousand years ago, is a more impressive thing than

even a ruined castle.  Luther's wedding-ring was shown me;

also a fork belonging to a time anterior to our era,

and an early bookjack.  And there was a plaster cast

of the head of a man who was assassinated about sixty

years ago.  The stab-wounds in the face were duplicated

with unpleasant fidelity.  One or two real hairs

still remained sticking in the eyebrows of the cast. 

That trifle seemed to almost change the counterfeit into

a corpse. 



There are many aged portraits--some valuable, some worthless;

some of great interest, some of none at all.  I bought a

couple--one a gorgeous duke of the olden time, and the other

a comely blue-eyed damsel, a princess, maybe.  I bought

them to start a portrait-gallery of my ancestors with. 

I paid a dollar and a half for the duke and a half

for the princess.  One can lay in ancestors at even

cheaper rates than these, in Europe, if he will mouse

among old picture shops and look out for chances. 

