



APPENDIX 



Nothing gives such weight and dignity to a book

as an Appendix.  HERODOTUS






APPENDIX A

The Portier



Omar Khay'am, the poet-prophet of Persia, writing more

than eight hundred years ago, has said:



"In the four parts of the earth are many that are able

to write learned books, many that are able to lead armies,

and many also that are able to govern kingdoms and empires;

but few there be that can keep a hotel."



A word about the European hotel PORTIER.  He is a most

admirable invention, a most valuable convenience. 

He always wears a conspicuous uniform; he can always

be found when he is wanted, for he sticks closely to

his post at the front door; he is as polite as a duke;

he speaks from four to ten languages; he is your surest

help and refuge in time of trouble or perplexity. 

He is not the clerk, he is not the landlord; he ranks above

the clerk, and represents the landlord, who is seldom seen. 

Instead of going to the clerk for information, as we do at home,

you go to the portier.  It is the pride of our average

hotel clerk to know nothing whatever; it is the pride

of the portier to know everything.  You ask the portier

at what hours the trains leave--he tells you instantly;

or you ask him who is the best physician in town; or what

is the hack tariff; or how many children the mayor has;

or what days the galleries are open, and whether a permit

is required, and where you are to get it, and what you

must pay for it; or when the theaters open and close,

what the plays are to be, and the price of seats;

or what is the newest thing in hats; or how the bills

of mortality average; or "who struck Billy Patterson."

It does not matter what you ask him: in nine cases

out of ten he knows, and in the tenth case he will find

out for you before you can turn around three times. 

There is nothing he will not put his hand to.  Suppose you

tell him you wish to go from Hamburg to Peking by the way

of Jericho, and are ignorant of routes and prices--

the next morning he will hand you a piece of paper with

the whole thing worked out on it to the last detail. 

Before you have been long on European soil, you find

yourself still SAYING you are relying on Providence,

but when you come to look closer you will see that in reality

you are relying on the portier.  He discovers what is

puzzling you, or what is troubling you, or what your need is,

before you can get the half of it out, and he promptly says,

"Leave that to me." Consequently, you easily drift into

the habit of leaving everything to him.  There is a certain

embarrassment about applying to the average American

hotel clerk, a certain hesitancy, a sense of insecurity

against rebuff; but you feel no embarrassment in your

intercourse with the portier; he receives your propositions

with an enthusiasm which cheers, and plunges into their

accomplishment with an alacrity which almost inebriates. 

The more requirements you can pile upon him, the better he

likes it.  Of course the result is that you cease from doing

anything for yourself.  He calls a hack when you want one;

puts you into it; tells the driver whither to take you;

receives you like a long-lost child when you return;

sends you about your business, does all the quarreling

with the hackman himself, and pays him his money out

of his own pocket.  He sends for your theater tickets,

and pays for them; he sends for any possible article

you can require, be it a doctor, an elephant, or a

postage stamp; and when you leave, at last, you will

find a subordinate seated with the cab-driver who will

put you in your railway compartment, buy your tickets,

have your baggage weighed, bring you the printed tags,

and tell you everything is in your bill and paid for. 

At home you get such elaborate, excellent, and willing

service as this only in the best hotels of our large cities;

but in Europe you get it in the mere back country-towns just

as well. 



What is the secret of the portier's devotion? It is

very simple: he gets FEES, AND NO SALARY.  His fee

is pretty closely regulated, too.  If you stay a week,

you give him five marks--a dollar and a quarter, or about

eighteen cents a day.  If you stay a month, you reduce

this average somewhat.  If you stay two or three months

or longer, you cut it down half, or even more than half. 

If you stay only one day, you give the portier a mark. 



The head waiter's fee is a shade less than the portier's;

the Boots, who not only blacks your boots and brushes

your clothes, but is usually the porter and handles your

baggage, gets a somewhat smaller fee than the head waiter;

the chambermaid's fee ranks below that of the Boots. 

You fee only these four, and no one else.  A German

gentleman told me that when he remained a week in a hotel,

he gave the portier five marks, the head waiter four,

the Boots three, and the chambermaid two; and if he

stayed three months he divided ninety marks among them,

in about the above proportions.  Ninety marks make

$22.50.



None of these fees are ever paid until you leave the hotel,

though it be a year--except one of these four servants

should go away in the mean time; in that case he will

be sure to come and bid you good-by and give you the

opportunity to pay him what is fairly coming to him. 

It is considered very bad policy to fee a servant while you

are still to remain longer in the hotel, because if you

gave him too little he might neglect you afterward,

and if you gave him too much he might neglect somebody

else to attend to you.  It is considered best to keep his

expectations "on a string" until your stay in concluded. 



I do not know whether hotel servants in New York get any

wages or not, but I do know that in some of the hotels there

the feeing system in vogue is a heavy burden.  The waiter

expects a quarter at breakfast--and gets it.  You have

a different waiter at luncheon, and so he gets a quarter. 

Your waiter at dinner is another stranger--consequently

he gets a quarter.  The boy who carries your satchel

to your room and lights your gas fumbles around and hangs

around significantly, and you fee him to get rid of him. 

Now you may ring for ice-water; and ten minutes later

for a lemonade; and ten minutes afterward, for a cigar;

and by and by for a newspaper--and what is the result? Why,

a new boy has appeared every time and fooled and fumbled

around until you have paid him something.  Suppose you

boldly put your foot down, and say it is the hotel's

business to pay its servants? You will have to ring your

bell ten or fifteen times before you get a servant there;

and when he goes off to fill your order you will grow old

and infirm before you see him again.  You may struggle nobly

for twenty-four hours, maybe, if you are an adamantine

sort of person, but in the mean time you will have been

so wretchedly served, and so insolently, that you will

haul down your colors, and go to impoverishing yourself

with fees. 



It seems to me that it would be a happy idea to import

the European feeing system into America.  I believe it

would result in getting even the bells of the Philadelphia

hotels answered, and cheerful service rendered. 



The greatest American hotels keep a number of clerks

and a cashier, and pay them salaries which mount up

to a considerable total in the course of a year. 

The great continental hotels keep a cashier on a trifling

salary, and a portier WHO PAYS THE HOTEL A SALARY. 

By the latter system both the hotel and the public

save money and are better served than by our system. 

One of our consuls told me that a portier of a great Berlin

hotel paid five thousand dollars a year for his position,

and yet cleared six thousand dollars for himself. 

The position of portier in the chief hotels of Saratoga,

Long Branch, New York, and similar centers of resort,

would be one which the holder could afford to pay even more

than five thousand dollars for, perhaps. 



When we borrowed the feeing fashion from Europe a dozen

years ago, the salary system ought to have been discontinued,

of course.  We might make this correction now, I should think. 

And we might add the portier, too.  Since I first began

to study the portier, I have had opportunities to observe

him in the chief cities of Germany, Switzerland, and Italy;

and the more I have seen of him the more I have wished

that he might be adopted in America, and become there,

as he is in Europe, the stranger's guardian angel. 



Yes, what was true eight hundred years ago, is just

as true today: "Few there be that can keep a hotel."

Perhaps it is because the landlords and their subordinates

have in too many cases taken up their trade without first

learning it.  In Europe the trade of hotel-keeper is taught. 

The apprentice begins at the bottom of the ladder

and masters the several grades one after the other. 

Just as in our country printing-offices the apprentice

first learns how to sweep out and bring water;

then learns to "roll"; then to sort "pi"; then to set type;

and finally rounds and completes his education with

job-work and press-work; so the landlord-apprentice serves

as call-boy; then as under-waiter; then as a parlor waiter;

then as head waiter, in which position he often has

to make out all the bills; then as clerk or cashier;

then as portier.  His trade is learned now, and by and

by he will assume the style and dignity of landlord,

and be found conducting a hotel of his own. 



Now in Europe, the same as in America, when a man has

kept a hotel so thoroughly well during a number of years

as to give it a great reputation, he has his reward. 

He can live prosperously on that reputation.  He can let

his hotel run down to the last degree of shabbiness and

yet have it full of people all the time.  For instance,

there is the Ho^tel de Ville, in Milan.  It swarms with mice

and fleas, and if the rest of the world were destroyed

it could furnish dirt enough to start another one with. 

The food would create an insurrection in a poorhouse;

and yet if you go outside to get your meals that hotel

makes up its loss by overcharging you on all sorts

of trifles--and without making any denials or excuses

about it, either.  But the Ho^tel de Ville's old excellent

reputation still keeps its dreary rooms crowded with travelers

who would be elsewhere if they had only some wise friend

to warn them. 

