




APPENDIX C

The College Prison



It seems that the student may break a good many of the public

laws without having to answer to the public authorities. 

His case must come before the University for trial

and punishment.  If a policeman catches him in an unlawful

act and proceeds to arrest him, the offender proclaims that

he is a student, and perhaps shows his matriculation card,

whereupon the officer asks for his address, then goes

his way, and reports the matter at headquarters.  If the

offense is one over which the city has no jurisdiction,

the authorities report the case officially to the University,

and give themselves no further concern about it. 

The University court send for the student, listen to

the evidence, and pronounce judgment.  The punishment

usually inflicted is imprisonment in the University prison. 

As I understand it, a student's case is often tried

without his being present at all.  Then something

like this happens: A constable in the service of the

University visits the lodgings of the said student,

knocks, is invited to come in, does so, and says politely--



"If you please, I am here to conduct you to prison."



"Ah," says the student, "I was not expecting it. 

What have I been doing?"



"Two weeks ago the public peace had the honor to be

disturbed by you."



"It is true; I had forgotten it.  Very well: I have been

complained of, tried, and found guilty--is that it?"



"Exactly. You are sentenced to two days' solitary confinement

in the College prison, and I am sent to fetch you."



STUDENT.  "O, I can't go today."



OFFICER.  "If you please--why?"



STUDENT.  "Because I've got an engagement."



OFFICER.  "Tomorrow, then, perhaps?"



STUDENT.  "No, I am going to the opera, tomorrow."



OFFICER.  "Could you come Friday?"



STUDENT.  (Reflectively.) "Let me see--Friday--Friday.

I don't seem to have anything on hand Friday."



OFFICER.  "Then, if you please, I will expect you on Friday."



STUDENT.  "All right, I'll come around Friday."



OFFICER.  "Thank you.  Good day, sir."



STUDENT.  "Good day."



So on Friday the student goes to the prison of his

own accord, and is admitted. 



It is questionable if the world's criminal history can

show a custom more odd than this.  Nobody knows, now,

how it originated.  There have always been many noblemen

among the students, and it is presumed that all students

are gentlemen; in the old times it was usual to mar

the convenience of such folk as little as possible;

perhaps this indulgent custom owes its origin to this. 



One day I was listening to some conversation upon this

subject when an American student said that for some time he

had been under sentence for a slight breach of the peace

and had promised the constable that he would presently

find an unoccupied day and betake himself to prison. 

I asked the young gentleman to do me the kindness to go

to jail as soon as he conveniently could, so that I might

try to get in there and visit him, and see what college

captivity was like.  He said he would appoint the very

first day he could spare. 



His confinement was to endure twenty-four hours.  He shortly

chose his day, and sent me word.  I started immediately. 

When I reached the University Place, I saw two gentlemen

talking together, and, as they had portfolios under

their arms, I judged they were tutors or elderly students;

so I asked them in English to show me the college jail. 

I had learned to take it for granted that anybody in Germany

who knows anything, knows English, so I had stopped

afflicting people with my German.  These gentlemen seemed

a trifle amused--and a trifle confused, too--but one

of them said he would walk around the corner with me

and show me the place.  He asked me why I wanted to get

in there, and I said to see a friend--and for curiosity. 

He doubted if I would be admitted, but volunteered to put

in a word or two for me with the custodian. 



He rang the bell, a door opened, and we stepped into a paved

way and then up into a small living-room, where we were

received by a hearty and good-natured German woman of fifty. 

She threw up her hands with a surprised "ACH GOTT,

HERR PROFESSOR!" and exhibited a mighty deference for my

new acquaintance.  By the sparkle in her eye I judged

she was a good deal amused, too.  The "Herr Professor"

talked to her in German, and I understood enough of it

to know that he was bringing very plausible reasons to bear

for admitting me.  They were successful.  So the Herr

Professor received my earnest thanks and departed. 

The old dame got her keys, took me up two or three flights

of stairs, unlocked a door, and we stood in the presence

of the criminal.  Then she went into a jolly and eager

description of all that had occurred downstairs, and what

the Herr Professor had said, and so forth and so on. 

Plainly, she regarded it as quite a superior joke that I had

waylaid a Professor and employed him in so odd a service. 

But I wouldn't have done it if I had known he was a Professor;

therefore my conscience was not disturbed. 



Now the dame left us to ourselves.  The cell was not a roomy one;

still it was a little larger than an ordinary prison cell. 

It had a window of good size, iron-grated; a small stove;

two wooden chairs; two oaken tables, very old and

most elaborately carved with names, mottoes, faces,

armorial bearings, etc.--the work of several generations

of imprisoned students; and a narrow wooden bedstead

with a villainous straw mattress, but no sheets, pillows,

blankets, or coverlets--for these the student must furnish

at his own cost if he wants them.  There was no carpet, of

course. 



The ceiling was completely covered with names, dates,

and monograms, done with candle-smoke. The walls were

thickly covered with pictures and portraits (in profile),

some done with ink, some with soot, some with a pencil,

and some with red, blue, and green chalks; and whenever

an inch or two of space had remained between the pictures,

the captives had written plaintive verses, or names

and dates.  I do not think I was ever in a more elaborately

frescoed apartment. 



Against the wall hung a placard containing the prison laws. 

I made a note of one or two of these.  For instance:

The prisoner must pay, for the "privilege" of entering,

a sum equivalent to 20 cents of our money; for the privilege

of leaving, when his term had expired, 20 cents; for every

day spent in the prison, 12 cents; for fire and light,

12 cents a day.  The jailer furnishes coffee, mornings,

for a small sum; dinners and suppers may be ordered

from outside if the prisoner chooses--and he is allowed

to pay for them, too. 



Here and there, on the walls, appeared the names

of American students, and in one place the American

arms and motto were displayed in colored chalks. 



With the help of my friend I translated many of the inscriptions.



Some of them were cheerful, others the reverse. 

I will give the reader a few specimens:



"In my tenth semester (my best one), I am cast here

through the complaints of others.  Let those who follow

me take warning."



"III TAGE OHNE GRUND ANGEBLICH AUS NEUGIERDE." Which is to say,

he had a curiosity to know what prison life was like;

so he made a breach in some law and got three days for it. 

It is more than likely that he never had the same

curiosity again. 



(TRANSLATION.) "E. Glinicke, four days for being too eager

a spectator of a row."



"F. Graf Bismarck--27-29, II, '74." Which means that

Count Bismarck, son of the great statesman, was a prisoner

two days in 1874. 



(TRANSLATION.) "R. Diergandt--for Love--4 days."

Many people in this world have caught it heavier than

for the same indiscretion. 



This one is terse.  I translate:



"Four weeks for MISINTERPRETED GALLANTRY." I wish

the sufferer had explained a little more fully. 

A four-week term is a rather serious matter. 



There were many uncomplimentary references, on the walls,

to a certain unpopular dignitary.  One sufferer had got

three days for not saluting him.  Another had "here two days

slept and three nights lain awake," on account of this

same "Dr. K." In one place was a picture of Dr. K. hanging

on a gallows. 



Here and there, lonesome prisoners had eased the heavy time

by altering the records left by predecessors.  Leaving the

name standing, and the date and length of the captivity,

they had erased the description of the misdemeanor,

and written in its place, in staring capitals, "FOR THEFT!"

or "FOR MURDER!" or some other gaudy crime.  In one place,

all by itself, stood this blood-curdling word:



"Rache!" [1]



1.  "Revenge!"



There was no name signed, and no date.  It was an

inscription well calculated to pique curiosity. 

One would greatly like to know the nature of the wrong

that had been done, and what sort of vengeance was wanted,

and whether the prisoner ever achieved it or not. 

But there was no way of finding out these things. 



Occasionally, a name was followed simply by the remark,

"II days, for disturbing the peace," and without comment

upon the justice or injustice of the sentence. 



In one place was a hilarious picture of a student of the

green cap corps with a bottle of champagne in each hand;

and below was the legend: "These make an evil fate endurable."



There were two prison cells, and neither had space left on

walls or ceiling for another name or portrait or picture. 

The inside surfaces of the two doors were completely

covered with CARTES DE VISITE of former prisoners,

ingeniously let into the wood and protected from dirt

and injury by glass. 



I very much wanted one of the sorry old tables which

the prisoners had spent so many years in ornamenting

with their pocket-knives, but red tape was in the way. 

The custodian could not sell one without an order from

a superior; and that superior would have to get it from

HIS superior; and this one would have to get it from

a higher one--and so on up and up until the faculty

should sit on the matter and deliver final judgment. 

The system was right, and nobody could find fault with it;

but it did not seem justifiable to bother so many people,

so I proceeded no further.  It might have cost me more than

I could afford, anyway; for one of those prison tables,

which was at the time in a private museum in Heidelberg,

was afterward sold at auction for two hundred and fifty dollars. 

It was not worth more than a dollar, or possibly a dollar

and half, before the captive students began their work

on it.  Persons who saw it at the auction said it was

so curiously and wonderfully carved that it was worth

the money that was paid for it. 



Among them many who have tasted the college prison's

dreary hospitality was a lively young fellow from one

of the Southern states of America, whose first year's

experience of German university life was rather peculiar. 

The day he arrived in Heidelberg he enrolled his name

on the college books, and was so elated with the fact

that his dearest hope had found fruition and he was

actually a student of the old and renowned university,

that he set to work that very night to celebrate the event

by a grand lark in company with some other students. 

In the course of his lark he managed to make a wide

breach in one of the university's most stringent laws. 

Sequel: before noon, next day, he was in the college

prison--booked for three months.  The twelve long weeks

dragged slowly by, and the day of deliverance came at last. 

A great crowd of sympathizing fellow-students received

him with a rousing demonstration as he came forth,

and of course there was another grand lark--in the course

of which he managed to make a wide breach of the CITY'S

most stringent laws.  Sequel: before noon, next day,

he was safe in the city lockup--booked for three months. 

This second tedious captivity drew to an end in the course

of time, and again a great crowd of sympathizing fellow

students gave him a rousing reception as he came forth;

but his delight in his freedom was so boundless that he

could not proceed soberly and calmly, but must go hopping

and skipping and jumping down the sleety street from sheer

excess of joy.  Sequel: he slipped and broke his leg,

and actually lay in the hospital during the next three

months!



When he at last became a free man again, he said he believed

he would hunt up a brisker seat of learning; the Heidelberg

lectures might be good, but the opportunities of attending

them were too rare, the educational process too slow;

he said he had come to Europe with the idea that the

acquirement of an education was only a matter of time,

but if he had averaged the Heidelberg system correctly,

it was rather a matter of eternity. 

