




CHAPTER X

[How Wagner Operas Bang Along]



Three or four hours.  That is a long time to sit in one place,

whether one be conspicuous or not, yet some of Wagner's

operas bang along for six whole hours on a stretch!

But the people sit there and enjoy it all, and wish it

would last longer.  A German lady in Munich told me

that a person could not like Wagner's music at first,

but must go through the deliberate process of learning

to like it--then he would have his sure reward;

for when he had learned to like it he would hunger

for it and never be able to get enough of it.  She said

that six hours of Wagner was by no means too much. 

She said that this composer had made a complete revolution

in music and was burying the old masters one by one. 

And she said that Wagner's operas differed from all others

in one notable respect, and that was that they were not

merely spotted with music here and there, but were ALL music,

from the first strain to the last.  This surprised me. 

I said I had attended one of his insurrections, and found

hardly ANY music in it except the Wedding Chorus. 

She said "Lohengrin" was noisier than Wagner's other operas,

but that if I would keep on going to see it I would find

by and by that it was all music, and therefore would

then enjoy it.  I COULD have said, "But would you advise

a person to deliberately practice having a toothache

in the pit of his stomach for a couple of years in order

that he might then come to enjoy it?" But I reserved

that remark. 



This lady was full of the praises of the head-tenor

who had performed in a Wagner opera the night before,

and went on to enlarge upon his old and prodigious fame,

and how many honors had been lavished upon him by the

princely houses of Germany.  Here was another surprise. 

I had attended that very opera, in the person of my agent,

and had made close and accurate observations.  So I

said:



"Why, madam, MY experience warrants me in stating

that that tenor's voice is not a voice at all,

but only a shriek--the shriek of a hyena."



"That is very true," she said; "he cannot sing now;

it is already many years that he has lost his voice,

but in other times he sang, yes, divinely! So whenever

he comes now, you shall see, yes, that the theater

will not hold the people.  JAWOHL BEI GOTT! his voice

is WUNDERSCHO"N in that past time."



I said she was discovering to me a kindly trait in the

Germans which was worth emulating.  I said that over

the water we were not quite so generous; that with us,

when a singer had lost his voice and a jumper had lost

his legs, these parties ceased to draw.  I said I had been

to the opera in Hanover, once, and in Mannheim once,

and in Munich (through my authorized agent) once, and this

large experience had nearly persuaded me that the Germans

PREFERRED singers who couldn't sing.  This was not such

a very extravagant speech, either, for that burly Mannheim

tenor's praises had been the talk of all Heidelberg for

a week before his performance took place--yet his voice

was like the distressing noise which a nail makes when you

screech it across a window-pane. I said so to Heidelberg

friends the next day, and they said, in the calmest and

simplest way, that that was very true, but that in earlier

times his voice HAD been wonderfully fine.  And the tenor

in Hanover was just another example of this sort. 

The English-speaking German gentleman who went with me

to the opera there was brimming with enthusiasm over that tenor. 

He said:



"ACH GOTT! a great man! You shall see him.  He is so celebrate

in all Germany--and he has a pension, yes, from the government. 

He not obliged to sing now, only twice every year;

but if he not sing twice each year they take him his pension

away."



Very well, we went.  When the renowned old tenor appeared,

I got a nudge and an excited whisper:



"Now you see him!"



But the "celebrate" was an astonishing disappointment to me. 

If he had been behind a screen I should have supposed

they were performing a surgical operation on him. 

I looked at my friend--to my great surprise he seemed

intoxicated with pleasure, his eyes were dancing

with eager delight.  When the curtain at last fell,

he burst into the stormiest applause, and kept it up--as

did the whole house--until the afflictive tenor had

come three times before the curtain to make his bow. 

While the glowing enthusiast was swabbing the perspiration

from his face, I said:



"I don't mean the least harm, but really, now, do you

think he can sing?"



"Him? NO! GOTT IM HIMMEL, ABER, how he has been able to

sing twenty-five years ago?" [Then pensively.] "ACH, no,

NOW he not sing any more, he only cry.  When he think

he sing, now, he not sing at all, no, he only make

like a cat which is unwell."



Where and how did we get the idea that the Germans

are a stolid, phlegmatic race? In truth, they are

widely removed from that.  They are warm-hearted,

emotional, impulsive, enthusiastic, their tears come

at the mildest touch, and it is not hard to move them

to laughter.  They are the very children of impulse. 

We are cold and self-contained, compared to the Germans. 

They hug and kiss and cry and shout and dance and sing;

and where we use one loving, petting expressions they pour

out a score.  Their language is full of endearing diminutives;

nothing that they love escapes the application of a petting

diminutive--neither the house, nor the dog, nor the horse,

nor the grandmother, nor any other creature, animate or

inanimate. 



In the theaters at Hanover, Hamburg, and Mannheim,

they had a wise custom.  The moment the curtain went up,

the light in the body of the house went down. 

The audience sat in the cool gloom of a deep twilight,

which greatly enhanced the glowing splendors of the stage. 

It saved gas, too, and people were not sweated to death. 



When I saw "King Lear" played, nobody was allowed to see

a scene shifted; if there was nothing to be done but slide

a forest out of the way and expose a temple beyond, one did

not see that forest split itself in the middle and go

shrieking away, with the accompanying disenchanting spectacle

of the hands and heels of the impelling impulse--no,

the curtain was always dropped for an instant--one heard

not the least movement behind it--but when it went up,

the next instant, the forest was gone.  Even when the

stage was being entirely reset, one heard no noise. 

During the whole time that "King Lear" was playing

the curtain was never down two minutes at any one time. 

The orchestra played until the curtain was ready to go up

for the first time, then they departed for the evening. 

Where the stage waits never each two minutes there is no

occasion for music.  I had never seen this two-minute

business between acts but once before, and that was when

the "Shaughraun" was played at Wallack's.



I was at a concert in Munich one night, the people

were streaming in, the clock-hand pointed to seven,

the music struck up, and instantly all movement in

the body of the house ceased--nobody was standing,

or walking up the aisles, or fumbling with a seat,

the stream of incomers had suddenly dried up at its source. 

I listened undisturbed to a piece of music that was fifteen

minutes long--always expecting some tardy ticket-holders

to come crowding past my knees, and being continuously and

pleasantly disappointed--but when the last note was struck,

here came the stream again.  You see, they had made

those late comers wait in the comfortable waiting-parlor

from the time the music had begin until it was ended. 



It was the first time I had ever seen this sort of

criminals denied the privilege of destroying the comfort

of a house full of their betters.  Some of these were

pretty fine birds, but no matter, they had to tarry

outside in the long parlor under the inspection of

a double rank of liveried footmen and waiting-maids

who supported the two walls with their backs and held

the wraps and traps of their masters and mistresses on their

arms. 



We had no footmen to hold our things, and it was not

permissible to take them into the concert-room; but there

were some men and women to take charge of them for us. 

They gave us checks for them and charged a fixed price,

payable in advance--five cents. 



In Germany they always hear one thing at an opera

which has never yet been heard in America, perhaps--I

mean the closing strain of a fine solo or duet. 

We always smash into it with an earthquake of applause. 

The result is that we rob ourselves of the sweetest

part of the treat; we get the whiskey, but we don't get

the sugar in the bottom of the glass. 



Our way of scattering applause along through an act seems

to me to be better than the Mannheim way of saving it

all up till the act is ended.  I do not see how an actor

can forget himself and portray hot passion before a cold

still audience.  I should think he would feel foolish. 

It is a pain to me to this day, to remember how that old

German Lear raged and wept and howled around the stage,

with never a response from that hushed house, never a

single outburst till the act was ended.  To me there was

something unspeakably uncomfortable in the solemn dead

silences that always followed this old person's tremendous

outpourings of his feelings.  I could not help putting

myself in his place--I thought I knew how sick and flat

he felt during those silences, because I remembered a case

which came under my observation once, and which--but I

will tell the incident:



One evening on board a Mississippi steamboat, a boy of ten

years lay asleep in a berth--a long, slim-legged boy,

he was, encased in quite a short shirt; it was the first

time he had ever made a trip on a steamboat, and so he

was troubled, and scared, and had gone to bed with his

head filled with impending snaggings, and explosions,

and conflagrations, and sudden death.  About ten o'clock

some twenty ladies were sitting around about the ladies'

saloon, quietly reading, sewing, embroidering, and so on,

and among them sat a sweet, benignant old dame with round

spectacles on her nose and her busy knitting-needles

in her hands.  Now all of a sudden, into the midst of this

peaceful scene burst that slim-shanked boy in the brief shirt,

wild-eyed, erect-haired, and shouting, "Fire, fire!

JUMP AND RUN, THE BOAT'S AFIRE AND THERE AIN'T A MINUTE

TO LOSE!" All those ladies looked sweetly up and smiled,

nobody stirred, the old lady pulled her spectacles down,

looked over them, and said, gently:



"But you mustn't catch cold, child.  Run and put on

your breastpin, and then come and tell us all about it."



It was a cruel chill to give to a poor little devil's

gushing vehemence.  He was expecting to be a sort of

hero--the creator of a wild panic--and here everybody

sat and smiled a mocking smile, and an old woman made

fun of his bugbear.  I turned and crept away--for I

was that boy--and never even cared to discover whether

I had dreamed the fire or actually seen it. 



I am told that in a German concert or opera, they hardly

ever encore a song; that though they may be dying to hear

it again, their good breeding usually preserves them

against requiring the repetition. 



Kings may encore; that is quite another matter;

it delights everybody to see that the King is pleased;

and as to the actor encored, his pride and gratification

are simply boundless.  Still, there are circumstances

in which even a royal encore--



But it is better to illustrate.  The King of Bavaria is

a poet, and has a poet's eccentricities--with the advantage

over all other poets of being able to gratify them,

no matter what form they may take.  He is fond of opera,

but not fond of sitting in the presence of an audience;

therefore, it has sometimes occurred, in Munich,

that when an opera has been concluded and the players

were getting off their paint and finery, a command has

come to them to get their paint and finery on again. 

Presently the King would arrive, solitary and alone,

and the players would being at the beginning and do the

entire opera over again with only that one individual

in the vast solemn theater for audience.  Once he took

an odd freak into his head.  High up and out of sight,

over the prodigious stage of the court theater is a maze

of interlacing water-pipes, so pierced that in case

of fire, innumerable little thread-like streams of

water can be caused to descend; and in case of need,

this discharge can be augmented to a pouring flood. 

American managers might want to make a note of that. 

The King was sole audience.  The opera proceeded,

it was a piece with a storm in it; the mimic thunder

began to mutter, the mimic wind began to wail and sough,

and the mimic rain to patter.  The King's interest rose

higher and higher; it developed into enthusiasm.  He cried

out:



"It is very, very good, indeed! But I will have real

rain! Turn on the water!"



The manager pleaded for a reversal of the command; said it

would ruin the costly scenery and the splendid costumes,

but the King cried:



"No matter, no matter, I will have real rain! Turn

on the water!"



So the real rain was turned on and began to descend in

gossamer lances to the mimic flower-beds and gravel walks

of the stage.  The richly dressed actresses and actors

tripped about singing bravely and pretending not to mind it. 

The King was delighted--his enthusiasm grew higher. 

He cried out:



"Bravo, bravo! More thunder! more lightning! turn

on more rain!"



The thunder boomed, the lightning glared, the storm-winds raged,

the deluge poured down.  The mimic royalty on the stage,

with their soaked satins clinging to their bodies,

slopped about ankle-deep in water, warbling their sweetest

and best, the fiddlers under the eaves of the state sawed

away for dear life, with the cold overflow spouting down

the backs of their necks, and the dry and happy King sat

in his lofty box and wore his gloves to ribbons applauding. 



"More yet!" cried the King; "more yet--let loose all

the thunder, turn on all the water! I will hang the man

that raises an umbrella!"



When this most tremendous and effective storm that had

ever been produced in any theater was at last over,

the King's approbation was measureless.  He cried:



"Magnificent, magnificent! ENCORE! Do it again!"



But the manager succeeded in persuading him to recall

the encore, and said the company would feel sufficiently

rewarded and complimented in the mere fact that the

encore was desired by his Majesty, without fatiguing

him with a repetition to gratify their own vanity. 



During the remainder of the act the lucky performers

were those whose parts required changes of dress;

the others were a soaked, bedraggled, and uncomfortable lot,

but in the last degree picturesque.  The stage scenery

was ruined, trap-doors were so swollen that they wouldn't

work for a week afterward, the fine costumes were spoiled,

and no end of minor damages were done by that remarkable storm. 



It was royal idea--that storm--and royally carried out. 

But observe the moderation of the King; he did not

insist upon his encore.  If he had been a gladsome,

unreflecting American opera-audience, he probably would

have had his storm repeated and repeated until he drowned

all those people. 

