





CHAPTER VIII

The Great French Duel

[I Second Gambetta in a Terrific Duel]



Much as the modern French duel is ridiculed by certain

smart people, it is in reality one of the most dangerous

institutions of our day.  Since it is always fought in the

open air, the combatants are nearly sure to catch cold. 

M. Paul de Cassagnac, the most inveterate of the French

duelists, had suffered so often in this way that he is at

last a confirmed invalid; and the best physician in Paris

has expressed the opinion that if he goes on dueling for

fifteen or twenty years more--unless he forms the habit

of fighting in a comfortable room where damps and draughts

cannot intrude--he will eventually endanger his life. 

This ought to moderate the talk of those people who are

so stubborn in maintaining that the French duel is the

most health-giving of recreations because of the open-air

exercise it affords.  And it ought also to moderate that

foolish talk about French duelists and socialist-hated

monarchs being the only people who are immoral. 



But it is time to get at my subject.  As soon as I heard

of the late fiery outbreak between M. Gambetta and M. Fourtou

in the French Assembly, I knew that trouble must follow. 

I knew it because a long personal friendship with

M. Gambetta revealed to me the desperate and implacable

nature of the man.  Vast as are his physical proportions,

I knew that the thirst for revenge would penetrate

to the remotest frontiers of his person. 



I did not wait for him to call on me, but went at once

to him.  As I had expected, I found the brave fellow

steeped in a profound French calm.  I say French calm,

because French calmness and English calmness have points

of difference.  He was moving swiftly back and forth

among the debris of his furniture, now and then staving

chance fragments of it across the room with his foot;

grinding a constant grist of curses through his set teeth;

and halting every little while to deposit another handful

of his hair on the pile which he had been building of it on

the table. 



He threw his arms around my neck, bent me over his stomach

to his breast, kissed me on both cheeks, hugged me four

or five times, and then placed me in his own arm-chair.

As soon as I had got well again, we began business at once. 



I said I supposed he would wish me to act as his second,

and he said, "Of course." I said I must be allowed

to act under a French name, so that I might be shielded

from obloquy in my country, in case of fatal results. 

He winced here, probably at the suggestion that dueling was

not regarded with respect in America.  However, he agreed

to my requirement.  This accounts for the fact that in all

the newspaper reports M. Gambetta's second was apparently

a Frenchman. 



First, we drew up my principal's will.  I insisted upon this,

and stuck to my point.  I said I had never heard of a man

in his right mind going out to fight a duel without

first making his will.  He said he had never heard

of a man in his right mind doing anything of the kind. 

When he had finished the will, he wished to proceed

to a choice of his "last words." He wanted to know

how the following words, as a dying exclamation, struck me:



"I die for my God, for my country, for freedom of speech,

for progress, and the universal brotherhood of man!"



I objected that this would require too lingering a death;

it was a good speech for a consumptive, but not suited

to the exigencies of the field of honor.  We wrangled

over a good many ante-mortem outburts, but I finally got

him to cut his obituary down to this, which he copied

into his memorandum-book, purposing to get it by heart:



"I DIE THAT FRANCE MIGHT LIVE."



I said that this remark seemed to lack relevancy; but he

said relevancy was a matter of no consequence in last words,

what you wanted was thrill. 



The next thing in order was the choice of weapons. 

My principal said he was not feeling well, and would leave

that and the other details of the proposed meeting to me. 

Therefore I wrote the following note and carried it to

M. Fourtou's friend:



Sir: M. Gambetta accepts M. Fourtou's challenge,

and authorizes me to propose Plessis-Piquet as the place

of meeting; tomorrow morning at daybreak as the time;

and axes as the weapons. 



I am, sir, with great respect,



Mark Twain. 



M. Fourtou's friend read this note, and shuddered. 

Then he turned to me, and said, with a suggestion of

severity in his tone:



"Have you considered, sir, what would be the inevitable

result of such a meeting as this?"



"Well, for instance, what WOULD it be?"



"Bloodshed!"



"That's about the size of it," I said.  "Now, if it is

a fair question, what was your side proposing to shed?"



I had him there.  He saw he had made a blunder, so he hastened

to explain it away.  He said he had spoken jestingly. 

Then he added that he and his principal would enjoy axes,

and indeed prefer them, but such weapons were barred

by the French code, and so I must change my proposal. 



I walked the floor, turning the thing over in my mind,

and finally it occurred to me that Gatling-guns at fifteen

paces would be a likely way to get a verdict on the field

of honor.  So I framed this idea into a proposition. 



But it was not accepted.  The code was in the way again. 

I proposed rifles; then double-barreled shotguns;

then Colt's navy revolvers.  These being all rejected,

I reflected awhile, and sarcastically suggested brickbats

at three-quarters of a mile.  I always hate to fool away

a humorous thing on a person who has no perception of humor;

and it filled me with bitterness when this man went soberly

away to submit the last proposition to his principal. 



He came back presently and said his principal was charmed

with the idea of brickbats at three-quarters of a mile,

but must decline on account of the danger to disinterested

parties passing between them.  Then I said:



"Well, I am at the end of my string, now.  Perhaps YOU

would be good enough to suggest a weapon? Perhaps you

have even had one in your mind all the time?"



His countenance brightened, and he said with alacrity:



"Oh, without doubt, monsieur!"



So he fell to hunting in his pockets--pocket after pocket,

and he had plenty of them--muttering all the while,

"Now, what could I have done with them?"



At last he was successful.  He fished out of his vest pocket

a couple of little things which I carried to the light

and ascertained to be pistols.  They were single-barreled

and silver-mounted, and very dainty and pretty. 

I was not able to speak for emotion.  I silently hung

one of them on my watch-chain, and returned the other. 

My companion in crime now unrolled a postage-stamp

containing several cartridges, and gave me one of them. 

I asked if he meant to signify by this that our men were

to be allowed but one shot apiece.  He replied that the

French code permitted no more.  I then begged him to go

and suggest a distance, for my mind was growing weak

and confused under the strain which had been put upon it. 

He named sixty-five yards.  I nearly lost my patience. 

I said:



"Sixty-five yards, with these instruments? Squirt-guns

would be deadlier at fifty.  Consider, my friend,

you and I are banded together to destroy life, not make

it eternal."



But with all my persuasions, all my arguments, I was only

able to get him to reduce the distance to thirty-five yards;

and even this concession he made with reluctance,

and said with a sigh, "I wash my hands of this slaughter;

on your head be it."



There was nothing for me but to go home to my old

lion-heart and tell my humiliating story.  When I entered,

M. Gambetta was laying his last lock of hair upon the altar. 

He sprang toward me, exclaiming:



"You have made the fatal arrangements--I see it in your eye!"



"I have."



His face paled a trifle, and he leaned upon the table

for support.  He breathed thick and heavily for a moment

or two, so tumultuous were his feelings; then he hoarsely

whispered:



"The weapon, the weapon! Quick! what is the weapon?"



"This!" and I displayed that silver-mounted thing. 

He cast but one glance at it, then swooned ponderously

to the floor. 



When he came to, he said mournfully:



"The unnatural calm to which I have subjected myself

has told upon my nerves.  But away with weakness!

I will confront my fate like a man and a Frenchman."



He rose to his feet, and assumed an attitude which

for sublimity has never been approached by man,

and has seldom been surpassed by statues.  Then he said,

in his deep bass tones:



"Behold, I am calm, I am ready; reveal to me the distance."



"Thirty-five yards." ... 



I could not lift him up, of course; but I rolled him over,

and poured water down his back.  He presently came to,

and said:



"Thirty-five yards--without a rest? But why ask? Since

murder was that man's intention, why should he palter

with small details? But mark you one thing: in my fall

the world shall see how the chivalry of France meets death."



After a long silence he asked:



"Was nothing said about that man's family standing

up with him, as an offset to my bulk? But no matter;

I would not stoop to make such a suggestion; if he is

not noble enough to suggest it himself, he is welcome

to this advantage, which no honorable man would take."



He now sank into a sort of stupor of reflection,

which lasted some minutes; after which he broke silence with:



"The hour--what is the hour fixed for the collision?"



"Dawn, tomorrow."



He seemed greatly surprised, and immediately said:



"Insanity! I never heard of such a thing.  Nobody is

abroad at such an hour."



"That is the reason I named it.  Do you mean to say you

want an audience?"



"It is no time to bandy words.  I am astonished that M. Fourtou

should ever have agreed to so strange an innovation. 

Go at once and require a later hour."



I ran downstairs, threw open the front door, and almost

plunged into the arms of M. Fourtou's second.  He said:



"I have the honor to say that my principal strenuously

objects to the hour chosen, and begs you will consent

to change it to half past nine."



"Any courtesy, sir, which it is in our power to extend

is at the service of your excellent principal.  We agree

to the proposed change of time."



"I beg you to accept the thanks of my client." Then he

turned to a person behind him, and said, "You hear, M. Noir,

the hour is altered to half past nine.  " Whereupon

M. Noir bowed, expressed his thanks, and went away. 

My accomplice continued:



"If agreeable to you, your chief surgeons and ours shall

proceed to the field in the same carriage as is customary."



"It is entirely agreeable to me, and I am obliged

to you for mentioning the surgeons, for I am afraid

I should not have thought of them.  How many shall

I want? I supposed two or three will be enough?"



"Two is the customary number for each party.  I refer

to 'chief' surgeons; but considering the exalted positions

occupied by our clients, it will be well and decorous

that each of us appoint several consulting surgeons,

from among the highest in the profession.  These will

come in their own private carriages.  Have you engaged

a hearse?"



"Bless my stupidity, I never thought of it!" I will attend

to it right away.  I must seem very ignorant to you;

but you must try to overlook that, because I have never

had any experience of such a swell duel as this before. 

I have had a good deal to do with duels on the Pacific coast,

but I see now that they were crude affairs.  A hearse--sho!

we used to leave the elected lying around loose, and let

anybody cord them up and cart them off that wanted to. 

Have you anything further to suggest?"



"Nothing, except that the head undertakers shall ride together,

as is usual.  The subordinates and mutes will go on foot,

as is also usual.  I will see you at eight o'clock

in the morning, and we will then arrange the order

of the procession.  I have the honor to bid you a good day."



I returned to my client, who said, "Very well;

at what hour is the engagement to begin?"



"Half past nine."



"Very good indeed.; Have you sent the fact to the newspapers?"



"SIR! If after our long and intimate friendship you can

for a moment deem me capable of so base a treachery--"



"Tut, tut! What words are these, my dear friend? Have I

wounded you? Ah, forgive me; I am overloading you with labor. 

Therefore go on with the other details, and drop this

one from your list.  The bloody-minded Fourtou will be

sure to attend to it.  Or I myself--yes, to make certain,

I will drop a note to my journalistic friend, M. Noir--"



"Oh, come to think of it, you may save yourself the trouble;

that other second has informed M. Noir."



"H'm! I might have known it.  It is just like that Fourtou,

who always wants to make a display."



At half past nine in the morning the procession approached

the field of Plessis-Piquet in the following order: first

came our carriage--nobody in it but M. Gambetta and myself;

then a carriage containing M. Fourtou and his second;

then a carriage containing two poet-orators who did

not believe in God, and these had MS.  funeral orations

projecting from their breast pockets; then a carriage

containing the head surgeons and their cases of instruments;

then eight private carriages containing consulting surgeons;

then a hack containing a coroner; then the two hearses;

then a carriage containing the head undertakers;

then a train of assistants and mutes on foot; and after

these came plodding through the fog a long procession

of camp followers, police, and citizens generally. 

It was a noble turnout, and would have made a fine display

if we had had thinner weather. 



There was no conversation.  I spoke several times to

my principal, but I judge he was not aware of it, for he

always referred to his note-book and muttered absently,

"I die that France might live."



"Arrived on the field, my fellow-second and I paced off

the thirty-five yards, and then drew lots for choice

of position.  This latter was but an ornamental ceremony,

for all the choices were alike in such weather. 

These preliminaries being ended, I went to my principal

and asked him if he was ready.  He spread himself out

to his full width, and said in a stern voice, "Ready! Let

the batteries be charged."



The loading process was done in the presence of duly

constituted witnesses.  We considered it best to perform

this delicate service with the assistance of a lantern,

on account of the state of the weather.  We now placed

our men. 



At this point the police noticed that the public had massed

themselves together on the right and left of the field;

they therefore begged a delay, while they should put

these poor people in a place of safety. 



The request was granted. 



The police having ordered the two multitudes to take

positions behind the duelists, we were once more ready. 

The weather growing still more opaque, it was agreed between

myself and the other second that before giving the fatal

signal we should each deliver a loud whoop to enable

the combatants to ascertain each other's whereabouts. 



I now returned to my principal, and was distressed

to observe that he had lost a good deal of his spirit. 

I tried my best to hearten him.  I said, "Indeed, sir,

things are not as bad as they seem.  Considering the character

of the weapons, the limited number of shots allowed,

the generous distance, the impenetrable solidity of the fog,

and the added fact that one of the combatants is one-eyed

and the other cross-eyed and near-sighted, it seems to me

that this conflict need not necessarily be fatal.  There are

chances that both of you may survive.  Therefore, cheer up;

do not be downhearted."



This speech had so good an effect that my principal

immediately stretched forth his hand and said, "I am

myself again; give me the weapon."



I laid it, all lonely and forlorn, in the center of the vast

solitude of his palm.  He gazed at it and shuddered. 

And still mournfully contemplating it, he murmured in a

broken voice:



"Alas, it is not death I dread, but mutilation."



I heartened him once more, and with such success that he

presently said, "Let the tragedy begin.  Stand at my back;

do not desert me in this solemn hour, my friend."



I gave him my promise.  I now assisted him to point

his pistol toward the spot where I judged his adversary

to be standing, and cautioned him to listen well and

further guide himself by my fellow-second's whoop. 

Then I propped myself against M. Gambetta's back,

and raised a rousing "Whoop-ee!" This was answered from

out the far distances of the fog, and I immediately shouted:



"One--two--three--FIRE!"



Two little sounds like SPIT! SPIT! broke upon my ear,

and in the same instant I was crushed to the earth under

a mountain of flesh.  Bruised as I was, I was still able

to catch a faint accent from above, to this effect:



"I die for... for ... perdition take it,

what IS it I die for? ... oh, yes--FRANCE! I die

that France may live!"



The surgeons swarmed around with their probes in

their hands, and applied their microscopes to the whole

area of M. Gambetta's person, with the happy result of

finding nothing in the nature of a wound.  Then a scene

ensued which was in every way gratifying and inspiriting. 



The two gladiators fell upon each other's neck, with floods

of proud and happy tears; that other second embraced me;

the surgeons, the orators, the undertakers, the police,

everybody embraced, everybody congratulated, everybody cried,

and the whole atmosphere was filled with praise and with

joy unspeakable. 



It seems to me then that I would rather be a hero

of a French duel than a crowned and sceptered monarch. 



When the commotion had somewhat subsided, the body

of surgeons held a consultation, and after a good deal

of debate decided that with proper care and nursing there

was reason to believe that I would survive my injuries. 

My internal hurts were deemed the most serious, since it

was apparent that a broken rib had penetrated my left lung,

and that many of my organs had been pressed out so far

to one side or the other of where they belonged, that it

was doubtful if they would ever learn to perform their

functions in such remote and unaccustomed localities. 

They then set my left arm in two places, pulled my right

hip into its socket again, and re-elevated my nose. 

I was an object of great interest, and even admiration;

and many sincere and warm-hearted persons had themselves

introduced to me, and said they were proud to know

the only man who had been hurt in a French duel in

forty years. 



I was placed in an ambulance at the very head of the procession;

and thus with gratifying 'ECLAT I was marched into Paris,

the most conspicuous figure in that great spectacle,

and deposited at the hospital. 



The cross of the Legion of Honor has been conferred

upon me.  However, few escape that distinction. 



Such is the true version of the most memorable private

conflict of the age. 



I have no complaints to make against any one.  I acted

for myself, and I can stand the consequences. 



Without boasting, I think I may say I am not afraid

to stand before a modern French duelist, but as long

as I keep in my right mind I will never consent to stand

behind one again. 

