




CHAPTER XXXVI

[The Fiendish Fun of Alp-climbing]



We did not oversleep at St. Nicholas.  The church-bell

began to ring at four-thirty in the morning, and from

the length of time it continued to ring I judged that it

takes the Swiss sinner a good while to get the invitation

through his head.  Most church-bells in the world

are of poor quality, and have a harsh and rasping

sound which upsets the temper and produces much sin,

but the St. Nicholas bell is a good deal the worst one

that has been contrived yet, and is peculiarly maddening

in its operation.  Still, it may have its right and its

excuse to exist, for the community is poor and not every

citizen can afford a clock, perhaps; but there cannot be

any excuse for our church-bells at home, for their is no

family in America without a clock, and consequently there

is no fair pretext for the usual Sunday medley of dreadful

sounds that issues from our steeples.  There is much more

profanity in America on Sunday than is all in the other six

days of the week put together, and it is of a more bitter

and malignant character than the week-day profanity, too. 

It is produced by the cracked-pot clangor of the cheap

church-bells.



We build our churches almost without regard to cost;

we rear an edifice which is an adornment to the town, and we

gild it, and fresco it, and mortgage it, and do everything

we can think of to perfect it, and then spoil it all by

putting a bell on it which afflicts everybody who hears it,

giving some the headache, others St. Vitus's dance,

and the rest the blind staggers. 



An American village at ten o'clock on a summer Sunday is

the quietest and peacefulest and holiest thing in nature;

but it is a pretty different thing half an hour later. 

Mr. Poe's poem of the "Bells" stands incomplete to this day;

but it is well enough that it is so, for the public reciter

or "reader" who goes around trying to imitate the sounds

of the various sorts of bells with his voice would find

himself "up a stump" when he got to the church-bell--

as Joseph Addison would say.  The church is always trying

to get other people to reform; it might not be a bad idea

to reform itself a little, by way of example.  It is still

clinging to one or two things which were useful once,

but which are not useful now, neither are they ornamental. 

One is the bell-ringing to remind a clock-caked town

that it is church-time, and another is the reading from

the pulpit of a tedious list of "notices" which everybody

who is interested has already read in the newspaper. 

The clergyman even reads the hymn through--a relic

of an ancient time when hymn-books are scarce and costly;

but everybody has a hymn-book, now, and so the public reading

is no longer necessary.  It is not merely unnecessary,

it is generally painful; for the average clergyman could

not fire into his congregation with a shotgun and hit a worse

reader than himself, unless the weapon scattered shamefully. 

I am not meaning to be flippant and irreverent, I am only

meaning to be truthful.  The average clergyman, in all

countries and of all denominations, is a very bad reader. 

One would think he would at least learn how to read

the Lord's Prayer, by and by, but it is not so.  He races

through it as if he thought the quicker he got it in,

the sooner it would be answered.  A person who does not

appreciate the exceeding value of pauses, and does not know

how to measure their duration judiciously, cannot render

the grand simplicity and dignity of a composition like

that effectively. 



We took a tolerably early breakfast, and tramped off

toward Zermatt through the reeking lanes of the village,

glad to get away from that bell.  By and by we had a fine

spectacle on our right.  It was the wall-like butt end of a

huge glacier, which looked down on us from an Alpine height

which was well up in the blue sky.  It was an astonishing

amount of ice to be compacted together in one mass. 

We ciphered upon it and decided that it was not less than

several hundred feet from the base of the wall of solid

ice to the top of it--Harris believed it was really

twice that.  We judged that if St. Paul's, St. Peter's,

the Great Pyramid, the Strasburg Cathedral and the Capitol

in Washington were clustered against that wall, a man

sitting on its upper edge could not hang his hat on the top

of any one of them without reaching down three or four

hundred feet--a thing which, of course, no man could do. 



To me, that mighty glacier was very beautiful.  I did

not imagine that anybody could find fault with it; but I

was mistaken.  Harris had been snarling for several days. 

He was a rabid Protestant, and he was always saying:



"In the Protestant cantons you never see such poverty

and dirt and squalor as you do in this Catholic one;

you never see the lanes and alleys flowing with foulness;

you never see such wretched little sties of houses;

you never see an inverted tin turnip on top of a church

for a dome; and as for a church-bell, why, you never hear

a church-bell at all."



All this morning he had been finding fault, straight along. 

First it was with the mud.  He said, "It ain't muddy in a

Protestant canton when it rains." Then it was with the dogs:

"They don't have those lop-eared dogs in a Protestant canton."

Then it was with the roads: "They don't leave the roads

to make themselves in a Protestant canton, the people make

them--and they make a road that IS a road, too." Next it

was the goats: "You never see a goat shedding tears

in a Protestant canton--a goat, there, is one of the

cheerfulest objects in nature." Next it was the chamois:

"You never see a Protestant chamois act like one of these--

they take a bite or two and go; but these fellows camp

with you and stay." Then it was the guide-boards: "In

a Protestant canton you couldn't get lost if you wanted to,

but you never see a guide-board in a Catholic canton."

Next, "You never see any flower-boxes in the windows,

here--never anything but now and then a cat--a torpid one;

but you take a Protestant canton: windows perfectly lovely

with flowers--and as for cats, there's just acres of them. 

These folks in this canton leave a road to make itself,

and then fine you three francs if you 'trot' over it--

as if a horse could trot over such a sarcasm of a road."

Next about the goiter: "THEY talk about goiter!--I haven't

seen a goiter in this whole canton that I couldn't put

in a hat."



He had growled at everything, but I judged it would puzzle

him to find anything the matter with this majestic glacier. 

I intimated as much; but he was ready, and said with surly

discontent: "You ought to see them in the Protestant cantons."



This irritated me.  But I concealed the feeling, and asked:



"What is the matter with this one?"



"Matter? Why, it ain't in any kind of condition. 

They never take any care of a glacier here.  The moraine

has been spilling gravel around it, and got it all dirty."



"Why, man, THEY can't help that."



"THEY? You're right.  That is, they WON'T. They could

if they wanted to.  You never see a speck of dirt

on a Protestant glacier.  Look at the Rhone glacier. 

It is fifteen miles long, and seven hundred feet think. 

If this was a Protestant glacier you wouldn't see it looking

like this, I can tell you."



"That is nonsense.  What would they do with it?"



"They would whitewash it.  They always do."



I did not believe a word of this, but rather than have

trouble I let it go; for it is a waste of breath to argue

with a bigot.  I even doubted if the Rhone glacier WAS

in a Protestant canton; but I did not know, so I could

not make anything by contradicting a man who would

probably put me down at once with manufactured evidence. 



About nine miles from St. Nicholas we crossed a bridge

over the raging torrent of the Visp, and came to a log

strip of flimsy fencing which was pretending to secure

people from tumbling over a perpendicular wall forty feet

high and into the river.  Three children were approaching;

one of them, a little girl, about eight years old,

was running; when pretty close to us she stumbled and fell,

and her feet shot under the rail of the fence and for a

moment projected over the stream.  It gave us a sharp shock,

for we thought she was gone, sure, for the ground slanted

steeply, and to save herself seemed a sheer impossibility;

but she managed to scramble up, and ran by us laughing. 



We went forward and examined the place and saw the long

tracks which her feet had made in the dirt when they

darted over the verge.  If she had finished her trip she

would have struck some big rocks in the edge of the water,

and then the torrent would have snatched her downstream

among the half-covered boulders and she would have been

pounded to pulp in two minutes.  We had come exceedingly

near witnessing her death. 



And now Harris's contrary nature and inborn selfishness

were striking manifested.  He has no spirit of self-denial.

He began straight off, and continued for an hour,

to express his gratitude that the child was not destroyed. 

I never saw such a man.  That was the kind of person he was;

just so HE was gratified, he never cared anything about

anybody else.  I had noticed that trait in him, over and

over again.  Often, of course, it was mere heedlessness,

mere want of reflection.  Doubtless this may have been

the case in most instances, but it was not the less hard

to bar on that account--and after all, its bottom,

its groundwork, was selfishness.  There is no avoiding

that conclusion.  In the instance under consideration,

I did think the indecency of running on in that way might

occur to him; but no, the child was saved and he was glad,

that was sufficient--he cared not a straw for MY feelings,

or my loss of such a literary plum, snatched from my

very mouth at the instant it was ready to drop into it. 

His selfishness was sufficient to place his own gratification

in being spared suffering clear before all concern for me,

his friend.  Apparently, he did not once reflect upon the

valuable details which would have fallen like a windfall

to me: fishing the child out--witnessing the surprise of

the family and the stir the thing would have made among the

peasants--then a Swiss funeral--then the roadside monument,

to be paid for by us and have our names mentioned in it. 

And we should have gone into Baedeker and been immortal. 

I was silent.  I was too much hurt to complain.  If he could

act so, and be so heedless and so frivolous at such a time,

and actually seem to glory in it, after all I had done for him,

I would have cut my hand off before I would let him see

that I was wounded. 



We were approaching Zermatt; consequently, we were

approaching the renowned Matterhorn.  A month before,

this mountain had been only a name to us, but latterly

we had been moving through a steadily thickening double

row of pictures of it, done in oil, water, chromo, wood,

steel, copper, crayon, and photography, and so it had at

length become a shape to us--and a very distinct, decided,

and familiar one, too.  We were expecting to recognize

that mountain whenever or wherever we should run across it. 

We were not deceived.  The monarch was far away when we

first saw him, but there was no such thing as mistaking him. 

He has the rare peculiarity of standing by himself;

he is peculiarly steep, too, and is also most oddly shaped. 

He towers into the sky like a colossal wedge, with the

upper third of its blade bent a little to the left. 

The broad base of this monster wedge is planted upon

a grand glacier-paved Alpine platform whose elevation

is ten thousand feet above sea-level; as the wedge itself

is some five thousand feet high, it follows that its

apex is about fifteen thousand feet above sea-level.

So the whole bulk of this stately piece of rock, this

sky-cleaving monolith, is above the line of eternal snow. 

Yet while all its giant neighbors have the look of being

built of solid snow, from their waists up, the Matterhorn

stands black and naked and forbidding, the year round,

or merely powdered or streaked with white in places,

for its sides are so steep that the snow cannot stay there. 

Its strange form, its august isolation, and its majestic

unkinship with its own kind, make it--so to speak--the Napoleon

of the mountain world.  "Grand, gloomy, and peculiar,"

is a phrase which fits it as aptly as it fitted the great

captain. 



Think of a monument a mile high, standing on a pedestal

two miles high! This is what the Matterhorn is--a monument. 

Its office, henceforth, for all time, will be to keep

watch and ward over the secret resting-place of the young

Lord Douglas, who, in 1865, was precipitated from the

summit over a precipice four thousand feet high, and never

seen again.  No man ever had such a monument as this before;

the most imposing of the world's other monuments are

but atoms compared to it; and they will perish, and their

places will pass from memory, but this will remain. [1]



1.  The accident which cost Lord Douglas his life (see

    Chapter xii) also cost the lives of three other men. 

    These three fell four-fifths of a mile, and their bodies

    were afterward found, lying side by side, upon a glacier,

    whence they were borne to Zermatt and buried in the

churchyard. 

    The remains of Lord Douglas have never been found. 

    The secret of his sepulture, like that of Moses, must remain

    a mystery always. 



A walk from St. Nicholas to Zermatt is a wonderful experience. 

Nature is built on a stupendous plan in that region. 

One marches continually between walls that are piled

into the skies, with their upper heights broken into

a confusion of sublime shapes that gleam white and cold

against the background of blue; and here and there one

sees a big glacier displaying its grandeurs on the top

of a precipice, or a graceful cascade leaping and flashing

down the green declivities.  There is nothing tame,

or cheap, or trivial--it is all magnificent.  That short

valley is a picture-gallery of a notable kind, for it

contains no mediocrities; from end to end the Creator

has hung it with His masterpieces. 



We made Zermatt at three in the afternoon, nine hours out

from St. Nicholas.  Distance, by guide-book, twelve miles;

by pedometer seventy-two. We were in the heart and home

of the mountain-climbers, now, as all visible things

testified.  The snow-peaks did not hold themselves aloof,

in aristocratic reserve; they nestled close around,

in a friendly, sociable way; guides, with the ropes and

axes and other implements of their fearful calling slung

about their persons, roosted in a long line upon a stone

wall in front of the hotel, and waited for customers;

sun-burnt climbers, in mountaineering costume, and followed

by their guides and porters, arrived from time to time,

from breakneck expeditions among the peaks and glaciers

of the High Alps; male and female tourists, on mules,

filed by, in a continuous procession, hotelward-bound from

wild adventures which would grow in grandeur very time

they were described at the English or American fireside,

and at last outgrow the possible itself. 



We were not dreaming; this was not a make-believe home

of the Alp-climber, created by our heated imaginations;

no, for here was Mr. Girdlestone himself, the famous

Englishman who hunts his way to the most formidable Alpine

summits without a guide.  I was not equal to imagining

a Girdlestone; it was all I could do to even realize him,

while looking straight at him at short range.  I would rather

face whole Hyde Parks of artillery than the ghastly forms

of death which he has faced among the peaks and precipices

of the mountains.  There is probably no pleasure equal

to the pleasure of climbing a dangerous Alp; but it is

a pleasure which is confined strictly to people who can


find pleasure in it.  I have not jumped to this conclusion;

I have traveled to it per gravel-train, so to speak. 

I have thought the thing all out, and am quite sure I

am right.  A born climber's appetite for climbing is hard

to satisfy; when it comes upon him he is like a starving

man with a feast before him; he may have other business

on hand, but it must wait.  Mr. Girdlestone had had

his usual summer holiday in the Alps, and had spent it

in his usual way, hunting for unique chances to break

his neck; his vacation was over, and his luggage packed

for England, but all of a sudden a hunger had come upon

him to climb the tremendous Weisshorn once more, for he

had heard of a new and utterly impossible route up it. 

His baggage was unpacked at once, and now he and a friend,

laden with knapsacks, ice-axes, coils of rope, and canteens

of milk, were just setting out.  They would spend

the night high up among the snows, somewhere, and get

up at two in the morning and finish the enterprise. 

I had a strong desire to go with them, but forced it down--

a feat which Mr. Girdlestone, with all his fortitude,

could not do. 



Even ladies catch the climbing mania, and are unable to

throw it off.  A famous climber, of that sex, had attempted

the Weisshorn a few days before our arrival, and she

and her guides had lost their way in a snow-storm high up

among the peaks and glaciers and been forced to wander

around a good while before they could find a way down. 

When this lady reached the bottom, she had been on her

feet twenty-three hours!



Our guides, hired on the Gemmi, were already at Zermatt

when we reached there.  So there was nothing to interfere

with our getting up an adventure whenever we should

choose the time and the object.  I resolved to devote

my first evening in Zermatt to studying up the subject

of Alpine climbing, by way of preparation. 



I read several books, and here are some of the things

I found out.  One's shoes must be strong and heavy,

and have pointed hobnails in them.  The alpenstock

must be of the best wood, for if it should break,

loss of life might be the result.  One should carry an ax,

to cut steps in the ice with, on the great heights. 

There must be a ladder, for there are steep bits of rock

which can be surmounted with this instrument--or this

utensil--but could not be surmounted without it;

such an obstruction has compelled the tourist to waste

hours hunting another route, when a ladder would have

saved him all trouble.  One must have from one hundred

and fifty to five hundred feet of strong rope, to be used

in lowering the party down steep declivities which are

too steep and smooth to be traversed in any other way. 

One must have a steel hook, on another rope--a very

useful thing; for when one is ascending and comes to a low

bluff which is yet too high for the ladder, he swings

this rope aloft like a lasso, the hook catches at the top

of the bluff, and then the tourist climbs the rope,

hand over hand--being always particular to try and forget

that if the hook gives way he will never stop falling

till he arrives in some part of Switzerland where they

are not expecting him.  Another important thing--there

must be a rope to tie the whole party together with,

so that if one falls from a mountain or down a bottomless

chasm in a glacier, the others may brace back on the rope

and save him.  One must have a silk veil, to protect

his face from snow, sleet, hail and gale, and colored

goggles to protect his eyes from that dangerous enemy,

snow-blindness. Finally, there must be some porters,

to carry provisions, wine and scientific instruments,

and also blanket bags for the party to sleep in. 



I closed my readings with a fearful adventure which

Mr. Whymper once had on the Matterhorn when he was prowling

around alone, five thousand feet above the town of Breil. 

He was edging his way gingerly around the corner of a

precipice where the upper edge of a sharp declivity

of ice-glazed snow joined it.  This declivity swept

down a couple of hundred feet, into a gully which curved

around and ended at a precipice eight hundred feet high,

overlooking a glacier.  His foot slipped, and he fell. 



He says:



"My knapsack brought my head down first, and I pitched into

some rocks about a dozen feet below; they caught something,

and tumbled me off the edge, head over heels, into the gully;

the baton was dashed from my hands, and I whirled downward

in a series of bounds, each longer than the last; now over ice,

now into rocks, striking my head four or five times,

each time with increased force.  The last bound sent me

spinning through the air in a leap of fifty or sixty feet,

from one side of the gully to the other, and I struck

the rocks, luckily, with the whole of my left side. 

They caught my clothes for a moment, and I fell back on

to the snow with motion arrested.  My head fortunately

came the right side up, and a few frantic catches brought

me to a halt, in the neck of the gully and on the verge

of the precipice.  Baton, hat, and veil skimmed by

and disappeared, and the crash of the rocks--which I had

started--as they fell on to the glacier, told how narrow

had been the escape from utter destruction.  As it was,

I fell nearly two hundred feet in seven or eight bounds. 

Ten feet more would have taken me in one gigantic leaps

of eight hundred feet on to the glacier below. 



"The situation was sufficiently serious.  The rocks could

not be let go for a moment, and the blood was spurting

out of more than twenty cuts.  The most serious ones were

in the head, and I vainly tried to close them with one hand,

while holding on with the other.  It was useless;

the blood gushed out in blinding jets at each pulsation. 

At last, in a moment of inspiration, I kicked out a big

lump of snow and struck it as plaster on my head. 

The idea was a happy one, and the flow of blood diminished. 

Then, scrambling up, I got, not a moment too soon, to a

place of safety, and fainted away.  The sun was setting

when consciousness returned, and it was pitch-dark before

the Great Staircase was descended; but by a combination

of luck and care, the whole four thousand seven hundred

feet of descent to Breil was accomplished without a slip,

or once missing the way."



His wounds kept him abed some days.  Then he got up

and climbed that mountain again.  That is the way with

a true Alp-climber; the more fun he has, the more he wants. 

