





CHAPTER XXXII

[The Jungfrau, the Bride, and the Piano]



We located ourselves at the Jungfrau Hotel, one of those

huge establishments which the needs of modern travel

have created in every attractive spot on the continent. 

There was a great gathering at dinner, and, as usual,

one heard all sorts of languages. 



The table d'ho^te was served by waitresses dressed

in the quaint and comely costume of the Swiss peasants. 

This consists of a simple gros de laine, trimmed with ashes

of roses, with overskirt of scare bleu ventre saint gris,

cut bias on the off-side, with facings of petit polonaise

and narrow insertions of pa^te de foie gras backstitched

to the mise en sce`ne in the form of a jeu d'esprit. It gives

to the wearer a singularly piquant and alluring aspect. 



One of these waitresses, a woman of forty,

had side-whiskers reaching half-way down her jaws. 

They were two fingers broad, dark in color, pretty thick,

and the hairs were an inch long.  One sees many women on

the continent with quite conspicuous mustaches, but this

was the only woman I saw who had reached the dignity of whiskers.





After dinner the guests of both sexes distributed themselves

about the front porches and the ornamental grounds belonging

to the hotel, to enjoy the cool air; but, as the twilight

deepened toward darkness, they gathered themselves together

in that saddest and solemnest and most constrained of

all places, the great blank drawing-room which is the chief

feature of all continental summer hotels.  There they

grouped themselves about, in couples and threes, and mumbled

in bated voices, and looked timid and homeless and forlorn. 



There was a small piano in this room, a clattery, wheezy,

asthmatic thing, certainly the very worst miscarriage

in the way of a piano that the world has seen.  In turn,

five or six dejected and homesick ladies approached

it doubtingly, gave it a single inquiring thump, and retired

with the lockjaw.  But the boss of that instrument was

to come, nevertheless; and from my own country--from Arkansaw. 



She was a brand-new bride, innocent, girlish, happy in herself

and her grave and worshiping stripling of a husband; she was

about eighteen, just out of school, free from affections,

unconscious of that passionless multitude around her;

and the very first time she smote that old wreck one

recognized that it had met its destiny.  Her stripling

brought an armful of aged sheet-music from their room--

for this bride went "heeled," as you might say--and bent

himself lovingly over and got ready to turn the pages. 



The bride fetched a swoop with her fingers from one end

of the keyboard to the other, just to get her bearings,

as it were, and you could see the congregation set their teeth

with the agony of it.  Then, without any more preliminaries,

she turned on all the horrors of the "Battle of Prague,"

that venerable shivaree, and waded chin-deep in the blood

of the slain.  She made a fair and honorable average

of two false notes in every five, but her soul was in arms

and she never stopped to correct.  The audience stood it

with pretty fair grit for a while, but when the cannonade

waxed hotter and fiercer, and the discord average

rose to four in five, the procession began to move. 

A few stragglers held their ground ten minutes longer,

but when the girl began to wring the true inwardness out

of the "cries of the wounded," they struck their colors

and retired in a kind of panic. 



There never was a completer victory; I was the only

non-combatant left on the field.  I would not have

deserted my countrywoman anyhow, but indeed I had no

desires in that direction.  None of us like mediocrity,

but we all reverence perfection.  This girl's music

was perfection in its way; it was the worst music that

had ever been achieved on our planet by a mere human being. 



I moved up close, and never lost a strain.  When she

got through, I asked her to play it again.  She did it

with a pleased alacrity and a heightened enthusiasm. 

She made it ALL discords, this time.  She got an amount

of anguish into the cries of the wounded that shed a new

light on human suffering.  She was on the war-path all

the evening.  All the time, crowds of people gathered on

the porches and pressed their noses against the windows

to look and marvel, but the bravest never ventured in. 

The bride went off satisfied and happy with her young fellow,

when her appetite was finally gorged, and the tourists

swarmed in again. 



What a change has come over Switzerland, and in fact

all Europe, during this century! Seventy or eighty years

ago Napoleon was the only man in Europe who could really

be called a traveler; he was the only man who had devoted

his attention to it and taken a powerful interest in it;

he was the only man who had traveled extensively;

but now everybody goes everywhere; and Switzerland,

and many other regions which were unvisited and unknown

remotenesses a hundred years ago, are in our days

a buzzing hive of restless strangers every summer. 

But I digress. 



In the morning, when we looked out of our windows,

we saw a wonderful sight.  Across the valley,

and apparently quite neighborly and close at hand,

the giant form of the Jungfrau rose cold and white into

the clear sky, beyond a gateway in the nearer highlands. 

It reminded me, somehow, of one of those colossal billows

which swells suddenly up beside one's ship, at sea,

sometimes, with its crest and shoulders snowy white, and the

rest of its noble proportions streaked downward with creamy foam.





I took out my sketch-book and made a little picture

of the Jungfrau, merely to get the shape.  [Figure 9]



I do not regard this as one of my finished works, in fact I

do not rank it among my Works at all; it is only a study;

it is hardly more than what one might call a sketch. 

Other artists have done me the grace to admire it; but I

am severe in my judgments of my own pictures, and this

one does not move me. 



It was hard to believe that that lofty wooded rampart on

the left which so overtops the Jungfrau was not actually

the higher of the two, but it was not, of course. 

It is only two or three thousand feet high, and of course

has no snow upon it in summer, whereas the Jungfrau is not

much shorter of fourteen thousand feet high and therefore

that lowest verge of snow on her side, which seems nearly

down to the valley level, is really about seven thousand feet

higher up in the air than the summit of that wooded rampart. 

It is the distance that makes the deception.  The wooded

height is but four or five miles removed from us,

but the Jungfrau is four or five times that distance away. 



Walking down the street of shops, in the fore-noon, I

was attracted by a large picture, carved, frame and all,

from a single block of chocolate-colored wood. 

There are people who know everything.  Some of these had

told us that continental shopkeepers always raise their

prices on English and Americans.  Many people had told

us it was expensive to buy things through a courier,

whereas I had supposed it was just the reverse. 

When I saw this picture, I conjectured that it was worth

more than the friend I proposed to buy it for would

like to pay, but still it was worth while to inquire;

so I told the courier to step in and ask the price, as if he

wanted it for himself; I told him not to speak in English,

and above all not to reveal the fact that he was a courier. 

Then I moved on a few yards, and waited. 



The courier came presently and reported the price. 

I said to myself, "It is a hundred francs too much,"

and so dismissed the matter from my mind.  But in

the afternoon I was passing that place with Harris,

and the picture attracted me again.  We stepped in,

to see how much higher broken German would raise the price. 

The shopwoman named a figure just a hundred francs lower

than the courier had named.  This was a pleasant surprise. 

I said I would take it.  After I had given directions as to

where it was to be shipped, the shipped, the shopwoman said,

appealingly:



"If your please, do not let your courier know you bought it."



This was an unexpected remark.  I said:



"What makes you think I have a courier?"



"Ah, that is very simple; he told me himself."



"He was very thoughtful.  But tell me--why did you charge

him more than you are charging me?"



"That is very simple, also: I do not have to pay you

a percentage."



"Oh, I begin to see.  You would have had to pay the courier

a percentage."



"Undoubtedly. The courier always has his percentage. 

In this case it would have been a hundred francs."



"Then the tradesman does not pay a part of it--

the purchaser pays all of it?"



"There are occasions when the tradesman and the courier

agree upon a price which is twice or thrice the value of

the article, then the two divide, and both get a percentage."



"I see.  But it seems to me that the purchaser does

all the paying, even then."



"Oh, to be sure! It goes without saying."



"But I have bought this picture myself; therefore why

shouldn't the courier know it?"



The woman exclaimed, in distress:



"Ah, indeed it would take all my little profit! He would

come and demand his hundred francs, and I should have

to pay."



"He has not done the buying.  You could refuse."



"I could not dare to refuse.  He would never bring

travelers here again.  More than that, he would denounce me

to the other couriers, they would divert custom from me,

and my business would be injured."



I went away in a thoughtful frame of mind.  I began to see why

a courier could afford to work for fifty-five dollars a month

and his fares.  A month or two later I was able to understand

why a courier did not have to pay any board and lodging,

and why my hotel bills were always larger when I had him

with me than when I left him behind, somewhere, for a few days. 



Another thing was also explained, now, apparently. 

In one town I had taken the courier to the bank to do

the translating when I drew some money.  I had sat

in the reading-room till the transaction was finished. 

Then a clerk had brought the money to me in person,

and had been exceedingly polite, even going so far as to

precede me to the door and holding it open for me and bow

me out as if I had been a distinguished personage. 

It was a new experience.  Exchange had been in my favor

ever since I had been in Europe, but just that one time. 

I got simply the face of my draft, and no extra francs,

whereas I had expected to get quite a number of them. 

This was the first time I had ever used the courier at

the bank.  I had suspected something then, and as long

as he remained with me afterward I managed bank matters

by myself. 



Still, if I felt that I could afford the tax, I would

never travel without a courier, for a good courier is

a convenience whose value cannot be estimated in dollars

and cents.  Without him, travel is a bitter harassment,

a purgatory of little exasperating annoyances, a ceaseless

and pitiless punishment--I mean to an irascible man

who has no business capacity and is confused by details. 



Without a courier, travel hasn't a ray of pleasure

in it, anywhere; but with him it is a continuous and

unruffled delight.  He is always at hand, never has to be

sent for; if your bell is not answered promptly--and it

seldom is--you have only to open the door and speak,

the courier will hear, and he will have the order attended

to or raise an insurrection.  You tell him what day

you will start, and whither you are going--leave all

the rest to him.  You need not inquire about trains,

or fares, or car changes, or hotels, or anything else. 

At the proper time he will put you in a cab or an omnibus,

and drive you to the train or the boat; he has packed your

luggage and transferred it, he has paid all the bills. 

Other people have preceded you half an hour to scramble

for impossible places and lose their tempers, but you can

take your time; the courier has secured your seats for you,

and you can occupy them at your leisure. 



At the station, the crowd mash one another to pulp in the

effort to get the weigher's attention to their trunks;

they dispute hotly with these tyrants, who are cool

and indifferent; they get their baggage billets, at last,

and then have another squeeze and another rage over the

disheartening business of trying to get them recorded and

paid for, and still another over the equally disheartening

business of trying to get near enough to the ticket

office to buy a ticket; and now, with their tempers gone

to the dogs, they must stand penned up and packed together,

laden with wraps and satchels and shawl-straps, with the

weary wife and babies, in the waiting-room, till the doors

are thrown open--and then all hands make a grand final

rush to the train, find it full, and have to stand on

the platform and fret until some more cars are put on. 

They are in a condition to kill somebody by this time. 

Meantime, you have been sitting in your car, smoking,

and observing all this misery in the extremest comfort. 



On the journey the guard is polite and watchful--won't

allow anybody to get into your compartment--tells them

you are just recovering from the small-pox and do not

like to be disturbed.  For the courier has made everything

right with the guard.  At way-stations the courier comes

to your compartment to see if you want a glass of water,

or a newspaper, or anything; at eating-stations he sends

luncheon out to you, while the other people scramble

and worry in the dining-rooms. If anything breaks about

the car you are in, and a station-master proposes to pack

you and your agent into a compartment with strangers,

the courier reveals to him confidentially that you are

a French duke born deaf and dumb, and the official comes

and makes affable signs that he has ordered a choice car

to be added to the train for you. 



At custom-houses the multitude file tediously through,

hot and irritated, and look on while the officers

burrow into the trunks and make a mess of everything;

but you hand your keys to the courier and sit still. 

Perhaps you arrive at your destination in a rain-storm

at ten at night--you generally do.  The multitude

spend half an hour verifying their baggage and getting

it transferred to the omnibuses; but the courier puts

you into a vehicle without a moment's loss of time,

and when you reach your hotel you find your rooms have been

secured two or three days in advance, everything is ready,

you can go at once to bed.  Some of those other people will

have to drift around to two or three hotels, in the rain,

before they find accommodations. 



I have not set down half of the virtues that are

vested in a good courier, but I think I have set down

a sufficiency of them to show that an irritable man

who can afford one and does not employ him is not a

wise economist.  My courier was the worst one in Europe,

yet he was a good deal better than none at all. 

It could not pay him to be a better one than he was,

because I could not afford to buy things through him. 

He was a good enough courier for the small amount he

got out of his service.  Yes, to travel with a courier

is bliss, to travel without one is the reverse. 



I have had dealings with some very bad couriers; but I have also

had dealings with one who might fairly be called perfection. 

He was a young Polander, named Joseph N. Verey.  He spoke

eight languages, and seemed to be equally at home in all

of them; he was shrewd, prompt, posted, and punctual;

he was fertile in resources, and singularly gifted in

the matter of overcoming difficulties; he not only knew

how to do everything in his line, but he knew the best ways

and the quickest; he was handy with children and invalids;

all his employer needed to do was to take life easy

and leave everything to the courier.  His address is,

care of Messrs.  Gay & Son, Strand, London; he was formerly

a conductor of Gay's tourist parties.  Excellent couriers

are somewhat rare; if the reader is about to travel,

he will find it to his advantage to make a note of this one. 

