





CHAPTER XIV

[Rafting Down the Neckar]



When the landlord learned that I and my agents were artists,

our party rose perceptibly in his esteem; we rose still

higher when he learned that we were making a pedestrian

tour of Europe. 



He told us all about the Heidelberg road, and which

were the best places to avoid and which the best ones

to tarry at; he charged me less than cost for the things

I broke in the night; he put up a fine luncheon for us

and added to it a quantity of great light-green plums,

the pleasantest fruit in Germany; he was so anxious to do us

honor that he would not allow us to walk out of Heilbronn,

but called up Go"tz von Berlichingen's horse and cab

and made us ride. 



I made a sketch of the turnout.  It is not a Work, it is only

what artists call a "study"--a thing to make a finished

picture from.  This sketch has several blemishes in it;

for instance, the wagon is not traveling as fast as the

horse is.  This is wrong.  Again, the person trying to get

out of the way is too small; he is out of perspective,

as we say.  The two upper lines are not the horse's back,

they are the reigns; there seems to be a wheel missing--

this would be corrected in a finished Work, of course. 

This thing flying out behind is not a flag, it is a curtain. 

That other thing up there is the sun, but I didn't get

enough distance on it.  I do not remember, now, what that

thing is that is in front of the man who is running,

but I think it is a haystack or a woman.  This study

was exhibited in the Paris Salon of 1879, but did not

take any medal; they do not give medals for studies. 

[Figure 3]



We discharged the carriage at the bridge.  The river was

full of logs--long, slender, barkless pine logs--and we

leaned on the rails of the bridge, and watched the men put

them together into rafts.  These rafts were of a shape

and construction to suit the crookedness and extreme

narrowness of the Neckar.  They were from fifty to one

hundred yards long, and they gradually tapered from a

nine-log breadth at their sterns, to a three-log breadth

at their bow-ends. The main part of the steering is done

at the bow, with a pole; the three-log breadth there

furnishes room for only the steersman, for these little logs

are not larger around than an average young lady's waist. 

The connections of the several sections of the raft are

slack and pliant, so that the raft may be readily bent

into any sort of curve required by the shape of the river. 



The Neckar is in many places so narrow that a person

can throw a dog across it, if he has one; when it is

also sharply curved in such places, the raftsman has

to do some pretty nice snug piloting to make the turns. 

The river is not always allowed to spread over its whole

bed--which is as much as thirty, and sometimes forty yards

wide--but is split into three equal bodies of water,

by stone dikes which throw the main volume, depth, and current

into the central one.  In low water these neat narrow-edged

dikes project four or five inches above the surface,

like the comb of a submerged roof, but in high water

they are overflowed.  A hatful of rain makes high water

in the Neckar, and a basketful produces an overflow. 



There are dikes abreast the Schloss Hotel, and the current

is violently swift at that point.  I used to sit for hours

in my glass cage, watching the long, narrow rafts slip

along through the central channel, grazing the right-bank

dike and aiming carefully for the middle arch of the stone

bridge below; I watched them in this way, and lost all this

time hoping to see one of them hit the bridge-pier and wreck

itself sometime or other, but was always disappointed. 

One was smashed there one morning, but I had just stepped

into my room a moment to light a pipe, so I lost it. 



While I was looking down upon the rafts that morning

in Heilbronn, the daredevil spirit of adventure came

suddenly upon me, and I said to my comrades:



"_I_ am going to Heidelberg on a raft.  Will you venture

with me?"



Their faces paled a little, but they assented with as

good a grace as they could.  Harris wanted to cable his

mother--thought it his duty to do that, as he was all

she had in this world--so, while he attended to this,

I went down to the longest and finest raft and hailed

the captain with a hearty "Ahoy, shipmate!" which put us

upon pleasant terms at once, and we entered upon business. 

I said we were on a pedestrian tour to Heidelberg,

and would like to take passage with him.  I said this

partly through young Z, who spoke German very well,

and partly through Mr. X, who spoke it peculiarly.  I can

UNDERSTAND German as well as the maniac that invented it,

but I TALK it best through an interpreter. 



The captain hitched up his trousers, then shifted

his quid thoughtfully.  Presently he said just what I

was expecting he would say--that he had no license

to carry passengers, and therefore was afraid the law

would be after him in case the matter got noised about

or any accident happened.  So I CHARTERED the raft

and the crew and took all the responsibilities on myself. 



With a rattling song the starboard watch bent to their

work and hove the cable short, then got the anchor home,

and our bark moved off with a stately stride, and soon

was bowling along at about two knots an hour. 



Our party were grouped amidships.  At first the talk was

a little gloomy, and ran mainly upon the shortness of life,

the uncertainty of it, the perils which beset it, and the

need and wisdom of being always prepared for the worst;

this shaded off into low-voiced references to the dangers

of the deep, and kindred matters; but as the gray east

began to redden and the mysterious solemnity and silence

of the dawn to give place to the joy-songs of the birds,

the talk took a cheerier tone, and our spirits began to

rise steadily. 



Germany, in the summer, is the perfection of the beautiful,

but nobody has understood, and realized, and enjoyed

the utmost possibilities of this soft and peaceful

beauty unless he has voyaged down the Neckar on a raft. 

The motion of a raft is the needful motion; it is gentle,

and gliding, and smooth, and noiseless; it calms down

all feverish activities, it soothes to sleep all nervous

hurry and impatience; under its restful influence all the

troubles and vexations and sorrows that harass the mind

vanish away, and existence becomes a dream, a charm,

a deep and tranquil ecstasy.  How it contrasts with hot

and perspiring pedestrianism, and dusty and deafening

railroad rush, and tedious jolting behind tired horses

over blinding white roads!



We went slipping silently along, between the green and

fragrant banks, with a sense of pleasure and contentment

that grew, and grew, all the time.  Sometimes the banks

were overhung with thick masses of willows that wholly

hid the ground behind; sometimes we had noble hills on

one hand, clothed densely with foliage to their tops,

and on the other hand open levels blazing with poppies,

or clothed in the rich blue of the corn-flower;

sometimes we drifted in the shadow of forests, and sometimes

along the margin of long stretches of velvety grass,

fresh and green and bright, a tireless charm to the eye. 

And the birds!--they were everywhere; they swept back

and forth across the river constantly, and their jubilant

music was never stilled. 



It was a deep and satisfying pleasure to see the sun

create the new morning, and gradually, patiently,

lovingly, clothe it on with splendor after splendor,

and glory after glory, till the miracle was complete. 

How different is this marvel observed from a raft,

from what it is when one observes it through the dingy

windows of a railway-station in some wretched village

while he munches a petrified sandwich and waits for the train. 

