




CHAPTER XLV

A Catastrophe Which Cost Eleven Lives

[Perished at the Verge of Safety]



On the 5th of September, 1870, a caravan of eleven persons

departed from Chamonix to make the ascent of Mont Blanc. 

Three of the party were tourists; Messrs.  Randall and Bean,

Americans, and Mr. George Corkindale, a Scotch gentleman;

there were three guides and five porters.  The cabin

on the Grands Mulets was reached that day; the ascent

was resumed early the next morning, September 6th. 

The day was fine and clear, and the movements of the party

were observed through the telescopes of Chamonix; at two

o'clock in the afternoon they were seen to reach the summit. 

A few minutes later they were seen making the first steps

of the descent; then a cloud closed around them and hid

them from view. 



Eight hours passed, the cloud still remained, night came,

no one had returned to the Grands Mulets.  Sylvain Couttet,

keeper of the cabin there, suspected a misfortune,

and sent down to the valley for help.  A detachment of

guides went up, but by the time they had made the tedious

trip and reached the cabin, a raging storm had set in. 

They had to wait; nothing could be attempted in such

a tempest. 



The wild storm lasted MORE THAN A WEEK, without ceasing;

but on the 17th, Couttet, with several guides, left the

cabin and succeeded in making the ascent.  In the snowy

wastes near the summit they came upon five bodies,

lying upon their sides in a reposeful attitude which

suggested that possibly they had fallen asleep there,

while exhausted with fatigue and hunger and benumbed with cold,

and never knew when death stole upon them.  Couttet moved

a few steps further and discovered five more bodies. 

The eleventh corpse--that of a porter--was not found,

although diligent search was made for it. 



In the pocket of Mr. Bean, one of the Americans, was found

a note-book in which had been penciled some sentences

which admit us, in flesh and spirit, as it were, to the

presence of these men during their last hours of life,

and to the grisly horrors which their fading vision looked

upon and their failing consciousness took cognizance of:



TUESDAY, SEPT.  6.  I have made the ascent of Mont Blanc,

with ten persons--eight guides, and Mr. Corkindale

and Mr. Randall.  We reached the summit at half past 2. 

Immediately after quitting it, we were enveloped in clouds

of snow.  We passed the night in a grotto hollowed

in the snow, which afforded us but poor shelter, and I

was ill all night. 



SEPT.  7--MORNING. The cold is excessive.  The snow falls

heavily and without interruption.  The guides take no rest. 



EVENING.  My Dear Hessie, we have been two days on

Mont Blanc, in the midst of a terrible hurricane of snow,

we have lost our way, and are in a hole scooped in the snow,

at an altitude of 15,000 feet.  I have no longer any hope

of descending. 



They had wandered around, and around, in the blinding

snow-storm, hopelessly lost, in a space only a hundred

yards square; and when cold and fatigue vanquished them

at last, they scooped their cave and lay down there

to die by inches, UNAWARE THAT FIVE STEPS MORE WOULD HAVE

BROUGHT THEM INTO THE TRUTH PATH.  They were so near

to life and safety as that, and did not suspect it. 

The thought of this gives the sharpest pang that the tragic

story conveys. 



The author of the HISTOIRE DU MONT BLANC introduced

the closing sentences of Mr. Bean's pathetic record thus:



"Here the characters are large and unsteady; the hand

which traces them is become chilled and torpid;

but the spirit survives, and the faith and resignation

of the dying man are expressed with a sublime simplicity."



Perhaps this note-book will be found and sent to you. 

We have nothing to eat, my feet are already frozen,

and I am exhausted; I have strength to write only a few

words more.  I have left means for C's education; I know

you will employ them wisely.  I die with faith in God,

and with loving thoughts of you.  Farewell to all. 

We shall meet again, in Heaven. ... I think of

you always. 



It is the way of the Alps to deliver death to their victims

with a merciful swiftness, but here the rule failed. 

These men suffered the bitterest death that has been

recorded in the history of those mountains, freighted as

that history is with grisly tragedies. 

