





CHAPTER XXIX

[Looking West for Sunrise]



He kept his word.  We heard his horn and instantly got up. 

It was dark and cold and wretched.  As I fumbled around

for the matches, knocking things down with my quaking hands,

I wished the sun would rise in the middle of the day,

when it was warm and bright and cheerful, and one

wasn't sleepy.  We proceeded to dress by the gloom of a

couple sickly candles, but we could hardly button anything,

our hands shook so.  I thought of how many happy people

there were in Europe, Asia, and America, and everywhere,

who were sleeping peacefully in their beds, and did not

have to get up and see the Rigi sunrise--people who did

not appreciate their advantage, as like as not, but would

get up in the morning wanting more boons of Providence. 

While thinking these thoughts I yawned, in a rather ample way,

and my upper teeth got hitched on a nail over the door,

and while I was mounting a chair to free myself, Harris drew

the window-curtain, and said:



"Oh, this is luck! We shan't have to go out at all--

yonder are the mountains, in full view."



That was glad news, indeed.  It made us cheerful right away. 

One could see the grand Alpine masses dimly outlined

against the black firmament, and one or two faint stars

blinking through rifts in the night.  Fully clothed,

and wrapped in blankets, and huddled ourselves up,

by the window, with lighted pipes, and fell into chat,

while we waited in exceeding comfort to see how an Alpine

sunrise was going to look by candlelight.  By and by

a delicate, spiritual sort of effulgence spread itself

by imperceptible degrees over the loftiest altitudes of

the snowy wastes--but there the effort seemed to stop. 

I said, presently:



"There is a hitch about this sunrise somewhere. 

It doesn't seem to go.  What do you reckon is the matter

with it?"



"I don't know.  It appears to hang fire somewhere. 

I never saw a sunrise act like that before.  Can it be

that the hotel is playing anything on us?"



"Of course not.  The hotel merely has a property interest

in the sun, it has nothing to do with the management of it. 

It is a precarious kind of property, too; a succession

of total eclipses would probably ruin this tavern. 

Now what can be the matter with this sunrise?"



Harris jumped up and said:



"I've got it! I know what's the matter with it! We've

been looking at the place where the sun SET last night!"



"It is perfectly true! Why couldn't you have thought of

that sooner? Now we've lost another one! And all through

your blundering.  It was exactly like you to light a pipe

and sit down to wait for the sun to rise in the west."



"It was exactly like me to find out the mistake, too. 

You never would have found it out.  I find out all the mistakes."



"You make them all, too, else your most valuable faculty

would be wasted on you.  But don't stop to quarrel,

now--maybe we are not too late yet."



But we were.  The sun was well up when we got to the

exhibition-ground.



On our way up we met the crowd returning--men and women

dressed in all sorts of queer costumes, and exhibiting

all degrees of cold and wretchedness in their gaits

and countenances.  A dozen still remained on the ground

when we reached there, huddled together about the scaffold

with their backs to the bitter wind.  They had their red

guide-books open at the diagram of the view, and were

painfully picking out the several mountains and trying

to impress their names and positions on their memories. 

It was one of the saddest sights I ever saw. 



Two sides of this place were guarded by railings,

to keep people from being blown over the precipices. 

The view, looking sheer down into the broad valley,

eastward, from this great elevation--almost a perpendicular

mile--was very quaint and curious.  Counties, towns,

hilly ribs and ridges, wide stretches of green meadow,

great forest tracts, winding streams, a dozen blue lakes,

a block of busy steamboats--we saw all this little

world in unique circumstantiality of detail--saw it

just as the birds see it--and all reduced to the smallest

of scales and as sharply worked out and finished as a

steel engraving.  The numerous toy villages, with tiny

spires projecting out of them, were just as the children

might have left them when done with play the day before;

the forest tracts were diminished to cushions of moss;

one or two big lakes were dwarfed to ponds, the smaller

ones to puddles--though they did not look like puddles,

but like blue eardrops which had fallen and lodged

in slight depressions, conformable to their shapes,

among the moss-beds and the smooth levels of dainty

green farm-land; the microscopic steamboats glided along,

as in a city reservoir, taking a mighty time to cover

the distance between ports which seemed only a yard apart;

and the isthmus which separated two lakes looked as if

one might stretch out on it and lie with both elbows

in the water, yet we knew invisible wagons were toiling

across it and finding the distance a tedious one. 

This beautiful miniature world had exactly the appearance

of those "relief maps" which reproduce nature precisely,

with the heights and depressions and other details graduated

to a reduced scale, and with the rocks, trees, lakes,

etc., colored after nature. 



I believed we could walk down to Wa"ggis or Vitznau

in a day, but I knew we could go down by rail in about

an hour, so I chose the latter method.  I wanted to see

what it was like, anyway.  The train came along about

the middle of the afternoon, and an odd thing it was. 

The locomotive-boiler stood on end, and it and the whole

locomotive-boiler stood on end, and it and the whole

locomotive were tiled sharply backward.  There were

two passenger-cars, roofed, but wide open all around. 

These cars were not tilted back, but the seats were;

this enables the passenger to sit level while going down a

steep incline. 



There are three railway-tracks; the central one is cogged;

the "lantern wheel" of the engine grips its way along

these cogs, and pulls the train up the hill or retards its

motion on the down trip.  About the same speed--three miles

an hour--is maintained both ways.  Whether going up or down,

the locomotive is always at the lower end of the train. 

It pushes in the one case, braces back in the other. 

The passenger rides backward going up, and faces forward

going down. 



We got front seats, and while the train moved along

about fifty yards on level ground, I was not the

least frightened; but now it started abruptly downstairs,

and I caught my breath.  And I, like my neighbors,

unconsciously held back all I could, and threw my weight

to the rear, but, of course, that did no particular good. 

I had slidden down the balusters when I was a boy,

and thought nothing of it, but to slide down the balusters

in a railway-train is a thing to make one's flesh creep. 

Sometimes we had as much as ten yards of almost level

ground, and this gave us a few full breaths in comfort;

but straightway we would turn a corner and see a long steep

line of rails stretching down below us, and the comfort

was at an end.  One expected to see the locomotive pause,

or slack up a little, and approach this plunge cautiously,

but it did nothing of the kind; it went calmly on, and went

it reached the jumping-off place it made a sudden bow,

and went gliding smoothly downstairs, untroubled by

the circumstances. 



It was wildly exhilarating to slide along the edge of

the precipices, after this grisly fashion, and look straight

down upon that far-off valley which I was describing a while ago.





There was no level ground at the Kaltbad station;

the railbed was as steep as a roof; I was curious

to see how the stop was going to be managed. 

But it was very simple; the train came sliding down,

and when it reached the right spot it just stopped--that

was all there was "to it"--stopped on the steep incline,

and when the exchange of passengers and baggage had

been made, it moved off and went sliding down again. 

The train can be stopped anywhere, at a moment's notice. 



There was one curious effect, which I need not take the

trouble to describe--because I can scissor a description

of it out of the railway company's advertising pamphlet,

and say my ink:



"On the whole tour, particularly at the Descent, we undergo

an optical illusion which often seems to be incredible. 

All the shrubs, fir trees, stables, houses, etc., seem to be bent

in a slanting direction, as by an immense pressure of air. 

They are all standing awry, so much awry that the chalets

and cottages of the peasants seem to be tumbling down. 

It is the consequence of the steep inclination of the line. 

Those who are seated in the carriage do not observe that they

are doing down a declivity of twenty to twenty-five degrees

(their seats being adapted to this course of proceeding

and being bent down at their backs). They mistake their

carriage and its horizontal lines for a proper measure

of the normal plain, and therefore all the objects outside

which really are in a horizontal position must show a

disproportion of twenty to twenty-five degrees declivity,

in regard to the mountain."



By the time one reaches Kaltbad, he has acquired confidence

in the railway, and he now ceases to try to ease the

locomotive by holding back.  Thenceforth he smokes his

pipe in serenity, and gazes out upon the magnificent

picture below and about him with unfettered enjoyment. 

There is nothing to interrupt the view or the breeze;

it is like inspecting the world on the wing.  However--to be

exact--there is one place where the serenity lapses for a while;

this is while one is crossing the Schnurrtobel Bridge,

a frail structure which swings its gossamer frame down

through the dizzy air, over a gorge, like a vagrant

spider-strand.



One has no difficulty in remembering his sins while

the train is creeping down this bridge; and he repents

of them, too; though he sees, when he gets to Vitznau,

that he need not have done it, the bridge was perfectly safe. 



So ends the eventual trip which we made to the Rigi-Kulm

to see an Alpine sunrise. 

