




CHAPTER XXXVIII

[I Conquer the Gorner Grat]



We went into camp on that wild spot to which that ram

had brought us.  The men were greatly fatigued. 

Their conviction that we were lost was forgotten in the cheer

of a good supper, and before the reaction had a chance

to set in, I loaded them up with paregoric and put them to bed. 



Next morning I was considering in my mind our desperate

situation and trying to think of a remedy, when Harris

came to me with a Baedeker map which showed conclusively

that the mountain we were on was still in Switzerland--yes,

every part of it was in Switzerland.  So we were not lost,

after all.  This was an immense relief; it lifted the weight

of two such mountains from my breast.  I immediately

had the news disseminated and the map was exhibited. 

The effect was wonderful.  As soon as the men saw with

their own eyes that they knew where they were, and that it

was only the summit that was lost and not themselves,

they cheered up instantly and said with one accord,

let the summit take care of itself. 



Our distresses being at an end, I now determined to rest

the men in camp and give the scientific department of the

Expedition a chance.  First, I made a barometric observation,

to get our altitude, but I could not perceive that there

was any result.  I knew, by my scientific reading,

that either thermometers or barometers ought to be boiled,

to make them accurate; I did not know which it was,

so I boiled them both.  There was still no result;

so I examined these instruments and discovered that they

possessed radical blemishes: the barometer had no hand

but the brass pointer and the ball of the thermometer was

stuffed with tin-foil. I might have boiled those things

to rags, and never found out anything. 



I hunted up another barometer; it was new and perfect. 

I boiled it half an hour in a pot of bean soup which

the cooks were making.  The result was unexpected: the

instrument was not affecting at all, but there was such

a strong barometer taste to the soup that the head cook,

who was a most conscientious person, changed its name

in the bill of fare.  The dish was so greatly liked by all,

that I ordered the cook to have barometer soup every day. 

It was believed that the barometer might eventually

be injured, but I did not care for that.  I had demonstrated

to my satisfaction that it could not tell how high

a mountain was, therefore I had no real use for it. 

Changes in the weather I could take care of without it;

I did not wish to know when the weather was going to be good,

what I wanted to know was when it was going to be bad,

and this I could find out from Harris's corns.  Harris had

had his corns tested and regulated at the government

observatory in Heidelberg, and one could depend upon them

with confidence.  So I transferred the new barometer to

the cooking department, to be used for the official mess. 

It was found that even a pretty fair article of soup could

be made from the defective barometer; so I allowed that one

to be transferred to the subordinate mess. 



I next boiled the thermometer, and got a most excellent result;

the mercury went up to about 200 degrees Fahrenheit. 

In the opinion of the other scientists of the Expedition,

this seemed to indicate that we had attained the extraordinary

altitude of two hundred thousand feet above sea-level.

Science places the line of eternal snow at about ten thousand

feet above sea-level. There was no snow where we were,

consequently it was proven that the eternal snow-line

ceases somewhere above the ten-thousand-foot level and

does not begin any more.  This was an interesting fact,

and one which had not been observed by any observer before. 

It was as valuable as interesting, too, since it would open

up the deserted summits of the highest Alps to population

and agriculture.  It was a proud thing to be where we were,

yet it caused us a pang to reflect that but for that ram we

might just as well been two hundred thousand feet higher. 



The success of my last experiment induced me to try an

experiment with my photographic apparatus.  I got it out,

and boiled one of my cameras, but the thing was a failure;

it made the wood swell up and burst, and I could not see

that the lenses were any better than they were before. 



I now concluded to boil a guide.  It might improve him,

it could not impair his usefulness.  But I was not

allowed to proceed.  Guides have no feeling for science,

and this one would not consent to be made uncomfortable

in its interest. 



In the midst of my scientific work, one of those

needless accidents happened which are always occurring

among the ignorant and thoughtless.  A porter shot

at a chamois and missed it and crippled the Latinist. 

This was not a serious matter to me, for a Latinist's

duties are as well performed on crutches as otherwise--

but the fact remained that if the Latinist had not

happened to be in the way a mule would have got

that load.  That would have been quite another matter,

for when it comes down to a question of value there is

a palpable difference between a Latinist and a mule. 

I could not depend on having a Latinist in the right

place every time; so, to make things safe, I ordered

that in the future the chamois must not be hunted within

limits of the camp with any other weapon than the forefinger. 



My nerves had hardly grown quiet after this affair when

they got another shake-up--one which utterly unmanned

me for a moment: a rumor swept suddenly through the camp

that one of the barkeepers had fallen over a precipice!



However, it turned out that it was only a chaplain. 

I had laid in an extra force of chaplains, purposely to

be prepared for emergencies like this, but by some

unaccountable oversight had come away rather short-handed

in the matter of barkeepers. 



On the following morning we moved on, well refreshed and in

good spirits.  I remember this day with peculiar pleasure,

because it saw our road restored to us.  Yes, we found

our road again, and in quite an extraordinary way. 

We had plodded along some two hours and a half, when we came

up against a solid mass of rock about twenty feet high. 

I did not need to be instructed by a mule this time. 

I was already beginning to know more than any mule in

the Expedition.  I at once put in a blast of dynamite,

and lifted that rock out of the way.  But to my surprise

and mortification, I found that there had been a chalet

on top of it. 



I picked up such members of the family as fell in my vicinity,

and subordinates of my corps collected the rest. 

None of these poor people were injured, happily, but they

were much annoyed.  I explained to the head chaleteer

just how the thing happened, and that I was only searching

for the road, and would certainly have given him timely

notice if I had known he was up there.  I said I had

meant no harm, and hoped I had not lowered myself in

his estimation by raising him a few rods in the air. 

I said many other judicious things, and finally when I

offered to rebuild his chalet, and pay for the breakages,

and throw in the cellar, he was mollified and satisfied. 

He hadn't any cellar at all, before; he would not have

as good a view, now, as formerly, but what he had lost

in view he had gained in cellar, by exact measurement. 

He said there wasn't another hole like that in the mountains--

and he would have been right if the late mule had not tried

to eat up the nitroglycerin. 



I put a hundred and sixteen men at work, and they rebuilt

the chalet from its own debris in fifteen minutes. 

It was a good deal more picturesque than it was before,

too.  The man said we were now on the Feil-Stutz, above

the Schwegmatt--information which I was glad to get,

since it gave us our position to a degree of particularity

which we had not been accustomed to for a day or so. 

We also learned that we were standing at the foot

of the Riffelberg proper, and that the initial chapter

of our work was completed. 



We had a fine view, from here, of the energetic Visp,

as it makes its first plunge into the world from under a huge

arch of solid ice, worn through the foot-wall of the great

Gorner Glacier; and we could also see the Furggenbach,

which is the outlet of the Furggen Glacier. 



The mule-road to the summit of the Riffelberg passed right

in front of the chalet, a circumstance which we almost

immediately noticed, because a procession of tourists was

filing along it pretty much all the time.  [1] The chaleteer's

business consisted in furnishing refreshments to tourists. 

My blast had interrupted this trade for a few minutes,

by breaking all the bottles on the place; but I gave

the man a lot of whiskey to sell for Alpine champagne,

and a lot of vinegar which would answer for Rhine wine,

consequently trade was soon as brisk as ever. 



1.  "Pretty much" may not be elegant English, but it is

    high time it was.  There is no elegant word or phrase

    which means just what it means.--M.T.



Leaving the Expedition outside to rest, I quartered myself

in the chalet, with Harris, proposing to correct my journals

and scientific observations before continuing the ascent. 

I had hardly begun my work when a tall, slender, vigorous

American youth of about twenty-three, who was on his

way down the mountain, entered and came toward me with

that breeze self-complacency which is the adolescent's

idea of the well-bred ease of the man of the world. 

His hair was short and parted accurately in the middle,

and he had all the look of an American person who would

be likely to begin his signature with an initial,

and spell his middle name out.  He introduced himself,

smiling a smirky smile borrowed from the courtiers

of the stage, extended a fair-skinned talon, and while

he gripped my hand in it he bent his body forward

three times at the hips, as the stage courtier does,

and said in the airiest and most condescending

and patronizing way--I quite remember his exact language:



"Very glad to make your acquaintance, 'm sure; very glad indeed,

assure you.  I've read all your little efforts and greatly

admired them, and when I heard you were here, I ..."



I indicated a chair, and he sat down.  This grandee was

the grandson of an American of considerable note in his day,

and not wholly forgotten yet--a man who came so near

being a great man that he was quite generally accounted

one while he lived. 



I slowly paced the floor, pondering scientific problems,

and heard this conversation:



GRANDSON.  First visit to Europe?



HARRIS.  Mine? Yes. 



G.S. (With a soft reminiscent sigh suggestive of bygone

joys that may be tasted in their freshness but once.)

Ah, I know what it is to you.  A first visit!--ah,

the romance of it! I wish I could feel it again. 



H. Yes, I find it exceeds all my dreams.  It is enchantment. 

I go... 



G.S. (With a dainty gesture of the hand signifying "Spare

me your callow enthusiasms, good friend.") Yes, _I_ know,

I know; you go to cathedrals, and exclaim; and you drag

through league-long picture-galleries and exclaim; and you

stand here, and there, and yonder, upon historic ground,

and continue to exclaim; and you are permeated with

your first crude conceptions of Art, and are proud

and happy.  Ah, yes, proud and happy--that expresses it. 

Yes-yes, enjoy it--it is right--it is an innocent revel. 



H. And you? Don't you do these things now?



G.S. I! Oh, that is VERY good! My dear sir, when you

are as old a traveler as I am, you will not ask such

a question as that.  _I_ visit the regulation gallery,

moon around the regulation cathedral, do the worn round

of the regulation sights, YET?--Excuse me!



H. Well, what DO you do, then?



G.S. Do? I flit--and flit--for I am ever on the wing--but I

avoid the herd.  Today I am in Paris, tomorrow in Berlin,

anon in Rome; but you would look for me in vain in the

galleries of the Louvre or the common resorts of the

gazers in those other capitals.  If you would find me,

you must look in the unvisited nooks and corners where

others never think of going.  One day you will find me

making myself at home in some obscure peasant's cabin,

another day you will find me in some forgotten castle

worshiping some little gem or art which the careless eye

has overlooked and which the unexperienced would despise;

again you will find me as guest in the inner sanctuaries

of palaces while the herd is content to get a hurried

glimpse of the unused chambers by feeing a servant. 



H. You are a GUEST in such places?



G.S. And a welcoming one. 



H. It is surprising.  How does it come?



G.S. My grandfather's name is a passport to all the courts

in Europe.  I have only to utter that name and every

door is open to me.  I flit from court to court at my

own free will and pleasure, and am always welcome. 

I am as much at home in the palaces of Europe as you are

among your relatives.  I know every titled person in Europe,

I think.  I have my pockets full of invitations all the time. 

I am under promise to go to Italy, where I am to be the

guest of a succession of the noblest houses in the land. 

In Berlin my life is a continued round of gaiety in the

imperial palace.  It is the same, wherever I go. 



H. It must be very pleasant.  But it must make Boston

seem a little slow when you are at home. 



G.S. Yes, of course it does.  But I don't go home much. 

There's no life there--little to feed a man's higher nature. 

Boston's very narrow, you know.  She doesn't know it, and you

couldn't convince her of it--so I say nothing when I'm

there: where's the use? Yes, Boston is very narrow, but she

has such a good opinion of herself that she can't see it. 

A man who has traveled as much as I have, and seen as much

of the world, sees it plain enough, but he can't cure it,

you know, so the best is to leave it and seek a sphere

which is more in harmony with his tastes and culture. 

I run across there, one a year, perhaps, when I have

nothing important on hand, but I'm very soon back again. 

I spend my time in Europe. 



H. I see.  You map out your plans and ... 



G.S. No, excuse me.  I don't map out any plans.  I simply

follow the inclination of the day.  I am limited by no ties,

no requirements, I am not bound in any way.  I am too old

a traveler to hamper myself with deliberate purposes. 

I am simply a traveler--an inveterate traveler--a man of

the world, in a word--I can call myself by no other name. 

I do not say, "I am going here, or I am going there"--I

say nothing at all, I only act.  For instance, next week

you may find me the guest of a grandee of Spain, or you

may find me off for Venice, or flitting toward Dresden. 

I shall probably go to Egypt presently; friends will say

to friends, "He is at the Nile cataracts"--and at that

very moment they will be surprised to learn that I'm away

off yonder in India somewhere.  I am a constant surprise

to people.  They are always saying, "Yes, he was in Jerusalem

when we heard of him last, but goodness knows where he

is now."



Presently the Grandson rose to leave--discovered he

had an appointment with some Emperor, perhaps.  He did

his graces over again: gripped me with one talon,

at arm's-length, pressed his hat against his stomach

with the other, bent his body in the middle three times,

murmuring:



"Pleasure, 'm sure; great pleasure, 'm sure.  Wish you

much success."



Then he removed his gracious presence.  It is a great

and solemn thing to have a grandfather. 



I have not purposed to misrepresent this boy in any way,

for what little indignation he excited in me soon

passed and left nothing behind it but compassion. 

One cannot keep up a grudge against a vacuum. 

I have tried to repeat this lad's very words;

if I have failed anywhere I have at least not failed

to reproduce the marrow and meaning of what he said. 

He and the innocent chatterbox whom I met on the Swiss

lake are the most unique and interesting specimens of

Young America I came across during my foreign tramping. 

I have made honest portraits of them, not caricatures. 

The Grandson of twenty-three referred to himself five

or six times as an "old traveler,"and as many as three

times (with a serene complacency which was maddening)

as a "man of the world." There was something very delicious

about his leaving Boston to her "narrowness," unreproved

and uninstructed. 



I formed the caravan in marching order, presently,

and after riding down the line to see that it was

properly roped together, gave the command to proceed. 

In a little while the road carried us to open, grassy land. 

We were above the troublesome forest, now, and had an

uninterrupted view, straight before us, of our summit--

the summit of the Riffelberg. 



We followed the mule-road, a zigzag course, now to the right,

now to the left, but always up, and always crowded and

incommoded by going and coming files of reckless tourists

who were never, in a single instance, tied together. 

I was obliged to exert the utmost care and caution,

for in many places the road was not two yards wide,

and often the lower side of it sloped away in slanting

precipices eight and even nine feet deep.  I had to

encourage the men constantly, to keep them from giving

way to their unmanly fears. 



We might have made the summit before night, but for a

delay caused by the loss of an umbrella.  I was allowing

the umbrella to remain lost, but the men murmured,

and with reason, for in this exposed region we stood

in peculiar need of protection against avalanches;

so I went into camp and detached a strong party to go

after the missing article. 



The difficulties of the next morning were severe,

but our courage was high, for our goal was near. 

At noon we conquered the last impediment--we stood

at last upon the summit, and without the loss of a

single man except the mule that ate the glycerin. 

Our great achievement was achieved--the possibility of

the impossible was demonstrated, and Harris and I walked

proudly into the great dining-room of the Riffelberg

Hotel and stood our alpenstocks up in the corner. 



Yes, I had made the grand ascent; but it was a mistake

to do it in evening dress.  The plug hats were battered,

the swallow-tails were fluttering rags, mud added no grace,

the general effect was unpleasant and even disreputable. 



There were about seventy-five tourists at the hotel--

mainly ladies and little children--and they gave us

an admiring welcome which paid us for all our privations

and sufferings.  The ascent had been made, and the names

and dates now stand recorded on a stone monument there

to prove it to all future tourists. 



I boiled a thermometer and took an altitude, with a most

curious result: THE SUMMIT WAS NOT AS HIGH AS THE POINT ON

THE MOUNTAINSIDE WHERE I HAD TAKEN THE FIRST ALTITUDE. 

Suspecting that I had made an important discovery,

I prepared to verify it.  There happened to be a still

higher summit (called the Gorner Grat), above the hotel,

and notwithstanding the fact that it overlooks a glacier

from a dizzy height, and that the ascent is difficult

and dangerous, I resolved to venture up there and boil

a thermometer.  So I sent a strong party, with some

borrowed hoes, in charge of two chiefs of service, to dig

a stairway in the soil all the way up, and this I ascended,

roped to the guides.  This breezy height was the summit

proper--so I accomplished even more than I had originally

purposed to do.  This foolhardy exploit is recorded on

another stone monument. 



I boiled my thermometer, and sure enough, this spot,

which purported to be two thousand feet higher than the

locality of the hotel, turned out to be nine thousand

feet LOWER.  Thus the fact was clearly demonstrated that,

ABOVE A CERTAIN POINT, THE HIGHER A POINT SEEMS TO BE,

THE LOWER IT ACTUALLY IS.  Our ascent itself was a

great achievement, but this contribution to science was

an inconceivably greater matter. 



Cavilers object that water boils at a lower and lower

temperature the higher and higher you go, and hence the

apparent anomaly.  I answer that I do not base my theory

upon what the boiling water does, but upon what a boiled

thermometer says.  You can't go behind the thermometer. 



I had a magnificent view of Monte Rosa, and apparently

all the rest of the Alpine world, from that high place. 

All the circling horizon was piled high with a mighty

tumult of snowy crests.  One might have imagined he

saw before him the tented camps of a beleaguering host

of Brobdingnagians. 



But lonely, conspicuous, and superb, rose that wonderful

upright wedge, the Matterhorn.  Its precipitous sides were

powdered over with snow, and the upper half hidden in thick

clouds which now and then dissolved to cobweb films and gave

brief glimpses of the imposing tower as through a veil. 

[2] A little later the Matterhorn took to himself the

semblance of a volcano; he was stripped naked to his apex--

around this circled vast wreaths of white cloud which strung

slowly out and streamed away slantwise toward the sun,

a twenty-mile stretch of rolling and tumbling vapor,

and looking just as if it were pouring out of a crater. 

Later again, one of the mountain's sides was clean and clear,

and another side densely clothed from base to summit in

thick smokelike cloud which feathered off and flew around

the shaft's sharp edge like the smoke around the corners of

a burning building.  The Matterhorn is always experimenting,

and always gets up fine effects, too.  In the sunset,

when all the lower world is palled in gloom, it points

toward heaven out of the pervading blackness like a finger

of fire.  In the sunrise--well, they say it is very fine

in the sunrise. 



2.  NOTE.--I had the very unusual luck to catch one little

    momentary glimpse of the Matterhorn wholly unencumbered

    by clouds.  I leveled my photographic apparatus at it

    without the loss of an instant, and should have got

    an elegant picture if my donkey had not interfered. 

    It was my purpose to draw this photograph all by myself

    for my book, but was obliged to put the mountain part

    of it into the hands of the professional artist because

    I found I could not do landscape well.



Authorities agree that there is no such tremendous "layout"

of snowy Alpine magnitude, grandeur, and sublimity to be

seen from any other accessible point as the tourist may see

from the summit of the Riffelberg.  Therefore, let the

tourist rope himself up and go there; for I have shown

that with nerve, caution, and judgment, the thing can be done. 



I wish to add one remark, here--in parentheses, so to speak

--suggested by the word "snowy," which I have just used. 

We have all seen hills and mountains and levels with snow

on them, and so we think we know all the aspects and

effects produced by snow.  But indeed we do not until

we have seen the Alps.  Possibly mass and distance add

something--at any rate, something IS added.  Among other

noticeable things, there is a dazzling, intense whiteness

about the distant Alpine snow, when the sun is on it,

which one recognizes as peculiar, and not familiar to

the eye.  The snow which one is accustomed to has a tint

to it--painters usually give it a bluish cast--but there

is no perceptible tint to the distant Alpine snow when it

is trying to look its whitest.  As to the unimaginable

splendor of it when the sun is blazing down on it--well,

it simply IS unimaginable. 

