





CHAPTER XXXIX

[We Travel by Glacier]



A guide-book is a queer thing.  The reader has just seen

what a man who undertakes the great ascent from Zermatt

to the Riffelberg Hotel must experience.  Yet Baedeker

makes these strange statements concerning this matter:



1.  Distance--3 hours. 

2.  The road cannot be mistaken. 

3.  Guide unnecessary. 

4.  Distance from Riffelberg Hotel to the Gorner Grat,

    one hour and a half. 

5.  Ascent simple and easy.  Guide unnecessary. 

6.  Elevation of Zermatt above sea-level, 5,315 feet. 

7.  Elevation of Riffelberg Hotel above sea-level,

    8,429 feet. 

8.  Elevation of the Gorner Grat above sea-level, 10,289 feet. 



I have pretty effectually throttled these errors by sending

him the following demonstrated facts:



1.  Distance from Zermatt to Riffelberg Hotel, 7 days. 

2.  The road CAN be mistaken.  If I am the first that did it,

    I want the credit of it, too. 

3.  Guides ARE necessary, for none but a native can read

    those finger-boards.

4.  The estimate of the elevation of the several localities

    above sea-level is pretty correct--for Baedeker. 

    He only misses it about a hundred and eighty or ninety

    thousand feet. 



I found my arnica invaluable.  My men were suffering

excruciatingly, from the friction of sitting down so much. 

During two or three days, not one of them was able to do

more than lie down or walk about; yet so effective was

the arnica, that on the fourth all were able to sit up. 

I consider that, more than to anything else, I owe the

success of our great undertaking to arnica and paregoric. 



My men are being restored to health and strength,

my main perplexity, now, was how to get them down

the mountain again.  I was not willing to expose the

brave fellows to the perils, fatigues, and hardships

of that fearful route again if it could be helped. 

First I thought of balloons; but, of course, I had to

give that idea up, for balloons were not procurable. 

I thought of several other expedients, but upon

consideration discarded them, for cause.  But at last

I hit it.  I was aware that the movement of glaciers

is an established fact, for I had read it in Baedeker;

so I resolved to take passage for Zermatt on the great

Gorner Glacier. 



Very good.  The next thing was, how to get down the

glacier comfortably--for the mule-road to it was long,

and winding, and wearisome.  I set my mind at work,

and soon thought out a plan.  One looks straight down

upon the vast frozen river called the Gorner Glacier,

from the Gorner Grat, a sheer precipice twelve hundred

feet high.  We had one hundred and fifty-four umbrellas--

and what is an umbrella but a parachute?



I mentioned this noble idea to Harris, with enthusiasm,

and was about to order the Expedition to form on the

Gorner Grat, with their umbrellas, and prepare for

flight by platoons, each platoon in command of a guide,

when Harris stopped me and urged me not to be too hasty. 

He asked me if this method of descending the Alps had

ever been tried before.  I said no, I had not heard

of an instance.  Then, in his opinion, it was a matter

of considerable gravity; in his opinion it would not be

well to send the whole command over the cliff at once;

a better way would be to send down a single individual,

first, and see how he fared. 



I saw the wisdom in this idea instantly.  I said as much,

and thanked my agent cordially, and told him to take

his umbrella and try the thing right away, and wave

his hat when he got down, if he struck in a soft place,

and then I would ship the rest right along. 



Harris was greatly touched with this mark of confidence,

and said so, in a voice that had a perceptible tremble in it;

but at the same time he said he did not feel himself worthy

of so conspicuous a favor; that it might cause jealousy

in the command, for there were plenty who would not hesitate

to say he had used underhanded means to get the appointment,

whereas his conscience would bear him witness that he

had not sought it at all, nor even, in his secret heart,

desired it. 



I said these words did him extreme credit, but that he must not

throw away the imperishable distinction of being the first man

to descend an Alp per parachute, simply to save the feelings

of some envious underlings.  No, I said, he MUST accept

the appointment--it was no longer an invitation, it was a

command. 



He thanked me with effusion, and said that putting

the thing in this form removed every objection. 

He retired, and soon returned with his umbrella, his eye

flaming with gratitude and his cheeks pallid with joy. 

Just then the head guide passed along.  Harris's expression

changed to one of infinite tenderness, and he said:



"That man did me a cruel injury four days ago, and I

said in my heart he should live to perceive and confess

that the only noble revenge a man can take upon his enemy

is to return good for evil.  I resign in his favor. 

Appoint him."



I threw my arms around the generous fellow and said:



"Harris, you are the noblest soul that lives.  You shall

not regret this sublime act, neither shall the world

fail to know of it.  You shall have opportunity far

transcending this one, too, if I live--remember that."



I called the head guide to me and appointed him on

the spot.  But the thing aroused no enthusiasm in him. 

He did not take to the idea at all. 



He said:



"Tie myself to an umbrella and jump over the Gorner

Grat! Excuse me, there are a great many pleasanter roads

to the devil than that."



Upon a discussion of the subject with him, it appeared that he

considered the project distinctly and decidedly dangerous. 

I was not convinced, yet I was not willing to try the

experiment in any risky way--that is, in a way that might

cripple the strength and efficiency of the Expedition. 

I was about at my wits' end when it occurred to me to try

it on the Latinist. 



He was called in.  But he declined, on the plea

of inexperience, diffidence in public, lack of curiosity,

and I didn't know what all.  Another man declined

on account of a cold in the head; thought he ought

to avoid exposure.  Another could not jump well--never

COULD jump well--did not believe he could jump so far

without long and patient practice.  Another was afraid it

was going to rain, and his umbrella had a hole in it. 

Everybody had an excuse.  The result was what the reader

has by this time guessed: the most magnificent idea

that was ever conceived had to be abandoned, from sheer

lack of a person with enterprise enough to carry it out. 

Yes, I actually had to give that thing up--while doubtless

I should live to see somebody use it and take all the credit from

me. 



Well, I had to go overland--there was no other way. 

I marched the Expedition down the steep and tedious mule-path

and took up as good a position as I could upon the middle

of the glacier--because Baedeker said the middle part

travels the fastest.  As a measure of economy, however,

I put some of the heavier baggage on the shoreward parts,

to go as slow freight. 



I waited and waited, but the glacier did not move. 

Night was coming on, the darkness began to gather--still we

did not budge.  It occurred to me then, that there might

be a time-table in Baedeker; it would be well to find out

the hours of starting.  I called for the book--it could not

be found.  Bradshaw would certainly contain a time-table;

but no Bradshaw could be found. 



Very well, I must make the best of the situation.  So I

pitched the tents, picketed the animals, milked the cows,

had supper, paregoricked the men, established the watch,

and went to bed--with orders to call me as soon as we came

in sight of Zermatt. 



I awoke about half past ten next morning, and looked around. 

We hadn't budged a peg! At first I could not understand it;

then it occurred to me that the old thing must be aground. 

So I cut down some trees and rigged a spar on the starboard

and another on the port side, and fooled away upward of

three hours trying to spar her off.  But it was no use. 

She was half a mile wide and fifteen or twenty miles long,

and there was no telling just whereabouts she WAS aground. 

The men began to show uneasiness, too, and presently they

came flying to me with ashy faces, saying she had sprung

a leak. 



Nothing but my cool behavior at this critical time saved us

from another panic.  I order them to show me the place. 

They led me to a spot where a huge boulder lay in a deep

pool of clear and brilliant water.  It did look like

a pretty bad leak, but I kept that to myself.  I made

a pump and set the men to work to pump out the glacier. 

We made a success of it.  I perceived, then, that it was not

a leak at all.  This boulder had descended from a precipice

and stopped on the ice in the middle of the glacier,

and the sun had warmed it up, every day, and consequently

it had melted its way deeper and deeper into the ice,

until at last it reposed, as we had found it, in a deep

pool of the clearest and coldest water. 



Presently Baedeker was found again, and I hunted eagerly

for the time-table. There was none.  The book simply said

the glacier was moving all the time.  This was satisfactory,

so I shut up the book and chose a good position to view

the scenery as we passed along.  I stood there some time

enjoying the trip, but at last it occurred to me that we did

not seem to be gaining any on the scenery.  I said to myself,

"This confounded old thing's aground again, sure,"--and

opened Baedeker to see if I could run across any remedy

for these annoying interruptions.  I soon found a sentence

which threw a dazzling light upon the matter.  It said,

"The Gorner Glacier travels at an average rate of a little

less than an inch a day." I have seldom felt so outraged. 

I have seldom had my confidence so wantonly betrayed. 

I made a small calculation: One inch a day, say thirty

feet a year; estimated distance to Zermatt, three and

one-eighteenth miles.  Time required to go by glacier,

A LITTLE OVER FIVE HUNDRED YEARS! I said to myself, "I can

WALK it quicker--and before I will patronize such a fraud

as this, I will do it."



When I revealed to Harris the fact that the passenger part

of this glacier--the central part--the lightning-express part,

so to speak--was not due in Zermatt till the summer

of 2378, and that the baggage, coming along the slow edge,

would not arrive until some generations later, he burst

out with:



"That is European management, all over! An inch a day--think

of that! Five hundred years to go a trifle over three miles!

But I am not a bit surprised.  It's a Catholic glacier. 

You can tell by the look of it.  And the management."



I said, no, I believed nothing but the extreme end of it

was in a Catholic canton. 



"Well, then, it's a government glacier," said Harris. 

"It's all the same.  Over here the government runs

everything--so everything's slow; slow, and ill-managed. But

with us, everything's done by private enterprise--and then

there ain't much lolling around, you can depend on it. 

I wish Tom Scott could get his hands on this torpid old

slab once--you'd see it take a different gait from this."



I said I was sure he would increase the speed, if there

was trade enough to justify it. 



"He'd MAKE trade," said Harris.  "That's the difference

between governments and individuals.  Governments don't care,

individuals do.  Tom Scott would take all the trade;

in two years Gorner stock would go to two hundred,

and inside of two more you would see all the other glaciers

under the hammer for taxes." After a reflective pause,

Harris added, "A little less than an inch a day; a little

less than an INCH, mind you.  Well, I'm losing my reverence

for glaciers."



I was feeling much the same way myself.  I have traveled

by canal-boat, ox-wagon, raft, and by the Ephesus and

Smyrna railway; but when it comes down to good solid

honest slow motion, I bet my money on the glacier. 

As a means of passenger transportation, I consider

the glacier a failure; but as a vehicle of slow freight,

I think she fills the bill.  In the matter of putting

the fine shades on that line of business, I judge she

could teach the Germans something. 



I ordered the men to break camp and prepare for the land

journey to Zermatt.  At this moment a most interesting

find was made; a dark object, bedded in the glacial ice,

was cut out with the ice-axes, and it proved to be a piece

of the undressed skin of some animal--a hair trunk, perhaps;

but a close inspection disabled the hair-trunk theory,

and further discussion and examination exploded it

entirely--that is, in the opinion of all the scientists

except the one who had advanced it.  This one clung

to his theory with affectionate fidelity characteristic

of originators of scientific theories, and afterward won

many of the first scientists of the age to his view,

by a very able pamphlet which he wrote, entitled, "Evidences

going to show that the hair trunk, in a wild state,

belonged to the early glacial period, and roamed the wastes

of chaos in the company with the cave-bear, primeval man,

and the other Oo"litics of the Old Silurian family."



Each of our scientists had a theory of his own, and put

forward an animal of his own as a candidate for the skin. 

I sided with the geologist of the Expedition in the

belief that this patch of skin had once helped to cover

a Siberian elephant, in some old forgotten age--but we

divided there, the geologist believing that this discovery

proved that Siberia had formerly been located where

Switzerland is now, whereas I held the opinion that it

merely proved that the primeval Swiss was not the dull

savage he is represented to have been, but was a being

of high intellectual development, who liked to go to the

menagerie. 



We arrived that evening, after many hardships and adventures,

in some fields close to the great ice-arch where the mad

Visp boils and surges out from under the foot of the

great Gorner Glacier, and here we camped, our perils over

and our magnificent undertaking successfully completed. 

We marched into Zermatt the next day, and were received

with the most lavish honors and applause.  A document,

signed and sealed by the authorities, was given to me

which established and endorsed the fact that I had made

the ascent of the Riffelberg.  This I wear around my neck,

and it will be buried with me when I am no more. 

