




CHAPTER XVI

An Ancient Legend of the Rhine

[The Lorelei]



The last legend reminds one of the "Lorelei"--a legend

of the Rhine.  There is a song called "The Lorelei."



Germany is rich in folk-songs, and the words and airs of

several of them are peculiarly beautiful--but "The Lorelei"

is the people's favorite.  I could not endure it at first,

but by and by it began to take hold of me, and now there

is no tune which I like so well. 



It is not possible that it is much known in America, else I

should have heard it there.  The fact that I never heard

it there, is evidence that there are others in my country

who have fared likewise; therefore, for the sake of these,

I mean to print the words and music in this chapter. 

And I will refresh the reader's memory by printing the legend

of the Lorelei, too.  I have it by me in the LEGENDS OF

THE RHINE, done into English by the wildly gifted Garnham,

Bachelor of Arts.  I print the legend partly to refresh

my own memory, too, for I have never read it before. 



THE LEGEND



Lore (two syllables) was a water nymph who used to sit

on a high rock called the Ley or Lei (pronounced like our

word LIE) in the Rhine, and lure boatmen to destruction

in a furious rapid which marred the channel at that spot. 

She so bewitched them with her plaintive songs and her

wonderful beauty that they forgot everything else to gaze

up at her, and so they presently drifted among the broken

reefs and were lost. 



In those old, old times, the Count Bruno lived in a great

castle near there with his son, the Count Hermann, a youth

of twenty.  Hermann had heard a great deal about the

beautiful Lore, and had finally fallen very deeply in love

with her without having seen her.  So he used to wander

to the neighborhood of the Lei, evenings, with his Zither

and "Express his Longing in low Singing," as Garnham says. 

On one of these occasions, "suddenly there hovered around

the top of the rock a brightness of unequaled clearness

and color, which, in increasingly smaller circles thickened,

was the enchanting figure of the beautiful Lore. 



"An unintentional cry of Joy escaped the Youth, he let

his Zither fall, and with extended arms he called out

the name of the enigmatical Being, who seemed to stoop

lovingly to him and beckon to him in a friendly manner;

indeed, if his ear did not deceive him, she called his

name with unutterable sweet Whispers, proper to love. 

Beside himself with delight the youth lost his Senses

and sank senseless to the earth."



After that he was a changed person.  He went dreaming about,

thinking only of his fairy and caring for naught else

in the world.  "The old count saw with affliction this

changement in his son," whose cause he could not divine,

and tried to divert his mind into cheerful channels,

but to no purpose.  Then the old count used authority. 

He commanded the youth to betake himself to the camp. 

Obedience was promised.  Garnham says:



"It was on the evening before his departure, as he

wished still once to visit the Lei and offer to the

Nymph of the Rhine his Sighs, the tones of his Zither,

and his Songs.  He went, in his boat, this time accompanied

by a faithful squire, down the stream.  The moon shed

her silvery light over the whole country; the steep

bank mountains appeared in the most fantastical shapes,

and the high oaks on either side bowed their Branches

on Hermann's passing.  As soon as he approached the Lei,

and was aware of the surf-waves, his attendant was seized

with an inexpressible Anxiety and he begged permission

to land; but the Knight swept the strings of his Guitar

and sang:



"Once I saw thee in dark night, In supernatural Beauty bright;

Of Light-rays, was the Figure wove, To share its light,

locked-hair strove. 



"Thy Garment color wave-dove By thy hand the sign of love,

Thy eyes sweet enchantment, Raying to me, oh! enchantment. 



"O, wert thou but my sweetheart, How willingly thy love

to part! With delight I should be bound To thy rocky

house in deep ground."



That Hermann should have gone to that place at all,

was not wise; that he should have gone with such a song

as that in his mouth was a most serious mistake.  The Lorelei

did not "call his name in unutterable sweet Whispers"

this time.  No, that song naturally worked an instant

and thorough "changement" in her; and not only that,

but it stirred the bowels of the whole afflicted region

around about there--for--



"Scarcely had these tones sounded, everywhere there

began tumult and sound, as if voices above and below

the water.  On the Lei rose flames, the Fairy stood above,

at that time, and beckoned with her right hand clearly

and urgently to the infatuated Knight, while with a staff

in her left hand she called the waves to her service. 

They began to mount heavenward; the boat was upset,

mocking every exertion; the waves rose to the gunwale,

and splitting on the hard stones, the Boat broke into Pieces. 

The youth sank into the depths, but the squire was thrown on

shore by a powerful wave."



The bitterest things have been said about the Lorelei

during many centuries, but surely her conduct upon this

occasion entitles her to our respect.  One feels drawn

tenderly toward her and is moved to forget her many crimes

and remember only the good deed that crowned and closed

her career. 



"The Fairy was never more seen; but her enchanting tones have

often been heard.  In the beautiful, refreshing, still nights

of spring, when the moon pours her silver light over the Country,

the listening shipper hears from the rushing of the waves,

the echoing Clang of a wonderfully charming voice,

which sings a song from the crystal castle, and with sorrow

and fear he thinks on the young Count Hermann, seduced by the

Nymph."



Here is the music, and the German words by Heinrich Heine. 

This song has been a favorite in Germany for forty years,

and will remain a favorite always, maybe.  [Figure 5]



I have a prejudice against people who print things

in a foreign language and add no translation. 

When I am the reader, and the author considers me

able to do the translating myself, he pays me quite

a nice compliment--but if he would do the translating

for me I would try to get along without the compliment. 



If I were at home, no doubt I could get a translation of

this poem, but I am abroad and can't; therefore I will make

a translation myself.  It may not be a good one, for poetry

is out of my line, but it will serve my purpose--which is,

to give the unGerman young girl a jingle of words to hang

the tune on until she can get hold of a good version,

made by some one who is a poet and knows how to convey

a poetical thought from one language to another. 



THE LORELEI



I cannot divine what it meaneth, This haunting nameless

pain: A tale of the bygone ages Keeps brooding through

my brain:



The faint air cools in the glooming, And peaceful flows

the Rhine, The thirsty summits are drinking The sunset's

flooding wine;



The loveliest maiden is sitting High-throned in yon blue air,

Her golden jewels are shining, She combs her golden hair;



She combs with a comb that is golden, And sings a weird

refrain That steeps in a deadly enchantment The list'ner's

ravished brain:



The doomed in his drifting shallop, Is tranced with

the sad sweet tone, He sees not the yawning breakers,

He sees but the maid alone:



The pitiless billows engulf him!--So perish sailor and bark;

And this, with her baleful singing, Is the Lorelei's

gruesome work. 



I have a translation by Garnham, Bachelor of Arts,

in the LEGENDS OF THE RHINE, but it would not answer

the purpose I mentioned above, because the measure is too

nobly irregular; it don't fit the tune snugly enough;

in places it hangs over at the ends too far, and in other

places one runs out of words before he gets to the end

of a bar.  Still, Garnham's translation has high merits,

and I am not dreaming of leaving it out of my book. 

I believe this poet is wholly unknown in America and England;

I take peculiar pleasure in bringing him forward because I

consider that I discovered him:



THE LORELEI



Translated by L. W. Garnham, B.A.



I do not know what it signifies.  That I am so sorrowful?

A fable of old Times so terrifies, Leaves my heart

so thoughtful. 



The air is cool and it darkens, And calmly flows the Rhine;

The summit of the mountain hearkens In evening sunshine line. 



The most beautiful Maiden entrances Above wonderfully there,

Her beautiful golden attire glances, She combs her

golden hair. 



With golden comb so lustrous, And thereby a song sings,

It has a tone so wondrous, That powerful melody rings. 



The shipper in the little ship It effects with woe sad might;

He does not see the rocky slip, He only regards dreaded height. 



I believe the turbulent waves Swallow the last shipper

and boat; She with her singing craves All to visit her

magic moat. 



No translation could be closer.  He has got in all

the facts; and in their regular order, too.  There is not

a statistic wanting.  It is as succinct as an invoice. 

That is what a translation ought to be; it should exactly

reflect the thought of the original.  You can't SING "Above

wonderfully there," because it simply won't go to the tune,

without damaging the singer; but it is a most clingingly exact

translation of DORT OBEN WUNDERBAR--fits it like a blister. 

Mr. Garnham's reproduction has other merits--a hundred

of them--but it is not necessary to point them out. 

They will be detected. 



No one with a specialty can hope to have a monopoly of it. 

Even Garnham has a rival.  Mr. X had a small pamphlet

with him which he had bought while on a visit to Munich. 

It was entitled A CATALOGUE OF PICTURES IN THE OLD PINACOTEK,

and was written in a peculiar kind of English.  Here are

a few extracts:



"It is not permitted to make use of the work

in question to a publication of the same contents

as well as to the pirated edition of it."



"An evening landscape.  In the foreground near a pond

and a group of white beeches is leading a footpath

animated by travelers."



"A learned man in a cynical and torn dress holding an open

book in his hand."



"St. Bartholomew and the Executioner with the knife

to fulfil the martyr."



"Portrait of a young man.  A long while this picture

was thought to be Bindi Altoviti's portrait; now somebody

will again have it to be the self-portrait of Raphael."



"Susan bathing, surprised by the two old man. 

In the background the lapidation of the condemned."



("Lapidation" is good; it is much more elegant than

"stoning.")



"St. Rochus sitting in a landscape with an angel who looks

at his plague-sore, whilst the dog the bread in his mouth

attents him."



"Spring. The Goddess Flora, sitting.  Behind her a fertile

valley perfused by a river."



"A beautiful bouquet animated by May-bugs, etc."



"A warrior in armor with a gypseous pipe in his hand leans

against a table and blows the smoke far away of himself."



"A Dutch landscape along a navigable river which perfuses

it till to the background."



"Some peasants singing in a cottage.  A woman lets drink

a child out of a cup."



"St. John's head as a boy--painted in fresco on a brick."

(Meaning a tile.)



"A young man of the Riccio family, his hair cut off

right at the end, dressed in black with the same cap. 

Attributed to Raphael, but the signation is false."



"The Virgin holding the Infant.  It is very painted

in the manner of Sassoferrato."



"A Larder with greens and dead game animated by a cook-maid

and two kitchen-boys."



However, the English of this catalogue is at least

as happy as that which distinguishes an inscription

upon a certain picture in Rome--to wit:



"Revelations-View. St. John in Patterson's Island."



But meanwhile the raft is moving on. 

