




CHAPTER XLI

[The Fearful Disaster of 1865]



One of the most memorable of all the Alpine catastrophes

was that of July, 1865, on the Matterhorn--already

sighted referred to, a few pages back.  The details

of it are scarcely known in America.  To the vast

majority of readers they are not known at all. 

Mr. Whymper's account is the only authentic one. 

I will import the chief portion of it into this book,

partly because of its intrinsic interest, and partly

because it gives such a vivid idea of what the perilous

pastime of Alp-climbing is.  This was Mr. Whymper's

NINTH attempt during a series of years, to vanquish

that steep and stubborn pillar or rock; it succeeded,

the other eight were failures.  No man had ever accomplished

the ascent before, though the attempts had been numerous. 



MR. WHYMPER'S NARRATIVE



We started from Zermatt on the 13th of July, at half

past five, on a brilliant and perfectly cloudless morning. 

We were eight in number--Croz (guide), old Peter

Taugwalder (guide) and his two sons; Lord F. Douglas,

Mr. Hadow, Rev. Mr. Hudson, and I. To insure steady

motion, one tourist and one native walked together. 

The youngest Taugwalder fell to my share.  The wine-bags

also fell to my lot to carry, and throughout the day,

after each drink, I replenished them secretly with water,

so that at the next halt they were found fuller than

before! This was considered a good omen, and little short

of miraculous. 



On the first day we did not intend to ascend to any

great height, and we mounted, accordingly, very leisurely. 

Before twelve o'clock we had found a good position

for the tent, at a height of eleven thousand feet. 

We passed the remaining hours of daylight--some basking

in the sunshine, some sketching, some collecting;

Hudson made tea, I coffee, and at length we retired,

each one to his blanket bag. 



We assembled together before dawn on the 14th

and started directly it was light enough to move. 

One of the young Taugwalders returned to Zermatt. 

In a few minutes we turned the rib which had intercepted

the view of the eastern face from our tent platform. 

The whole of this great slope was now revealed, rising for

three thousand feet like a huge natural staircase. 

Some parts were more, and others were less easy, but we

were not once brought to a halt by any serious impediment,

for when an obstruction was met in front it could always

be turned to the right or to the left.  For the greater part

of the way there was no occasion, indeed, for the rope,

and sometimes Hudson led, sometimes myself.  At six-twenty we

had attained a height of twelve thousand eight hundred feet,

and halted for half an hour; we then continued the ascent

without a break until nine-fifty-five, when we stopped

for fifty minutes, at a height of fourteen thousand feet. 



We had now arrived at the foot of that part which, seen from

the Riffelberg, seems perpendicular or overhanging. 

We could no longer continue on the eastern side.  For a little

distance we ascended by snow upon the ARE^TE--that is,

the ridge--then turned over to the right, or northern side. 

The work became difficult, and required caution.  In some places

there was little to hold; the general slope of the mountain

was LESS than forty degrees, and snow had accumulated in,

and had filled up, the interstices of the rock-face, leaving

only occasional fragments projecting here and there. 

These were at times covered with a thin film of ice. 

It was a place which any fair mountaineer might pass

in safety.  We bore away nearly horizontally for about four

hundred feet, then ascended directly toward the summit

for about sixty feet, then doubled back to the ridge

which descends toward Zermatt.  A long stride round

a rather awkward corner brought us to snow once more. 

That last doubt vanished! The Matterhorn was ours! Nothing

but two hundred feet of easy snow remained to be surmounted. 



The higher we rose, the more intense became the excitement. 

The slope eased off, at length we could be detached,

and Croz and I, dashed away, ran a neck-and-neck race,

which ended in a dead heat.  At 1:40 P.M., the world was at

our feet, and the Matterhorn was conquered!



The others arrived.  Croz now took the tent-pole, and

planted it in the highest snow.  "Yes," we said, "there is

the flag-staff, but where is the flag?" "Here it is,"

he answered, pulling off his blouse and fixing it to the stick. 

It made a poor flag, and there was no wind to float it out,

yet it was seen all around.  They saw it at Zermatt--at

the Riffel--in the Val Tournanche... . 



We remained on the summit for one hour--



One crowded hour of glorious life. 



It passed away too quickly, and we began to prepare

for the descent. 



Hudson and I consulted as to the best and safest arrangement

of the party.  We agreed that it was best for Croz

to go first, and Hadow second; Hudson, who was almost

equal to a guide in sureness of foot, wished to be third;

Lord Douglas was placed next, and old Peter, the strongest

of the remainder, after him.  I suggested to Hudson

that we should attach a rope to the rocks on our arrival

at the difficult bit, and hold it as we descended,

as an additional protection.  He approved the idea,

but it was not definitely decided that it should be done. 

The party was being arranged in the above order while I

was sketching the summit, and they had finished,

and were waiting for me to be tied in line, when some one

remembered that our names had not been left in a bottle. 

They requested me to write them down, and moved off

while it was being done. 



A few minutes afterward I tied myself to young Peter,

ran down after the others, and caught them just as they

were commencing the descent of the difficult part. 

Great care was being taken.  Only one man was moving at a time;

when he was firmly planted the next advanced, and so on. 

They had not, however, attached the additional rope

to rocks, and nothing was said about it.  The suggestion

was not made for my own sake, and I am not sure that it

ever occurred to me again.  For some little distance we

two followed the others, detached from them, and should

have continued so had not Lord Douglas asked me, about 3

P.M., to tie on to old Peter, as he feared, he said,

that Taugwalder would not be able to hold his ground if a

slip occurred. 



A few minutes later, a sharp-eyed lad ran into the Monte

Rosa Hotel, at Zermatt, saying that he had seen an avalanche

fall from the summit of the Matterhorn onto the Matterhorn

glacier.  The boy was reproved for telling idle stories;

he was right, nevertheless, and this was what he saw. 



Michel Croz had laid aside his ax, and in order to give

Mr. Hadow greater security, was absolutely taking

hold of his legs, and putting his feet, one by one,

into their proper positions.  As far as I know, no one

was actually descending.  I cannot speak with certainty,

because the two leading men were partially hidden

from my sight by an intervening mass of rock, but it

is my belief, from the movements of their shoulders,

that Croz, having done as I said, was in the act

of turning round to go down a step or two himself;

at this moment Mr. Hadow slipped, fell against him,

and knocked him over.  I heard one startled exclamation

from Croz, then saw him and Mr. Hadow flying downward;

in another moment Hudson was dragged from his steps,

and Lord Douglas immediately after him.  All this was the

work of a moment.  Immediately we heard Croz's exclamation,

old Peter and I planted ourselves as firmly as the rocks

would permit; the rope was taut between us, and the jerk

came on us both as on one man.  We held; but the rope

broke midway between Taugwalder and Lord Francis Douglas. 

For a few seconds we saw our unfortunate companions sliding

downward on their backs, and spreading out their hands,

endeavoring to save themselves.  They passed from our

sight uninjured, disappeared one by one, and fell from the

precipice to precipice onto the Matterhorn glacier below,

a distance of nearly four thousand feet in height. 

From the moment the rope broke it was impossible to help them. 

So perished our comrades!



For more than two hours afterward I thought almost every

moment that the next would be my last; for the Taugwalders,

utterly unnerved, were not only incapable of giving assistance,

but were in such a state that a slip might have been

expected from them at any moment.  After a time we were able

to do that which should have been done at first, and fixed

rope to firm rocks, in addition to being tied together. 

These ropes were cut from time to time, and were left behind. 

Even with their assurance the men were afraid to proceed,

and several times old Peter turned, with ashy face

and faltering limbs, and said, with terrible emphasis,

"I CANNOT!"



About 6 P.M., we arrived at the snow upon the ridge

descending toward Zermatt, and all peril was over. 

We frequently looked, but in vain, for traces of our

unfortunate companions; we bent over the ridge and cried

to them, but no sound returned.  Convinced at last that

they were neither within sight nor hearing, we ceased

from our useless efforts; and, too cast down for speech,

silently gathered up our things, and the little effects

of those who were lost, and then completed the descent. 



----------



Such is Mr. Whymper's graphic and thrilling narrative. 

Zermatt gossip darkly hints that the elder Taugwalder

cut the rope, when the accident occurred, in order

to preserve himself from being dragged into the abyss;

but Mr. Whymper says that the ends of the rope showed

no evidence of cutting, but only of breaking.  He adds

that if Taugwalder had had the disposition to cut the rope,

he would not have had time to do it, the accident was so

sudden and unexpected. 



Lord Douglas' body has never been found.  It probably

lodged upon some inaccessible shelf in the face of the

mighty precipice.  Lord Douglas was a youth of nineteen. 

The three other victims fell nearly four thousand feet,

and their bodies lay together upon the glacier when found

by Mr. Whymper and the other searchers the next morning. 

Their graves are beside the little church in Zermatt. 

