




CHAPTER XLIV

[I Scale Mont Blanc--by Telescope]



After breakfast, that next morning in Chamonix, we went

out in the yard and watched the gangs of excursioning

tourists arriving and departing with their mules and guides

and porters; they we took a look through the telescope

at the snowy hump of Mont Blanc.  It was brilliant

with sunshine, and the vast smooth bulge seemed hardly

five hundred yards away.  With the naked eye we could

dimly make out the house at the Pierre Pointue, which is

located by the side of the great glacier, and is more

than three thousand feet above the level of the valley;

but with the telescope we could see all its details. 

While I looked, a woman rode by the house on a mule, and I

saw her with sharp distinctness; I could have described

her dress.  I saw her nod to the people of the house,

and rein up her mule, and put her hand up to shield

her eyes from the sun.  I was not used to telescopes;

in fact, I had never looked through a good one before;

it seemed incredible to me that this woman could be

so far away.  I was satisfied that I could see all

these details with my naked eye; but when I tried it,

that mule and those vivid people had wholly vanished,

and the house itself was become small and vague.  I tried

the telescope again, and again everything was vivid. 

The strong black shadows of the mule and the woman were

flung against the side of the house, and I saw the mule's

silhouette wave its ears. 



The telescopulist--or the telescopulariat--I do not know

which is right--said a party were making a grand ascent,

and would come in sight on the remote upper heights,

presently; so we waited to observe this performance. 

Presently I had a superb idea.  I wanted to stand with

a party on the summit of Mont Blanc, merely to be able

to say I had done it, and I believed the telescope

could set me within seven feet of the uppermost man. 

The telescoper assured me that it could.  I then asked

him how much I owed him for as far as I had got? He said,

one franc.  I asked him how much it would cost to make

the entire ascent? Three francs.  I at once determined

to make the entire ascent.  But first I inquired

if there was any danger? He said no--not by telescope;

said he had taken a great many parties to the summit,

and never lost a man.  I asked what he would charge to let

my agent go with me, together with such guides and porters

as might be necessary.  He said he would let Harris go

for two francs; and that unless we were unusually timid,

he should consider guides and porters unnecessary;

it was not customary to take them, when going by telescope,

for they were rather an encumbrance than a help. 

He said that the party now on the mountain were approaching

the most difficult part, and if we hurried we should

overtake them within ten minutes, and could then join them

and have the benefit of their guides and porters without

their knowledge, and without expense to us. 



I then said we would start immediately.  I believe I

said it calmly, though I was conscious of a shudder

and of a paling cheek, in view of the nature of the

exploit I was so unreflectingly engaged in.  But the old

daredevil spirit was upon me, and I said that as I

had committed myself I would not back down; I would

ascend Mont Blanc if it cost me my life.  I told the man

to slant his machine in the proper direction and let us be off. 



Harris was afraid and did not want to go, but I heartened

him up and said I would hold his hand all the way; so he

gave his consent, though he trembled a little at first. 

I took a last pathetic look upon the pleasant summer scene

about me, then boldly put my eye to the glass and prepared

to mount among the grim glaciers and the everlasting snows. 



We took our way carefully and cautiously across the great

Glacier des Bossons, over yawning and terrific crevices

and among imposing crags and buttresses of ice which were

fringed with icicles of gigantic proportions.  The desert

of ice that stretched far and wide about us was wild and

desolate beyond description, and the perils which beset us

were so great that at times I was minded to turn back. 

But I pulled my pluck together and pushed on. 



We passed the glacier safely and began to mount

the steeps beyond, with great alacrity.  When we

were seven minutes out from the starting-point, we

reached an altitude where the scene took a new aspect;

an apparently limitless continent of gleaming snow was

tilted heavenward before our faces.  As my eye followed

that awful acclivity far away up into the remote skies,

it seemed to me that all I had ever seen before of sublimity

and magnitude was small and insignificant compared to this. 



We rested a moment, and then began to mount with speed. 

Within three minutes we caught sight of the party ahead of us,

and stopped to observe them.  They were toiling up a long,

slanting ridge of snow--twelve persons, roped together some

fifteen feet apart, marching in single file, and strongly

marked against the clear blue sky.  One was a woman. 

We could see them lift their feet and put them down;

we saw them swing their alpenstocks forward in unison,

like so many pendulums, and then bear their weight

upon them; we saw the lady wave her handkerchief. 

They dragged themselves upward in a worn and weary way,

for they had been climbing steadily from the Grand Mulets,

on the Glacier des Dossons, since three in the morning,

and it was eleven, now.  We saw them sink down in the

snow and rest, and drink something from a bottle. 

After a while they moved on, and as they approached the final

short dash of the home-stretch we closed up on them and

joined them. 



Presently we all stood together on the summit! What a view

was spread out below! Away off under the northwestern horizon

rolled the silent billows of the Farnese Oberland, their snowy

crests glinting softly in the subdued lights of distance;

in the north rose the giant form of the Wobblehorn,

draped from peak to shoulder in sable thunder-clouds;

beyond him, to the right, stretched the grand processional

summits of the Cisalpine Cordillera, drowned in a

sensuous haze; to the east loomed the colossal masses

of the Yodelhorn, the Fuddelhorn, and the Dinnerhorn,

their cloudless summits flashing white and cold in the sun;

beyond them shimmered the faint far line of the Ghauts

of Jubbelpore and the Aigulles des Alleghenies; in the

south towered the smoking peak of Popocatapetl and the

unapproachable altitudes of the peerless Scrabblehorn;

in the west-south the stately range of the Himalayas

lay dreaming in a purple gloom; and thence all around

the curving horizon the eye roved over a troubled sea

of sun-kissed Alps, and noted, here and there, the noble

proportions and the soaring domes of the Bottlehorn,

and the Saddlehorn, and the Shovelhorn, and the Powderhorn,

all bathed in the glory of noon and mottled with softly

gliding blots, the shadows flung from drifting clouds. 



Overcome by the scene, we all raised a triumphant,

tremendous shout, in unison.  A startled man at my elbow

said:



"Confound you, what do you yell like that for, right here

in the street?"



That brought me down to Chamonix, like a flirt. 

I gave that man some spiritual advice and disposed of him,

and then paid the telescope man his full fee, and said

that we were charmed with the trip and would remain down,

and not reascend and require him to fetch us down by telescope. 

This pleased him very much, for of course we could have

stepped back to the summit and put him to the trouble

of bringing us home if we wanted to. 



I judged we could get diplomas, now, anyhow; so we

went after them, but the Chief Guide put us off,

with one pretext or another, during all the time we stayed

in Chamonix, and we ended by never getting them at all. 

So much for his prejudice against people's nationality. 

However, we worried him enough to make him remember

us and our ascent for some time.  He even said, once,

that he wished there was a lunatic asylum in Chamonix. 

This shows that he really had fears that we were going

to drive him mad.  It was what we intended to do,

but lack of time defeated it. 



I cannot venture to advise the reader one way or the other,

as to ascending Mont Blanc.  I say only this: if he is at

all timid, the enjoyments of the trip will hardly make up

for the hardships and sufferings he will have to endure. 

But, if he has good nerve, youth, health, and a bold,

firm will, and could leave his family comfortably provided

for in case the worst happened, he would find the ascent

a wonderful experience, and the view from the top a vision

to dream about, and tell about, and recall with exultation

all the days of his life. 



While I do not advise such a person to attempt the ascent,

I do not advise him against it.  But if he elects to attempt it,

let him be warily careful of two things: chose a calm,

clear day; and do not pay the telescope man in advance. 

There are dark stories of his getting advance payers on

the summit and then leaving them there to rot. 



A frightful tragedy was once witnessed through the

Chamonix telescopes.  Think of questions and answers

like these, on an inquest:



CORONER.  You saw deceased lose his life?



WITNESS.  I did. 



C. Where was he, at the time?



W. Close to the summit of Mont Blanc. 



C. Where were you?



W. In the main street of Chamonix. 



C. What was the distance between you?



W. A LITTLE OVER FIVE MILES, as the bird flies. 



This accident occurred in 1866, a year and a month after the

disaster on the Matterhorn.  Three adventurous English gentlemen,

[1] of great experience in mountain-climbing, made up their

minds to ascend Mont Blanc without guides or porters. 

All endeavors to dissuade them from their project failed. 

Powerful telescopes are numerous in Chamonix.  These huge

brass tubes, mounted on their scaffoldings and pointed

skyward from every choice vantage-ground, have the

formidable look of artillery, and give the town the general

aspect of getting ready to repel a charge of angels. 

The reader may easily believe that the telescopes

had plenty of custom on that August morning in 1866,

for everybody knew of the dangerous undertaking which was

on foot, and all had fears that misfortune would result. 

All the morning the tubes remained directed toward the

mountain heights, each with its anxious group around it;

but the white deserts were vacant. 



1.  Sir George Young and his brothers James and Albert. 



At last, toward eleven o'clock, the people who were

looking through the telescopes cried out "There they

are!"--and sure enough, far up, on the loftiest terraces

of the Grand Plateau, the three pygmies appeared,

climbing with remarkable vigor and spirit.  They disappeared

in the "Corridor," and were lost to sight during an hour. 

Then they reappeared, and were presently seen standing together

upon the extreme summit of Mont Blanc.  So, all was well. 

They remained a few minutes on that highest point of land

in Europe, a target for all the telescopes, and were then

seen to begin descent.  Suddenly all three vanished. 

An instant after, they appeared again, TWO THOUSAND FEET

BELOW!



Evidently, they had tripped and been shot down an almost

perpendicular slope of ice to a point where it joined

the border of the upper glacier.  Naturally, the distant

witness supposed they were now looking upon three corpses;

so they could hardly believe their eyes when they presently saw

two of the men rise to their feet and bend over the third. 

During two hours and a half they watched the two busying

themselves over the extended form of their brother,

who seemed entirely inert.  Chamonix's affairs stood still;

everybody was in the street, all interest was centered

upon what was going on upon that lofty and isolated stage

five miles away.  Finally the two--one of them walking

with great difficulty--were seen to begin descent,

abandoning the third, who was no doubt lifeless. 

Their movements were followed, step by step, until they

reached the "Corridor" and disappeared behind its ridge. 

Before they had had time to traverse the "Corridor"

and reappear, twilight was come, and the power of the

telescope was at an end. 



The survivors had a most perilous journey before

them in the gathering darkness, for they must get

down to the Grands Mulets before they would find

a safe stopping-place--a long and tedious descent,

and perilous enough even in good daylight.  The oldest

guides expressed the opinion that they could not succeed;

that all the chances were that they would lose their lives. 



Yet those brave men did succeed.  They reached the Grands

Mulets in safety.  Even the fearful shock which their nerves

had sustained was not sufficient to overcome their coolness

and courage.  It would appear from the official account

that they were threading their way down through those

dangers from the closing in of twilight until two o'clock

in the morning, or later, because the rescuing party from

Chamonix reached the Grand Mulets about three in the morning

and moved thence toward the scene of the disaster under

the leadership of Sir George Young, "who had only just arrived."



After having been on his feet twenty-four hours,

in the exhausting work of mountain-climbing, Sir George

began the reascent at the head of the relief party

of six guides, to recover the corpse of his brother. 

This was considered a new imprudence, as the number

was too few for the service required.  Another relief

party presently arrived at the cabin on the Grands

Mulets and quartered themselves there to await events. 

Ten hours after Sir George's departure toward the summit,

this new relief were still scanning the snowy altitudes

above them from their own high perch among the ice

deserts ten thousand feet above the level of the sea,

but the whole forenoon had passed without a glimpse of any

living thing appearing up there. 



This was alarming.  Half a dozen of their number set out,

then early in the afternoon, to seek and succor Sir George

and his guides.  The persons remaining at the cabin saw

these disappear, and then ensued another distressing wait. 

Four hours passed, without tidings.  Then at five

o'clock another relief, consisting of three guides,

set forward from the cabin.  They carried food and

cordials for the refreshment of their predecessors;

they took lanterns with them, too; night was coming on,

and to make matters worse, a fine, cold rain had begun

to fall. 



At the same hour that these three began their dangerous ascent,

the official Guide-in-Chief of the Mont Blanc region

undertook the dangerous descent to Chamonix, all alone,

to get reinforcements.  However, a couple of hours later,

at 7 P.M., the anxious solicitude came to an end,

and happily.  A bugle note was heard, and a cluster

of black specks was distinguishable against the snows

of the upper heights.  The watchers counted these specks

eagerly--fourteen--nobody was missing.  An hour and a half

later they were all safe under the roof of the cabin. 

They had brought the corpse with them.  Sir George Young

tarried there but a few minutes, and then began the long

and troublesome descent from the cabin to Chamonix. 

He probably reached there about two or three o'clock

in the morning, after having been afoot among the rocks

and glaciers during two days and two nights.  His endurance

was equal to his daring. 



The cause of the unaccountable delay of Sir George and

the relief parties among the heights where the disaster

had happened was a thick fog--or, partly that and partly

the slow and difficult work of conveying the dead body

down the perilous steeps. 



The corpse, upon being viewed at the inquest, showed

no bruises, and it was some time before the surgeons

discovered that the neck was broken.  One of the surviving

brothers had sustained some unimportant injuries,

but the other had suffered no hurt at all.  How these men

could fall two thousand feet, almost perpendicularly,

and live afterward, is a most strange and unaccountable thing. 



A great many women have made the ascent of Mont Blanc. 

An English girl, Miss Stratton, conceived the daring idea,

two or three years ago, of attempting the ascent in the

middle of winter.  She tried it--and she succeeded. 

Moreover, she froze two of her fingers on the way up,

she fell in love with her guide on the summit,

and she married him when she got to the bottom again. 

There is nothing in romance, in the way of a striking

"situation," which can beat this love scene in midheaven

on an isolated ice-crest with the thermometer at zero

and an Artic gale blowing. 



The first woman who ascended Mont Blanc was a girl aged

twenty-two--Mlle. Maria Paradis--1809. Nobody was

with her but her sweetheart, and he was not a guide. 

The sex then took a rest for about thirty years,

when a Mlle. d'Angeville made the ascent --1838. In

Chamonix I picked up a rude old lithograph of that day

which pictured her "in the act."



However, I value it less as a work of art than as a

fashion-plate. Miss d'Angeville put on a pair of men's

pantaloons to climb it, which was wise; but she cramped

their utility by adding her petticoat, which was idiotic. 



One of the mournfulest calamities which men's disposition

to climb dangerous mountains has resulted in,

happened on Mont Blanc in September 1870.  M. D'Arve

tells the story briefly in his HISTOIRE DU MONT BLANC. 

In the next chapter I will copy its chief features. 

