




CHAPTER XIII

[My Long Crawl in the Dark]



When we got back to the hotel I wound and set the

pedometer and put it in my pocket, for I was to carry

it next day and keep record of the miles we made. 

The work which we had given the instrument to do during

which had just closed had not fatigued it perceptibly. 



We were in bed by ten, for we wanted to be up and away on

our tramp homeward with the dawn.  I hung fire, but Harris

went to sleep at once.  I hate a man who goes to sleep

at once; there is a sort of indefinable something about it

which is not exactly an insult, and yet is an insolence;

and one which is hard to bear, too.  I lay there fretting

over this injury, and trying to go to sleep; but the harder

I tried, the wider awake I grew.  I got to feeling very lonely

in the dark, ith no company but an undigested dinner. 

My mind got a start by and by, and began to consider the

beginning of every subject which has ever been thought of;

but it never went further than the beginning; it was touch

and go; it fled from topic to topic with a frantic speed. 

At the end of an hour my head was in a perfect whirl and I

was dead tired, fagged out. 



The fatigue was so great that it presently began to make some

head against the nervous excitement; while imagining myself

wide awake, I would really doze into momentary unconsciousness,

and come suddenly out of it with a physical jerk which nearly

wrenched my joints apart--the delusion of the instant

being that I was tumbling backward over a precipice. 

After I had fallen over eight or nine precipices and thus

found out that one half of my brain had been asleep eight

or nine times without the wide-awake, hard-working other

half suspecting it, the periodical unconsciousnesses

began to extend their spell gradually over more of my

brain-territory, and at last I sank into a drowse which

grew deeper and deeper and was doubtless just on the very

point of being a solid, blessed dreamless stupor, when--what was

that?



My dulled faculties dragged themselves partly back to life

and took a receptive attitude.  Now out of an immense,

a limitless distance, came a something which grew and grew,

and approached, and presently was recognizable as a sound--

it had rather seemed to be a feeling, before.  This sound

was a mile away, now--perhaps it was the murmur of a storm;

and now it was nearer--not a quarter of a mile away;

was it the muffled rasping and grinding of distant

machinery? No, it came still nearer; was it the measured

tramp of a marching troop? But it came nearer still,

and still nearer--and at last it was right in the room: it

was merely a mouse gnawing the woodwork.  So I had held my

breath all that time for such a trifle. 



Well, what was done could not be helped; I would go

to sleep at once and make up the lost time.  That was

a thoughtless thought.  Without intending it--hardly

knowing it--I fell to listening intently to that sound,

and even unconsciously counting the strokes of the mouse's

nutmeg-grater. Presently I was deriving exquisite suffering

from this employment, yet maybe I could have endured

it if the mouse had attended steadily to his work;

but he did not do that; he stopped every now and then,

and I suffered more while waiting and listening for

him to begin again than I did while he was gnawing. 

Along at first I was mentally offering a reward

of five--six--seven--ten--dollars for that mouse;

but toward the last I was offering rewards which were

entirely beyond my means.  I close-reefed my ears--

that is to say, I bent the flaps of them down and furled

them into five or six folds, and pressed them against

the hearing-orifice--but it did no good: the faculty

was so sharpened by nervous excitement that it was become

a microphone and could hear through the overlays without trouble.





My anger grew to a frenzy.  I finally did what all persons

before me have done, clear back to Adam,--resolved to

throw something.  I reached down and got my walking-shoes,

then sat up in bed and listened, in order to exactly locate

the noise.  But I couldn't do it; it was as unlocatable

as a cricket's noise; and where one thinks that that is,

is always the very place where it isn't. So I presently

hurled a shoe at random, and with a vicious vigor. 

It struck the wall over Harris's head and fell down on him;

I had not imagined I could throw so far.  It woke Harris,

and I was glad of it until I found he was not angry;

then I was sorry.  He soon went to sleep again,

which pleased me; but straightway the mouse began again,

which roused my temper once more.  I did not want to wake

Harris a second time, but the gnawing continued until I

was compelled to throw the other shoe.  This time I broke

a mirror--there were two in the room--I got the largest one,

of course.  Harris woke again, but did not complain,

and I was sorrier than ever.  I resolved that I would

suffer all possible torture before I would disturb him a

third time. 



The mouse eventually retired, and by and by I was sinking

to sleep, when a clock began to strike; I counted till

it was done, and was about to drowse again when another

clock began; I counted; then the two great RATHHAUS clock

angels began to send forth soft, rich, melodious blasts

from their long trumpets.  I had never heard anything

that was so lovely, or weird, or mysterious--but when they

got to blowing the quarter-hours, they seemed to me to be

overdoing the thing.  Every time I dropped off for the moment,

a new noise woke me.  Each time I woke I missed my coverlet,

and had to reach down to the floor and get it again. 



At last all sleepiness forsook me.  I recognized the fact

that I was hopelessly and permanently wide awake. 

Wide awake, and feverish and thirsty.  When I had lain

tossing there as long as I could endure it, it occurred

to me that it would be a good idea to dress and go out in

the great square and take a refreshing wash in the fountain,

and smoke and reflect there until the remnant of the night

was gone. 



I believed I could dress in the dark without waking Harris. 

I had banished my shoes after the mouse, but my slippers

would do for a summer night.  So I rose softly, and gradually

got on everything--down to one sock.  I couldn't seem

to get on the track of that sock, any way I could fix it. 

But I had to have it; so I went down on my hands and knees,

with one slipper on and the other in my hand, and began to

paw gently around and rake the floor, but with no success. 

I enlarged my circle, and went on pawing and raking. 

With every pressure of my knee, how the floor creaked!

and every time I chanced to rake against any article,

it seemed to give out thirty-five or thirty-six times

more noise than it would have done in the daytime. 

In those cases I always stopped and held my breath till I

was sure Harris had not awakened--then I crept along again. 

I moved on and on, but I could not find the sock;

I could not seem to find anything but furniture. 

I could not remember that there was much furniture

in the room when I went to bed, but the place was alive

with it now --especially chairs--chairs everywhere--

had a couple of families moved in, in the mean time? And

I never could seem to GLANCE on one of those chairs,

but always struck it full and square with my head. 

My temper rose, by steady and sure degrees, and as I

pawed on and on, I fell to making vicious comments under

my breath. 



Finally, with a venomous access of irritation, I said I

would leave without the sock; so I rose up and made straight

for the door--as I supposed--and suddenly confronted my

dim spectral image in the unbroken mirror.  It startled

the breath out of me, for an instant; it also showed me

that I was lost, and had no sort of idea where I was. 

When I realized this, I was so angry that I had to sit

down on the floor and take hold of something to keep

from lifting the roof off with an explosion of opinion. 

If there had been only one mirror, it might possibly have

helped to locate me; but there were two, and two were as

bad as a thousand; besides, these were on opposite sides

of the room.  I could see the dim blur of the windows,

but in my turned-around condition they were exactly

where they ought not to be, and so they only confused me

instead of helping me. 



I started to get up, and knocked down an umbrella;

it made a noise like a pistol-shot when it struck

that hard, slick, carpetless floor; I grated my teeth

and held my breath--Harris did not stir.  I set the

umbrella slowly and carefully on end against the wall,

but as soon as I took my hand away, its heel slipped

from under it, and down it came again with another bang. 

I shrunk together and listened a moment in silent fury--

no harm done, everything quiet.  With the most painstaking

care and nicety, I stood the umbrella up once more,

took my hand away, and down it came again. 



I have been strictly reared, but if it had not been

so dark and solemn and awful there in that lonely,

vast room, I do believe I should have said something

then which could not be put into a Sunday-school book

without injuring the sale of it.  If my reasoning powers

had not been already sapped dry by my harassments,

I would have known better than to try to set an umbrella

on end on one of those glassy German floors in the dark;

it can't be done in the daytime without four failures

to one success.  I had one comfort, though--Harris was

yet still and silent--he had not stirred. 



The umbrella could not locate me--there were four

standing around the room, and all alike.  I thought I

would feel along the wall and find the door in that way. 

I rose up and began this operation, but raked down

a picture.  It was not a large one, but it made noise

enough for a panorama.  Harris gave out no sound, but I

felt that if I experimented any further with the pictures

I should be sure to wake him.  Better give up trying to

get out.  Yes, I would find King Arthur's Round Table once

more--I had already found it several times--and use it

for a base of departure on an exploring tour for my bed;

if I could find my bed I could then find my water pitcher;

I would quench my raging thirst and turn in.  So I started

on my hands and knees, because I could go faster that way,

and with more confidence, too, and not knock down things. 

By and by I found the table--with my head--rubbed the

bruise a little, then rose up and started, with hands

abroad and fingers spread, to balance myself.  I found

a chair; then a wall; then another chair; then a sofa;

then an alpenstock, then another sofa; this confounded me,

for I had thought there was only one sofa.  I hunted

up the table again and took a fresh start; found some

more chairs. 



It occurred to me, now, as it ought to have done before,

that as the table was round, it was therefore of no

value as a base to aim from; so I moved off once more,

and at random among the wilderness of chairs and sofas--

wandering off into unfamiliar regions, and presently knocked

a candlestick and knocked off a lamp, grabbed at the lamp

and knocked off a water pitcher with a rattling crash,

and thought to myself, "I've found you at last--I

judged I was close upon you." Harris shouted "murder,"

and "thieves," and finished with "I'm absolutely drowned."



The crash had roused the house.  Mr. X pranced in,

in his long night-garment, with a candle, young Z after him

with another candle; a procession swept in at another door,

with candles and lanterns--landlord and two German guests

in their nightgowns and a chambermaid in hers. 



I looked around; I was at Harris's bed, a Sabbath-day's

journey from my own.  There was only one sofa; it was against

the wall; there was only one chair where a body could get

at it--I had been revolving around it like a planet,

and colliding with it like a comet half the night. 



I explained how I had been employing myself, and why. 

Then the landlord's party left, and the rest of us set

about our preparations for breakfast, for the dawn was

ready to break.  I glanced furtively at my pedometer,

and found I had made 47 miles.  But I did not care, for I

had come out for a pedestrian tour anyway. 

