




CHAPTER XVII

[Why Germans Wear Spectacles]



A mile or two above Eberbach we saw a peculiar ruin projecting

above the foliage which clothed the peak of a high and

very steep hill.  This ruin consisted of merely a couple

of crumbling masses of masonry which bore a rude resemblance

to human faces; they leaned forward and touched foreheads,

and had the look of being absorbed in conversation.  This ruin

had nothing very imposing or picturesque about it, and there

was no great deal of it, yet it was called the "Spectacular

Ruin."



LEGEND OF THE "SPECTACULAR RUIN"



The captain of the raft, who was as full of history as he

could stick, said that in the Middle Ages a most prodigious

fire-breathing dragon used to live in that region,

and made more trouble than a tax-collector. He was as long

as a railway-train, and had the customary impenetrable

green scales all over him.  His breath bred pestilence

and conflagration, and his appetite bred famine.  He ate

men and cattle impartially, and was exceedingly unpopular. 

The German emperor of that day made the usual offer:

he would grant to the destroyer of the dragon, any one

solitary thing he might ask for; for he had a surplusage

of daughters, and it was customary for dragon-killers

to take a daughter for pay. 



So the most renowned knights came from the four corners

of the earth and retired down the dragon's throat one after

the other.  A panic arose and spread.  Heroes grew cautious. 

The procession ceased.  The dragon became more destructive

than ever.  The people lost all hope of succor, and fled

to the mountains for refuge. 



At last Sir Wissenschaft, a poor and obscure knight,

out of a far country, arrived to do battle with the monster. 

A pitiable object he was, with his armor hanging in rags

about him, and his strange-shaped knapsack strapped

upon his back.  Everybody turned up their noses at him,

and some openly jeered him.  But he was calm.  He simply

inquired if the emperor's offer was still in force. 

The emperor said it was--but charitably advised him to go

and hunt hares and not endanger so precious a life as his

in an attempt which had brought death to so many of the

world's most illustrious heroes. 



But this tramp only asked--"Were any of these heroes

men of science?" This raised a laugh, of course,

for science was despised in those days.  But the tramp

was not in the least ruffled.  He said he might be a

little in advance of his age, but no matter--science

would come to be honored, some time or other.  He said

he would march against the dragon in the morning. 

Out of compassion, then, a decent spear was offered him,

but he declined, and said, "spears were useless to men

of science." They allowed him to sup in the servants'

hall, and gave him a bed in the stables. 



When he started forth in the morning, thousands were

gathered to see.  The emperor said:



"Do not be rash, take a spear, and leave off your knapsack."



But the tramp said:



"It is not a knapsack," and moved straight on. 



The dragon was waiting and ready.  He was breathing forth

vast volumes of sulphurous smoke and lurid blasts of flame. 

The ragged knight stole warily to a good position,

then he unslung his cylindrical knapsack--which was simply

the common fire-extinguisher known to modern times--

and the first chance he got he turned on his hose and shot

the dragon square in the center of his cavernous mouth. 

Out went the fires in an instant, and the dragon curled up

and died. 



This man had brought brains to his aid.  He had reared

dragons from the egg, in his laboratory, he had watched

over them like a mother, and patiently studied them

and experimented upon them while they grew.  Thus he had

found out that fire was the life principle of a dragon;

put out the dragon's fires and it could make steam

no longer, and must die.  He could not put out a fire

with a spear, therefore he invented the extinguisher. 

The dragon being dead, the emperor fell on the hero's neck

and said:



"Deliverer, name your request," at the same time beckoning

out behind with his heel for a detachment of his daughters

to form and advance.  But the tramp gave them no observance. 

He simply said:



"My request is, that upon me be conferred the monopoly

of the manufacture and sale of spectacles in Germany."



The emperor sprang aside and exclaimed:



"This transcends all the impudence I ever heard! A

modest demand, by my halidome! Why didn't you ask

for the imperial revenues at once, and be done with it?"



But the monarch had given his word, and he kept it. 

To everybody's surprise, the unselfish monopolist immediately

reduced the price of spectacles to such a degree that a

great and crushing burden was removed from the nation. 

The emperor, to commemorate this generous act, and to

testify his appreciation of it, issued a decree commanding

everybody to buy this benefactor's spectacles and wear them,

whether they needed them or not. 



So originated the wide-spread custom of wearing

spectacles in Germany; and as a custom once established

in these old lands is imperishable, this one remains

universal in the empire to this day.  Such is the legend

of the monopolist's once stately and sumptuous castle,

now called the "Spectacular Ruin."



On the right bank, two or three miles below the Spectacular

Ruin, we passed by a noble pile of castellated buildings

overlooking the water from the crest of a lofty elevation. 

A stretch of two hundred yards of the high front wall

was heavily draped with ivy, and out of the mass of

buildings within rose three picturesque old towers. 

The place was in fine order, and was inhabited by a

family of princely rank.  This castle had its legend,

too, but I should not feel justified in repeating

it because I doubted the truth of some of its minor details. 



Along in this region a multitude of Italian laborers

were blasting away the frontage of the hills to make

room for the new railway.  They were fifty or a hundred

feet above the river.  As we turned a sharp corner they

began to wave signals and shout warnings to us to look

out for the explosions.  It was all very well to warn us,

but what could WE do? You can't back a raft upstream,

you can't hurry it downstream, you can't scatter out

to one side when you haven't any room to speak of,

you won't take to the perpendicular cliffs on the other

shore when they appear to be blasting there, too. 

Your resources are limited, you see.  There is simply

nothing for it but to watch and pray. 



For some hours we had been making three and a half or four

miles an hour and we were still making that.  We had been

dancing right along until those men began to shout;

then for the next ten minutes it seemed to me that I had

never seen a raft go so slowly.  When the first blast went

off we raised our sun-umbrellas and waited for the result. 

No harm done; none of the stones fell in the water. 

Another blast followed, and another and another. 

Some of the rubbish fell in the water just astern

of us. 



We ran that whole battery of nine blasts in a row, and it

was certainly one of the most exciting and uncomfortable

weeks I ever spent, either aship or ashore.  Of course

we frequently manned the poles and shoved earnestly

for a second or so, but every time one of those spurts

of dust and debris shot aloft every man dropped his pole

and looked up to get the bearings of his share of it. 

It was very busy times along there for a while. 

It appeared certain that we must perish, but even that was

not the bitterest thought; no, the abjectly unheroic nature

of the death--that was the sting--that and the bizarre

wording of the resulting obituary: "SHOT WITH A ROCK,

ON A RAFT." There would be no poetry written about it. 

None COULD be written about it.  Example:



NOT by war's shock, or war's shaft,--SHOT, with a rock,

on a raft. 



No poet who valued his reputation would touch such a

theme as that.  I should be distinguished as the only

"distinguished dead" who went down to the grave unsonneted,

in 1878. 



But we escaped, and I have never regretted it. 

The last blast was peculiarly strong one, and after

the small rubbish was done raining around us and we

were just going to shake hands over our deliverance,

a later and larger stone came down amongst our little

group of pedestrians and wrecked an umbrella.  It did

no other harm, but we took to the water just the same. 



It seems that the heavy work in the quarries and the

new railway gradings is done mainly by Italians. 

That was a revelation.  We have the notion in our country

that Italians never do heavy work at all, but confine

themselves to the lighter arts, like organ-grinding,

operatic singing, and assassination.  We have blundered,

that is plain. 



All along the river, near every village, we saw little

station-houses for the future railway.  They were

finished and waiting for the rails and business. 

They were as trim and snug and pretty as they could be. 

They were always of brick or stone; they were of graceful

shape, they had vines and flowers about them already,

and around them the grass was bright and green,

and showed that it was carefully looked after.  They were

a decoration to the beautiful landscape, not an offense. 

Wherever one saw a pile of gravel or a pile of broken stone,

it was always heaped as trimly and exactly as a new grave

or a stack of cannon-balls; nothing about those stations

or along the railroad or the wagon-road was allowed

to look shabby or be unornamental.  The keeping a country

in such beautiful order as Germany exhibits, has a wise

practical side to it, too, for it keeps thousands of people

in work and bread who would otherwise be idle and mischievous. 



As the night shut down, the captain wanted to tie up,

but I thought maybe we might make Hirschhorn, so we went on. 

Presently the sky became overcast, and the captain came

aft looking uneasy.  He cast his eye aloft, then shook

his head, and said it was coming on to blow.  My party

wanted to land at once--therefore I wanted to go on. 

The captain said we ought to shorten sail anyway,

out of common prudence.  Consequently, the larboard watch

was ordered to lay in his pole.  It grew quite dark,

now, and the wind began to rise.  It wailed through

the swaying branches of the trees, and swept our decks

in fitful gusts.  Things were taking on an ugly look. 

The captain shouted to the steersman on the forward

log:



"How's she landing?"



The answer came faint and hoarse from far forward:



"Nor'-east-and-by-nor'--east-by-east, half-east, sir."



"Let her go off a point!"



"Aye-aye, sir!"



"What water have you got?"



"Shoal, sir.  Two foot large, on the stabboard,

two and a half scant on the labboard!"



"Let her go off another point!"



"Aye-aye, sir!"



"Forward, men, all of you! Lively, now! Stand by to crowd

her round the weather corner!"



"Aye-aye, sir!"



Then followed a wild running and trampling and hoarse shouting,

but the forms of the men were lost in the darkness and

the sounds were distorted and confused by the roaring

of the wind through the shingle-bundles. By this time

the sea was running inches high, and threatening every

moment to engulf the frail bark.  Now came the mate,

hurrying aft, and said, close to the captain's ear,

in a low, agitated voice:



"Prepare for the worst, sir--we have sprung a leak!"



"Heavens! where?"



"Right aft the second row of logs."



"Nothing but a miracle can save us! Don't let the men know,

or there will be a panic and mutiny! Lay her in shore

and stand by to jump with the stern-line the moment

she touches.  Gentlemen, I must look to you to second

my endeavors in this hour of peril.  You have hats--go

forward and bail for your lives!"



Down swept another mighty blast of wind, clothed in

spray and thick darkness.  At such a moment as this,

came from away forward that most appalling of all cries

that are ever heard at sea:



"MAN OVERBOARD!"



The captain shouted:



"Hard a-port! Never mind the man! Let him climb aboard

or wade ashore!"



Another cry came down the wind:



"Breakers ahead!"



"Where away?"



"Not a log's length off her port fore-foot!"



We had groped our slippery way forward, and were now

bailing with the frenzy of despair, when we heard

the mate's terrified cry, from far aft:



"Stop that dashed bailing, or we shall be aground!"



But this was immediately followed by the glad shout:



"Land aboard the starboard transom!"



"Saved!" cried the captain.  "Jump ashore and take a turn

around a tree and pass the bight aboard!"



The next moment we were all on shore weeping and embracing

for joy, while the rain poured down in torrents. 

The captain said he had been a mariner for forty years

on the Neckar, and in that time had seen storms to make

a man's cheek blanch and his pulses stop, but he had never,

never seen a storm that even approached this one. 

How familiar that sounded! For I have been at sea a good

deal and have heard that remark from captains with a

frequency accordingly. 



We framed in our minds the usual resolution of thanks

and admiration and gratitude, and took the first

opportunity to vote it, and put it in writing and

present it to the captain, with the customary speech. 

We tramped through the darkness and the drenching summer

rain full three miles, and reached "The Naturalist Tavern"

in the village of Hirschhorn just an hour before midnight,

almost exhausted from hardship, fatigue, and terror. 

I can never forget that night. 



The landlord was rich, and therefore could afford to be

crusty and disobliging; he did not at all like being

turned out of his warm bed to open his house for us. 

But no matter, his household got up and cooked a quick

supper for us, and we brewed a hot punch for ourselves,

to keep off consumption.  After supper and punch we

had an hour's soothing smoke while we fought the naval

battle over again and voted the resolutions; then we

retired to exceedingly neat and pretty chambers upstairs

that had clean, comfortable beds in them with heirloom

pillowcases most elaborately and tastefully embroidered

by hand. 



Such rooms and beds and embroidered linen are as frequent

in German village inns as they are rare in ours. 

Our villages are superior to German villages in

more merits, excellences, conveniences, and privileges

than I can enumerate, but the hotels do not belong in the list. 



"The Naturalist Tavern" was not a meaningless name; for all

the halls and all the rooms were lined with large glass

cases which were filled with all sorts of birds and animals,

glass-eyed, ably stuffed, and set up in the most natural

eloquent and dramatic attitudes.  The moment we were abed,

the rain cleared away and the moon came out.  I dozed off

to sleep while contemplating a great white stuffed owl

which was looking intently down on me from a high perch

with the air of a person who thought he had met me before,

but could not make out for certain. 



But young Z did not get off so easily.  He said that as he was

sinking deliciously to sleep, the moon lifted away the shadows

and developed a huge cat, on a bracket, dead and stuffed,

but crouching, with every muscle tense, for a spring,

and with its glittering glass eyes aimed straight at him. 

It made Z uncomfortable.  He tried closing his own eyes,

but that did not answer, for a natural instinct kept

making him open them again to see if the cat was still

getting ready to launch at him--which she always was. 

He tried turning his back, but that was a failure;

he knew the sinister eyes were on him still.  So at

last he had to get up, after an hour or two of worry

and experiment, and set the cat out in the hall.  So he won,

that time. 

