




CHAPTER XX

[My Precious, Priceless Tear-Jug]



Next morning brought good news--our trunks had arrived

from Hamburg at last.  Let this be a warning to the reader. 

The Germans are very conscientious, and this trait makes

them very particular.  Therefore if you tell a German you

want a thing done immediately, he takes you at your word;

he thinks you mean what you say; so he does that thing

immediately--according to his idea of immediately--

which is about a week; that is, it is a week if it refers

to the building of a garment, or it is an hour and a half

if it refers to the cooking of a trout.  Very well; if you

tell a German to send your trunk to you by "slow freight,"

he takes you at your word; he sends it by "slow freight,"

and you cannot imagine how long you will go on enlarging

your admiration of the expressiveness of that phrase

in the German tongue, before you get that trunk. 

The hair on my trunk was soft and thick and youthful,

when I got it ready for shipment in Hamburg; it was baldheaded

when it reached Heidelberg.  However, it was still sound,

that was a comfort, it was not battered in the least;

the baggagemen seemed to be conscientiously careful,

in Germany, of the baggage entrusted to their hands. 

There was nothing now in the way of our departure, therefore we

set about our preparations. 



Naturally my chief solicitude was about my collection

of Ceramics.  Of course I could not take it with me,

that would be inconvenient, and dangerous besides. 

I took advice, but the best brick-a-brackers were divided

as to the wisest course to pursue; some said pack the

collection and warehouse it; others said try to get it

into the Grand Ducal Museum at Mannheim for safe keeping. 

So I divided the collection, and followed the advice of

both parties.  I set aside, for the Museum, those articles

which were the most frail and precious. 



Among these was my Etruscan tear-jug. I have made a little

sketch of it here; [Figure 6] that thing creeping up

the side is not a bug, it is a hole.  I bought this

tear-jug of a dealer in antiquities for four hundred

and fifty dollars.  It is very rare.  The man said the

Etruscans used to keep tears or something in these things,

and that it was very hard to get hold of a broken one, now. 

I also set aside my Henri II.  plate.  See sketch

from my pencil; [Figure 7] it is in the main correct,

though I think I have foreshortened one end of it a little

too much, perhaps.  This is very fine and rare; the shape

is exceedingly beautiful and unusual.  It has wonderful

decorations on it, but I am not able to reproduce them. 

It cost more than the tear-jug, as the dealer said

there was not another plate just like it in the world. 

He said there was much false Henri II ware around,

but that the genuineness of this piece was unquestionable. 

He showed me its pedigree, or its history, if you please;

it was a document which traced this plate's movements

all the way down from its birth--showed who bought it,

from whom, and what he paid for it--from the first buyer

down to me, whereby I saw that it had gone steadily up

from thirty-five cents to seven hundred dollars.  He said

that the whole Ceramic world would be informed that it

was now in my possession and would make a note of it,

with the price paid.  [Figure 8]



There were Masters in those days, but, alas--it is not so now. 

Of course the main preciousness of this piece lies in its color;

it is that old sensuous, pervading, ramifying, interpolating,

transboreal blue which is the despair of modern art. 

The little sketch which I have made of this gem cannot

and does not do it justice, since I have been obliged

to leave out the color.  But I've got the expression, though. 



However, I must not be frittering away the reader's time

with these details.  I did not intend to go into any

detail at all, at first, but it is the failing of the

true ceramiker, or the true devotee in any department

of brick-a-brackery, that once he gets his tongue or his

pen started on his darling theme, he cannot well stop

until he drops from exhaustion.  He has no more sense

of the flight of time than has any other lover when talking

of his sweetheart.  The very "marks" on the bottom

of a piece of rare crockery are able to throw me into

a gibbering ecstasy; and I could forsake a drowning

relative to help dispute about whether the stopple

of a departed Buon Retiro scent-bottle was genuine or spurious. 



Many people say that for a male person, bric-a-brac hunting

is about as robust a business as making doll-clothes,

or decorating Japanese pots with decalcomanie butterflies

would be, and these people fling mud at the elegant Englishman,

Byng, who wrote a book called THE BRIC-A-BRAC HUNTER,

and make fun of him for chasing around after what they choose

to call "his despicable trifles"; and for "gushing" over

these trifles; and for exhibiting his "deep infantile delight"

in what they call his "tuppenny collection of beggarly

trivialities"; and for beginning his book with a picture

of himself seated, in a "sappy, self-complacent attitude,

in the midst of his poor little ridiculous bric-a-brac junk

shop."



It is easy to say these things; it is easy to revile us,

easy to despise us; therefore, let these people rail on;

they cannot feel as Byng and I feel--it is their loss,

not ours.  For my part I am content to be a brick-a-bracker

and a ceramiker--more, I am proud to be so named. 

I am proud to know that I lose my reason as immediately

in the presence of a rare jug with an illustrious mark

on the bottom of it, as if I had just emptied that jug. 

Very well; I packed and stored a part of my collection,

and the rest of it I placed in the care of the Grand Ducal

Museum i n Mannheim, by permission.  My Old Blue China

Cat remains there yet.  I presented it to that excellent

institution. 



I had but one misfortune with my things.  An egg which I

had kept back from breakfast that morning, was broken

in packing.  It was a great pity.  I had shown it to the

best connoisseurs in Heidelberg, and they all said it

was an antique.  We spent a day or two in farewell visits,

and then left for Baden-Baden. We had a pleasant

trip to it, for the Rhine valley is always lovely. 

The only trouble was that the trip was too short. 

If I remember rightly it only occupied a couple of hours,

therefore I judge that the distance was very little,

if any, over fifty miles.  We quitted the train at Oos,

and walked the entire remaining distance to Baden-Baden,

with the exception of a lift of less than an hour which we

got on a passing wagon, the weather being exhaustingly warm. 

We came into town on foot. 



One of the first persons we encountered, as we walked

up the street, was the Rev. Mr. ------, an old friend

from America--a lucky encounter, indeed, for his is

a most gentle, refined, and sensitive nature, and his

company and companionship are a genuine refreshment. 

We knew he had been in Europe some time, but were not

at all expecting to run across him.  Both parties burst

forth into loving enthusiasms, and Rev. Mr. ------said:



"I have got a brimful reservoir of talk to pour out

on you, and an empty one ready and thirsting to receive

what you have got; we will sit up till midnight

and have a good satisfying interchange, for I leave

here early in the morning." We agreed to that, of course. 



I had been vaguely conscious, for a while, of a person

who was walking in the street abreast of us; I had glanced

furtively at him once or twice, and noticed that he

was a fine, large, vigorous young fellow, with an open,

independent countenance, faintly shaded with a pale

and even almost imperceptible crop of early down,

and that he was clothed from head to heel in cool and

enviable snow-white linen.  I thought I had also noticed

that his head had a sort of listening tilt to it. 

Now about this time the Rev. Mr. ------said:



"The sidewalk is hardly wide enough for three, so I will

walk behind; but keep the talk going, keep the talk going,

there's no time to lose, and you may be sure I will do

my share." He ranged himself behind us, and straightway that

stately snow-white young fellow closed up to the sidewalk

alongside him, fetched him a cordial slap on the shoulder

with his broad palm, and sung out with a hearty cheeriness:



"AMERICANS for two-and-a-half and the money up! HEY?"



The Reverend winced, but said mildly:



"Yes--we are Americans."



"Lord love you, you can just bet that's what _I_ am,

every time! Put it there!"



He held out his Sahara of his palm, and the Reverend laid

his diminutive hand in it, and got so cordial a shake

that we heard his glove burst under it. 



"Say, didn't I put you up right?"



"Oh, yes."



"Sho! I spotted you for MY kind the minute I heard

your clack.  You been over here long?"



"About four months.  Have you been over long?"



"LONG? Well, I should say so! Going on two YEARS,

by geeminy! Say, are you homesick?"



"No, I can't say that I am.  Are you?"



"Oh, HELL, yes!" This with immense enthusiasm. 



The Reverend shrunk a little, in his clothes, and we

were aware, rather by instinct than otherwise, that he

was throwing out signals of distress to us; but we did

not interfere or try to succor him, for we were quite happy. 



The young fellow hooked his arm into the Reverend's, now,

with the confiding and grateful air of a waif who has

been longing for a friend, and a sympathetic ear,

and a chance to lisp once more the sweet accents of the

mother-tongue--and then he limbered up the muscles

of his mouth and turned himself loose--and with such a

relish! Some of his words were not Sunday-school words,

so I am obliged to put blanks where they occur. 



"Yes indeedy! If _I_ ain't an American there AIN'T

any Americans, that's all.  And when I heard you fellows

gassing away in the good old American language, I'm ------

if it wasn't all I could do to keep from hugging you! My

tongue's all warped with trying to curl it around these

------forsaken wind-galled nine-jointed German words here;

now I TELL you it's awful good to lay it over a Christian

word once more and kind of let the old taste soak it. 

I'm from western New York.  My name is Cholley Adams. 

I'm a student, you know.  Been here going on two years. 

I'm learning to be a horse-doctor! I LIKE that part of it,

you know, but ------these people, they won't learn a fellow

in his own language, they make him learn in German; so before

I could tackle the horse-doctoring I had to tackle this

miserable language. 



"First off, I thought it would certainly give me

the botts, but I don't mind now.  I've got it where the

hair's short, I think; and dontchuknow, they made me

learn Latin, too.  Now between you and me, I wouldn't

give a ------for all the Latin that was ever jabbered;

and the first thing _I_ calculate to do when I get through,

is to just sit down and forget it.  'Twon't take me long,

and I don't mind the time, anyway.  And I tell you what!

the difference between school-teaching over yonder and

school-teaching over here--sho! WE don't know anything

about it! Here you're got to peg and peg and peg and there

just ain't any let-up--and what you learn here, you've got

to KNOW, dontchuknow --or else you'll have one of these

------spavined, spectacles, ring-boned, knock-kneed old

professors in your hair.  I've been here long ENOUGH,

and I'm getting blessed tired of it, mind I TELL you. 

The old man wrote me that he was coming over in June,

and said he'd take me home in August, whether I was done

with my education or not, but durn him, he didn't come;

never said why; just sent me a hamper of Sunday-school

books, and told me to be good, and hold on a while. 

I don't take to Sunday-school books, dontchuknow--I

don't hanker after them when I can get pie--but I

READ them, anyway, because whatever the old man tells

me to do, that's the thing that I'm a-going to DO,

or tear something, you know.  I buckled in and read

all those books, because he wanted me to; but that kind

of thing don't excite ME, I like something HEARTY. 

But I'm awful homesick.  I'm homesick from ear-socket

to crupper, and from crupper to hock-joint; but it ain't

any use, I've got to stay here, till the old man drops

the rag and give the word--yes, SIR, right here in this

------country I've got to linger till the old man says

COME!--and you bet your bottom dollar, Johnny, it AIN'T

just as easy as it is for a cat to have twins!"



At the end of this profane and cordial explosion he

fetched a prodigious "WHOOSH!" to relieve his lungs

and make recognition of the heat, and then he straightway

dived into his narrative again for "Johnny's" benefit,

beginning, "Well, ------it ain't any use talking,

some of those old American words DO have a kind

of a bully swing to them; a man can EXPRESS himself

with 'em--a man can get at what he wants to SAY, dontchuknow."



When we reached our hotel and it seemed that he was

about to lose the Reverend, he showed so much sorrow,

and begged so hard and so earnestly that the Reverend's heart

was not hard enough to hold out against the pleadings--

so he went away with the parent-honoring student, like a

right Christian, and took supper with him in his lodgings,

and sat in the surf-beat of his slang and profanity

till near midnight, and then left him--left him pretty

well talked out, but grateful "clear down to his frogs,"

as he expressed it.  The Reverend said it had transpired

during the interview that "Cholley" Adams's father

was an extensive dealer in horses in western New York;

this accounted for Cholley's choice of a profession. 

The Reverend brought away a pretty high opinion of

Cholley as a manly young fellow, with stuff in him for

a useful citizen; he considered him rather a rough gem,

but a gem, nevertheless. 

