




CHAPTER IV

Student Life

[The Laborious Beer King]



The summer semester was in full tide; consequently the

most frequent figure in and about Heidelberg was

the student.  Most of the students were Germans,

of course, but the representatives of foreign lands

were very numerous.  They hailed from every corner

of the globe--for instruction is cheap in Heidelberg,

and so is living, too.  The Anglo-American Club,

composed of British and American students, had twenty-five

members, and there was still much material left to draw from. 



Nine-tenths of the Heidelberg students wore no badge

or uniform; the other tenth wore caps of various colors,

and belonged to social organizations called "corps." There

were five corps, each with a color of its own; there were

white caps, blue caps, and red, yellow, and green ones. 

The famous duel-fighting is confined to the "corps" boys. 

The "KNEIP" seems to be a specialty of theirs, too. 

Kneips are held, now and then, to celebrate great occasions,

like the election of a beer king, for instance. 

The solemnity is simple; the five corps assemble at night,

and at a signal they all fall loading themselves with beer,

out of pint-mugs, as fast as possible, and each man keeps

his own count--usually by laying aside a lucifer match

for each mud he empties.  The election is soon decided. 

When the candidates can hold no more, a count is instituted

and the one who has drank the greatest number of pints is

proclaimed king.  I was told that the last beer king elected

by the corps--or by his own capabilities--emptied his mug

seventy-five times.  No stomach could hold all that quantity

at one time, of course--but there are ways of frequently

creating a vacuum, which those who have been much at sea

will understand. 



One sees so many students abroad at all hours, that he

presently begins to wonder if they ever have any

working-hours. Some of them have, some of them haven't.

Each can choose for himself whether he will work or play;

for German university life is a very free life;

it seems to have no restraints.  The student does not live

in the college buildings, but hires his own lodgings,

in any locality he prefers, and he takes his meals when

and where he pleases.  He goes to bed when it suits him,

and does not get up at all unless he wants to. 

He is not entered at the university for any particular

length of time; so he is likely to change about. 

He passes no examinations upon entering college. 

He merely pays a trifling fee of five or ten dollars,

receives a card entitling him to the privileges of

the university, and that is the end of it.  He is now ready

for business--or play, as he shall prefer.  If he elects

to work, he finds a large list of lectures to choose from. 

He selects the subjects which he will study, and enters

his name for these studies; but he can skip attendance. 



The result of this system is, that lecture-courses upon

specialties of an unusual nature are often delivered

to very slim audiences, while those upon more practical

and every-day matters of education are delivered to very

large ones.  I heard of one case where, day after day,

the lecturer's audience consisted of three students--and always

the same three.  But one day two of them remained away. 

The lecturer began as usual --



"Gentlemen," --then, without a smile, he corrected himself,

saying --



"Sir," --and went on with his discourse. 



It is said that the vast majority of the Heidelberg students

are hard workers, and make the most of their opportunities;

that they have no surplus means to spend in dissipation,

and no time to spare for frolicking.  One lecture follows

right on the heels of another, with very little time

for the student to get out of one hall and into the next;

but the industrious ones manage it by going on a trot. 

The professors assist them in the saving of their time

by being promptly in their little boxed-up pulpits when the

hours strike, and as promptly out again when the hour finishes. 

I entered an empty lecture-room one day just before the

clock struck.  The place had simple, unpainted pine desks

and benches for about two hundred persons. 



About a minute before the clock struck, a hundred

and fifty students swarmed in, rushed to their seats,

immediately spread open their notebooks and dipped their

pens in ink.  When the clock began to strike, a burly

professor entered, was received with a round of applause,

moved swiftly down the center aisle, said "Gentlemen,"

and began to talk as he climbed his pulpit steps; and by

the time he had arrived in his box and faced his audience,

his lecture was well under way and all the pens were going. 

He had no notes, he talked with prodigious rapidity and

energy for an hour--then the students began to remind

him in certain well-understood ways that his time was up;

he seized his hat, still talking, proceeded swiftly down

his pulpit steps, got out the last word of his discourse

as he struck the floor; everybody rose respectfully,

and he swept rapidly down the aisle and disappeared. 

An instant rush for some other lecture-room followed,

and in a minute I was alone with the empty benches

once more. 



Yes, without doubt, idle students are not the rule. 

Out of eight hundred in the town, I knew the faces of only

about fifty; but these I saw everywhere, and daily. 

They walked about the streets and the wooded hills,

they drove in cabs, they boated on the river, they sipped

beer and coffee, afternoons, in the Schloss gardens. 

A good many of them wore colored caps of the corps. 

They were finely and fashionably dressed, their manners

were quite superb, and they led an easy, careless,

comfortable life.  If a dozen of them sat together and a lady

or a gentleman passed whom one of them knew and saluted,

they all rose to their feet and took off their caps. 

The members of a corps always received a fellow-member

in this way, too; but they paid no attention to members

of other corps; they did not seem to see them.  This was not

a discourtesy; it was only a part of the elaborate and rigid

corps etiquette. 



There seems to be no chilly distance existing between the

German students and the professor; but, on the contrary,

a companionable intercourse, the opposite of chilliness

and reserve.  When the professor enters a beer-hall

in the evening where students are gathered together,

these rise up and take off their caps, and invite the old

gentleman to sit with them and partake.  He accepts,

and the pleasant talk and the beer flow for an hour or two,

and by and by the professor, properly charged and comfortable,

gives a cordial good night, while the students stand

bowing and uncovered; and then he moves on his happy

way homeward with all his vast cargo of learning afloat

in his hold.  Nobody finds fault or feels outraged;

no harm has been done. 



It seemed to be a part of corps etiquette to keep a dog

or so, too.  I mean a corps dog--the common property of

the organization, like the corps steward or head servant;

then there are other dogs, owned by individuals. 



On a summer afternoon in the Castle gardens, I have

seen six students march solemnly into the grounds,

in single file, each carrying a bright Chinese parasol

and leading a prodigious dog by a string.  It was a very

imposing spectacle.  Sometimes there would be as many

dogs around the pavilion as students; and of all breeds

and of all degrees of beauty and ugliness.  These dogs

had a rather dry time of it; for they were tied to the

benches and had no amusement for an hour or two at a time

except what they could get out of pawing at the gnats,

or trying to sleep and not succeeding.  However, they got

a lump of sugar occasionally--they were fond of that. 



It seemed right and proper that students should indulge in dogs;

but everybody else had them, too--old men and young ones,

old women and nice young ladies.  If there is one spectacle

that is unpleasanter than another, it is that of an

elegantly dressed young lady towing a dog by a string. 

It is said to be the sign and symbol of blighted love. 

It seems to me that some other way of advertising it might

be devised, which would be just as conspicuous and yet

not so trying to the proprieties. 



It would be a mistake to suppose that the easy-going

pleasure-seeking student carries an empty head. 

Just the contrary.  He has spent nine years in the gymnasium,

under a system which allowed him no freedom, but vigorously

compelled him to work like a slave.  Consequently, he has

left the gymnasium with an education which is so extensive

and complete, that the most a university can do for it

is to perfect some of its profounder specialties. 

It is said that when a pupil leaves the gymnasium, he not

only has a comprehensive education, but he KNOWS what he

knows--it is not befogged with uncertainty, it is burnt

into him so that it will stay.  For instance, he does not

merely read and write Greek, but speaks it; the same with

the Latin.  Foreign youth steer clear of the gymnasium;

its rules are too severe.  They go to the university

to put a mansard roof on their whole general education;

but the German student already has his mansard roof, so he

goes there to add a steeple in the nature of some specialty,

such as a particular branch of law, or diseases of the eye,

or special study of the ancient Gothic tongues. 

So this German attends only the lectures which belong

to the chosen branch, and drinks his beer and tows his dog

around and has a general good time the rest of the day. 

He has been in rigid bondage so long that the large liberty

of the university life is just what he needs and likes

and thoroughly appreciates; and as it cannot last forever,

he makes the most of it while it does last, and so lays

up a good rest against the day that must see him put on

the chains once more and enter the slavery of official

or professional life. 

