




CHAPTER XXXVII

[Our Imposing Column Starts Upward]



After I had finished my readings, I was no longer myself;

I was tranced, uplifted, intoxicated, by the almost

incredible perils and adventures I had been following

my authors through, and the triumphs I had been sharing

with them.  I sat silent some time, then turned to Harris

and said:



"My mind is made up."



Something in my tone struck him: and when he glanced

at my eye and read what was written there, his face

paled perceptibly.  He hesitated a moment, then said:



"Speak."



I answered, with perfect calmness:



"I will ascend the Riffelberg."



If I had shot my poor friend he could not have fallen from

his chair more suddenly.  If I had been his father he could

not have pleaded harder to get me to give up my purpose. 

But I turned a deaf ear to all he said.  When he perceived

at last that nothing could alter my determination,

he ceased to urge, and for a while the deep silence was

broken only by his sobs.  I sat in marble resolution,

with my eyes fixed upon vacancy, for in spirit I was already

wrestling with the perils of the mountains, and my friend

sat gazing at me in adoring admiration through his tears. 

At last he threw himself upon me in a loving embrace and

exclaimed in broken tones:



"Your Harris will never desert you.  We will die together."



I cheered the noble fellow with praises, and soon his

fears were forgotten and he was eager for the adventure. 

He wanted to summon the guides at once and leave at

two in the morning, as he supposed the custom was;

but I explained that nobody was looking at that hour;

and that the start in the dark was not usually made from

the village but from the first night's resting-place

on the mountain side.  I said we would leave the village

at 3 or 4 P.M. on the morrow; meantime he could notify

the guides, and also let the public know of the attempt

which we proposed to make. 



I went to bed, but not to sleep.  No man can sleep when he

is about to undertake one of these Alpine exploits. 

I tossed feverishly all night long, and was glad enough

when I heard the clock strike half past eleven and knew it

was time to get up for dinner.  I rose, jaded and rusty,

and went to the noon meal, where I found myself the center

of interest and curiosity; for the news was already abroad. 

It is not easy to eat calmly when you are a lion; but it is

very pleasant, nevertheless. 



As usual, at Zermatt, when a great ascent is about to

be undertaken, everybody, native and foreign, laid aside

his own projects and took up a good position to observe

the start.  The expedition consisted of 198 persons,

including the mules; or 205, including the cows. 

As follows:



CHIEFS OF SERVICE SUBORDINATES



Myself 1 Veterinary Surgeon Mr. Harris 1 Butler 17

Guides 12 Waiters 4 Surgeons 1 Footman 1 Geologist 1

Barber 1 Botanist 1 Head Cook 3 Chaplains 9 Assistants

15 Barkeepers 1 Confectionery Artist 1 Latinist



TRANSPORTATION, ETC. 



27 Porters 3 Coarse Washers and Ironers 44 Mules 1 Fine

ditto 44 Muleteers 7 Cows 2 Milkers



Total, 154 men, 51 animals.  Grand Total, 205. 



RATIONS, ETC.  APPARATUS



16 Cases Hams 25 Spring Mattresses 2 Barrels Flour 2

Hair ditto 22 Barrels Whiskey Bedding for same 1 Barrel

Sugar 2 Mosquito-nets 1 Keg Lemons 29 Tents 2,000 Cigars

Scientific Instruments 1 Barrel Pies 97 Ice-axes 1 Ton

of Pemmican 5 Cases Dynamite 143 Pair Crutches 7 Cans

Nitroglycerin 2 Barrels Arnica 22 40-foot Ladders 1 Bale

of Lint 2 Miles of Rope 27 Kegs Paregoric 154 Umbrellas



It was full four o'clock in the afternoon before my cavalcade

was entirely ready.  At that hour it began to move. 

In point of numbers and spectacular effect, it was the most

imposing expedition that had ever marched from Zermatt. 



I commanded the chief guide to arrange the men and animals

in single file, twelve feet apart, and lash them all

together on a strong rope.  He objected that the first

two miles was a dead level, with plenty of room, and that

the rope was never used except in very dangerous places. 

But I would not listen to that.  My reading had taught

me that many serious accidents had happened in the Alps

simply from not having the people tied up soon enough;

I was not going to add one to the list.  The guide then

obeyed my order. 



When the procession stood at ease, roped together,

and ready to move, I never saw a finer sight.  It was 3,122

feet long--over half a mile; every man and me was on foot,

and had on his green veil and his blue goggles, and his

white rag around his hat, and his coil of rope over one

shoulder and under the other, and his ice-ax in his belt,

and carried his alpenstock in his left hand, his umbrella

(closed) in his right, and his crutches slung at his back. 

The burdens of the pack-mules and the horns of the cows

were decked with the Edelweiss and the Alpine rose. 



I and my agent were the only persons mounted.  We were

in the post of danger in the extreme rear, and tied

securely to five guides apiece.  Our armor-bearers carried

our ice-axes, alpenstocks, and other implements for us. 

We were mounted upon very small donkeys, as a measure

of safety; in time of peril we could straighten our legs

and stand up, and let the donkey walk from under. 

Still, I cannot recommend this sort of animal--at least

for excursions of mere pleasure--because his ears interrupt

the view.  I and my agent possessed the regulation

mountaineering costumes, but concluded to leave them behind. 

Out of respect for the great numbers of tourists of both

sexes who would be assembled in front of the hotels

to see us pass, and also out of respect for the many

tourists whom we expected to encounter on our expedition,

we decided to make the ascent in evening dress. 



We watered the caravan at the cold stream which rushes

down a trough near the end of the village, and soon

afterward left the haunts of civilization behind us. 

About half past five o'clock we arrived at a bridge which

spans the Visp, and after throwing over a detachment to see

if it was safe, the caravan crossed without accident. 

The way now led, by a gentle ascent, carpeted with

fresh green grass, to the church at Winkelmatten. 

Without stopping to examine this edifice, I executed

a flank movement to the right and crossed the bridge

over the Findelenbach, after first testing its strength. 

Here I deployed to the right again, and presently entered

an inviting stretch of meadowland which was unoccupied save

by a couple of deserted huts toward the furthest extremity. 

These meadows offered an excellent camping-place. We

pitched our tents, supped, established a proper grade,

recorded the events of the day, and then went to bed. 



We rose at two in the morning and dressed by candle-light. It

was a dismal and chilly business.  A few stars were shining,

but the general heavens were overcast, and the great shaft

of the Matterhorn was draped in a cable pall of clouds. 

The chief guide advised a delay; he said he feared it

was going to rain.  We waited until nine o'clock, and then

got away in tolerably clear weather. 



Our course led up some terrific steeps, densely wooded with

larches and cedars, and traversed by paths which the rains

had guttered and which were obstructed by loose stones. 

To add to the danger and inconvenience, we were constantly

meeting returning tourists on foot and horseback,

and as constantly being crowded and battered by ascending

tourists who were in a hurry and wanted to get by. 



Our troubles thickened.  About the middle of the afternoon

the seventeen guides called a halt and held a consultation. 

After consulting an hour they said their first suspicion

remained intact--that is to say, they believed they

were lost.  I asked if they did not KNOW it? No, they said,

they COULDN'T absolutely know whether they were lost or not,

because none of them had ever been in that part of the

country before.  They had a strong instinct that they

were lost, but they had no proofs--except that they

did not know where they were.  They had met no tourists

for some time, and they considered that a suspicious sign. 



Plainly we were in an ugly fix.  The guides were naturally

unwilling to go alone and seek a way out of the difficulty;

so we all went together.  For better security we moved

slow and cautiously, for the forest was very dense. 

We did not move up the mountain, but around it, hoping to

strike across the old trail.  Toward nightfall, when we

were about tired out, we came up against a rock as big

as a cottage.  This barrier took all the remaining spirit

out of the men, and a panic of fear and despair ensued. 

They moaned and wept, and said they should never see

their homes and their dear ones again.  Then they began

to upbraid me for bringing them upon this fatal expedition. 

Some even muttered threats against me. 



Clearly it was no time to show weakness.  So I made

a speech in which I said that other Alp-climbers had been

in as perilous a position as this, and yet by courage

and perseverance had escaped.  I promised to stand by them,

I promised to rescue them.  I closed by saying we had plenty

of provisions to maintain us for quite a siege--and did they

suppose Zermatt would allow half a mile of men and mules

to mysteriously disappear during any considerable time,

right above their noses, and make no inquiries? No,

Zermatt would send out searching-expeditions and we should be

saved. 



This speech had a great effect.  The men pitched the tents

with some little show of cheerfulness, and we were snugly

under cover when the night shut down.  I now reaped

the reward of my wisdom in providing one article which is

not mentioned in any book of Alpine adventure but this. 

I refer to the paregoric.  But for that beneficent drug,

would have not one of those men slept a moment during that

fearful night.  But for that gentle persuader they must

have tossed, unsoothed, the night through; for the whiskey

was for me.  Yes, they would have risen in the morning

unfitted for their heavy task.  As it was, everybody slept

but my agent and me--only we and the barkeepers. 

I would not permit myself to sleep at such a time. 

I considered myself responsible for all those lives. 

I meant to be on hand and ready, in case of avalanches

up there, but I did not know it then. 



We watched the weather all through that awful night,

and kept an eye on the barometer, to be prepared for

the least change.  There was not the slightest change

recorded by the instrument, during the whole time. 

Words cannot describe the comfort that that friendly,

hopeful, steadfast thing was to me in that season

of trouble.  It was a defective barometer, and had no hand

but the stationary brass pointer, but I did not know that

until afterward.  If I should be in such a situation again,

I should not wish for any barometer but that one. 



All hands rose at two in the morning and took breakfast,

and as soon as it was light we roped ourselves together

and went at that rock.  For some time we tried the hook-rope

and other means of scaling it, but without success--that is,

without perfect success.  The hook caught once, and Harris

started up it hand over hand, but the hold broke and if

there had not happened to be a chaplain sitting underneath

at the time, Harris would certainly have been crippled. 

As it was, it was the chaplain.  He took to his crutches,

and I ordered the hook-rope to be laid aside. 

It was too dangerous an implement where so many people

are standing around. 



We were puzzled for a while; then somebody thought of

the ladders.  One of these was leaned against the rock,

and the men went up it tied together in couples. 

Another ladder was sent up for use in descending. 

At the end of half an hour everybody was over, and that rock

was conquered.  We gave our first grand shout of triumph. 


But the joy was short-lived, for somebody asked how we were

going to get the animals over. 



This was a serious difficulty; in fact, it was an impossibility. 

The courage of the men began to waver immediately; once more

we were threatened with a panic.  But when the danger

was most imminent, we were saved in a mysterious way. 

A mule which had attracted attention from the beginning

by its disposition to experiment, tried to eat a five-pound

can of nitroglycerin.  This happened right alongside

the rock.  The explosion threw us all to the ground,

and covered us with dirt and debris; it frightened

us extremely, too, for the crash it made was deafening,

and the violence of the shock made the ground tremble. 

However, we were grateful, for the rock was gone. 

Its place was occupied by a new cellar, about thirty

feet across, by fifteen feet deep.  The explosion was

heard as far as Zermatt; and an hour and a half afterward,

many citizens of that town were knocked down and quite

seriously injured by descending portions of mule meat,

frozen solid.  This shows, better than any estimate

in figures, how high the experimenter went. 



We had nothing to do, now, but bridge the cellar and proceed

on our way.  With a cheer the men went at their work. 

I attended to the engineering, myself.  I appointed a strong

detail to cut down trees with ice-axes and trim them for

piers to support the bridge.  This was a slow business,

for ice-axes are not good to cut wood with.  I caused

my piers to be firmly set up in ranks in the cellar,

and upon them I laid six of my forty-foot ladders,

side by side, and laid six more on top of them. 

Upon this bridge I caused a bed of boughs to be spread,

and on top of the boughs a bed of earth six inches deep. 

I stretched ropes upon either side to serve as railings,

and then my bridge was complete.  A train of elephants

could have crossed it in safety and comfort.  By nightfall

the caravan was on the other side and the ladders were

taken up. 



Next morning we went on in good spirits for a while,

though our way was slow and difficult, by reason of the

steep and rocky nature of the ground and the thickness

of the forest; but at last a dull despondency crept into

the men's faces and it was apparent that not only they,

but even the guides, were now convinced that we were lost. 

The fact that we still met no tourists was a circumstance

that was but too significant.  Another thing seemed to

suggest that we were not only lost, but very badly lost;

for there must surely be searching-parties on the road

before this time, yet we had seen no sign of them. 



Demoralization was spreading; something must be done,

and done quickly, too.  Fortunately, I am not unfertile

in expedients.  I contrived one now which commended itself

to all, for it promised well.  I took three-quarters

of a mile of rope and fastened one end of it around

the waist of a guide, and told him to go find the road,

while the caravan waited.  I instructed him to guide himself

back by the rope, in case of failure; in case of success,

he was to give the rope a series of violent jerks,

whereupon the Expedition would go to him at once. 

He departed, and in two minutes had disappeared among

the trees.  I payed out the rope myself, while everybody

watched the crawling thing with eager eyes.  The rope

crept away quite slowly, at times, at other times with

some briskness.  Twice or thrice we seemed to get the signal,

and a shout was just ready to break from the men's lips

when they perceived it was a false alarm.  But at last,

when over half a mile of rope had slidden away, it stopped

gliding and stood absolutely still--one minute--two

minutes--three--while we held our breath and watched. 



Was the guide resting? Was he scanning the country from

some high point? Was he inquiring of a chance mountaineer?

Stop,--had he fainted from excess of fatigue and anxiety?



This thought gave us a shock.  I was in the very first act

of detailing an Expedition to succor him, when the cord

was assailed with a series of such frantic jerks that I

could hardly keep hold of it.  The huzza that went up,

then, was good to hear.  "Saved! saved!" was the word

that rang out, all down the long rank of the caravan. 



We rose up and started at once.  We found the route to be

good enough for a while, but it began to grow difficult,

by and by, and this feature steadily increased.  When we

judged we had gone half a mile, we momently expected

to see the guide; but no, he was not visible anywhere;

neither was he waiting, for the rope was still moving,

consequently he was doing the same.  This argued that he

had not found the road, yet, but was marching to it

with some peasant.  There was nothing for us to do but

plod along--and this we did.  At the end of three hours

we were still plodding.  This was not only mysterious,

but exasperating.  And very fatiguing, too; for we had

tried hard, along at first, to catch up with the guide,

but had only fagged ourselves, in vain; for although he

was traveling slowly he was yet able to go faster than the

hampered caravan over such ground. 



At three in the afternoon we were nearly dead with

exhaustion--and still the rope was slowly gliding out. 

The murmurs against the guide had been growing steadily,

and at last they were become loud and savage. 

A mutiny ensued.  The men refused to proceed.  They declared

that we had been traveling over and over the same ground

all day, in a kind of circle.  They demanded that our

end of the rope be made fast to a tree, so as to halt

the guide until we could overtake him and kill him. 

This was not an unreasonable requirement, so I gave the order. 



As soon as the rope was tied, the Expedition moved

forward with that alacrity which the thirst for

vengeance usually inspires.  But after a tiresome march

of almost half a mile, we came to a hill covered thick

with a crumbly rubbish of stones, and so steep that no

man of us all was now in a condition to climb it. 

Every attempt failed, and ended in crippling somebody. 

Within twenty minutes I had five men on crutches. 

Whenever a climber tried to assist himself by the rope,

it yielded and let him tumble backward.  The frequency

of this result suggested an idea to me.  I ordered

the caravan to 'bout face and form in marching order;

I then made the tow-rope fast to the rear mule, and gave

the command:



"Mark time--by the right flank--forward--march!"



The procession began to move, to the impressive strains

of a battle-chant, and I said to myself, "Now, if the rope

don't break I judge THIS will fetch that guide into the camp."

I watched the rope gliding down the hill, and presently

when I was all fixed for triumph I was confronted

by a bitter disappointment; there was no guide tied

to the rope, it was only a very indignant old black ram. 

The fury of the baffled Expedition exceeded all bounds. 

They even wanted to wreak their unreasoning vengeance on this

innocent dumb brute.  But I stood between them and their prey,

menaced by a bristling wall of ice-axes and alpenstocks,

and proclaimed that there was but one road to this murder,

and it was directly over my corpse.  Even as I spoke I

saw that my doom was sealed, except a miracle supervened

to divert these madmen from their fell purpose.  I see

the sickening wall of weapons now; I see that advancing

host as I saw it then, I see the hate in those cruel eyes;

I remember how I drooped my head upon my breast,

I feel again the sudden earthquake shock in my rear,

administered by the very ram I was sacrificing myself to save;

I hear once more the typhoon of laughter that burst from

the assaulting column as I clove it from van to rear

like a Sepoy shot from a Rodman gun. 



I was saved.  Yes, I was saved, and by the merciful instinct

of ingratitude which nature had planted in the breast

of that treacherous beast.  The grace which eloquence

had failed to work in those men's hearts, had been wrought

by a laugh.  The ram was set free and my life was spared. 



We lived to find out that that guide had deserted us as soon

as he had placed a half-mile between himself and us. 

To avert suspicion, he had judged it best that the line

should continue to move; so he caught that ram, and at

the time that he was sitting on it making the rope fast

to it, we were imagining that he was lying in a swoon,

overcome by fatigue and distress.  When he allowed the ram

to get up it fell to plunging around, trying to rid itself

of the rope, and this was the signal which we had risen

up with glad shouts to obey.  We had followed this ram

round and round in a circle all day--a thing which was

proven by the discovery that we had watered the Expedition

seven times at one and same spring in seven hours. 

As expert a woodman as I am, I had somehow failed to notice

this until my attention was called to it by a hog. 

This hog was always wallowing there, and as he was the

only hog we saw, his frequent repetition, together with

his unvarying similarity to himself, finally caused me

to reflect that he must be the same hog, and this led

me to the deduction that this must be the same spring,

also--which indeed it was. 



I made a note of this curious thing, as showing

in a striking manner the relative difference between

glacial action and the action of the hog.  It is now

a well-established fact that glaciers move; I consider

that my observations go to show, with equal conclusiveness,

that a hog in a spring does not move.  I shall be glad

to receive the opinions of other observers upon this point. 



To return, for an explanatory moment, to that guide,

and then I shall be done with him.  After leaving the ram

tied to the rope, he had wandered at large a while,

and then happened to run across a cow.  Judging that

a cow would naturally know more than a guide, he took

her by the tail, and the result justified his judgment. 

She nibbled her leisurely way downhill till it was near

milking-time, then she struck for home and towed him

into Zermatt. 

