





CHAPTER XXVIII

[The Jodel and Its Native Wilds]



The Rigi-Kulm is an imposing Alpine mass, six thousand

feet high, which stands by itself, and commands a mighty

prospect of blue lakes, green valleys, and snowy mountains--

a compact and magnificent picture three hundred miles

in circumference.  The ascent is made by rail, or horseback,

or on foot, as one may prefer.  I and my agent panoplied

ourselves in walking-costume, one bright morning,

and started down the lake on the steamboat; we got ashore

at the village of Wa"ggis; three-quarters of an hour distant

from Lucerne.  This village is at the foot of the mountain. 



We were soon tramping leisurely up the leafy mule-path,

and then the talk began to flow, as usual.  It was

twelve o'clock noon, and a breezy, cloudless day;

the ascent was gradual, and the glimpses, from under

the curtaining boughs, of blue water, and tiny sailboats,

and beetling cliffs, were as charming as glimpses of dreamland. 

All the circumstances were perfect--and the anticipations,

too, for we should soon be enjoying, for the first time,

that wonderful spectacle, an Alpine sunrise--the object

of our journey.  There was (apparently) no real need

for hurry, for the guide-book made the walking-distance

from Wa"ggis to the summit only three hours and a quarter. 

I say "apparently," because the guide-book had already

fooled us once--about the distance from Allerheiligen

to Oppenau--and for aught I knew it might be getting ready

to fool us again.  We were only certain as to the altitudes--

we calculated to find out for ourselves how many hours

it is from the bottom to the top.  The summit is six

thousand feet above the sea, but only forty-five hundred

feet above the lake.  When we had walked half an hour,

we were fairly into the swing and humor of the undertaking,

so we cleared for action; that is to say, we got a boy whom

we met to carry our alpenstocks and satchels and overcoats

and things for us; that left us free for business. 

I suppose we must have stopped oftener to stretch out

on the grass in the shade and take a bit of a smoke

than this boy was used to, for presently he asked if it

had been our idea to hire him by the job, or by the year?

We told him he could move along if he was in a hurry. 

He said he wasn't in such a very particular hurry,

but he wanted to get to the top while he was young. 

We told him to clear out, then, and leave the things at

the uppermost hotel and say we should be along presently. 

He said he would secure us a hotel if he could, but if they

were all full he would ask them to build another one

and hurry up and get the paint and plaster dry against

we arrived.  Still gently chaffing us, he pushed ahead,

up the trail, and soon disappeared.  By six o'clock we

were pretty high up in the air, and the view of lake

and mountains had greatly grown in breadth and interest. 

We halted awhile at a little public house, where we

had bread and cheese and a quart or two of fresh milk,

out on the porch, with the big panorama all before us--and

then moved on again. 



Ten minutes afterward we met a hot, red-faced man plunging

down the mountain, making mighty strides, swinging his

alpenstock ahead of him, and taking a grip on the ground

with its iron point to support these big strides. 

He stopped, fanned himself with his hat, swabbed the

perspiration from his face and neck with a red handkerchief,

panted a moment or two, and asked how far to Wa"ggis.

I said three hours.  He looked surprised, and said:



"Why, it seems as if I could toss a biscuit into the lake

from here, it's so close by.  Is that an inn, there?"



I said it was. 



"Well," said he, "I can't stand another three hours,

I've had enough today; I'll take a bed there."



I asked:



"Are we nearly to the top?"



"Nearly to the TOP?" Why, bless your soul, you haven't

really started, yet."



I said we would put up at the inn, too.  So we turned

back and ordered a hot supper, and had quite a jolly

evening of it with this Englishman. 



The German landlady gave us neat rooms and nice beds,

and when I and my agent turned in, it was with the resolution

to be up early and make the utmost of our first Alpine sunrise. 

But of course we were dead tired, and slept like policemen;

so when we awoke in the morning and ran to the window it

was already too late, because it was half past eleven. 

It was a sharp disappointment.  However, we ordered

breakfast and told the landlady to call the Englishman,

but she said he was already up and off at daybreak--and

swearing like mad about something or other.  We could not

find out what the matter was.  He had asked the landlady

the altitude of her place above the level of the lake,

and she told him fourteen hundred and ninety-five feet. 

That was all that was said; then he lost his temper. 

He said that between ------fools and guide-books, a man

could acquire ignorance enough in twenty-four hours in a

country like this to last him a year.  Harris believed

our boy had been loading him up with misinformation;

and this was probably the case, for his epithet described

that boy to a dot. 



We got under way about the turn of noon, and pulled out

for the summit again, with a fresh and vigorous step. 

When we had gone about two hundred yards, and stopped

to rest, I glanced to the left while I was lighting my pipe,

and in the distance detected a long worm of black smoke

crawling lazily up the steep mountain.  Of course that was

the locomotive.  We propped ourselves on our elbows at once,

to gaze, for we had never seen a mountain railway yet. 

Presently we could make out the train.  It seemed incredible

that that thing should creep straight up a sharp slant

like the roof of a house--but there it was, and it was doing

that very miracle. 



In the course of a couple hours we reached a fine breezy

altitude where the little shepherd huts had big stones

all over their roofs to hold them down to the earth when

the great storms rage.  The country was wild and rocky

about here, but there were plenty of trees, plenty of moss,

and grass. 



Away off on the opposite shore of the lake we could

see some villages, and now for the first time we could

observe the real difference between their proportions

and those of the giant mountains at whose feet they slept. 

When one is in one of those villages it seems spacious,

and its houses seem high and not out of proportion to the

mountain that overhands them--but from our altitude,

what a change! The mountains were bigger and grander

than ever, as they stood there thinking their solemn

thoughts with their heads in the drifting clouds,

but the villages at their feet--when the painstaking

eye could trace them up and find them--were so reduced,

almost invisible, and lay so flat against the ground,

that the exactest simile I can devise is to compare

them to ant-deposits of granulated dirt overshadowed

by the huge bulk of a cathedral.  The steamboats skimming

along under the stupendous precipices were diminished

by distance to the daintiest little toys, the sailboats

and rowboats to shallops proper for fairies that keep

house in the cups of lilies and ride to court on the backs

of bumblebees. 



Presently we came upon half a dozen sheep nibbling grass

in the spray of a stream of clear water that sprang

from a rock wall a hundred feet high, and all at once

our ears were startled with a melodious "Lul ... 

l ... l l l llul-lul-LAhee-o-o-o!" pealing joyously

from a near but invisible source, and recognized that we

were hearing for the first time the famous Alpine JODEL

in its own native wilds.  And we recognized, also,

that it was that sort of quaint commingling of baritone

and falsetto which at home we call "Tyrolese warbling."



The jodeling (pronounced yOdling--emphasis on the O)

continued, and was very pleasant and inspiriting to hear. 

Now the jodeler appeared--a shepherd boy of sixteen--

and in our gladness and gratitude we gave him a franc

to jodel some more.  So he jodeled and we listened. 

We moved on, presently, and he generously jodeled us

out of sight.  After about fifteen minutes we came across

another shepherd boy who was jodeling, and gave him half

a franc to keep it up.  He also jodeled us out of sight. 

After that, we found a jodeler every ten minutes;

we gave the first one eight cents, the second one

six cents, the third one four, the fourth one a penny,

contributed nothing to Nos.  5, 6, and 7, and during

the remainder of the day hired the rest of the jodelers,

at a franc apiece, not to jodel any more.  There is somewhat

too much of the jodeling in the Alps. 



About the middle of the afternoon we passed through

a prodigious natural gateway called the Felsenthor,

formed by two enormous upright rocks, with a third lying

across the top.  There was a very attractive little

hotel close by, but our energies were not conquered yet,

so we went on. 



Three hours afterward we came to the railway-track. It

was planted straight up the mountain with the slant

of a ladder that leans against a house, and it seemed

to us that man would need good nerves who proposed

to travel up it or down it either. 



During the latter part of the afternoon we cooled our

roasting interiors with ice-cold water from clear streams,

the only really satisfying water we had tasted since we

left home, for at the hotels on the continent they

merely give you a tumbler of ice to soak your water in,

and that only modifies its hotness, doesn't make it cold. 

Water can only be made cold enough for summer comfort by

being prepared in a refrigerator or a closed ice-pitcher.

Europeans say ice-water impairs digestion.  How do they

know?--they never drink any. 



At ten minutes past six we reached the Kaltbad station,

where there is a spacious hotel with great verandas which

command a majestic expanse of lake and mountain scenery. 

We were pretty well fagged out, now, but as we did

not wish to miss the Alpine sunrise, we got through our

dinner as quickly as possible and hurried off to bed. 

It was unspeakably comfortable to stretch our weary limbs

between the cool, damp sheets.  And how we did sleep!--for

there is no opiate like Alpine pedestrianism. 



In the morning we both awoke and leaped out of bed at the

same instant and ran and stripped aside the window-curtains;

but we suffered a bitter disappointment again: it

was already half past three in the afternoon. 



We dressed sullenly and in ill spirits, each accusing

the other of oversleeping.  Harris said if we had brought

the courier along, as we ought to have done, we should

not have missed these sunrises.  I said he knew very well

that one of us would have to sit up and wake the courier;

and I added that we were having trouble enough to take

care of ourselves, on this climb, without having to take

care of a courier besides. 



During breakfast our spirits came up a little, since we

found by this guide-book that in the hotels on the summit

the tourist is not left to trust to luck for his sunrise,

but is roused betimes by a man who goes through the halls

with a great Alpine horn, blowing blasts that would

raise the dead.  And there was another consoling thing:

the guide-book said that up there on the summit the guests

did not wait to dress much, but seized a red bed blanket

and sailed out arrayed like an Indian.  This was good;

this would be romantic; two hundred and fifty people

grouped on the windy summit, with their hair flying and

their red blankets flapping, in the solemn presence of the

coming sun, would be a striking and memorable spectacle. 

So it was good luck, not ill luck, that we had missed

those other sunrises. 



We were informed by the guide-book that we were now

3,228 feet above the level of the lake--therefore

full two-thirds of our journey had been accomplished. 

We got away at a quarter past four, P.M.; a hundred yards

above the hotel the railway divided; one track went

straight up the steep hill, the other one turned square

off to the right, with a very slight grade.  We took

the latter, and followed it more than a mile, turned a

rocky corner, and came in sight of a handsome new hotel. 

If we had gone on, we should have arrived at the summit,

but Harris preferred to ask a lot of questions--as usual,

of a man who didn't know anything--and he told us to go

back and follow the other route.  We did so.  We could ill

afford this loss of time. 



We climbed and climbed; and we kept on climbing; we reached about

forty summits, but there was always another one just ahead. 

It came on to rain, and it rained in dead earnest. 

We were soaked through and it was bitter cold.  Next a

smoky fog of clouds covered the whole region densely,

and we took to the railway-ties to keep from getting lost. 

Sometimes we slopped along in a narrow path on the left-hand

side of the track, but by and by when the fog blew as aside

a little and we saw that we were treading the rampart

of a precipice and that our left elbows were projecting

over a perfectly boundless and bottomless vacancy,

we gasped, and jumped for the ties again. 



The night shut down, dark and drizzly and cold. 

About eight in the evening the fog lifted and showed us

a well-worn path which led up a very steep rise to the left. 

We took it, and as soon as we had got far enough from the

railway to render the finding it again an impossibility,

the fog shut down on us once more. 



We were in a bleak, unsheltered place, now, and had

to trudge right along, in order to keep warm, though we

rather expected to go over a precipice, sooner or later. 

About nine o'clock we made an important discovery--

that we were not in any path.  We groped around a while

on our hands and knees, but we could not find it;

so we sat down in the mud and the wet scant grass to wait. 



We were terrified into this by being suddenly confronted

with a vast body which showed itself vaguely for an instant

and in the next instant was smothered in the fog again. 

It was really the hotel we were after, monstrously magnified

by the fog, but we took it for the face of a precipice,

and decided not to try to claw up it. 



We sat there an hour, with chattering teeth and quivering bodies,

and quarreled over all sorts of trifles, but gave most

of our attention to abusing each other for the stupidity

of deserting the railway-track. We sat with our backs

to the precipice, because what little wind there was

came from that quarter.  At some time or other the fog

thinned a little; we did not know when, for we were facing

the empty universe and the thinness could not show;

but at last Harris happened to look around, and there stood

a huge, dim, spectral hotel where the precipice had been. 

One could faintly discern the windows and chimneys,

and a dull blur of lights.  Our first emotion was deep,

unutterable gratitude, our next was a foolish rage,

born of the suspicion that possibly the hotel had been

visible three-quarters of an hour while we sat there

in those cold puddles quarreling. 



Yes, it was the Rigi-Kulm hotel--the one that occupies

the extreme summit, and whose remote little sparkle

of lights we had often seen glinting high aloft among

the stars from our balcony away down yonder in Lucerne. 

The crusty portier and the crusty clerks gave us the surly

reception which their kind deal out in prosperous times,

but by mollifying them with an extra display of obsequiousness

and servility we finally got them to show us to the room

which our boy had engaged for us. 



We got into some dry clothing, and while our supper was

preparing we loafed forsakenly through a couple of vast

cavernous drawing-rooms, one of which had a stove in it. 

This stove was in a corner, and densely walled around

with people.  We could not get near the fire, so we moved

at large in the artic spaces, among a multitude of people

who sat silent, smileless, forlorn, and shivering--thinking

what fools they were to come, perhaps.  There were some

Americans and some Germans, but one could see that the

great majority were English. 



We lounged into an apartment where there was a great crowd,

to see what was going on.  It was a memento-magazine.

The tourists were eagerly buying all sorts and styles of

paper-cutters, marked "Souvenir of the Rigi," with handles

made of the little curved horn of the ostensible chamois;

there were all manner of wooden goblets and such things,

similarly marked.  I was going to buy a paper-cutter, but I

believed I could remember the cold comfort of the Rigi-Kulm

without it, so I smothered the impulse. 



Supper warmed us, and we went immediately to bed--but first,

as Mr. Baedeker requests all tourists to call his attention

to any errors which they may find in his guide-books, I

dropped him a line to inform him he missed it by just

about three days.  I had previously informed him of his

mistake about the distance from Allerheiligen to Oppenau,

and had also informed the Ordnance Depart of the German

government of the same error in the imperial maps. 

I will add, here, that I never got any answer to those letters,

or any thanks from either of those sources; and, what is still

more discourteous, these corrections have not been made,

either in the maps or the guide-books. But I will write

again when I get time, for my letters may have miscarried. 



We curled up in the clammy beds, and went to sleep without

rocking. 

We were so sodden with fatigue that we never stirred nor

turned over till the blooming blasts of the Alpine horn

aroused us.  It may well be imagined that we did not lose

any time.  We snatched on a few odds and ends of clothing,

cocooned ourselves in the proper red blankets, and plunged

along the halls and out into the whistling wind bareheaded. 

We saw a tall wooden scaffolding on the very peak

of the summit, a hundred yards away, and made for it. 

We rushed up the stairs to the top of this scaffolding,

and stood there, above the vast outlying world, with hair

flying and ruddy blankets waving and cracking in the fierce

breeze. 



"Fifteen minutes too late, at last!" said Harris,

in a vexed voice.  "The sun is clear above the horizon."



"No matter," I said, "it is a most magnificent spectacle,

and we will see it do the rest of its rising anyway."



In a moment we were deeply absorbed in the marvel before us,

and dead to everything else.  The great cloud-barred disk

of the sun stood just above a limitless expanse of tossing

white-caps--so to speak--a billowy chaos of massy mountain

domes and peaks draped in imperishable snow, and flooded

with an opaline glory of changing and dissolving splendors,

while through rifts in a black cloud-bank above the sun,

radiating lances of diamond dust shot to the zenith. 

The cloven valleys of the lower world swam in a tinted

mist which veiled the ruggedness of their crags and ribs

and ragged forests, and turned all the forbidding region

into a soft and rich and sensuous paradise. 



We could not speak.  We could hardly breathe. 

We could only gaze in drunken ecstasy and drink in it. 

Presently Harris exclaimed:



"Why--nation, it's going DOWN!"



Perfectly true.  We had missed the MORNING hornblow,

and slept all day.  This was stupefying. 



Harris said:



"Look here, the sun isn't the spectacle--it's US--stacked

up here on top of this gallows, in these idiotic blankets,

and two hundred and fifty well-dressed men and women down

here gawking up at us and not caring a straw whether the sun

rises or sets, as long as they've got such a ridiculous

spectacle as this to set down in their memorandum-books.

They seem to be laughing their ribs loose, and there's

one girl there at appears to be going all to pieces. 

I never saw such a man as you before.  I think you are

the very last possibility in the way of an ass."



"What have _I_ done?" I answered, with heat. 



"What have you done?" You've got up at half past seven

o'clock in the evening to see the sun rise, that's what

you've done."



"And have you done any better, I'd like to know? I've

always used to get up with the lark, till I came under

the petrifying influence of your turgid intellect."



"YOU used to get up with the lark--Oh, no doubt--

you'll get up with the hangman one of these days. 

But you ought to be ashamed to be jawing here like this,

in a red blanket, on a forty-foot scaffold on top

of the Alps.  And no end of people down here to boot;

this isn't any place for an exhibition of temper."



And so the customary quarrel went on.  When the sun

was fairly down, we slipped back to the hotel in the

charitable gloaming, and went to bed again.  We had

encountered the horn-blower on the way, and he had tried

to collect compensation, not only for announcing the sunset,

which we did see, but for the sunrise, which we had

totally missed; but we said no, we only took our solar

rations on the "European plan"--pay for what you get. 

He promised to make us hear his horn in the morning,

if we were alive. 

