





CHAPTER XXIV

[I Protect the Empress of Germany]



That was a thoroughly satisfactory walk--and the only

one we were ever to have which was all the way downhill. 

We took the train next morning and returned to Baden-Baden

through fearful fogs of dust.  Every seat was crowded, too;

for it was Sunday, and consequently everybody was taking

a "pleasure" excursion.  Hot! the sky was an oven--and

a sound one, too, with no cracks in it to let in any air. 

An odd time for a pleasure excursion, certainly!



Sunday is the great day on the continent--the free day,

the happy day.  One can break the Sabbath in a hundred

ways without committing any sin. 



We do not work on Sunday, because the commandment forbids it;

the Germans do not work on Sunday, because the commandment

forbids it.  We rest on Sunday, because the commandment

requires it; the Germans rest on Sunday because the

commandment requires it.  But in the definition

of the word "rest" lies all the difference.  With us,

its Sunday meaning is, stay in the house and keep still;

with the Germans its Sunday and week-day meanings seem

to be the same--rest the TIRED PART, and never mind the

other parts of the frame; rest the tired part, and use

the means best calculated to rest that particular part. 

Thus: If one's duties have kept him in the house all the week,

it will rest him to be out on Sunday; if his duties

have required him to read weighty and serious matter all

the week, it will rest him to read light matter on Sunday;

if his occupation has busied him with death and funerals

all the week, it will rest him to go to the theater Sunday

night and put in two or three hours laughing at a comedy;

if he is tired with digging ditches or felling trees

all the week, it will rest him to lie quiet in the house

on Sunday; if the hand, the arm, the brain, the tongue,

or any other member, is fatigued with inanition,

it is not to be rested by added a day's inanition;

but if a member is fatigued with exertion, inanition is

the right rest for it.  Such is the way in which the Germans

seem to define the word "rest"; that is to say, they rest

a member by recreating, recuperating, restore its forces. 

But our definition is less broad.  We all rest alike

on Sunday--by secluding ourselves and keeping still,

whether that is the surest way to rest the most of us

or not.  The Germans make the actors, the preachers,

etc., work on Sunday.  We encourage the preachers,

the editors, the printers, etc., to work on Sunday,

and imagine that none of the sin of it falls upon us;

but I do not know how we are going to get around the fact

that if it is wrong for the printer to work at his trade

on Sunday it must be equally wrong for the preacher to

work at his, since the commandment has made no exception

in his favor.  We buy Monday morning's paper and read it,

and thus encourage Sunday printing.  But I shall never do

it again. 



The Germans remember the Sabbath-day to keep it holy,

by abstaining from work, as commanded; we keep it

holy by abstaining from work, as commanded, and by

also abstaining from play, which is not commanded. 

Perhaps we constructively BREAK the command to rest,

because the resting we do is in most cases only a name,

and not a fact. 



These reasonings have sufficed, in a measure, to mend

the rent in my conscience which I made by traveling to

Baden-Baden that Sunday.  We arrived in time to furbish

up and get to the English church before services began. 

We arrived in considerable style, too, for the landlord

had ordered the first carriage that could be found,

since there was no time to lose, and our coachman was

so splendidly liveried that we were probably mistaken

for a brace of stray dukes; why else were we honored

with a pew all to ourselves, away up among the very elect

at the left of the chancel? That was my first thought. 

In the pew directly in front of us sat an elderly lady,

plainly and cheaply dressed; at her side sat a young

lady with a very sweet face, and she also was quite

simply dressed; but around us and about us were clothes

and jewels which it would do anybody's heart good to

worship in. 



I thought it was pretty manifest that the elderly lady

was embarrassed at finding herself in such a conspicuous

place arrayed in such cheap apparel; I began to feel sorry

for her and troubled about her.  She tried to seem very busy

with her prayer-book and her responses, and unconscious

that she was out of place, but I said to myself, "She is

not succeeding--there is a distressed tremulousness

in her voice which betrays increasing embarrassment."

Presently the Savior's name was mentioned, and in her flurry

she lost her head completely, and rose and courtesied,

instead of making a slight nod as everybody else did. 

The sympathetic blood surged to my temples and I turned and gave

those fine birds what I intended to be a beseeching look,

but my feelings got the better of me and changed it into

a look which said, "If any of you pets of fortune laugh

at this poor soul, you will deserve to be flayed for it."

Things went from bad to worse, and I shortly found myself

mentally taking the unfriended lady under my protection. 

My mind was wholly upon her.  I forgot all about the sermon. 

Her embarrassment took stronger and stronger hold upon her;

she got to snapping the lid of her smelling-bottle--it

made a loud, sharp sound, but in her trouble she snapped

and snapped away, unconscious of what she was doing. 

The last extremity was reached when the collection-plate

began its rounds; the moderate people threw in pennies,

the nobles and the rich contributed silver, but she laid

a twenty-mark gold piece upon the book-rest before her

with a sounding slap! I said to myself, "She has parted

with all her little hoard to buy the consideration of these

unpitying people--it is a sorrowful spectacle." I did not

venture to look around this time; but as the service closed,

I said to myself, "Let them laugh, it is their opportunity;

but at the door of this church they shall see her step

into our fine carriage with us, and our gaudy coachman

shall drive her home."



Then she rose--and all the congregation stood while she

walked down the aisle.  She was the Empress of Germany!



No--she had not been so much embarrassed as I had supposed. 

My imagination had got started on the wrong scent, and that

is always hopeless; one is sure, then, to go straight

on misinterpreting everything, clear through to the end. 

The young lady with her imperial Majesty was a maid of

honor--and I had been taking her for one of her boarders,

all the time. 



This is the only time I have ever had an Empress under

my personal protection; and considering my inexperience,

I wonder I got through with it so well.  I should have

been a little embarrassed myself if I had known earlier

what sort of a contract I had on my hands. 



We found that the Empress had been in Baden-Baden

several days.  It is said that she never attends

any but the English form of church service. 



I lay abed and read and rested from my journey's fatigues

the remainder of that Sunday, but I sent my agent to represent

me at the afternoon service, for I never allow anything

to interfere with my habit of attending church twice every

Sunday. 



There was a vast crowd in the public grounds that night

to hear the band play the "Fremersberg." This piece tells

one of the old legends of the region; how a great noble

of the Middle Ages got lost in the mountains, and wandered

about with his dogs in a violent storm, until at last

the faint tones of a monastery bell, calling the monks

to a midnight service, caught his ear, and he followed

the direction the sounds came from and was saved. 

A beautiful air ran through the music, without ceasing,

sometimes loud and strong, sometimes so soft that it

could hardly be distinguished--but it was always there;

it swung grandly along through the shrill whistling

of the storm-wind, the rattling patter of the rain,

and the boom and crash of the thunder; it wound soft

and low through the lesser sounds, the distant ones,

such as the throbbing of the convent bell, the melodious

winding of the hunter's horn, the distressed bayings

of his dogs, and the solemn chanting of the monks;

it rose again, with a jubilant ring, and mingled itself

with the country songs and dances of the peasants assembled

in the convent hall to cheer up the rescued huntsman

while he ate his supper.  The instruments imitated all

these sounds with a marvelous exactness.  More than one

man started to raise his umbrella when the storm burst

forth and the sheets of mimic rain came driving by;

it was hardly possible to keep from putting your hand

to your hat when the fierce wind began to rage and shriek;

and it was NOT possible to refrain from starting when

those sudden and charmingly real thunder-crashes were

let loose. 



I suppose the "Fremersberg" is a very low-grade music;

I know, indeed, that it MUST be low-grade music, because it

delighted me, warmed me, moved me, stirred me, uplifted me,

enraptured me, that I was full of cry all the time,

and mad with enthusiasm.  My soul had never had such a

scouring out since I was born.  The solemn and majestic

chanting of the monks was not done by instruments,

but by men's voices; and it rose and fell, and rose again

in that rich confusion of warring sounds, and pulsing bells,

and the stately swing of that ever-present enchanting air,

and it seemed to me that nothing but the very lowest

of low-grade music COULD be so divinely beautiful. 

The great crowd which the "Fremersberg" had called out was

another evidence that it was low-grade music; for only

the few are educated up to a point where high-grade music

gives pleasure.  I have never heard enough classic music

to be able to enjoy it.  I dislike the opera because I want

to love it and can't.



I suppose there are two kinds of music--one kind which

one feels, just as an oyster might, and another sort

which requires a higher faculty, a faculty which must

be assisted and developed by teaching.  Yet if base music

gives certain of us wings, why should we want any other?

But we do.  We want it because the higher and better

like it.  We want it without giving it the necessary

time and trouble; so we climb into that upper tier,

that dress-circle, by a lie; we PRETEND we like it. 

I know several of that sort of people--and I propose

to be one of them myself when I get home with my fine

European education. 



And then there is painting.  What a red rag is to a bull,

Turner's "Slave Ship" was to me, before I studied art. 

Mr. Ruskin is educated in art up to a point where that

picture throws him into as mad an ecstasy of pleasure

as it used to throw me into one of rage, last year,

when I was ignorant.  His cultivation enables him--and me,

now--to see water in that glaring yellow mud, and natural

effects in those lurid explosions of mixed smoke and flame,

and crimson sunset glories; it reconciles him--and me,

now--to the floating of iron cable-chains and other

unfloatable things; it reconciles us to fishes swimming

around on top of the mud--I mean the water.  The most of

the picture is a manifest impossibility--that is to say,

a lie; and only rigid cultivation can enable a man to find

truth in a lie.  But it enabled Mr. Ruskin to do it,

and it has enabled me to do it, and I am thankful for it. 

A Boston newspaper reporter went and took a look at the Slave

Ship floundering about in that fierce conflagration of reds

and yellows, and said it reminded him of a tortoise-shell

cat having a fit in a platter of tomatoes.  In my then

uneducated state, that went home to my non-cultivation,

and I thought here is a man with an unobstructed eye. 

Mr. Ruskin would have said: This person is an ass. 

That is what I would say, now. [1]



1.  Months after this was written, I happened into the National

    Gallery in London, and soon became so fascinated with the

    Turner pictures that I could hardly get away from the place. 

    I went there often, afterward, meaning to see the rest

    of the gallery, but the Turner spell was too strong;

    it could not be shaken off.  However, the Turners

    which attracted me most did not remind me of the Slave Ship. 



However, our business in Baden-Baden this time,

was to join our courier.  I had thought it best

to hire one, as we should be in Italy, by and by,

and we did not know the language.  Neither did he. 

We found him at the hotel, ready to take charge of us. 

I asked him if he was "all fixed." He said he was. 

That was very true.  He had a trunk, two small satchels,

and an umbrella.  I was to pay him fifty-five dollars

a month and railway fares.  On the continent the railway

fare on a trunk is about the same it is on a man. 

Couriers do not have to pay any board and lodging. 

This seems a great saving to the tourist--at first. 

It does not occur to the tourist that SOMEBODY pays that

man's board and lodging.  It occurs to him by and by,

however, in one of his lucid moments. 

