





CHAPTER XLVI

[Meeting a Hog on a Precipice]



Mr. Harris and I took some guides and porters and ascended

to the Ho^tel des Pyramides, which is perched on the

high moraine which borders the Glacier des Bossons. 

The road led sharply uphill, all the way, through grass

and flowers and woods, and was a pleasant walk,

barring the fatigue of the climb. 



From the hotel we could view the huge glacier at very

close range.  After a rest we followed down a path

which had been made in the steep inner frontage

of the moraine, and stepped upon the glacier itself. 

One of the shows of the place was a tunnel-like cavern,

which had been hewn in the glacier.  The proprietor

of this tunnel took candles and conducted us into it. 

It was three or four feet wide and about six feet high. 

Its walls of pure and solid ice emitted a soft and rich

blue light that produced a lovely effect, and suggested

enchanted caves, and that sort of thing.  When we had

proceeded some yards and were entering darkness, we turned

about and had a dainty sunlit picture of distant woods

and heights framed in the strong arch of the tunnel and seen

through the tender blue radiance of the tunnel's atmosphere. 



The cavern was nearly a hundred yards long, and when we

reached its inner limit the proprietor stepped into a branch

tunnel with his candles and left us buried in the bowels

of the glacier, and in pitch-darkness. We judged his

purpose was murder and robbery; so we got out our matches

and prepared to sell our lives as dearly as possible

by setting the glacier on fire if the worst came to the

worst--but we soon perceived that this man had changed

his mind; he began to sing, in a deep, melodious voice,

and woke some curious and pleasing echoes.  By and by he

came back and pretended that that was what he had gone

behind there for.  We believed as much of that as we wanted to. 



Thus our lives had been once more in imminent peril,

but by the exercise of the swift sagacity and cool courage

which had saved us so often, we had added another escape

to the long list.  The tourist should visit that ice-cavern,

by all means, for it is well worth the trouble; but I would

advise him to go only with a strong and well-armed force. 

I do not consider artillery necessary, yet it would not be

unadvisable to take it along, if convenient.  The journey,

going and coming, is about three miles and a half, three of

which are on level ground.  We made it in less than a day,

but I would counsel the unpracticed--if not pressed

for time--to allow themselves two.  Nothing is gained

in the Alps by over-exertion; nothing is gained by crowding

two days' work into one for the poor sake of being able

to boast of the exploit afterward.  It will be found

much better, in the long run, to do the thing in two days,

and then subtract one of them from the narrative. 

This saves fatigue, and does not injure the narrative. 

All the more thoughtful among the Alpine tourists

do this. 



We now called upon the Guide-in-Chief, and asked for a squadron

of guides and porters for the ascent of the Montanvert. 

This idiot glared at us, and said:



"You don't need guides and porters to go to the Montanvert."



"What do we need, then?"



"Such as YOU?--an ambulance!"



I was so stung by this brutal remark that I took

my custom elsewhere. 



Betimes, next morning, we had reached an altitude of five

thousand feet above the level of the sea.  Here we camped

and breakfasted.  There was a cabin there--the spot is

called the Caillet--and a spring of ice-cold water. 

On the door of the cabin was a sign, in French, to the effect

that "One may here see a living chamois for fifty centimes."

We did not invest; what we wanted was to see a dead one. 



A little after noon we ended the ascent and arrived at the

new hotel on the Montanvert, and had a view of six miles,

right up the great glacier, the famous Mer de Glace. 

At this point it is like a sea whose deep swales and long,

rolling swells have been caught in mid-movement and

frozen solid; but further up it is broken up into wildly

tossing billows of ice. 



We descended a ticklish path in the steep side of the moraine,

and invaded the glacier.  There were tourists of both

sexes scattered far and wide over it, everywhere, and it

had the festive look of a skating-rink.



The Empress Josephine came this far, once.  She ascended

the Montanvert in 1810--but not alone; a small army

of men preceded her to clear the path--and carpet it,

perhaps--and she followed, under the protection

of SIXTY-EIGHT guides. 



Her successor visited Chamonix later, but in far different style.



It was seven weeks after the first fall of the Empire,

and poor Marie Louise, ex-Empress was a fugitive. 

She came at night, and in a storm, with only two attendants,

and stood before a peasant's hut, tired, bedraggled,

soaked with rain, "the red print of her lost crown still

girdling her brow, " and implored admittance--and was

refused! A few days before, the adulations and applauses

of a nation were sounding in her ears, and now she was come to

this!



We crossed the Mer de Glace in safety, but we had misgivings. 

The crevices in the ice yawned deep and blue and mysterious,

and it made one nervous to traverse them.  The huge

round waves of ice were slippery and difficult to climb,

and the chances of tripping and sliding down them and

darting into a crevice were too many to be comfortable. 



In the bottom of a deep swale between two of the biggest

of the ice-waves, we found a fraud who pretended

to be cutting steps to insure the safety of tourists. 

He was "soldiering" when we came upon him, but he hopped

up and chipped out a couple of steps about big enough

for a cat, and charged us a franc or two for it. 

Then he sat down again, to doze till the next party

should come along.  He had collected blackmail from two

or three hundred people already, that day, but had not

chipped out ice enough to impair the glacier perceptibly. 

I have heard of a good many soft sinecures, but it seems

to me that keeping toll-bridge on a glacier is the softest

one I have encountered yet. 



That was a blazing hot day, and it brought a persistent

and persecuting thirst with it.  What an unspeakable luxury

it was to slake that thirst with the pure and limpid

ice-water of the glacier! Down the sides of every great rib

of pure ice poured limpid rills in gutters carved by their

own attrition; better still, wherever a rock had lain,

there was now a bowl-shaped hole, with smooth white sides

and bottom of ice, and this bowl was brimming with water

of such absolute clearness that the careless observer would

not see it at all, but would think the bowl was empty. 

These fountains had such an alluring look that I often

stretched myself out when I was not thirsty and dipped my

face in and drank till my teeth ached.  Everywhere among

the Swiss mountains we had at hand the blessing--not

to be found in Europe EXCEPT in the mountains--of water

capable of quenching thirst.  Everywhere in the Swiss

highlands brilliant little rills of exquisitely cold water

went dancing along by the roadsides, and my comrade and I

were always drinking and always delivering our deep gratitude. 



But in Europe everywhere except in the mountains, the water

is flat and insipid beyond the power of words to describe. 

It is served lukewarm; but no matter, ice could not help it;

it is incurably flat, incurably insipid.  It is only good

to wash with; I wonder it doesn't occur to the average

inhabitant to try it for that.  In Europe the people

say contemptuously, "Nobody drinks water here." Indeed,

they have a sound and sufficient reason.  In many places

they even have what may be called prohibitory reasons. 

In Paris and Munich, for instance, they say, "Don't drink

the water, it is simply poison."



Either America is healthier than Europe, notwithstanding her

"deadly" indulgence in ice-water, or she does not keep

the run of her death-rate as sharply as Europe does. 

I think we do keep up the death statistics accurately;

and if we do, our cities are healthier than the cities

of Europe.  Every month the German government tabulates

the death-rate of the world and publishes it.  I scrap-booked

these reports during several months, and it was curious

to see how regular and persistently each city repeated

its same death-rate month after month.  The tables might

as well have been stereotyped, they varied so little. 

These tables were based upon weekly reports showing the

average of deaths in each 1,000 population for a year. 

Munich was always present with her 33 deaths in each

1,000 of her population (yearly average), Chicago was

as constant with her 15 or 17, Dublin with her 48--and

so on. 



Only a few American cities appear in these tables, but they

are scattered so widely over the country that they furnish

a good general average of CITY health in the United States;

and I think it will be granted that our towns and villages

are healthier than our cities. 



Here is the average of the only American cities reported

in the German tables:



Chicago, deaths in 1,000 population annually,

16; Philadelphia, 18; St. Louis, 18; San Francisco,

19; New York (the Dublin of America), 23. 



See how the figures jump up, as soon as one arrives

at the transatlantic list:



Paris, 27; Glasgow, 27; London, 28; Vienna, 28;

Augsburg, 28; Braunschweig, 28; K:onigsberg, 29;

Cologne, 29; Dresden, 29; Hamburg, 29; Berlin, 30;

Bombay, 30; Warsaw, 31; Breslau, 31; Odessa, 32;

Munich, 33; Strasburg, 33, Pesth, 35; Cassel, 35;

Lisbon, 36; Liverpool, 36; Prague, 37; Madras, 37;

Bucharest, 39; St. Petersburg, 40; Trieste, 40;

Alexandria (Egypt), 43; Dublin, 48; Calcutta, 55. 



Edinburgh is as healthy as New York--23; but there

is no CITY in the entire list which is healthier,

except Frankfort-on-the-Main--20. But Frankfort is not

as healthy as Chicago, San Francisco, St. Louis, or Philadelphia.





Perhaps a strict average of the world might develop the fact

that where one in 1,000 of America's population dies,

two in 1,000 of the other populations of the earth succumb. 



I do not like to make insinuations, but I do think

the above statistics darkly suggest that these people

over here drink this detestable water "on the sly."



We climbed the moraine on the opposite side of the glacier,

and then crept along its sharp ridge a hundred yards or so,

in pretty constant danger of a tumble to the glacier below. 

The fall would have been only one hundred feet, but it

would have closed me out as effectually as one thousand,

therefore I respected the distance accordingly, and was

glad when the trip was done.  A moraine is an ugly thing

to assault head-first. At a distance it looks like an endless

grave of fine sand, accurately shaped and nicely smoothed;

but close by, it is found to be made mainly of rough

boulders of all sizes, from that of a man's head to that of

a cottage. 



By and by we came to the Mauvais Pas, or the Villainous Road,

to translate it feelingly.  It was a breakneck path

around the face of a precipice forth or fifty feet high,

and nothing to hang on to but some iron railings. 

I got along, slowly, safely, and uncomfortably, and finally

reached the middle.  My hopes began to rise a little,

but they were quickly blighted; for there I met a hog--a

long-nosed, bristly fellow, that held up his snout

and worked his nostrils at me inquiringly.  A hog on

a pleasure excursion in Switzerland--think of it! It is

striking and unusual; a body might write a poem about it. 

He could not retreat, if he had been disposed to do it. 

It would have been foolish to stand upon our dignity

in a place where there was hardly room to stand upon

our feet, so we did nothing of the sort.  There were

twenty or thirty ladies and gentlemen behind us; we all

turned about and went back, and the hog followed behind. 

The creature did not seem set up by what he had done;

he had probably done it before. 



We reached the restaurant on the height called the Chapeau

at four in the afternoon.  It was a memento-factory, and

the stock was large, cheap, and varied.  I bought the usual

paper-cutter to remember the place by, and had Mont Blanc,

the Mauvais Pas, and the rest of the region branded on

my alpenstock; then we descended to the valley and walked

home without being tied together.  This was not dangerous,

for the valley was five miles wide, and quite level. 



We reached the hotel before nine o'clock. Next

morning we left for Geneva on top of the diligence,

under shelter of a gay awning.  If I remember rightly,

there were more than twenty people up there. 

It was so high that the ascent was made by ladder. 

The huge vehicle was full everywhere, inside and out. 

Five other diligences left at the same time, all full. 

We had engaged our seats two days beforehand, to make sure,

and paid the regulation price, five dollars each; but the

rest of the company were wiser; they had trusted Baedeker,

and waited; consequently some of them got their seats

for one or two dollars.  Baedeker knows all about hotels,

railway and diligence companies, and speaks his mind freely. 

He is a trustworthy friend of the traveler. 



We never saw Mont Blanc at his best until we were many

miles away; then he lifted his majestic proportions

high into the heavens, all white and cold and solemn,

and made the rest of the world seem little and plebeian,

and cheap and trivial. 



As he passed out of sight at last, an old Englishman

settled himself in his seat and said:



"Well, I am satisfied, I have seen the principal features

of Swiss scenery--Mont Blanc and the goiter--now for home!"

