




CHAPTER XXV

[Hunted by the Little Chamois]



Next morning we left in the train for Switzerland,

and reached Lucerne about ten o'clock at night. 

The first discovery I made was that the beauty of the lake

had not been exaggerated.  Within a day or two I made

another discovery.  This was, that the lauded chamois

is not a wild goat; that it is not a horned animal;

that it is not shy; that it does not avoid human society;

and that there is no peril in hunting it.  The chamois is

a black or brown creature no bigger than a mustard seed;

you do not have to go after it, it comes after you;

it arrives in vast herds and skips and scampers all over

your body, inside your clothes; thus it is not shy,

but extremely sociable; it is not afraid of man, on the

contrary, it will attack him; its bite is not dangerous,

but neither is it pleasant; its activity has not been

overstated --if you try to put your finger on it,

it will skip a thousand times its own length at one jump,

and no eye is sharp enough to see where it lights. 

A great deal of romantic nonsense has been written

about the Swiss chamois and the perils of hunting it,

whereas the truth is that even women and children

hunt it, and fearlessly; indeed, everybody hunts it;

the hunting is going on all the time, day and night,

in bed and out of it.  It is poetic foolishness to hunt

it with a gun; very few people do that; there is not

one man in a million who can hit it with a gun. 

It is much easier to catch it that it is to shoot it,

and only the experienced chamois-hunter can do either. 

Another common piece of exaggeration is that about the

"scarcity" of the chamois.  It is the reverse of scarce. 

Droves of one hundred million chamois are not unusual

in the Swiss hotels.  Indeed, they are so numerous

as to be a great pest.  The romancers always dress up

the chamois-hunter in a fanciful and picturesque costume,

whereas the best way to hut this game is to do it without

any costume at all.  The article of commerce called

chamois-skin is another fraud; nobody could skin a chamois,

it is too small.  The creature is a humbug in every way,

and everything which has been written about it is

sentimental exaggeration.  It was no pleasure to me to find

the chamois out, for he had been one of my pet illusions;

all my life it had been my dream to see him in his native

wilds some day, and engage in the adventurous sport

of chasing him from cliff to cliff.  It is no pleasure

to me to expose him, now, and destroy the reader's delight

in him and respect for him, but still it must be done,

for when an honest writer discovers an imposition it

is his simple duty to strip it bare and hurl it down

from its place of honor, no matter who suffers by it;

any other course would render him unworthy of the public

confidence. 



Lucerne is a charming place.  It begins at the water's edge,

with a fringe of hotels, and scrambles up and spreads

itself over two or three sharp hills in a crowded,

disorderly, but picturesque way, offering to the eye

a heaped-up confusion of red roofs, quaint gables,

dormer windows, toothpick steeples, with here and there

a bit of ancient embattled wall bending itself over

the ridges, worm-fashion, and here and there an old square

tower of heavy masonry.  And also here and there a town

clock with only one hand--a hand which stretches across

the dial and has no joint in it; such a clock helps out

the picture, but you cannot tell the time of day by it. 

Between the curving line of hotels and the lake is a broad

avenue with lamps and a double rank of low shade trees. 

The lake-front is walled with masonry like a pier,

and has a railing, to keep people from walking overboard. 

All day long the vehicles dash along the avenue, and nurses,

children, and tourists sit in the shade of the trees,

or lean on the railing and watch the schools of fishes

darting about in the clear water, or gaze out over the lake

at the stately border of snow-hooded mountains peaks. 

Little pleasure steamers, black with people, are coming

and going all the time; and everywhere one sees young

girls and young men paddling about in fanciful rowboats,

or skimming along by the help of sails when there is any wind. 

The front rooms of the hotels have little railed balconies,

where one may take his private luncheon in calm,

cool comfort and look down upon this busy and pretty

scene and enjoy it without having to do any of the work

connected with it. 



Most of the people, both male and female, are in walking

costume, and carry alpenstocks.  Evidently, it is not

considered safe to go about in Switzerland, even in town,

without an alpenstock.  If the tourist forgets and

comes down to breakfast without his alpenstock he goes

back and gets it, and stands it up in the corner. 

When his touring in Switzerland is finished, he does not

throw that broomstick away, but lugs it home with him,

to the far corners of the earth, although this costs him

more trouble and bother than a baby or a courier could. 

You see, the alpenstock is his trophy; his name

is burned upon it; and if he has climbed a hill,

or jumped a brook, or traversed a brickyard with it,

he has the names of those places burned upon it, too. 

Thus it is his regimental flag, so to speak, and bears

the record of his achievements.  It is worth three francs

when he buys it, but a bonanza could not purchase it

after his great deeds have been inscribed upon it. 

There are artisans all about Switzerland whose trade it is

to burn these things upon the alpenstock of the tourist. 

And observe, a man is respected in Switzerland according

to his alpenstock.  I found I could get no attention there,

while I carried an unbranded one.  However, branding is

not expected, so I soon remedied that.  The effect

upon the next detachment of tourists was very marked. 

I felt repaid for my trouble. 



Half of the summer horde in Switzerland is made up of

English people; the other half is made up of many nationalities,

the Germans leading and the Americans coming next. 

The Americans were not as numerous as I had expected

they would be. 



The seven-thirty table d'ho^te at the great Schweitzerhof

furnished a mighty array and variety of nationalities,

but it offered a better opportunity to observe costumes

than people, for the multitude sat at immensely long tables,

and therefore the faces were mainly seen in perspective;

but the breakfasts were served at small round tables,

and then if one had the fortune to get a table in the

midst of the assemblage he could have as many faces

to study as he could desire.  We used to try to guess out

the nationalities, and generally succeeded tolerably well. 

Sometimes we tried to guess people's names; but that was

a failure; that is a thing which probably requires a good

deal of practice.  We presently dropped it and gave our

efforts to less difficult particulars.  One morning I

said:



"There is an American party."



Harris said:



"Yes--but name the state."



I named one state, Harris named another.  We agreed upon

one thing, however--that the young girl with the party

was very beautiful, and very tastefully dressed. 

But we disagreed as to her age.  I said she was eighteen,

Harris said she was twenty.  The dispute between us

waxed warm, and I finally said, with a pretense of being

in earnest:



"Well, there is one way to settle the matter--I will go

and ask her."



Harris said, sarcastically, "Certainly, that is the thing

to do.  All you need to do is to use the common formula

over here: go and say, 'I'm an American!' Of course she

will be glad to see you."



Then he hinted that perhaps there was no great danger

of my venturing to speak to her. 



I said, "I was only talking--I didn't intend to approach her,

but I see that you do not know what an intrepid person

I am.  I am not afraid of any woman that walks. 

I will go and speak to this young girl."



The thing I had in my mind was not difficult. 

I meant to address her in the most respectful way and ask

her to pardon me if her strong resemblance to a former

acquaintance of mine was deceiving me; and when she should

reply that the name I mentioned was not the name she bore,

I meant to beg pardon again, most respectfully, and retire. 

There would be no harm done.  I walked to her table,

bowed to the gentleman, then turned to her and was about

to begin my little speech when she exclaimed:



"I KNEW I wasn't mistaken--I told John it was you!

John said it probably wasn't, but I knew I was right. 

I said you would recognize me presently and come over;

and I'm glad you did, for I shouldn't have felt much flattered

if you had gone out of this room without recognizing me. 

Sit down, sit down--how odd it is--you are the last person I

was ever expecting to see again."



This was a stupefying surprise.  It took my wits

clear away, for an instant.  However, we shook hands

cordially all around, and I sat down.  But truly this

was the tightest place I ever was in.  I seemed to vaguely

remember the girl's face, now, but I had no idea where I

had seen it before, or what named belonged with it. 

I immediately tried to get up a diversion about Swiss scenery,

to keep her from launching into topics that might

betray that I did not know her, but it was of no use,

she went right along upon matters which interested her more:



"Oh dear, what a night that was, when the sea washed

the forward boats away--do you remember it?"



"Oh, DON'T I!" said I--but I didn't. I wished the sea

had washed the rudder and the smoke-stack and the captain

away--then I could have located this questioner. 



"And don't you remember how frightened poor Mary was,

and how she cried?"



"Indeed I do!" said I. "Dear me, how it all comes back!"



I fervently wished it WOULD come back--but my memory was

a blank.  The wise way would have been to frankly own up;

but I could not bring myself to do that, after the young

girl had praised me so for recognizing her; so I went on,

deeper and deeper into the mire, hoping for a chance clue

but never getting one.  The Unrecognizable continued,

with vivacity:



"Do you know, George married Mary, after all?"



"Why, no! Did he?"



"Indeed he did.  He said he did not believe she was half

as much to blame as her father was, and I thought he

was right.  Didn't you?"



"Of course he was.  It was a perfectly plain case. 

I always said so."



"Why, no you didn't!--at least that summer."



"Oh, no, not that summer.  No, you are perfectly right

about that.  It was the following winter that I said it."



"Well, as it turned out, Mary was not in the least

to blame --it was all her father's fault--at least

his and old Darley's."



It was necessary to say something--so I said:



"I always regarded Darley as a troublesome old thing."



"So he was, but then they always had a great affection

for him, although he had so many eccentricities. 

You remember that when the weather was the least cold,

he would try to come into the house."



I was rather afraid to proceed.  Evidently Darley wa not

a man--he must be some other kind of animal--possibly

a dog, maybe an elephant.  However, tails are common

to all animals, so I ventured to say:



"And what a tail he had!"



"ONE! He had a thousand!"



This was bewildering.  I did not quite know what to say,

so I only said:



"Yes, he WAS rather well fixed in the matter of tails."



"For a negro, and a crazy one at that, I should say he was,"

said she. 



It was getting pretty sultry for me.  I said to myself,

"Is it possible she is going to stop there, and wait for

me to speak? If she does, the conversation is blocked. 

A negro with a thousand tails is a topic which a person

cannot talk upon fluently and instructively without more

or less preparation.  As to diving rashly into such a

vast subject--"



But here, to my gratitude, she interrupted my thoughts

by saying:



"Yes, when it came to tales of his crazy woes, there was

simply no end to them if anybody would listen.  His own

quarters were comfortable enough, but when the weather

was cold, the family were sure to have his company--nothing

could keep him out of the house.  But they always bore it

kindly because he had saved Tom's life, years before. 

You remember Tom?



"Oh, perfectly.  Fine fellow he was, too."



"Yes he was.  And what a pretty little thing his child was!"



"You may well say that.  I never saw a prettier child."



"I used to delight to pet it and dandle it and play

with it."



"So did I."



"You named it.  What WAS that name? I can't call it

to mind."



It appeared to me that the ice was getting pretty

thin, here.  I would have given something to know

what the child's was.  However, I had the good luck

to think of a name that would fit either sex--so I brought it

out:



"I named it Frances."



"From a relative, I suppose? But you named the one that died,

too--one that I never saw.  What did you call that one?"



I was out of neutral names, but as the child was dead

and she had never seen it, I thought I might risk a name

for it and trust to luck.  Therefore I said:



"I called that one Thomas Henry."



She said, musingly:



"That is very singular ... very singular."



I sat still and let the cold sweat run down.  I was

in a good deal of trouble, but I believed I could worry

through if she wouldn't ask me to name any more children. 

I wondered where the lightning was going to strike next. 

She was still ruminating over that last child's title,

but presently she said:



"I have always been sorry you were away at the time--I

would have had you name my child."



"YOUR child! Are you married?"



"I have been married thirteen years."



"Christened, you mean."



`"No, married.  The youth by your side is my son."



"It seems incredible--even impossible.  I do not mean

any harm by it, but would you mind telling me if you

are any over eighteen?--that is to say, will you tell

me how old you are?"



"I was just nineteen the day of the storm we were

talking about.  That was my birthday."



That did not help matters, much, as I did not know

the date of the storm.  I tried to think of some

non-committal thing to say, to keep up my end of the talk,

and render my poverty in the matter of reminiscences

as little noticeable as possible, but I seemed to be

about out of non-committal things.  I was about to say,

"You haven't changed a bit since then"--but that was risky. 

I thought of saying, "You have improved ever so much

since then"--but that wouldn't answer, of course. 

I was about to try a shy at the weather, for a saving change,

when the girl slipped in ahead of me and said:



"How I have enjoyed this talk over those happy old times--

haven't you?"



"I never have spent such a half-hour in all my life before!"

said I, with emotion; and I could have added, with a

near approach to truth, "and I would rather be scalped

than spend another one like it." I was holily grateful

to be through with the ordeal, and was about to make

my good-bys and get out, when the girl said:



"But there is one thing that is ever so puzzling to me."



"Why, what is that?"



"That dead child's name.  What did you say it was?"



Here was another balmy place to be in: I had forgotten the

child's name; I hadn't imagined it would be needed again. 

However, I had to pretend to know, anyway, so I said:



"Joseph William."



The youth at my side corrected me, and said:



"No, Thomas Henry."



I thanked him--in words--and said, with trepidation:



"O yes--I was thinking of another child that I named--I

have named a great many, and I get them confused--this

one was named Henry Thompson--"



"Thomas Henry," calmly interposed the boy. 



I thanked him again--strictly in words--and stammered

out:



"Thomas Henry--yes, Thomas Henry was the poor child's name. 

I named him for Thomas--er--Thomas Carlyle, the great author,

you know--and Henry--er--er--Henry the Eight.  The parents

were very grateful to have a child named Thomas Henry."



"That makes it more singular than ever," murmured my

beautiful friend. 



"Does it? Why?"



"Because when the parents speak of that child now,

they always call it Susan Amelia."



That spiked my gun.  I could not say anything.  I was entirely

out of verbal obliquities; to go further would be to lie,

and that I would not do; so I simply sat still and suffered

--sat mutely and resignedly there, and sizzled--for I

was being slowly fried to death in my own blushes. 

Presently the enemy laughed a happy laugh and said:



"I HAVE enjoyed this talk over old times, but you have not. 

I saw very soon that you were only pretending to know me,

and so as I had wasted a compliment on you in the beginning,

I made up my mind to punish you.  And I have succeeded

pretty well.  I was glad to see that you knew George and Tom

and Darley, for I had never heard of them before and therefore

could not be sure that you had; and I was glad to learn

the names of those imaginary children, too.  One can get

quite a fund of information out of you if one goes at

it cleverly.  Mary and the storm, and the sweeping away

of the forward boats, were facts--all the rest was fiction. 

Mary was my sister; her full name was Mary ------. NOW

do you remember me?"



"Yes," I said, "I do remember you now; and you are as

hard-headed as you were thirteen years ago in that ship,

else you wouldn't have punished me so.  You haven't

change your nature nor your person, in any way at all;

you look as young as you did then, you are just as beautiful

as you were then, and you have transmitted a deal

of your comeliness to this fine boy.  There--if that

speech moves you any, let's fly the flag of truce,

with the understanding that I am conquered and confess it."



All of which was agreed to and accomplished, on the spot. 

When I went back to Harris, I said:



"Now you see what a person with talent and address can do."



"Excuse me, I see what a person of colossal ignorance and

simplicity can do.  The idea of your going and intruding

on a party of strangers, that way, and talking for half

an hour; why I never heard of a man in his right mind

doing such a thing before.  What did you say to them?"



I never said any harm.  I merely asked the girl what her

name was."



"I don't doubt it.  Upon my word I don't. I think you

were capable of it.  It was stupid in me to let you go

over there and make such an exhibition of yourself. 

But you know I couldn't really believe you would do such

an inexcusable thing.  What will those people think

of us? But how did you say it?--I mean the manner of it. 

I hope you were not abrupt."



"No, I was careful about that.  I said, 'My friend and I

would like to know what your name is, if you don't mind.'"



"No, that was not abrupt.  There is a polish about it that

does you infinite credit.  And I am glad you put me in;

that was a delicate attention which I appreciate at its

full value.  What did she do?"



"She didn't do anything in particular.  She told me

her name."



"Simply told you her name.  Do you mean to say she did

not show any surprise?"



"Well, now I come to think, she did show something;

maybe it was surprise; I hadn't thought of that--I took

it for gratification."



"Oh, undoubtedly you were right; it must have been gratification;

it could not be otherwise than gratifying to be assaulted

by a stranger with such a question as that.  Then what did you

do?"



"I offered my hand and the party gave me a shake."



"I saw it! I did not believe my own eyes, at the time. 

Did the gentleman say anything about cutting your throat?"



"No, they all seemed glad to see me, as far as I could judge."



"And do you know, I believe they were.  I think they said

to themselves, 'Doubtless this curiosity has got away from

his keeper--let us amuse ourselves with him.' There is

no other way of accounting for their facile docility. 

You sat down.  Did they ASK you to sit down?"



"No, they did not ask me, but I suppose they did not think

of it."



"You have an unerring instinct.  What else did you do?

What did you talk about?"



"Well, I asked the girl how old she was."



"UNdoubtedly. Your delicacy is beyond praise.  Go on,

go on--don't mind my apparent misery--I always look

so when I am steeped in a profound and reverent joy. 

Go on--she told you her age?"



"Yes, she told me her age, and all about her mother,

and her grandmother, and her other relations, and all

about herself."



"Did she volunteer these statistics?"



"No, not exactly that.  I asked the questions and she

answered them."



"This is divine.  Go on--it is not possible that you

forgot to inquire into her politics?"



"No, I thought of that.  She is a democrat, her husband

is a republican, and both of them are Baptists."



"Her husband? Is that child married?"



"She is not a child.  She is married, and that is her

husband who is there with her."



"Has she any children."



"Yes--seven and a half."



"That is impossible."



"No, she has them.  She told me herself."



"Well, but seven and a HALF? How do you make out the half?

Where does the half come in?"



"There is a child which she had by another husband--

not this one but another one--so it is a stepchild,

and they do not count in full measure."



"Another husband? Has she another husband?"



"Yes, four.  This one is number four."



"I don't believe a word of it.  It is impossible,

upon its face.  Is that boy there her brother?"



"No, that is her son.  He is her youngest.  He is not

as old as he looked; he is only eleven and a half."



"These things are all manifestly impossible.  This is a

wretched business.  It is a plain case: they simply took

your measure, and concluded to fill you up.  They seem

to have succeeded.  I am glad I am not in the mess;

they may at least be charitable enough to think there

ain't a pair of us.  Are they going to stay here long?"



"No, they leave before noon."



"There is one man who is deeply grateful for that. 

How did you find out? You asked, I suppose?"



"No, along at first I inquired into their plans, in a

general way, and they said they were going to be here

a week, and make trips round about; but toward the end

of the interview, when I said you and I would tour around

with them with pleasure, and offered to bring you over

and introduce you, they hesitated a little, and asked

if you were from the same establishment that I was. 

I said you were, and then they said they had changed

their mind and considered it necessary to start at once

and visit a sick relative in Siberia."



"Ah, me, you struck the summit! You struck the loftiest

altitude of stupidity that human effort has ever reached. 

You shall have a monument of jackasses' skulls as high

as the Strasburg spire if you die before I do. 

They wanted to know I was from the same 'establishment'

that you hailed from, did they? What did they mean by

'establishment'?"



"I don't know; it never occurred to me to ask."



"Well _I_ know.  they meant an asylum--an IDIOT asylum,

do you understand? So they DO think there's a pair of us,

after all.  Now what do you think of yourself?"



"Well, I don't know.  I didn't know I was doing any harm;

I didn't MEAN to do any harm.  They were very nice people,

and they seemed to like me."



Harris made some rude remarks and left for his bedroom--

to break some furniture, he said.  He was a singularly

irascible man; any little thing would disturb his temper. 



I had been well scorched by the young woman, but no matter,

I took it out on Harris.  One should always "get even"

in some way, else the sore place will go on hurting. 

