




Part 3




When the buriers came up to him they soon found he was neither a

person infected and desperate, as I have observed above, or a person

distempered -in mind, but one oppressed with a dreadful weight of

grief indeed, having his wife and several of his children all in the cart

that was just come in with him, and he followed in an agony and

excess of sorrow.  He mourned heartily, as it was easy to see, but with

a kind of masculine grief that could not give itself vent by tears; and

calmly defying the buriers to let him alone, said he would only see the

bodies thrown in and go away, so they left importuning him.  But no

sooner was the cart turned round and the bodies shot into the pit

promiscuously, which was a surprise to him, for he at least expected

they would have been decently laid in, though indeed he was

afterwards convinced that was impracticable; I say, no sooner did he

see the sight but he cried out aloud, unable to contain himself.  I could

not hear what he said, but he went backward two or three steps and

fell down in a swoon.  The buriers ran to him and took him up, and in

a little while he came to himself, and they led him away to the Pie

Tavern over against the end of Houndsditch, where, it seems, the man

was known, and where they took care of him.  He looked into the pit

again as he went away, but the buriers had covered the bodies so

immediately with throwing in earth, that though there was light

enough, for there were lanterns, and candles in them, placed all night

round the sides of the pit, upon heaps of earth, seven or eight, or

perhaps more, yet nothing could be seen.



This was a mournful scene indeed, and affected me almost as much

as the rest; but the other was awful and full of terror.  The cart had in

it sixteen or seventeen bodies; some were wrapt up in linen sheets,

some in rags, some little other than naked, or so loose that what

covering they had fell from them in the shooting out of the cart, and

they fell quite naked among the rest; but the matter was not much to

them, or the indecency much to any one else, seeing they were all

dead, and were to be huddled together into the common grave of

mankind, as we may call it, for here was no difference made, but poor

and rich went together; there was no other way of burials, neither was

it possible there should, for coffins were not to be had for the

prodigious numbers that fell in such a calamity as this.



It was reported by way of scandal upon the buriers, that if any

corpse was delivered to them decently wound up, as we called it then,

in a winding-sheet tied over the head and feet, which some did, and

which was generally of good linen; I say, it was reported that the

buriers were so wicked as to strip them in the cart and carry them

quite naked to the ground.  But as I cannot easily credit anything so

vile among Christians, and at a time so filled with terrors as that was,

I can only relate it and leave it undetermined.



Innumerable stories also went about of the cruel behaviours and

practices of nurses who tended the sick, and of their hastening on the

fate of those they tended in their sickness.  But I shall say more of this

in its place.



I was indeed shocked with this sight; it almost overwhelmed me,

and I went away with my heart most afflicted, and full of the afflicting

thoughts, such as I cannot describe. just at my going out of the church,

and turning up the street towards my own house, I saw another cart

with links, and a bellman going before, coming out of Harrow Alley in

the Butcher Row, on the other side of the way, and being, as I

perceived, very full of dead bodies, it went directly over the street also

toward the church.  I stood a while, but I had no stomach to go back

again to see the same dismal scene over again, so I went directly home,

where I could not but consider with thankfulness the risk I had run,

believing I had gotten no injury, as indeed I had not.



Here the poor unhappy gentleman's grief came into my head again,

and indeed I could not but shed tears in the reflection upon it, perhaps

more than he did himself; but his case lay so heavy upon my mind that

I could not prevail with myself, but that I must go out again into the

street, and go to the Pie Tavern, resolving to inquire what became of him.



It was by this time one o'clock in the morning, and yet the poor

gentleman was there.  The truth was, the people of the house, knowing

him, had entertained him, and kept him there all the night,

notwithstanding the danger of being infected by him, though it

appeared the man was perfectly sound himself.



It is with regret that I take notice of this tavern.  The people were

civil, mannerly, and an obliging sort of folks enough, and had till this

time kept their house open and their trade going on, though not so

very publicly as formerly: but there was a dreadful set of fellows that

used their house, and who, in the middle of all this horror, met there

every night, behaved with all the revelling and roaring extravagances

as is usual for such people to do at other times, and, indeed, to such an

offensive degree that the very master and mistress of the house grew

first ashamed and then terrified at them.



They sat generally in a room next the street, and as they always kept

late hours, so when the dead-cart came across the street-end to go into

Houndsditch, which was in view of the tavern windows, they would

frequently open the windows as soon as they heard the bell and look

out at them; and as they might often hear sad lamentations of people

in the streets or at their windows as the carts went along, they would

make their impudent mocks and jeers at them, especially if they heard

the poor people call upon God to have mercy upon them, as many

would do at those times in their ordinary passing along the streets.



These gentlemen, being something disturbed with the clutter of

bringing the poor gentleman into the house, as above, were first angry

and very high with the master of the house for suffering such a fellow,

as they called him, to be brought out of the grave into their house; but

being answered that the man was a neighbour, and that he was sound,

but overwhelmed with the calamity of his family, and the like, they

turned their anger into ridiculing the man and his sorrow for his wife

and children, taunted him with want of courage to leap into the great

pit and go to heaven, as they jeeringly expressed it, along with them,

adding some very profane and even blasphemous expressions.



They were at this vile work when I came back to the house, and, as

far as I could see, though the man sat still, mute and disconsolate, and

their affronts could not divert his sorrow, yet he was both grieved and

offended at their discourse.  Upon this I gently reproved them, being

well enough acquainted with their characters, and not unknown in

person to two of them.



They immediately fell upon me with ill language and oaths, asked

me what I did out of my grave at such a time when so many honester

men were carried into the churchyard, and why I was not at home

saying my prayers against the dead-cart came for me, and the like.



I was indeed astonished at the impudence of the men, though not at

all discomposed at their treatment of me.  However, I kept my temper.

I told them that though I defied them or any man in the world to tax

me with any dishonesty, yet I acknowledged that in this terrible

judgement of God many better than I were swept away and carried to

their grave.  But to answer their question directly, the case was, that I

was mercifully preserved by that great God whose name they had

blasphemed and taken in vain by cursing and swearing in a dreadful

manner, and that I believed I was preserved in particular, among other

ends of His goodness, that I might reprove them for their audacious

boldness in behaving in such a manner and in such an awful time as

this was, especially for their jeering and mocking at an honest

gentleman and a neighbour (for some of them knew him), who, they

saw, was overwhelmed with sorrow for the breaches which it had

pleased God to make upon his family.



I cannot call exactly to mind the hellish, abominable raillery which

was the return they made to that talk of mine: being provoked, it

seems, that I was not at all afraid to be free with them; nor, if I could

remember, would I fill my account with any of the words, the horrid

oaths, curses, and vile expressions, such as, at that time of the day,

even the worst and ordinariest people in the street would not use; for,

except such hardened creatures as these, the most wicked wretches

that could be found had at that time some terror upon their minds of

the hand of that Power which could thus in a moment destroy them.



But that which was the worst in all their devilish language was, that

they were not afraid to blaspheme God and talk atheistically, making

a jest of my calling the plague the hand of God; mocking, and even

laughing, at the word judgement, as if the providence of God had no

concern in the inflicting such a desolating stroke; and that the people

calling upon God as they saw the carts carrying away the dead bodies

was all enthusiastic, absurd, and impertinent.



I made them some reply, such as I thought proper, but which I found

was so far from putting a check to their horrid way of speaking that it

made them rail the more, so that I confess it filled me with horror and

a kind of rage, and I came away, as I told them, lest the hand of that

judgement which had visited the whole city should glorify His

vengeance upon them, and all that were near them.



They received all reproof with the utmost contempt, and made the

greatest mockery that was possible for them to do at me, giving me all

the opprobrious, insolent scoffs that they could think of for preaching

to them, as they called it, which indeed grieved me, rather than angered me;

and I went away, blessing God, however, in my mind that I had not spared them,

though they had insulted me so much.



They continued this wretched course three or four days after this,

continually mocking and jeering at all that showed themselves

religious or serious, or that were any way touched with the sense of

the terrible judgement of God upon us; and I was informed they

flouted in the same manner at the good people who, notwithstanding

the contagion, met at the church, fasted, and prayed to God to remove

His hand from them.



I say, they continued this dreadful course three or four days - I think

it was no more - when one of them, particularly he who asked the

poor gentleman what he did out of his grave, was struck from Heaven

with the plague, and died in a most deplorable manner; and, in a

word, they were every one of them carried into the great pit which I

have mentioned above, before it was quite filled up, which was not

above a fortnight or thereabout.



These men were guilty of many extravagances, such as one would

think human nature should have trembled at the thoughts of at such a

time of general terror as was then upon us, and particularly scoffing

and mocking at everything which they happened to see that was

religious among the people, especially at their thronging zealously to

the place of public worship to implore mercy from Heaven in such a

time of distress; and this tavern where they held their dub being

within view of the church-door, they had the more particular occasion

for their atheistical profane mirth.



But this began to abate a little with them before the accident which I

have related happened, for the infection increased so violently at this

part of the town now, that people began to be afraid to come to the

church; at least such numbers did not resort thither as was usual.

Many of the clergymen likewise were dead, and others gone into the

country; for it really required a steady courage and a strong faith for a

man not only to venture being in town at such a time as this, but

likewise to venture to come to church and perform the office of a

minister to a congregation, of whom he had reason to believe many of

them were actually infected with the plague, and to do this every day,

or twice a day, as in some places was done.



It is true the people showed an extraordinary zeal in these religious

exercises, and as the church-doors were always open, people would go

in single at all times, whether the minister was officiating or no, and

locking themselves into separate pews, would be praying to God with

great fervency and devotion.



Others assembled at meeting-houses, every one as their different

opinions in such things guided, but all were promiscuously the subject

of these men's drollery, especially at the beginning of the visitation.



It seems they had been checked for their open insulting religion in

this manner by several good people of every persuasion, and that, and

the violent raging of the infection, I suppose, was the occasion that

they had abated much of their rudeness for some time before, and

were only roused by the spirit of ribaldry and atheism at the clamour

which was made when the gentleman was first brought in there, and

perhaps were agitated by the same devil, when I took upon me to

reprove them; though I did it at first with all the calmness, temper,

and good manners that I could, which for a while they insulted me the

more for thinking it had been in fear of their resentment, though

afterwards they found the contrary.



I went home, indeed, grieved and afflicted in my mind at the

abominable wickedness of those men, not doubting, however, that

they would be made dreadful examples of God's justice; for I looked

upon this dismal time to be a particular season of Divine vengeance,

and that God would on this occasion single out the proper objects of

His displeasure in a more especial and remarkable manner than at

another time; and that though I did believe that many good people

would, and did, fall in the common calamity, and that it was no

certain rule to ' judge of the eternal state of any one by their being

distinguished in such a time of general destruction neither one way or

other; yet, I say, it could not but seem reasonable to believe that God

would not think fit to spare by His mercy such open declared enemies,

that should insult His name and Being, defy His vengeance, and mock

at His worship and worshippers at such a time; no, not though His

mercy had thought fit to bear with and spare them at other times; that

this was a day of visitation, a day of God's anger, and those words

came into my thought, Jer. v. 9: 'Shall I not visit for these things? saith

the Lord: and shall not My soul be avenged of such a nation as this?'



These things, I say, lay upon my mind, and I went home very much

grieved and oppressed with the horror of these men's wickedness, and

to think that anything could be so vile, so hardened, and notoriously

wicked as to insult God, and His servants, and His worship in such a

manner, and at such a time as this was, when He had, as it were, His

sword drawn in His hand on purpose to take vengeance not on them

only, but on the whole nation.



I had, indeed, been in some passion at first with them - though it

was really raised, not by any affront they had offered me personally,

but by the horror their blaspheming tongues filled me with.  However,

I was doubtful in my thoughts whether the resentment I retained was

not all upon my own private account, for they had given me a great

deal of ill language too - I mean personally; but after some pause, and

having a weight of grief upon my mind, I retired myself as soon as I

came home, for I slept not that night; and giving God most humble

thanks for my preservation in the eminent danger I had been in, I set

my mind seriously and with the utmost earnestness to pray for those

desperate wretches, that God would pardon them, open their eyes, and

effectually humble them.



By this I not only did my duty, namely, to pray for those who

despitefully used me, but I fully tried my own heart, to my fun

satisfaction, that it was not filled with any spirit of resentment as they

had offended me in particular; and I humbly recommend the method

to all those that would know, or be certain, how to distinguish

between their zeal for the honour of God and the effects of their

private passions and resentment.



But I must go back here to the particular incidents which occur to

my thoughts of the time of the visitation, and particularly to the time

of their shutting up houses in the first part of their sickness; for before

the sickness was come to its height people had more room to make

their observations than they had afterward; but when it was in the

extremity there was no such thing as communication with one

another, as before.



During the shutting up of houses, as I have said, some violence was

offered to the watchmen.  As to soldiers, there were none to be

found.- the few guards which the king then had, which were nothing

like the number entertained since, were dispersed, either at Oxford

with the Court, or in quarters in the remoter parts of the country, small

detachments excepted, who did duty at the Tower and at Whitehall,

and these but very few.  Neither am I positive that there was any other

guard at the Tower than the warders, as they called them, who stand at

the gate with gowns and caps, the same as the yeomen of the guard,

except the ordinary gunners, who were twenty-four, and the officers

appointed to look after the magazine, who were called armourers.  As

to trained bands, there was no possibility of raising any; neither, if the

Lieutenancy, either of London or Middlesex, had ordered the drums to

beat for the militia, would any of the companies, I believe, have

drawn together, whatever risk they had run.



This made the watchmen be the less regarded, and perhaps

occasioned the greater violence to be used against them.  I mention it

on this score to observe that the setting watchmen thus to keep the

people in was, first of all, not effectual, but that the people broke out,

whether by force or by stratagem, even almost as often as they

pleased; and, second, that those that did thus break out were generally

people infected who, in their desperation, running about from one

place to another, valued not whom they injured: and which perhaps, as

I have said, might give birth to report that it was natural to the

infected people to desire to infect others, which report was really false.



And I know it so well, and in so many several cases, that I could

give several relations of good, pious, and religious people who, when

they have had the distemper, have been so far from being forward to

infect others that they have forbid their own family to come near

them, in hopes of their being preserved, and have even died without

seeing their nearest relations lest they should be instrumental to give

them the distemper, and infect or endanger them.  If, then, there were

cases wherein the infected people were careless of the injury they did

to others, this was certainly one of them, if not the chief, namely,

when people who had the distemper had broken out from houses which were

so shut up, and having been driven to extremities for provision

or for entertainment, had endeavoured to conceal their condition,

and have been thereby instrumental involuntarily to infect others

who have been ignorant and unwary.



This is one of the reasons why I believed then, and do believe still,

that the shutting up houses thus by force, and restraining, or rather

imprisoning, people in their own houses, as I said above, was of little

or no service in the whole.  Nay, I am of opinion it was rather hurtful,

having forced those desperate people to wander abroad with the

plague upon them, who would otherwise have died quietly in their beds.



I remember one citizen who, having thus broken out of his house in

Aldersgate Street or thereabout, went along the road to Islington; he

attempted to have gone in at the Angel Inn, and after that the White

Horse, two inns known still by the same signs, but was refused; after

which he came to the Pied Bull, an inn also still continuing the same

sign.  He asked them for lodging for one night only, pretending to be

going into Lincolnshire, and assuring them of his being very sound

and free from the infection, which also at that time had not reached

much that way.



They told him they had no lodging that they could spare but one bed

up in the garret, and that they could spare that bed for one night, some

drovers being expected the next day with cattle; so, if he would accept

of that lodging, he might have it, which he did.  So a servant was sent

up with a candle with him to show him the room.  He was very well

dressed, and looked like a person not used to lie in a garret; and when

he came to the room he fetched a deep sigh, and said to the servant, 'I

have seldom lain in such a lodging as this. 'However, the servant

assuring him again that they had no better, 'Well,' says he, 'I must

make shift; this is a dreadful time; but it is but for one night.' So he sat

down upon the bedside, and bade the maid, I think it was, fetch him

up a pint of warm ale.  Accordingly the servant went for the ale, but

some hurry in the house, which perhaps employed her other ways, put

it out of her head, and she went up no more to him.



The next morning, seeing no appearance of the gentleman,

somebody in the house asked the servant that had showed him upstairs

what was become of him.  She started.  'Alas l' says she, 'I never

thought more of him.  He bade me carry him some warm ale, but I

forgot.' Upon which, not the maid, but some other person was sent up

to see after him, who, coming into the room, found him stark dead and

almost cold, stretched out across the bed.  His clothes were pulled off,

his jaw fallen, his eyes open in a most frightful posture, the rug of the

bed being grasped hard in one of his hands, so that it was plain he

died soon after the maid left him; and 'tis probable, had she gone up

with the ale, she had found him dead in a few minutes after he sat

down upon the bed.  The alarm was great in the house, as anyone may

suppose, they having been free from the distemper till that disaster,

which, bringing the infection to the house, spread it immediately to

other houses round about it.  I do not remember how many died in the

house itself, but I think the maid-servant who went up first with him

fell presently ill by the fright, and several others; for, whereas there

died but two in Islington of the plague the week before, there died

seventeen the week after, whereof fourteen were of the plague.  This

was in the week from the 11th of July to the 18th.



There was one shift that some families had, and that not a few,

when their houses happened to be infected, and that was this: the

families who, in the first breaking-out of the distemper, fled away into

the country and had retreats among their friends, generally found

some or other of their neighbours or relations to commit the charge of

those houses to for the safety of the goods and the like.  Some houses

were, indeed, entirely locked up, the doors padlocked, the windows

and doors having deal boards nailed over them, and only the

inspection of them committed to the ordinary watchmen and parish

officers; bat these were but few.



It was thought that there were not less than 10,000 houses forsaken

of the inhabitants in the city and suburbs, including what was in the

out-parishes and in Surrey, or the side of the water they called

Southwark.  This was besides the numbers of lodgers, and of

particular persons who were fled out of other families; so that in all it

was computed that about 200,000 people were fled and gone.  But of

this I shall speak again.  But I mention it here on this account, namely,

that it was a rule with those who had thus two houses in their keeping

or care, that if anybody was taken sick in a family, before the master

of the family let the examiners or any other officer know of it, he

immediately would send all the rest of his family, whether children or

servants, as it fell out to be, to such other house which he had so in

charge, and then giving notice of the sick person to the examiner,

have a nurse or nurses appointed, and have another person to be shut

up in the house with them (which many for money would do), so to

take charge of the house in case the person should die.



This was, in many cases, the saving a whole family, who, if they had

been shut up with the sick person, would inevitably have perished.

But, on the other hand, this was another of the inconveniences of

shutting up houses; for the apprehensions and terror of being shut up

made many run away with the rest of the family, who, though it was

not publicly known, and they were not quite sick, had yet the

distemper upon them; and who, by having an uninterrupted liberty to

go about, but being obliged still to conceal their circumstances, or

perhaps not knowing it themselves, gave the distemper to others, and

spread the infection in a dreadful manner, as I shall explain further

hereafter.



And here I may be able to make an observation or two of my own,

which may be of use hereafter to those into whose bands these may

come, if they should ever see the like dreadful visitation. (1) The

infection generally came into the houses of the citizens by the means

of their servants, whom they were obliged to send up and down the

streets for necessaries; that is to say, for food or physic, to

bakehouses, brew-houses, shops, &c.; and who going necessarily

through the streets into shops, markets, and the like, it was impossible

but that they should, one way or

other, meet with distempered people, who conveyed the fatal breath

into them, and they brought it home to the families to which they

belonged. (2) It was a great mistake that such a great city as this had

but one pest-house; for had there been, instead of one pest-house -

viz., beyond Bunhill Fields, where, at most, they could receive,

perhaps, two hundred or three hundred people - I say, had there,

instead of that one, been several pest-houses, every one able to

contain a thousand people, without lying two in a bed, or two beds in

a room; and had every master of a family, as soon as any servant

especially had been taken sick in his house, been obliged to send them

to the next pest-house, if they were willing, as many were, and had the

examiners done the like among the poor people when any had been

stricken with the infection; I say, had this been done where the people

were willing (not otherwise), and the houses not been shut, I am

persuaded, and was all the while of that opinion, that not so many, by

several thousands, had died; for it was observed, and I could give

several instances within the compass of my own knowledge, where a

servant had been taken sick, and the family had either time to send

him out or retire from the house and leave the sick person, as I have

said above, they had all been preserved; whereas when, upon one or

more sickening in a family, the house has been shut up, the whole

family have perished, and the bearers been obliged to go in to fetch

out the dead bodies, not being able to bring them to the door, and at

last none left to do it.



(3) This put it out of question to me, that the calamity was spread by

infection; that is to say, by some certain steams or fumes, which the

physicians call effluvia, by the breath, or by the sweat, or by the

stench of the sores of the sick persons, or some other way, perhaps,

beyond even the reach of the physicians themselves, which effluvia

affected the sound who came within certain distances of the sick,

immediately penetrating the vital parts of the said sound persons,

putting their blood into an immediate ferment, and agitating their

spirits to that degree which it was found they were agitated; and so

those newly infected persons communicated it in the same manner to

others.  And this I shall give some instances of, that cannot but

convince those who seriously consider it; and I cannot but with some

wonder find some people, now the contagion is over, talk of its being

an immediate stroke from Heaven, without the agency of means,

having commission to strike this and that particular person, and none

other - which I look upon with contempt as the effect of manifest

ignorance and enthusiasm; likewise the opinion of others, who talk of

infection being carried on by the air only, by carrying with it vast

numbers of insects and invisible creatures, who enter into the body

with the breath, or even at the pores with the air, and there generate or

emit most acute poisons, or poisonous ovae or eggs, which mingle

themselves with the blood, and so infect the body: a discourse full of

learned simplicity, and manifested to be so by universal experience;

but I shall say more to this case in its order.



I must here take further notice that nothing was more fatal to the

inhabitants of this city than the supine negligence of the people

themselves, who, during the long notice or warning they had of the

visitation, made no provision for it by laying in store of provisions, or

of other necessaries, by which they might have lived retired and

within their own houses, as I have observed others did, and who were

in a great measure preserved by that caution; nor were they, after they

were a little hardened to it, so shy of conversing with one another,

when actually infected, as they were at first: no, though they knew it.



I acknowledge I was one of those thoughtless ones that had made so

little provision that my servants were obliged to go out of doors to buy

every trifle by penny and halfpenny, just as before it began, even till

my experience showing me the folly, I began to be wiser so late that I

had scarce time to store myself sufficient for our common subsistence

for a month.



I had in family only an ancient woman that managed the house, a

maid-servant, two apprentices, and myself; and the plague beginning

to increase about us, I had many sad thoughts about what course I

should take, and how I should act.  The many dismal objects which

happened everywhere as I went about the streets, had filled my mind

with a great deal of horror for fear of the distemper, which was indeed

very horrible in itself, and in some more than in others.  The

swellings, which were generally in the neck or groin, when they grew

hard and would not break, grew so painful that it was equal to the

most exquisite torture; and some, not able to bear the torment, threw

themselves out at windows or shot themselves, or otherwise made

themselves away, and I saw several dismal objects of that kind.

Others, unable to contain themselves, vented their pain by incessant

roarings, and such loud and lamentable cries were to be heard as we

walked along the streets that would pierce the very heart to think of,

especially when it was to be considered that the same dreadful

scourge might be expected every moment to seize upon ourselves.



I cannot say but that now I began to faint in my resolutions; my

heart failed me very much, and sorely I repented of my rashness.

When I had been out, and met with such terrible things as these I have

talked of, I say I repented my rashness in venturing to abide in town.  I

wished often that I had not taken upon me to stay, but had gone away

with my brother and his family.



Terrified by those frightful objects, I would retire home sometimes

and resolve to go out no more; and perhaps I would keep those

resolutions for three or four days, which time I spent in the most

serious thankfulness for my preservation and the preservation of my

family, and the constant confession of my sins, giving myself up to

God every day, and applying to Him with fasting, humiliation, and

meditation.  Such intervals as I had I employed in reading books and

in writing down my memorandums of what occurred to me every day,

and out of which afterwards I took most of this work, as it relates to

my observations without doors.  What I wrote of my private

meditations I reserve for private use, and desire it may not be made

public on any account whatever.



I also wrote other meditations upon divine subjects, such as

occurred to me at that time and were profitable to myself, but not fit

for any other view, and therefore I say no more of that.



I had a very good friend, a physician, whose name was Heath, whom

I frequently visited during this dismal time, and to whose advice I was

very much obliged for many things which he directed me to take, by

way of preventing the infection when I went out, as he found I

frequently did, and to hold in my mouth when I was in the streets.  He

also came very often to see me, and as he was a good Christian as well

as a good physician, his agreeable conversation was a very great

support to me in the worst of this terrible time.



It was now the beginning of August, and the plague grew very

violent and terrible in the place where I lived, and Dr Heath coming to

visit me, and finding that I ventured so often out in the streets,

earnestly persuaded me to lock myself up and my family, and not to

suffer any of us to go out of doors; to keep all our windows fast,

shutters and curtains close, and never to open them; but first, to make

a very strong smoke in the room where the window or door was to be

opened, with rozen and pitch, brimstone or gunpowder and the like;

and we did this for some time; but as I had not laid in a store of

provision for such a retreat, it was impossible that we could keep

within doors entirely.  However, I attempted, though it was so very

late, to do something towards it; and first, as I had convenience both

for brewing and baking, I went and bought two sacks of meal, and for

several weeks, having an oven, we baked all our own bread; also I

bought malt, and brewed as much beer as all the casks I had would

hold, and which seemed enough to serve my house for five or six

weeks; also I laid in a quantity of salt butter and Cheshire cheese; but

I had no flesh-meat, and the plague raged so violently among the

butchers and slaughter-houses on the other side of our street, where

they are known to dwell in great numbers, that it was not advisable so

much as to go over the street among them.



And here I must observe again, that this necessity of going out of

our houses to buy provisions was in a great measure the ruin of the

whole city, for the people catched the distemper on these occasions

one of another, and even the provisions themselves were often tainted;

at least I have great reason to believe so; and therefore I cannot say

with satisfaction what I know is repeated with great assurance, that

the market-people and such as brought provisions to town were never

infected.  I am certain the butchers of Whitechappel, where the greatest

part of the flesh-meat was killed, were dreadfully visited, and that at

least to such a degree that few of their shops were kept open, and

those that remained of them killed their meat at Mile End and that

way, and brought it to market upon horses.



However, the poor people could not lay up provisions, and there was

a necessity that they must go to market to buy, and others to send

servants or their children; and as this was a necessity which renewed

itself daily, it brought abundance of unsound people to the markets,

and a great many that went thither sound brought death home with them.



It is true people used all possible precaution.  When any one bought

a joint of meat in the market they would not take it off the butcher's

hand, but took it off the hooks themselves.  On the other hand, the

butcher would not touch the money, but have it put into a pot full of

vinegar, which he kept for that purpose.  The buyer carried always

small money to make up any odd sum, that they might take no change.

They carried bottles of scents and perfumes in their hands, and all the

means that could be used were used, but then the poor could not do

even these things, and they went at all hazards.



Innumerable dismal stories we heard every day on this very account.

Sometimes a man or woman dropped down dead in the very markets,

for many people that had the plague upon them knew nothing of it till

the inward gangrene had affected their vitals, and they died in a few

moments.  This caused that many died frequently in that manner in

the streets suddenly, without any warning; others perhaps had time to

go to the next bulk or stall, or to any door-porch, and just sit down and

die, as I have said before.



These objects were so frequent in the streets that when the plague

came to be very raging on one side, there was scarce any passing by

the streets but that several dead bodies would be lying here and there

upon the ground.  On the other hand, it is observable that though at

first the people would stop as they went along and call to the

neighbours to come out on such an occasion, yet afterward no notice

was taken of them; but that if at any time we found a corpse lying, go

across the way and not come near it; or, if in a narrow lane or passage,

go back again and seek some other way to go on the business we were

upon; and in those cases the corpse was always left till the officers

had notice to come and take them away, or till night, when the bearers

attending the dead-cart would take them up and carry them away.  Nor

did those undaunted creatures who performed these offices fail to

search their pockets, and sometimes strip off their clothes if they were

well dressed, as sometimes they were, and carry off what they could get.



But to return to the markets.  The butchers took that care that if any

person died in the market they had the officers always at band to take

them up upon hand-barrows and carry them to the next churchyard;

and this was so frequent that such were not entered in the weekly bill,

'Found dead in the streets or fields', as is the case now, but they went

into the general articles of the great distemper.



But now the fury of the distemper increased to such a degree that

even the markets were but very thinly furnished with provisions or

frequented with buyers compared to what they were before; and the

Lord Mayor caused the country people who brought provisions to be

stopped in the streets leading into the town, and to sit down there with

their goods, where they sold what they brought, and went immediately

away; and this encouraged the country people greatly-to do so, for

they sold their provisions at the very entrances into the town, and even

in the fields, as particularly in the fields beyond Whitechappel, in

Spittlefields; also in St George's Fields in Southwark, in Bunhill

Fields, and in a great field called Wood's Close, near Islington.

Thither the Lord Mayor, aldermen, and magistrates sent their officers

and servants to buy for their families, themselves keeping within

doors as much as possible, and the like did many other people; and

after this method was taken the country people came with great

cheerfulness, and brought provisions of all sorts, and very seldom got

any harm, which, I suppose, added also to that report of their being

miraculously preserved.



As for my little family, having thus, as I have said, laid in a store of

bread, butter, cheese, and beer, I took my friend and physician's

advice, and locked myself up, and my family, and resolved to suffer

the hardship of living a few months without flesh-meat, rather than to

purchase it at the hazard of our lives.



But though I confined my family, I could not prevail upon my

unsatisfied curiosity to stay within entirely myself; and though I

generally came frighted and terrified home, vet I could not restrain;

only that indeed I did not do it so frequently as at first.



I had some little obligations, indeed, upon me to go to my brother's

house, which was in Coleman Street parish and which he had left to

my care, and I went at first every day, but afterwards only once or

twice a week.



In these walks I had many dismal scenes before my eyes, as

particularly of persons falling dead in the streets, terrible shrieks and

screechings of women, who, in their agonies, would throw open their

chamber windows and cry out in a dismal, surprising manner.  It is

impossible to describe the variety of postures in which the passions of

the poor people would express themselves.



Passing through Tokenhouse Yard, in Lothbury, of a sudden a

casement violently opened just over my head, and a woman gave three

frightful screeches, and then cried, 'Oh! death, death, death!' in a

most inimitable tone, and which struck me with horror and a chillness

in my very blood.  There was nobody to be seen in the whole street,

neither did any other window open. for people had no curiosity now in

any case, nor could anybody help one another, so I went on to pass

into Bell Alley.



Just in Bell Alley, on the right hand of the passage, there was a more

terrible cry than that, though it was not so directed out at the window;

but the whole family was in a terrible fright, and I could hear women

and children run screaming about the rooms like distracted, when a

garret-window opened and somebody from a window on the other

side the alley called and asked, 'What is the matter?' upon which, from

the first window, it was answered, 'Oh Lord, my old master has

hanged himself!' The other asked again, 'Is he quite dead?' and the

first answered, 'Ay, ay, quite dead; quite dead and cold!' This person

was a merchant and a deputy alderman, and very rich.  I care not to

mention the name, though I knew his name too, but that would be an

hardship to the family, which is now flourishing again.



But this is but one; it is scarce credible what dreadful cases

happened in particular families every day.  People in the rage of the

distemper, or in the torment of their swellings, which was indeed

intolerable, running out of their own government, raving and

distracted, and oftentimes laying violent hands upon themselves,

throwing themselves out at their windows, shooting themselves.,;,

&c.; mothers murdering their own children in their lunacy, some

dying of mere grief as a passion, some of mere fright and surprise

without any infection at all, others frighted into idiotism and foolish

distractions, some into despair and lunacy, others into melancholy madness.



The pain of the swelling was in particular very violent, and to some

intolerable; the physicians and surgeons may be said to have tortured

many poor creatures even to death.  The swellings in some grew hard,

and they applied violent drawing-plaisters or poultices to break them,

and if these did not do they cut and scarified them in a terrible

manner.  In some those swellings were made hard partly by the force

of the distemper and partly by their being too violently drawn, and

were so hard that no instrument could cut them, and then they burnt

them with caustics, so that many died raving mad with the torment,

and some in the very operation.  In these distresses, some, for want of

help to hold them down in their beds, or to look to them, laid hands

upon themselves as above.  Some broke out into the streets, perhaps

naked, and would run directly down to the river if they were not

stopped by the watchman or other officers, and plunge themselves

into the water wherever they found it.



It often pierced my very soul to hear the groans and cries of those

who were thus tormented, but of the two this was counted the most

promising particular in the whole infection, for if these swellings

could be brought to a head, and to break and run, or, as the surgeons

call it, to digest, the patient generally recovered; whereas those who,

like the gentlewoman's daughter, were struck with death at the

beginning, and had the tokens come out upon them, often went about

indifferent easy till a little before they died, and some till the moment

they dropped down, as in apoplexies and epilepsies is often the case.

Such would be taken suddenly very sick, and would run to a bench or

bulk, or any convenient place that offered itself, or to their own

houses if possible, as I mentioned before, and there sit down, grow

faint, and die.  This kind of dying was much the same as it was with

those who die of common mortifications, who die swooning, and, as it

were, go away in a dream.  Such as died thus had very little notice of

their being infected at all till the gangrene was spread through their

whole body; nor could physicians themselves know certainly how it

was with them till they opened their breasts or other parts of their

body and saw the tokens.



We had at this time a great many frightful stories told us of nurses

and watchmen who looked after the dying people; that is to say, hired

nurses who attended infected people, using them barbarously, starving

them, smothering them, or by other wicked means hastening their end,

that is to say, murdering of them; and watchmen, being set to guard

houses that were shut up when there has been but one person left, and

perhaps that one lying sick, that they have broke in and murdered that

body, and immediately thrown them out into the dead-cart! And so

they have gone scarce cold to the grave.



I cannot say but that some such murders were committed, and I

think two were sent to prison for it, but died before they could be

tried; and I have heard that three others, at several times, were

excused for murders of that kind; but I must say I believe nothing of

its being so common a crime as some have since been pleased to say,

nor did it seem to be so rational where the people were brought so low

as not to be able to help themselves, for such seldom recovered, and

there was no temptation to commit a murder, at least none equal to

the fact, where they were sure persons would die in so short a time,

and could not live.



That there were a great many robberies and wicked practices

committed even in this dreadful time I do not deny.  The power of

avarice was so strong in some that they would run any hazard to steal

and to plunder; and particularly in houses where all the families or

inhabitants have been dead and carried out, they would break in at all

hazards, and without regard to the danger of infection, take even the

clothes off the dead bodies and the bed-clothes from others where

they lay dead.



This, I suppose, must be the case of a family in Houndsditch, where

a man and his daughter, the rest of the family being, as I suppose,

carried away before by the dead-cart, were found stark naked, one in

one chamber and one in another, lying dead on the floor, and the

clothes of the beds, from whence 'tis supposed they were rolled off by

thieves, stolen and carried quite away.



It is indeed to be observed that the women were in all this calamity

the most rash, fearless, and desperate creatures, and as there were vast

numbers that went about as nurses to tend those that were sick, they

committed a great many petty thieveries in the houses where they

were employed; and some of them were publicly whipped for it, when

perhaps they ought rather to have been hanged for examples, for

numbers of houses were robbed on these occasions, till at length the

parish officers were sent to recommend nurses to the sick, and always

took an account whom it was they sent, so as that they might call them

to account if the house had been abused where they were placed.



But these robberies extended chiefly to wearing-clothes, linen, and

what rings or money they could come at when the person died who

was under their care, but not to a general plunder of the houses; and I

could give you an account of one of these nurses, who, several years

after, being on her deathbed, confessed with the utmost horror the

robberies she had committed at the time of her being a nurse, and by

which she had enriched herself to a great degree.  But as for murders,

I do not find that there was ever any proof of the facts in the manner

as it has been reported, except as above.



They did tell me, indeed, of a nurse in one place that laid a wet cloth

upon the face of a dying patient whom she tended, and so put an end

to his life, who was just expiring before; and another that smothered a

young woman she was looking to when she was in a fainting fit, and

would have come to herself; some that killed them by giving them one

thing, some another, and some starved them by giving them nothing at

all.  But these stories had two marks of suspicion that always attended

them, which caused me always to slight them and to look on them as

mere stories that people continually frighted one another with.  First,

that wherever it was that we heard it, they always placed the scene at

the farther end of the town, opposite or most remote from where you

were to hear it.  If you heard it in Whitechappel, it had happened at St

Giles's, or at Westminster, or Holborn, or that end of the town.  If you

heard of it at that end of the town, then it was done in Whitechappel, or

the Minories, or about Cripplegate parish.  If you heard of it in the

city, why, then it happened in Southwark; and if you heard of it in

Southwark, then it was done in the city, and the like.



In the next place, of what part soever you heard the story, the

particulars were always the same, especially that of laying a wet

double clout on a dying man's face, and that of smothering a young

gentlewoman; so that it was apparent, at least to my judgement, that

there was more of tale than of truth in those things.



However, I cannot say but it had some effect upon the people, and

particularly that, as I said before, they grew more cautious whom they

took into their houses, and whom they trusted their lives with, and had

them always recommended if they could; and where they could not

find such, for they were not very plenty, they applied to the parish

officers.



But here again the misery of that time lay upon the poor who, being

infected, had neither food or physic, neither physician or apothecary

to assist them, or nurse to attend them.  Many of those died calling for

help, and even for sustenance, out at their windows in a most

miserable and deplorable manner; but it must be added that whenever

the cases of such persons or families were represented to my Lord

Mayor they always were relieved.



It is true, in some houses where the people were not very poor, yet

where they had sent perhaps their wives and children away, and if

they had any servants they had been dismissed; - I say it is true that to

save the expenses, many such as these shut themselves in, and not

having help, died alone.



A neighbour and acquaintance of mine, having some money owing

to him from a shopkeeper in Whitecross Street or thereabouts, sent his

apprentice, a youth about eighteen years of age, to endeavour to get

the money.  He came to the door, and finding it shut, knocked pretty

hard; and, as he thought, heard somebody answer within, but was not

sure, so he waited, and after some stay knocked again, and then a third

time, when he heard somebody coming downstairs.



At length the man of the house came to the door; he had on his

breeches or drawers, and a yellow flannel waistcoat, no stockings, a

pair of slipped-shoes, a white cap on his head, and, as the young man

said, 'death in his face'.



When he opened the door, says he, 'What do you disturb me thus for?'

The boy, though a little surprised, replied, 'I come from such a

one, and my master sent me for the money which he says you know

of.' 'Very well, child,' returns the living ghost; 'call as you go by at

Cripplegate Church, and bid them ring the bell'; and with these words

shut the door again, and went up again, and died the same day; nay,

perhaps the same hour.  This the young man told me himself, and I

have reason to believe it.  This was while the plague was not come to

a height.  I think it was in June, towards the latter end of the month; it

must be before the dead-carts came about, and while they used the

ceremony of ringing the bell for the dead, which was over for certain,

in that parish at least, before the month of July, for by the 25th of July

there died 550 and upwards in a week, and then they could no more

bury in form, rich or poor.



I have mentioned above that notwithstanding this dreadful calamity,

yet the numbers of thieves were abroad upon all occasions, where they

had found any prey, and that these were generally women.  It was one

morning about eleven O'clock, I had walked out to my brother's house

in Coleman Street parish, as I often did, to see that all was safe.



My brother's house had a little court before it, and a brick wall and a

gate in it, and within that several warehouses where his goods of

several sorts lay.  It happened that in one of these warehouses were

several packs of women's high-crowned hats, which came out of the

country and were, as I suppose, for exportation: whither, I know not.



I was surprised that when I came near my brother's door, which was

in a place they called Swan Alley, I met three or four women with

high-crowned hats on their heads; and, as I remembered afterwards,

one, if not more, had some hats likewise in their hands; but as I did

not see them come out at my brother's door, and not knowing that my

brother had any such goods in his warehouse, I did not offer to say

anything to them, but went across the way to shun meeting them, as

was usual to do at that time, for fear of the plague.  But when I came

nearer to the gate I met another woman with more hats come out of

the gate.  'What business, mistress,' said I, 'have you had there?'

'There are more people there,' said she; 'I have had no more business there

than they.' I was hasty to get to the gate then, and said no more to her,

by which means she got away.  But just as I came to the gate, I saw

two more coming across the yard to come out with hats also on their

heads and under their arms, at which I threw the gate to behind me,

which having a spring lock fastened itself; and turning to the women,

'Forsooth,' said I, 'what are you doing here?' and seized upon the hats,

and took them from them.  One of them, who, I confess, did not look

like a thief - 'Indeed,' says she, 'we are wrong, but we were told they

were goods that had no owner.  Be pleased to take them again; and

look yonder, there are more such customers as we.' She cried and

looked pitifully, so I took the hats from her and opened the gate, and

bade them be gone, for I pitied the women indeed; but when I looked

towards the warehouse, as she directed, there were six or seven more,

all women, fitting themselves with hats as unconcerned and quiet as if

they had been at a hatter's shop buying for their money.



I was surprised, not at the sight of so many thieves only, but at the

circumstances I was in; being now to thrust myself in among so many

people, who for some weeks had been so shy of myself that if I met

anybody in the street I would cross the way from them.



They were equally surprised, though on another account.  They all

told me they were neighbours, that they had heard anyone might take

them, that they were nobody's goods, and the like.  I talked big to

them at first, went back to the gate and took out the key, so that they

were all my prisoners, threatened to lock them all into the warehouse,

and go and fetch my Lord Mayor's officers for them.



They begged heartily, protested they found the gate open, and the

warehouse door open; and that it had no doubt been broken open by

some who expected to find goods of greater value: which indeed was

reasonable to believe, because the lock was broke, and a padlock that

hung to the door on the outside also loose, and not abundance of the

hats carried away.



At length I considered that this was not a time to be cruel and

rigorous; and besides that, it would necessarily oblige me to go much

about, to have several people come to me, and I go to several whose

circumstances of health I knew nothing of; and that even at this time

the plague was so high as that there died 4000 a week; so that in

showing my resentment, or even in seeking justice for my brother's

goods, I might lose my own life; so I contented myself with taking the

names and places where some of them lived, who were really inhabitants

in the neighbourhood, and threatening that my brother should call them

to an account for it when he returned to his habitation.



Then I talked a little upon another foot with them, and asked them

how they could do such things as these in a time of such general

calamity, and, as it were, in the face of God's most dreadful

judgements, when the plague was at their very doors, and, it may be,

in their very houses, and they did not know but that the dead-cart

might stop at their doors in a few hours to carry them to their graves.



I could not perceive that my discourse made much impression upon

them all that while, till it happened that there came two men of the

neighbourhood, hearing of the disturbance, and knowing my brother,

for they had been both dependents upon his family, and they came to

my assistance.  These being, as I said, neighbours, presently knew

three of the women and told me who they were and where they lived;

and it seems they had given me a true account of themselves before.



This brings these two men to a further remembrance.  The name of

one was John Hayward, who was at that time undersexton of the

parish of St Stephen, Coleman Street.  By undersexton was

understood at that time gravedigger and bearer of the dead.  This man

carried, or assisted to carry, all the dead to their graves which were

buried in that large parish, and who were carried in form; and after

that form of burying was stopped, went with the dead-cart and the bell

to fetch the dead bodies from the houses where they lay, and fetched

many of them out of the chambers and houses; for the parish was, and

is still, remarkable particularly, above all the parishes in London,

for a great number of alleys and thoroughfares, very long, into which

no carts could come, and where they were obliged to go and fetch the

bodies a very long way; which alleys now remain to witness it, such

as White's Alley, Cross Key Court, Swan Alley, Bell Alley, White

Horse Alley, and many more.  Here they went with a kind of hand-

barrow and laid the dead bodies on it, and carried them out to the

carts; which work he performed and never had the distemper at all,

but lived about twenty years after it, and was sexton of the parish to

the time of his death.  His wife at the same time was a nurse to

infected people, and tended many that died in the parish, being for her

honesty recommended by the parish officers; yet she never was

infected neither.



He never used any preservative against the infection, other than

holding garlic and rue in his mouth, and smoking tobacco.  This I also

had from his own mouth.  And his wife's remedy was washing her head

in vinegar and sprinkling her head-clothes so with vinegar as to

keep them always moist, and if the smell of any of those she waited

on was more than ordinary offensive, she snuffed vinegar up her nose

and sprinkled vinegar upon her head-clothes, and held a handkerchief

wetted with vinegar to her mouth.



It must be confessed that though the plague was chiefly among the

poor, yet were the poor the most venturous and fearless of it, and went

about their employment with a sort of brutal courage; I must call it so,

for it was founded neither on religion nor prudence; scarce did they

use any caution, but ran into any business which they could get

employment in, though it was the most hazardous.  Such was that of

tending the sick, watching houses shut up, carrying infected persons to

the pest-house, and, which was still worse, carrying the dead away to

their graves.



It was under this John Hayward's care, and within his bounds, that

the story of the piper, with which people have made themselves so

merry, happened, and he assured me that it was true.  It is said that it

was a blind piper; but, as John told me, the fellow was not blind, but

an ignorant, weak, poor man, and usually walked his rounds about ten

o'clock at night and went piping along from door to door, and the

people usually took him in at public-houses where they knew him, and

would give him drink and victuals, and sometimes farthings; and he in

return would pipe and sing and talk simply, which diverted the

people; and thus he lived.  It was but a very bad time for this diversion

while things were as I have told, yet the poor fellow went about as

usual, but was almost starved; and when anybody asked how he did he

would answer, the dead cart had not taken him yet, but that they had

promised to call for him next week.



It happened one night that this poor fellow, whether somebody had

given him too much drink or no - John Hayward said he had not drink

in his house, but that they had given him a little more victuals than

ordinary at a public-house in Coleman Street - and the poor fellow,

having not usually had a bellyful for perhaps not a good while, was

laid all along upon the top of a bulk or stall, and fast asleep, at a door

in the street near London Wall, towards Cripplegate-, and that upon

the same bulk or stall the people of some house, in the alley of which

the house was a corner, hearing a bell which they always rang before

the cart came, had laid a body really dead of the plague just by him,

thinking, too, that this poor fellow had been a dead body, as the other

was, and laid there by some of the neighbours.



Accordingly, when John Hayward with his bell and the cart came

along, finding two dead bodies lie upon the stall, they took them up

with the instrument they used and threw them into the cart, and, all

this while the piper slept soundly.



From hence they passed along and took in other dead bodies, till, as

honest John Hayward told me, they almost buried him alive in the

cart; yet all this while he slept soundly.  At length the cart came to the

place where the bodies were to be thrown into the ground, which, as I

do remember, was at Mount Mill; and as the cart usually stopped

some time before they were ready to shoot out the melancholy load

they had in it, as soon as the cart stopped the fellow awaked and

struggled a little to get his head out from among the dead bodies,

when, raising himself up in the cart, he called out, 'Hey! where am I?'

This frighted the fellow that attended about the work; but after some

pause John Hayward, recovering himself, said, 'Lord, bless us!

There's somebody in the cart not quite dead!' So another called to him

and said, 'Who are you?' The fellow answered, 'I am the poor piper.

Where am I?' 'Where are you?' says Hayward.  'Why, you are in the

dead-cart, and we are going to bury you.' 'But I an't dead though, am

I?' says the piper, which made them laugh a little though, as John said,

they were heartily frighted at first; so they helped the poor fellow

down, and he went about his business.



I know the story goes he set up his pipes in the cart and frighted the

bearers and others so that they ran away; but John Hayward did not

tell the story so, nor say anything of his piping at all; but that he was a

poor piper, and that he was carried away as above I am fully satisfied

of the truth of.



It is to be noted here that the dead-carts in the city were not

confined to particular parishes, but one cart went through several

parishes, according as the number of dead presented; nor were they

tied to carry the dead to their respective parishes, but many of the

dead taken up in the city were carried to the burying-ground in the

out-parts for want of room.



I have already mentioned the surprise that this judgement was at

first among the people.  I must be allowed to give some of my

observations on the more serious and religious part.  Surely never city,

at least of this bulk and magnitude, was taken in a condition so

perfectly unprepared for such a dreadful visitation, whether I am to

speak of the civil preparations or religious.  They were, indeed, as if

they had had no warning, no expectation, no apprehensions, and

consequently the least provision imaginable was made for it in a

public way.  For example, the Lord Mayor and sheriffs had made no

provision as magistrates for the regulations which were to be

observed.  They had gone into no measures for relief of the poor.  The

citizens had no public magazines or storehouses for corn or meal for

the subsistence of the poor, which if they had provided themselves, as

in such cases is done abroad, many miserable families who were now

reduced to the utmost distress would have been relieved, and that in a

better manner than now could be done.



The stock of the city's money I can say but little to.  The Chamber of

London was said to be exceedingly rich, and it may be concluded that

they were so, by the vast of money issued from thence in the

rebuilding the public edifices after the fire of London, and in building

new works, such as, for the first part, the Guildhall, Blackwell Hall,

part of Leadenhall, half the Exchange, the Session House, the

Compter, the prisons of Ludgate, Newgate, &c., several of the wharfs

and stairs and landing-places on the river; all which were either

burned down or damaged by the great fire of London, the next year

after the plague; and of the second sort, the Monument, Fleet Ditch

with its bridges, and the Hospital of Bethlem or Bedlam, &c.  But

possibly the managers of the city's credit at that time made more

conscience of breaking in upon the orphan's money to show charity to

the distressed citizens than the managers in the following years did to

beautify the city and re-edify the buildings; though, in the first case,

the losers would have thought their fortunes better bestowed, and the

public faith of the city have been less subjected to scandal and reproach.



It must be acknowledged that the absent citizens, who, though they

were fled for safety into the country, were yet greatly interested in the

welfare of those whom they left behind, forgot not to contribute

liberally to the relief of the poor, and large sums were also collected

among trading towns in the remotest parts of England; and, as I have

heard also, the nobility and the gentry in all parts of England took the

deplorable condition of the city into their consideration, and sent up

large sums of money in charity to the Lord Mayor and magistrates for

the relief of the poor.  The king also, as I was told, ordered a thousand

pounds a week to be distributed in four parts: one quarter to the city

and liberty of Westminster; one quarter or part among the inhabitants

of the Southwark side of the water; one quarter to the liberty and parts

within of the city, exclusive of the city within the walls; and one-

fourth part to the suburbs in the county of Middlesex, and the east and

north parts of the city.  But this latter I only speak of as a report.



Certain it is, the greatest part of the poor or families who formerly

lived by their labour, or by retail trade, lived now on charity; and had

there not been prodigious sums of money given by charitable, well-

minded Christians for the support of such, the city could never have

subsisted.  There were, no question, accounts kept of their charity, and

of the just distribution of it by the magistrates.  But as such multitudes

of those very officers died through whose hands it was distributed,

and also that, as I have been told, most of the accounts of those things

were lost in the great fire which happened in the very next year, and

which burnt even the chamberlain's office and many of their papers,

so I could never come at the particular account, which I used great

endeavours to have seen.



It may, however, be a direction in case of the approach of a like

visitation, which God keep the city from; - I say, it may be of use to

observe that by the care of the Lord Mayor and aldermen at that time

in distributing weekly great sums of money for relief of the poor, a

multitude of people who would otherwise have perished, were

relieved, and their lives preserved.  And here let me enter into a brief

state of the case of the poor at that time, and what way apprehended

from them, from whence may be judged hereafter what may be

expected if the like distress should come upon the city.



At the beginning of the plague, when there was now no more hope

but that the whole city would be visited; when, as I have said, all that

had friends or estates in the country retired with their families;

and when, indeed, one would have thought the very city itself was

running out of the gates, and that there would be nobody left behind;

you may be sure from that hour all trade, except such as related to

immediate subsistence, was, as it were, at a full stop.



This is so lively a case, and contains in it so much of the real

condition of the people, that I think I cannot be too particular in it,

and therefore I descend to the several arrangements or classes of

people who fell into immediate distress upon this occasion.  For example:



1.  All master-workmen in manufactures, especially such as belonged

to ornament and the less necessary parts of the people's dress, clothes,

and furniture for houses, such as riband-weavers and other weavers,

gold and silver lace makers, and gold and silver wire drawers,

sempstresses, milliners, shoemakers, hatmakers, and glovemakers;

also upholsterers, joiners, cabinet-makers, looking-glass makers, and

innumerable trades which depend upon such as these; - I say, the

master-workmen in such stopped their work, dismissed their

journeymen and workmen, and all their dependents.



2.  As merchandising was at a full stop, for very few ships ventured to

come up the river and none at all went out, so all the extraordinary

officers of the customs, likewise the watermen, carmen, porters, and

all the poor whose labour depended upon the merchants, were at once

dismissed and put out of business.



3.  All the tradesmen usually employed in building or repairing of

houses were at a full stop, for the people were far from wanting to

build houses when so many thousand houses were at once stripped of

their inhabitants; so that this one article turned all the ordinary

workmen of that kind out of business, such as bricklayers, masons,

carpenters, joiners, plasterers, painters, glaziers, smiths, plumbers, and

all the labourers depending on such.



4.  As navigation was at a stop, our ships neither coming in or going

out as before, so the seamen were all out of employment, and many of

them in the last and lowest degree of distress; and with the seamen

were all the several tradesmen and workmen belonging to and

depending upon the building and fitting out of ships, such as ship-

carpenters, caulkers, ropemakers, dry coopers, sailmakers,

anchorsmiths, and other smiths; blockmakers, carvers, gunsmiths,

ship-chandlers, ship-carvers, and the like.  The masters of those

perhaps might live upon their substance, but the traders were

universally at a stop, and consequently all their workmen discharged.

Add to these that the river was in a manner without boats, and all or

most part of the watermen, lightermen, boat-builders, and lighter-

builders in like manner idle and laid by.



5.  All families retrenched their living as much as possible, as well

those that fled as those that stayed; so that an innumerable multitude

of footmen, serving-men, shopkeepers, journeymen, merchants'

bookkeepers, and such sort of people, and especially poor maid-

servants, were turned off, and left friendless and helpless, without

employment and without habitation, and this was really a dismal article.





I might be more particular as to this part, but it may suffice to

mention in general, all trades being stopped, employment ceased: the

labour, and by that the bread, of the poor were cut off; and at first

indeed the cries of the poor were most lamentable to hear, though by

the distribution of charity their misery that way was greatly abated.

Many indeed fled into the counties, but thousands of them having

stayed in London till nothing but desperation sent them away, death

overtook them on the road, and they served for no better than the

messengers of death; indeed, others carrying the infection along with

them, spread it very unhappily into the remotest parts of the kingdom.



Many of these were the miserable objects of despair which I have

mentioned before, and were removed by the destruction which

followed.  These might be said to perish not by the infection itself but

by the consequence of it; indeed, namely, by hunger and distress and

the want of all things: being without lodging, without money, without

friends, without means to get their bread, or without anyone to give it

them; for many of them were without what we call legal settlements,

and so could not claim of the parishes, and all the support they had

was by application to the magistrates for relief, which relief was (to

give the magistrates their due) carefully and cheerfully administered

as they found it necessary, and those that stayed behind never felt the

want and distress of that kind which they felt who went away in the

manner above noted.



Let any one who is acquainted with what multitudes of people get

their daily bread in this city by their labour, whether artificers or mere

workmen - I say, let any man consider what must be the miserable

condition of this town if, on a sudden, they should be all turned out of

employment, that labour should cease, and wages for work be no more.



This was the case with us at that time; and had not the sums of

money contributed in charity by well-disposed people of every kind,

as well abroad as at home, been prodigiously great, it had not been in

the power of the Lord Mayor and sheriffs to have kept the public

peace.  Nor were they without apprehensions, as it was, that

desperation should push the people upon tumults, and cause them to

rifle the houses of rich men and plunder the markets of provisions; in

which case the country people, who brought provisions very freely

and boldly to town, would have been terrified from coming any more,

and the town would have sunk under an unavoidable famine.



But the prudence of my Lord Mayor and the Court of Aldermen

within the city, and of the justices of peace in the out-parts, was such,

and they were supported with money from all parts so well, that the

poor people were kept quiet, and their wants everywhere relieved, as

far as was possible to be done.



Two things besides this contributed to prevent the mob doing any

mischief.  One was, that really the rich themselves had not laid up

stores of provisions in their houses as indeed they ought to have done,

and which if they had been wise enough to have done, and locked

themselves entirely up, as some few did, they had perhaps escaped the

disease better.  But as it appeared they had not, so the mob had no

notion of finding stores of provisions there if they had broken in. as it

is plain they were sometimes very near doing, and which: if they bad,

they had finished the ruin of the whole city, for there were no regular

troops to have withstood them, nor could the trained bands have been

brought together to defend the city, no men being to be found to bear arms.



But the vigilance of the Lord Mayor and such magistrates as could

be had (for some, even of the aldermen, were dead, and some absent)

prevented this; and they did it by the most kind and gentle methods

they could think of, as particularly by relieving the most desperate

with money, and putting others into business, and particularly that

employment of watching houses that were infected and shut up.  And

as the number of these were very great (for it was said there was at

one time ten thousand houses shut up, and every house had two

watchmen to guard it, viz., one by night and the other by day), this

gave opportunity to employ a very great number of poor men at a

time.



The women and servants that were turned off from their places were

likewise employed as nurses to tend the sick in all places, and this

took off a very great number of them.



And, which though a melancholy article in itself, yet was a

deliverance in its kind: namely, the plague, which raged in a dreadful

manner from the middle of August to the middle of October, carried

off in that time thirty or forty thousand of these very people which,

had they been left, would certainly have been an insufferable burden

by their poverty; that is to say, the whole city could not have

supported the expense of them, or have provided food for them; and

they would in time have been even driven to the necessity of

plundering either the city itself or the country adjacent, to have

subsisted themselves, which would first or last have put the whole

nation, as well as the city, into the utmost terror and confusion.



It was observable, then, that this calamity of the people made them

very humble; for now for about nine weeks together there died near a

thousand a day, one day with another, even by the account of the

weekly bills, which yet, I have reason to be assured, never gave a full

account, by many thousands; the confusion being such, and the carts

working in the dark when they carried the dead, that in some places

no account at all was kept, but they worked on, the clerks and sextons

not attending for weeks together, and not knowing what number they

carried.  This account is verified by the following bills of mortality: -



                         Of all of the

                         Diseases.      Plague

From August   8    to August 15          5319          3880

"     "      15         "    22          5568          4237

"     "      22         "    29          7496          6102

"     "      29 to September  5          8252          6988

"  September  5         "    12          7690          6544

"     "      12         "    19          8297          7165

"     "      19         "    26          6460          5533

"     "      26 to October    3          5720          4979

"   October   3         "    10          5068          4327

                                        -----         -----

                                       59,870        49,705





So that the gross of the people were carried off in these two months;

for, as the whole number which was brought in to die of the plague

was but 68,590, here is 50,000 of them, within a trifle, in two months;

I say 50,000, because, as there wants 295 in the number above, so

there wants two days of two months in the account of time.



Now when I say that the parish officers did not give in a full

account, or were not to be depended upon for their account, let any

one but consider how men could be exact in such a time of dreadful

distress, and when many of them were taken sick themselves and

perhaps died in the very time when their accounts were to be given in;

I mean the parish clerks, besides inferior officers; for though these

poor men ventured at all hazards, yet they were far from being exempt

from the common calamity, especially if it be true that the parish of

Stepney had, within the year, 116 sextons, gravediggers, and their

assistants; that is to say, bearers, bellmen, and drivers of carts for

carrying off the dead bodies.



Indeed the work was not of a nature to allow them leisure to take an

exact tale of the dead bodies, which were all huddled together in the

dark into a pit; which pit or trench no man could come nigh but at the

utmost peril.  I observed often that in the parishes of Aldgate and

Cripplegate, Whitechappel and Stepney, there were five, six, seven, and

eight hundred in a week in the bills; whereas if we may believe the

opinion of those that lived in the city all the time as well as I, there

died sometimes 2000 a week in those parishes; and I saw it under the

hand of one that made as strict an examination into that part as he

could, that there really died an hundred thousand people of the plague

in that one year whereas in the bills, the articles of the plague, it was

but 68,590.



If I may be allowed to give my opinion, by what I saw with my eyes

and heard from other people that were eye-witnesses, I do verily

believe the same, viz., that there died at least 100,000 of the plague

only, besides other distempers and besides those which died in the

fields and highways and secret Places out of the compass of the

communication, as it was called, and who were not put down in the

bills though they really belonged to the body of the inhabitants.  It was

known to us all that abundance of poor despairing creatures who had

the distemper upon them, and were grown stupid or melancholy by

their misery, as many were, wandered away into the fields and Woods,

and into secret uncouth places almost anywhere, to creep into a bush

or hedge and die.



The inhabitants of the villages adjacent would, in pity, carry them

food and set it at a distance, that they might fetch it, if they were able;

and sometimes they were not able, and the next time they went they

should find the poor wretches lie dead and the food untouched.  The

number of these miserable objects were many, and I know so many

that perished thus, and so exactly where, that I believe I could go to

the very place and dig their bones up still; for the country people

would go and dig a hole at a distance from them, and then with long

poles, and hooks at the end of them, drag the bodies into these pits,

and then throw the earth in from as far as they could cast it, to cover

them, taking notice how the wind blew, and so coming on that side

which the seamen call to windward, that the scent of the bodies might

blow from them; and thus great numbers went out of the world who

were never known, or any account of them taken, as well within the

bills of mortality as without.



This, indeed, I had in the main only from the relation of others, for I

seldom walked into the fields, except towards Bethnal Green and

Hackney, or as hereafter.  But when I did walk, I always saw a great

many poor wanderers at a distance; but I could know little of their

cases, for whether it were in the street or in the fields, if we had seen

anybody coming, it was a general method to walk away; yet I believe

the account is exactly true.



As this puts me upon mentioning my walking the streets and fields, I

cannot omit taking notice what a desolate place the city was at that

time.  The great street I lived in (which is known to be one of the

broadest of all the streets of London, I mean of the suburbs as well as

the liberties) all the side where the butchers lived, especially without

the bars, was more like a green field than a paved street, and the

people generally went in the middle with the horses and carts.  It is

true that the farthest end towards Whitechappel Church was not all

paved, but even the part that was paved was full of grass also; but this

need not seem strange, since the great streets within the city, such as

Leadenhall Street, Bishopsgate Street, Cornhill, and even the

Exchange itself, had grass growing in them in several places; neither

cart or coach were seen in the streets from morning to evening, except

some country carts to bring roots and beans, or peas, hay, and straw,

to the market, and those but very few compared to what was usual.

As for coaches, they were scarce used but to carry sick people to the

pest-house, and to other hospitals, and some few to carry physicians to

such places as they thought fit to venture to visit; for really coaches

were dangerous things, and people did not care to venture into them,

because they did not know who might have been carried in them last,

and sick, infected people were, as I have said, ordinarily carried in

them to the pest-houses, and sometimes people expired in them as

they went along.



It is true, when the infection came to such a height as I have now

mentioned, there were very few physicians which cared to stir abroad

to sick houses, and very many of the most eminent of the faculty were

dead, as well as the surgeons also; for now it was indeed a dismal

time, and for about a month together, not taking any notice of the bills

of mortality, I believe there did not die less than 1500 or 1700 a day,

one day with another.



One of the worst days we had in the whole time, as I thought, was in

the beginning of September, when, indeed, good people began to

think that God was resolved to make a full end of the people in this

miserable city.  This was at that time when the plague was fully come

into the eastern parishes.  The parish of Aldgate, if I may give my

opinion, buried above a thousand a week for two weeks, though the

bills did not say so many; - but it surrounded me at so dismal a rate

that there was not a house in twenty uninfected in the Minories, in

Houndsditch, and in those parts of Aldgate parish about the Butcher

Row and the alleys over against me.  I say, in those places death

reigned in every corner.  Whitechappel parish was in the same

condition, and though much less than the parish I lived in, yet buried

near 600 a week by the bills, and in my opinion near twice as many.

Whole families, and indeed whole streets of families, were swept

away together; insomuch that it was frequent for neighbours to call to

the bellman to go to such-and-such houses and fetch out the people,

for that they were all dead.



And, indeed, the work of removing the dead bodies by carts was

now grown so very odious and dangerous that it was complained of

that the bearers did not take care to dear such houses where all the

inhabitants were dead, but that sometimes the bodies lay several days

unburied, till the neighbouring families were offended with the

stench, and consequently infected; and this neglect of the officers was

such that the churchwardens and constables were summoned to look

after it, and even the justices of the Hamlets were obliged to venture

their lives among them to quicken and encourage them, for

innumerable of the bearers died of the distemper, infected by the

bodies they were obliged to come so near.  And had it not been that

the number of poor people who wanted employment and wanted

bread (as I have said before) was so great that necessity drove them to

undertake anything and venture anything, they would never have

found people to be employed.  And then the bodies of the dead would

have lain above ground, and have perished and rotted in a dreadful manner.



But the magistrates cannot be enough commended in this, that they

kept such good order for the burying of the dead, that as fast as any of

these they employed to carry off and bury the dead fell sick or died, as

was many times the case, they immediately supplied the places with

others, which, by reason of the great number of poor that was left out

of business, as above, was not hard to do.  This occasioned, that

notwithstanding the infinite number of people which died and were

sick, almost all together, yet they were always cleared away and

carried off every night, so that it was never to be said of London that

the living were not able to bury the dead.



As the desolation was greater during those terrible times, so the

amazement of the people increased, and a thousand unaccountable

things they would do in the violence of their fright, as others did the

same in the agonies of their distemper, and this part was very

affecting.  Some went roaring and crying and wringing their hands

along the street; some would go praying and lifting up their hands to

heaven, calling upon God for mercy.  I cannot say, indeed, whether

this was not in their distraction, but, be it so, it was still an indication

of a more serious mind, when they had the use of their senses, and

was much better, even as it was, than the frightful yellings and cryings

that every day, and especially in the evenings, were heard in some

streets.  I suppose the world has heard of the famous Solomon Eagle,

an enthusiast.  He, though not infected at all but in his head, went

about denouncing of judgement upon the city in a frightful manner,

sometimes quite naked, and with a pan of burning charcoal on his

head.  What he said, or pretended, indeed I could not learn.



I will not say whether that clergyman was distracted or not, or

whether he did it in pure zeal for the poor people, who went every

evening through the streets of Whitechappel, and, with his hands lifted

up, repeated that part of the Liturgy of the Church continually, 'Spare

us, good Lord; spare Thy people, whom Thou has redeemed with Thy

most precious blood.' I say, I cannot speak positively of these things,

because these were only the dismal objects which represented

themselves to me as I looked through my chamber windows (for I

seldom opened the casements), while I confined myself within doors

during that most violent raging of the pestilence; when, indeed, as I

have said, many began to think, and even to say, that there would

none escape; and indeed I began to think so too, and therefore kept

within doors for about a fortnight and never stirred out.  But I could

not hold it.  Besides, there were some people who, notwithstanding

the danger, did not omit publicly to attend the worship of God, even in

the most dangerous times; and though it is true that a great many

clergymen did shut up their churches, and fled, as other people did,

for the safety of their lives, yet all did not do so.  Some ventured to

officiate and to keep up the assemblies of the people by constant

prayers, and sometimes sermons or brief exhortations to repentance

and reformation, and this as long as any would come to hear them.

And Dissenters did the like also, and even in the very churches where

the parish ministers were either dead or fled; nor was there any room

for making difference at such a time as this was.



It was indeed a lamentable thing to hear the miserable lamentations

of poor dying creatures calling out for ministers to comfort them and

pray with them, to counsel them and to direct them, calling out to God

for pardon and mercy, and confessing aloud their past sins.  It would

make the stoutest heart bleed to hear how many warnings were then

given by dying penitents to others not to put off and delay their

repentance to the day of distress; that such a time of calamity as this

was no time for repentance, was no time to call upon God.  I wish I

could repeat the very sound of those groans and of those exclamations

that I heard from some poor dying creatures when in the height of

their agonies and distress, and that I could make him that reads this

hear, as I imagine I now hear them, for the sound seems still to ring in

my ears.



If I could but tell this part in such moving accents as should alarm

the very soul of the reader, I should rejoice that I recorded those

things, however short and imperfect.



It pleased God that I was still spared, and very hearty and sound in

health, but very impatient of being pent up within doors without air,

as I had been for fourteen days or thereabouts; and I could not restrain

myself, but I would go to carry a letter for my brother to the post-

house.  Then it was indeed that I observed a profound silence in the

streets.  When I came to the post-house, as I went to put in my letter I

saw a man stand in one corner of the yard and talking to another at a

window, and a third had opened a door belonging to the office.  In the

middle of the yard lay a small leather purse with two keys hanging at

it, with money in it, but nobody would meddle with it.  I asked how

long it had lain there; the man at the window said it had lain almost an

hour, but that they had not meddled with it, because they did not know

but the person who dropped it might come back to look for it.  I had

no such need of money, nor was the sum so big that I had any

inclination to meddle with it, or to get the money at the hazard it

might be attended with; so I seemed to go away, when the man who

had opened the door said he would take it up, but so that if the right

owner came for it he should be sure to have it.  So he went in and

fetched a pail of water and set it down hard by the purse, then went

again and fetch some gunpowder, and cast a good deal of powder

upon the purse, and then made a train from that which he had thrown

loose upon the purse.  The train reached about two yards.  After this

he goes in a third time and fetches out a pair of tongs red hot, and

which he had prepared, I suppose, on purpose; and first setting fire to

the train of powder, that singed the purse and also smoked the air

sufficiently.  But he was not content with that, but he then takes up the

purse with the tongs, holding it so long till the tongs burnt through the

purse, and then he shook the money out into the pail of water, so he

carried it in.  The money, as I remember, was about thirteen shilling

and some smooth groats and brass farthings.



There might perhaps have been several poor people, as I have

observed above, that would have been hardy enough to have ventured

for the sake of the money; but you may easily see by what I have

observed that the few people who were spared were very careful of

themselves at that time when the distress was so exceeding great.



Much about the same time I walked out into the fields towards Bow;

for I had a great mind to see how things were managed in the river

and among the ships; and as I had some concern in shipping, I had a

notion that it had been one of the best ways of securing one's self from

the infection to have retired into a ship; and musing how to satisfy my

curiosity in that point, I turned away over the fields from Bow to

Bromley, and down to Blackwall to the stairs which are there for

landing or taking water.



Here I saw a poor man walking on the bank, or sea-wall, as they call

it, by himself.  I walked a while also about, seeing the houses all shut

up.  At last I fell into some talk, at a distance, with this poor man; first

I asked him how people did thereabouts.  'Alas, sir!' says he, 'almost

desolate; all dead or sick.  Here are very few families in this part, or in

that village' (pointing at Poplar), 'where half of them are not dead

already, and the rest sick.' Then he pointing to one house, 'There they

are all dead', said he, 'and the house stands open; nobody dares go into

it.  A poor thief', says he, 'ventured in to steal something, but he paid

dear for his theft, for he was carried to the churchyard too last night.'

Then he pointed to several other houses.  'There', says he.  'they are all

dead, the man and his wife, and five children.  There', says he, 'they

are shut up; you see a watchman at the door'; and so of other houses.

'Why,' says I, 'what do you here all alone?  ' 'Why,' says he, 'I am a

poor, desolate man; it has pleased God I am not yet visited, though my

family is, and one of my children dead.' 'How do you mean, then,' said

I, 'that you are not visited?' 'Why,' says he, 'that's my house' (pointing

to a very little, low-boarded house), 'and there my poor wife and two

children live,' said he, 'if they may be said to live, for my wife and one

of the children are visited, but I do not come at them.' And with that

word I saw the tears run very plentifully down his face; and so they

did down mine too, I assure you.



'But,' said I, 'why do you not come at them?  How can you abandon

your own flesh and blood?' 'Oh, sir,' says he, 'the Lord forbid! I do not

abandon them; I work for them as much as I am able; and, blessed be

the Lord, I keep them from want'; and with that I observed he lifted up

his eyes to heaven, with a countenance that presently told me I had

happened on a man that was no hypocrite, but a serious, religious,

good man, and his ejaculation was an expression of thankfulness that,

in such a condition as he was in, he should be able to say his family

did not want.  'Well,' says I, 'honest man, that is a great mercy as

things go now with the poor.  But how do you live, then, and how are

you kept from the dreadful calamity that is now upon us all?' 'Why,

sir,' says he, 'I am a waterman, and there's my boat,' says he, 'and the

boat serves me for a house.  I work in it in the day, and I sleep in it in

the night; and what I get I lay down upon that stone,' says he, showing

me a broad stone on the other side of the street, a good way from his

house; 'and then,' says he, 'I halloo, and call to them till I make them

hear; and they come and fetch it.'



'Well, friend,' says I, 'but how can you get any money as a

waterman?  Does an body go by water these times?' 'Yes, sir,' says he,

'in the way I am employed there does.  Do you see there,' says he, 'five

ships lie at anchor' (pointing down the river a good way below the

town), 'and do you see', says he, 'eight or ten ships lie at the chain

there, and at anchor yonder?' pointing above the town).  'All those

ships have families on board, of their merchants and owners, and

such-like, who have locked themselves up and live on board, close

shut in, for fear of the infection; and I tend on them to fetch things for

them, carry letters, and do what is absolutely necessary, that they may

not be obliged to come on shore; and every night I fasten my boat on

board one of the ship's boats, and there I sleep by myself, and, blessed

be God, I am preserved hitherto.'



'Well,' said I, 'friend, but will they let you come on board after you

have been on shore here, when this is such a terrible place, and so

infected as it is?'



'Why, as to that,' said he, 'I very seldom go up the ship-side, but

deliver what I bring to their boat, or lie by the side, and they hoist it

on board.  If I did, I think they are in no danger from me, for I never

go into any house on shore, or touch anybody, no, not of my own

family; but I fetch provisions for them.'



'Nay,' says I, 'but that may be worse, for you must have those

provisions of somebody or other; and since all this part of the town is

so infected, it is dangerous so much as to speak with anybody, for the

village', said I, 'is, as it were, the beginning of London, though it be at

some distance from it.'



'That is true,' added he; 'but you do not understand me right; I do not

buy provisions for them here.  I row up to Greenwich and buy fresh

meat there, and sometimes I row down the river to Woolwich and buy

there; then I go to single farm-houses on the Kentish side, where I am

known, and buy fowls and eggs and butter, and bring to the ships, as

they direct me, sometimes one, sometimes the other.  I seldom come

on shore here, and I came now only to call on my wife and hear how

my family do, and give them a little money, which I received last night.'



'Poor man!' said I; 'and how much hast thou gotten for them?'



'I have gotten four shillings,' said he, 'which is a great sum, as things

go now with poor men; but they have given me a bag of bread too, and

a salt fish and some flesh; so all helps out.' 'Well,' said I, 'and have you

given it them yet?'



'No,' said he; 'but I have called, and my wife has answered that she

cannot come out yet, but in half-an-hour she hopes to come, and I am

waiting for her.  Poor woman!' says he, 'she is brought sadly down.

She has a swelling, and it is broke, and I hope she will recover; but I

fear the child will die, but it is the Lord - '



Here he stopped, and wept very much.



'Well, honest friend,' said I, 'thou hast a sure Comforter, if thou hast

brought thyself to be resigned to the will of God; He is dealing with us

all in judgement.'



'Oh, sir!' says he, 'it is infinite mercy if any of us are spared, and

who am I to repine!'



'Sayest thou so?' said I, 'and how much less is my faith than thine?'

And here my heart smote me, suggesting how much better this poor

man's foundation was on which he stayed in the danger than mine;

that he had nowhere to fly; that he had a family to bind him to

attendance, which I had not; and mine was mere presumption, his a

true dependence and a courage resting on God; and yet that he used all

possible caution for his safety.



I turned a little way from the man while these thoughts engaged me,

for, indeed, I could no more refrain from tears than he.



At length, after some further talk, the poor woman opened the door

and called, 'Robert, Robert'.  He answered, and bid her stay a few

moments and he would come; so he ran down the common stairs to

his boat and fetched up a sack, in which was the provisions he had

brought from the ships; and when he returned he hallooed again.

Then he went to the great stone which he showed me and emptied the

sack, and laid all out, everything by themselves, and then retired; and

his wife came with a little boy to fetch them away, and called and said

such a captain had sent such a thing, and such a captain such a thing,

and at the end adds, 'God has sent it all; give thanks to Him.' When the

poor woman had taken up all, she was so weak she could not carry it

at once in, though the weight was not much neither; so she left the

biscuit, which was in a little bag, and left a little boy to watch it till

she came again.



'Well, but', says I to him, 'did you leave her the four shillings too,

which you said was your week's pay?'



'Yes, yes,' says he; 'you shall hear her own it.' So he calls again,

'Rachel, Rachel,' which it seems was her name, 'did you take up the

money?' 'Yes,' said she.  'How much was it?' said he.  'Four shillings

and a groat,' said she.  'Well, well,' says he, 'the Lord keep you all'; and

so he turned to go away.





End of Part 3
