



Part  2





I saw both these stars, and, I must confess, had so much of the

common notion of such things in my head, that I was apt to look upon

them as the forerunners and warnings of God's judgements; and

especially when, after the plague had followed the first, I yet saw

another of the like kind, I could not but say God had not yet

sufficiently scourged the city.



But I could not at the same time carry these things to the height that

others did, knowing, too, that natural causes are assigned by the

astronomers for such things, and that their motions and even their

revolutions are calculated, or pretended to be calculated, so that they

cannot be so perfectly called the forerunners or foretellers, much less

the procurers, of such events as pestilence, war, fire, and the like.



But let my thoughts and the thoughts of the philosophers be, or have

been, what they will, these things had a more than ordinary influence

upon the minds of the common people, and they had almost universal

melancholy apprehensions of some dreadful calamity and judgement

coming upon the city; and this principally from the sight of this

comet, and the little alarm that was given in December by two people

dying at St Giles's, as above.



The apprehensions of the people were likewise strangely increased

by the error of the times; in which, I think, the people, from what

principle I cannot imagine, were more addicted to prophecies and

astrological conjurations, dreams, and old wives' tales than ever they

were before or since.  Whether this unhappy temper was originally

raised by the follies of some people who got money by it - that is to

say, by printing predictions and prognostications - I know not; but

certain it is, books frighted them terribly, such as Lilly's Almanack,

Gadbury's Astrological Predictions, Poor Robin's Almanack, and the

like; also several pretended religious books, one entitled, Come out of

her, my People, lest you be Partaker of her Plagues; another called,

Fair Warning; another, Britain's Remembrancer; and many such, all,

or most part of which, foretold, directly or covertly, the ruin of the

city.  Nay, some were so enthusiastically bold as to run about the

streets with their oral predictions, pretending they were sent to preach

to the city; and one in particular, who, like Jonah to Nineveh, cried in

the streets, 'Yet forty days, and London shall be destroyed.' I will not

be positive whether he said yet forty days or yet a few days.  Another

ran about naked, except a pair of drawers about his waist, crying day

and night, like a man that Josephus mentions, who cried, 'Woe to

Jerusalem!' a little before the destruction of that city.  So this poor

naked creature cried, 'Oh, the great and the dreadful God!' and said no

more, but repeated those words continually, with a voice and

countenance full of horror, a swift pace; and nobody could ever find

him to stop or rest, or take any sustenance, at least that ever I could

hear of.  I met this poor creature several times in the streets, and

would have spoken to him, but he would not enter into speech with

me or any one else, but held on his dismal cries continually.



These things terrified the people to the last degree, and especially

when two or three times, as I have mentioned already, they found one

or two in the bills dead of the plague at St Giles's.



Next to these public things were the dreams of old women, or, I

should say, the interpretation of old women upon other people's

dreams; and these put abundance of people even out of their wits.

Some heard voices warning them to be gone, for that there would be

such a plague in London, so that the living would not be able to bury

the dead.  Others saw apparitions in the air; and I must be allowed to

say of both, I hope without breach of charity, that they heard voices

that never spake, and saw sights that never appeared; but the

imagination of the people was really turned wayward and possessed.

And no wonder, if they who were poring continually at the clouds saw

shapes and figures, representations and appearances, which had

nothing in them but air, and vapour.  Here they told us they saw a

flaming sword held in a hand coming out of a cloud, with a point

hanging directly over the city; there they saw hearses and coffins in

the air carrying to be buried; and there again, heaps of dead bodies

lying unburied, and the like, just as the imagination of the poor

terrified people furnished them with matter to work upon.

  So hypochondriac fancies represent

  Ships, armies, battles in the firmament;

  Till steady eyes the exhalations solve,

  And all to its first matter, cloud, resolve.





I could fill this account with the strange relations such people gave

every day of what they had seen; and every one was so positive of

their having seen what they pretended to see, that there was no

contradicting them without breach of friendship, or being accounted

rude and unmannerly on the one hand, and profane and impenetrable

on the other.  One time before the plague was begun (otherwise than

as I have said in St Giles's), I think it was in March, seeing a crowd of

people in the street, I joined with them to satisfy my curiosity, and

found them all staring up into the air to see what a woman told them

appeared plain to her, which was an angel clothed in white, with a

fiery sword in his hand, waving it or brandishing it over his head.  She

described every part of the figure to the life, showed them the motion

and the form, and the poor people came into it so eagerly, and with so

much readiness; 'Yes, I see it all plainly,' says one; 'there's the sword

as plain as can be.' Another saw the angel.  One saw his very face, and

cried out what a glorious creature he was! One saw one thing, and

one another.  I looked as earnestly as the rest, but perhaps not with so

much willingness to be imposed upon; and I said, indeed, that I could

see nothing but a white cloud, bright on one side by the shining of the

sun upon the other part.  The woman endeavoured to show it me, but

could not make me confess that I saw it, which, indeed, if I had I must

have lied.  But the woman, turning upon me, looked in my face, and

fancied I laughed, in which her imagination deceived her too, for I

really did not laugh, but was very seriously reflecting how the poor

people were terrified by the force of their own imagination.  However,

she turned from me, called me profane fellow, and a scoffer; told me

that it was a time of God's anger, and dreadful judgements were

approaching, and that despisers such as I should wander and perish.



The people about her seemed disgusted as well as she; and I found

there was no persuading them that I did not laugh at them, and that

I should be rather mobbed by them than be able to undeceive them.

So I left them; and this appearance passed for as real as the

blazing star itself.



Another encounter I had in the open day also; and this was in going

through a narrow passage from Petty France into Bishopsgate

Churchyard, by a row of alms-houses.  There are two churchyards to

Bishopsgate church or parish; one we go over to pass from the place

called Petty France into Bishopsgate Street, coming out just by the

church door; the other is on the side of the narrow passage where the

alms-houses are on the left; and a dwarf-wall with a palisado on it on

the right hand, and the city wall on the other side more to the right.



In this narrow passage stands a man looking through between the

palisadoes into the burying-place, and as many people as the

narrowness of the passage would admit to stop, without hindering the

passage of others, and he was talking mightily eagerly to them, and

pointing now to one place, then to another, and affirming that he saw

a ghost walking upon such a gravestone there.  He described the

shape, the posture, and the movement of it so exactly that it was the

greatest matter of amazement to him in the world that everybody did

not see it as well as he.  On a sudden he would cry, 'There it is; now it

comes this way.' Then, 'Tis turned back'; till at length he persuaded the

people into so firm a belief of it, that one fancied he saw it, and

another fancied he saw it; and thus he came every day making a

strange hubbub, considering it was in so narrow a passage, till

Bishopsgate clock struck eleven, and then the ghost would seem to

start, and, as if he were called away, disappeared on a sudden.



I looked earnestly every way, and at the very moment that this man

directed, but could not see the least appearance of anything; but so

positive was this poor man, that he gave the people the vapours in

abundance, and sent them away trembling and frighted, till at length

few people that knew of it cared to go through that passage, and

hardly anybody by night on any account whatever.



This ghost, as the poor man affirmed, made signs to the houses, and

to the ground, and to the people, plainly intimating, or else they so

understanding it, that abundance of the people should come to be

buried in that churchyard, as indeed happened; but that he saw such

aspects I must acknowledge I never believed, nor could I see anything

of it myself, though I looked most earnestly to see it, if possible.



These things serve to show how far the people were really overcome

with delusions; and as they had a notion of the approach of a

visitation, all their predictions ran upon a most dreadful plague, which

should lay the whole city, and even the kingdom, waste, and should

destroy almost all the nation, both man and beast.



To this, as I said before, the astrologers added stories of the

conjunctions of planets in a malignant manner and with a mischievous

influence, one of which conjunctions was to happen, and did happen,

in October, and the other in November; and they filled the people's

heads with predictions on these signs of the heavens, intimating that

those conjunctions foretold drought, famine, and pestilence.  In the

two first of them, however, they were entirely mistaken, for we had no

droughty season, but in the beginning of the year a hard frost, which

lasted from December almost to March, and after that moderate

weather, rather warm than hot, with refreshing winds, and, in short,

very seasonable weather, and also several very great rains.



Some endeavours were used to suppress the printing of such books

as terrified the people, and to frighten the dispersers of them, some of

whom were taken up; but nothing was done in it, as I am informed,

the Government being unwilling to exasperate the people, who were,

as I may say, all out of their wits already.



Neither can I acquit those ministers that in their sermons rather sank

than lifted up the hearts of their hearers.  Many of them no doubt did

it for the strengthening the resolution of the people, and especially for

quickening them to repentance, but it certainly answered not their

end, at least not in proportion to the injury it did another way; and

indeed, as God Himself through the whole Scriptures rather draws to

Him by invitations and calls to turn to Him and live, than drives us by

terror and amazement, so I must confess I thought the ministers

should have done also, imitating our blessed Lord and Master in this,

that His whole Gospel is full of declarations from heaven of God's

mercy, and His readiness to receive penitents and forgive them,

complaining, 'Ye will not come unto Me that ye may have life',

and that therefore His Gospel is called the Gospel of Peace and

the Gospel of Grace.



But we had some good men, and that of all persuasions and opinions,

whose discourses were full of terror, who spoke nothing but dismal things;

and as they brought the people together with a kind of horror, sent them

away in tears, prophesying nothing but evil tidings, terrifying the people

with the apprehensions of being utterly destroyed, not guiding them,

at least not enough, to cry to heaven for mercy.



It was, indeed, a time of very unhappy breaches among us in matters

of religion.  Innumerable sects and divisions and separate opinions

prevailed among the people.  The Church of England was restored,

indeed, with the restoration of the monarchy, about four years before;

but the ministers and preachers of the Presbyterians and Independents,

and of all the other sorts of professions, had begun to gather separate

societies and erect altar against altar, and all those had their meetings

for worship apart, as they have now, but not so many then, the

Dissenters being not thoroughly formed into a body as they are since;

and those congregations which were thus gathered together were yet

but few.  And even those that were, the Government did not allow, but

endeavoured to suppress them and shut up their meetings.



But the visitation reconciled them again, at least for a time, and

many of the best and most valuable ministers and preachers of the

Dissenters were suffered to go into the churches where the

incumbents were fled away, as many were, not being able to stand it;

and the people flocked without distinction to hear them preach, not

much inquiring who or what opinion they were of.  But after the

sickness was over, that spirit of charity abated; and every church

being again supplied with their own ministers, or others presented

where the minister was dead, things returned to their old channel again.



One mischief always introduces another.  These terrors and

apprehensions of the people led them into a thousand weak, foolish,

and wicked things, which they wanted not a sort of people really

wicked to encourage them to: and this was running about to fortune-

tellers, cunning-men, and astrologers to know their fortune, or, as it is

vulgarly expressed, to have their fortunes told them, their nativities

calculated, and the like; and this folly presently made the town swarm

with a wicked generation of pretenders to magic, to the black art, as

they called it, and I know not what; nay, to a thousand worse dealings

with the devil than they were really guilty of.  And this trade grew so

open and so generally practised that it became common to have signs

and inscriptions set up at doors: 'Here lives a fortune-teller', 'Here lives

an astrologer', 'Here you may have your nativity calculated', and the

like; and Friar Bacon's brazen-head, which was the usual sign of these

people's dwellings, was to be seen almost in every street, or else the

sign of Mother Shipton, or of Merlin's head, and the like.



With what blind, absurd, and ridiculous stuff these oracles of the

devil pleased and satisfied the people I really know not, but certain it

is that innumerable attendants crowded about their doors every day.

And if but a grave fellow in a velvet jacket, a band, and a black coat,

which was the habit those quack-conjurers generally went in, was but

seen in the streets the people would follow them in crowds, and ask

them questions as they went along.



I need not mention what a horrid delusion this was, or what it

tended to; but there was no remedy for it till the plague itself put an

end to it all - and, I suppose, cleared the town of most of those

calculators themselves.  One mischief was, that if the poor people

asked these mock astrologers whether there would be a plague or no,

they all agreed in general to answer 'Yes', for that kept up their trade.

And had the people not been kept in a fright about that, the wizards

would presently have been rendered useless, and their craft had been

at an end.  But they always talked to them of such-and-such influences

of the stars, of the conjunctions of such-and-such planets, which must

necessarily bring sickness and distempers, and consequently the

plague.  And some had the assurance to tell them the plague was

begun already, which was too true, though they that said so knew

nothing of the matter.



The ministers, to do them justice, and preachers of most sorts that

were serious and understanding persons, thundered against these and

other wicked practices, and exposed the folly as well as the

wickedness of them together, and the most sober and judicious people

despised and abhorred them.  But it was impossible to make any

impression upon the middling people and the working labouring poor.

Their fears were predominant over all their passions, and they threw

away their money in a most distracted manner upon those whimsies.

Maid-servants especially, and men-servants, were the chief of their

customers, and their question generally was, after the first demand of

'Will there be a plague?' I say, the next question was, 'Oh, sir I for the

Lord's sake, what will become of me?  Will my mistress keep me, or

will she turn me off?  Will she stay here, or will she go into the

country?  And if she goes into the country, will she take me with her,

or leave me here to be starved and undone?' And the like of menservants.



The truth is, the case of poor servants was very dismal, as I shall

have occasion to mention again by-and-by, for it was apparent a

prodigious number of them would be turned away, and it was so.  And

of them abundance perished, and particularly of those that these false

prophets had flattered with hopes that they should be continued in

their services, and carried with their masters and mistresses into the

country; and had not public charity provided for these poor creatures,

whose number was exceeding great and in all cases of this nature

must be so, they would have been in the worst condition of any people

in the city.



These things agitated the minds of the common people for many

months, while the first apprehensions were upon them, and while the

plague was not, as I may say, yet broken out.  But I must also not

forget that the more serious part of the inhabitants behaved after

another manner.  The Government encouraged their devotion, and

appointed public prayers and days of fasting and humiliation, to make

public confession of sin and implore the mercy of God to avert the

dreadful judgement which hung over their heads; and it is not to he

expressed with what alacrity the people of all persuasions embraced

the occasion; how they flocked to the churches and meetings, and they

were all so thronged that there was often no coming near, no, not to

the very doors of the largest churches.  Also there were daily prayers

appointed morning and evening at several churches, and days of

private praying at other places; at all which the people attended, I say,

with an uncommon devotion.  Several private families also, as well of

one opinion as of another, kept family fasts, to which they admitted

their near relations only.  So that, in a word, those people who were

really serious and religious applied themselves in a truly Christian

manner to the proper work of repentance and humiliation, as a

Christian people ought to do.



Again, the public showed that they would bear their share in. these

things; the very Court, which was then gay and luxurious, put on a

face of just concern for the public danger.  All the plays and interludes

which, after the manner of the French Court, had been set up, and

began to increase among us, were forbid to act; the gaming-tables,

public dancing-rooms, and music-houses, which multiplied and began

to debauch the manners of the people, were shut up and suppressed;

and the jack-puddings, merry-andrews, puppet-shows, rope-dancers,

and such-like doings, which had bewitched the poor common people,

shut up their shops, finding indeed no trade; for the minds of the

people were agitated with other things, and a kind of sadness and

horror at these things sat upon the countenances even of the common

people.  Death was before their eyes, and everybody began to think of

their graves, not of mirth and diversions.



But even those wholesome reflections - which, rightly managed,

would have most happily led the people to fall upon their knees, make

confession of their sins, and look up to their merciful Saviour for

pardon, imploring His compassion on them in such a time of their

distress, by which we might have been as a second Nineveh - had a

quite contrary extreme in the common people, who, ignorant and

stupid in their reflections as they were brutishly wicked and

thoughtless before, were now led by their fright to extremes of folly;

and, as I have said before, that they ran to conjurers and witches, and

all sorts of deceivers, to know what should become of them (who fed

their fears, and kept them always alarmed and awake on purpose to

delude them and pick their pockets), so they were as mad upon their

running after quacks and mountebanks, and every practising old

woman, for medicines and remedies; storing themselves with such

multitudes of pills, potions, and preservatives, as they were called,

that they not only spent their money but even poisoned themselves

beforehand for fear of the poison of the infection; and prepared their

bodies for the plague, instead of preserving them against it.  On the

other hand it is incredible and scarce to be imagined, how the posts of

houses and corners of streets were plastered over with doctors' bills

and papers of ignorant fellows, quacking and tampering in physic, and

inviting the people to come to them for remedies, which was generally

set off with such flourishes as these, viz.: 'Infallible preventive pills

against the plague.' 'Neverfailing preservatives against the infection.'

'Sovereign cordials against the corruption of the air.' 'Exact regulations

for the conduct of the body in case of an infection.' 'Anti-pestilential

pills.' 'Incomparable drink against the plague, never found out before.'

'An universal remedy for the plague.' 'The only true plague water.' 'The

royal antidote against all kinds of infection'; - and such a number

more that I cannot reckon up; and if I could, would fill a book of

themselves to set them down.



Others set up bills to summon people to their lodgings for directions

and advice in the case of infection.  These had specious titles also,

such as these: -



'An eminent High Dutch physician, newly come over from Holland,

where he resided during all the time of the great plague last year in

Amsterdam, and cured multitudes of people that actually had the

plague upon them.'



'An Italian gentlewoman just arrived from Naples, having a choice

secret to prevent infection, which she found out by her great

experience, and did wonderful cures with it in the late plague there,

wherein there died 20,000 in one day.'



'An ancient gentlewoman, having practised with great success in the

late plague in this city, anno 1636, gives her advice only to the female

sex.  To be spoken with,' &c.



'An experienced physician, who has long studied the doctrine of

antidotes against all sorts of poison and infection, has, after forty

years' practice, arrived to such skill as may, with God's blessing, direct

persons how to prevent their being touched by any contagious

distemper whatsoever.  He directs the poor gratis.'





I take notice of these by way of specimen.  I could give you two or

three dozen of the like and yet have abundance left behind.  'Tis

sufficient from these to apprise any one of the humour of those times,

and how a set of thieves and pickpockets not only robbed and cheated

the poor people of their money, but poisoned their bodies with odious

and fatal preparations; some with mercury, and some with other things

as bad, perfectly remote from the thing pretended to, and rather

hurtful than serviceable to the body in case an infection followed.



I cannot omit a subtility of one of those quack operators, with which

he gulled the poor people to crowd about him, but did nothing for

them without money.  He had, it seems, added to his bills, which he

gave about the streets, this advertisement in capital letters, viz.,

'He gives advice to the poor for nothing.'



Abundance of poor people came to him accordingly, to whom he

made a great many fine speeches, examined them of the state of their

health and of the constitution of their bodies, and told them many

good things for them to do, which were of no great moment.  But the

issue and conclusion of all was, that he had a preparation which if

they took such a quantity of every morning, he would pawn his life

they should never have the plague; no, though they lived in the house

with people that were infected.  This made the people all resolve to

have it; but then the price of that was so much, I think 'twas half-a-

crown.  'But, sir,' says one poor woman, 'I am a poor almswoman and

am kept by the parish, and your bills say you give the poor your help

for nothing.' 'Ay, good woman,' says the doctor, 'so I do, as I published

there.  I give my advice to the poor for nothing, but not my physic.'

'Alas, sir!' says she, 'that is a snare laid for the poor, then; for you give

them advice for nothing; that is to say, you advise them gratis, to buy

your physic for their money; so does every shop-keeper with his

wares.' Here the woman began to give him ill words, and stood at his

door all that day, telling her tale to all the people that came, till the

doctor finding she turned away his customers, was obliged to call her

upstairs again, and give her his box of physic for nothing, which

perhaps, too, was good for nothing when she had it.



But to return to the people, whose confusions fitted them to be

imposed upon by all sorts of pretenders and by every mountebank.

There is no doubt but these quacking sort of fellows raised great gains

out of the miserable people, for we daily found the crowds that ran

after them were infinitely greater, and their doors were more thronged

than those of Dr Brooks, Dr Upton, Dr Hodges, Dr Berwick, or any,

though the most famous men of the time.  I And I was told that some

of them got five pounds a day by their physic.



But there was still another madness beyond all this, which may

serve to give an idea of the distracted humour of the poor people at

that time: and this was their following a worse sort of deceivers than

any of these; for these petty thieves only deluded them to pick their

pockets and get their money, in which their wickedness, whatever it

was, lay chiefly on the side of the deceivers, not upon the deceived.

But in this part I am going to mention, it lay chiefly in the people

deceived, or equally in both; and this was in wearing charms, philtres,

exorcisms, amulets, and I know not what preparations, to fortify the

body with them against the plague; as if the plague was not the hand

of God, but a kind of possession of an evil spirit, and that it was to be

kept off with crossings, signs of the zodiac, papers tied up with so

many knots, and certain words or figures written on them, as

particularly the word Abracadabra,     formed in triangle or pyramid,

thus: -



     ABRACADABRA

     ABRACADABR     Others had the Jesuits'

     ABRACADAB         mark in a cross:

     ABRACADA             I H

     ABRACAD               S.

     ABRACA

     ABRAC          Others nothing but this

     ABRA               mark, thus:

     ABR

     AB                   * *

     A                    {*} 

                          * *  





I might spend a great deal of time in my exclamations against the

follies, and indeed the wickedness, of those things, in a time of such

danger, in a matter of such consequences as this, of a national

infection.  But my memorandums of these things relate rather to take

notice only of the fact, and mention only that it was so.  How the poor

people found the insufficiency of those things, and how many of them

were afterwards carried away in the dead-carts and thrown into the

common graves of every parish with these hellish charms and trumpery

hanging about their necks, remains to be spoken of as we go along.



All this was the effect of the hurry the people were in, after the first

notion of the plaque being at hand was among them, and which may

be said to be from about Michaelmas 1664, but more particularly after

the two men died in St Giles's in the beginning of December;

and again, after another alarm in February.  For when the plague

evidently spread itself, they soon began to see the folly of trusting

to those unperforming creatures who had gulled them of their money;

and then their fears worked another way, namely, to amazement

and stupidity, not knowing what course to take or what to do either

to help or relieve themselves.  But they ran about from one neighbour's

house to another, and even in the streets from one door to another,

with repeated cries of, 'Lord, have mercy upon us!  What shall we do?'



Indeed, the poor people were to be pitied in one particular thing in

which they had little or no relief, and which I desire to mention with a

serious awe and reflection, which perhaps every one that reads this

may not relish; namely, that whereas death now began not, as we may

say, to hover over every one's head only, but to look into their houses

and chambers and stare in their faces.  Though there might be some

stupidity and dulness of the mind (and there was so, a great deal), yet

there was a great deal of just alarm sounded into the very inmost soul,

if I may so say, of others.  Many consciences were awakened; many

hard hearts melted into tears; many a penitent confession was made of

crimes long concealed.  It would wound the soul of any Christian to

have heard the dying groans of many a despairing creature, and none

durst come near to comfort them.  Many a robbery, many a murder,

was then confessed aloud, and nobody surviving to record the

accounts of it.  People might be heard, even into the streets as we

passed along, calling upon God for mercy through Jesus Christ, and

saying, 'I have been a thief, 'I have been an adulterer', 'I have been a

murderer', and the like, and none durst stop to make the least inquiry

into such things or to administer comfort to the poor creatures that in

the anguish both of soul and body thus cried out.  Some of the

ministers did visit the sick at first and for a little while, but it was not

to be done.  It would have been present death to have gone into some

houses.  The very buriers of the dead, who were the hardenedest

creatures in town, were sometimes beaten back and so terrified that

they durst not go into houses where the whole families were swept

away together, and where the circumstances were more particularly horrible,

as some were; but this was, indeed, at the first heat of the distemper.



Time inured them to it all, and they ventured everywhere afterwards

without hesitation, as I shall have occasion to mention

at large hereafter.



I am supposing now the plague to be begun, as I have said, and that

the magistrates began to take the condition of the people into their

serious consideration.  What they did as to the regulation of the

inhabitants and of infected families, I shall speak to by itself; but as to

the affair of health, it is proper to mention it here that, having seen the

foolish humour of the people in running after quacks and

mountebanks, wizards and fortune-tellers, which they did as above,

even to madness, the Lord Mayor, a very sober and religious

gentleman, appointed physicians and surgeons for relief of the poor - I

mean the diseased poor and in particular ordered the College of

Physicians to publish directions for cheap remedies for the poor, in all

the circumstances of the distemper.  This, indeed, was one of the most

charitable and judicious things that could be done at that time, for this

drove the people from haunting the doors of every disperser of bills,

and from taking down blindly and without consideration poison for

physic and death instead of life.



This direction of the physicians was done by a consultation of the

whole College; and, as it was particularly calculated for the use of the

poor and for cheap medicines, it was made public, so that everybody

might see it, and copies were given gratis to all that desired it.  But as

it is public, and to be seen on all occasions, I need not give the reader

of this the trouble of it.



I shall not be supposed to lessen the authority or capacity of the

physicians when I say that the violence of the distemper, when it came

to its extremity, was like the fire the next year.  The fire, which

consumed what the plague could not touch, defied all the application

of remedies; the fire-engines were broken, the buckets thrown away,

and the power of man was baffled and brought to an end.  So the

Plague defied all medicines; the very physicians were seized with it,

with their preservatives in their mouths; and men went about

prescribing to others and telling them what to do till the tokens were

upon them, and they dropped down dead, destroyed by that very

enemy they directed others to oppose.  This was the case of several

physicians, even some of them the most eminent, and of several of the

most skilful surgeons.  Abundance of quacks too died, who had the

folly to trust to their own medicines, which they must needs be

conscious to themselves were good for nothing, and who rather ought,

like other sorts of thieves, to have run away, sensible of their guilt,

from the justice that they could not but expect should punish them as

they knew they had deserved.



Not that it is any derogation from the labour or application of the

physicians to say they fell in the common calamity; nor is it so

intended by me; it rather is to their praise that they ventured their lives

so far as even to lose them in the service of mankind.  They

endeavoured to do good, and to save the lives of others.  But we were

not to expect that the physicians could stop God's judgements, or

prevent a distemper eminently armed from heaven from executing the

errand it was sent about.



Doubtless, the physicians assisted many by their skill, and by their

prudence and applications, to the saving of their lives and restoring

their health.  But it is not lessening their character or their skill, to say

they could not cure those that had the tokens upon them, or those who

were mortally infected before the physicians were sent for, as was

frequently the case.



It remains to mention now what public measures were taken by the

magistrates for the general safety, and to prevent the spreading of the

distemper, when it first broke out.  I shall have frequent occasion to

speak of the prudence of the magistrates, their charity, their vigilance

for the poor, and for preserving good order, furnishing provisions, and

the like, when the plague was increased, as it afterwards was.  But I

am now upon the order and regulations they published for the

government of infected families.



I mentioned above shutting of houses up; and it is needful to say

something particularly to that, for this part of the history of the plague

is very melancholy, but the most grievous story must be told.



About June the Lord Mayor of London and the Court of Aldermen,

as I have said, began more particularly to concern themselves for the

regulation of the city.



The justices of Peace for Middlesex, by direction of the Secretary of

State, had begun to shut up houses in the parishes of St Giles-in-the-

Fields, St Martin, St Clement Danes, &c., and it was with good

success; for in several streets where the plague broke out, upon strict

guarding the houses that were infected, and taking care to bury those

that died immediately after they were known to be dead, the plague

ceased in those streets.  It was also observed that the plague decreased

sooner in those parishes after they had been visited to the full than it

did in the parishes of Bishopsgate, Shoreditch, Aldgate, Whitechappel,

Stepney, and others; the early care taken in that manner being a great

means to the putting a check to it.



This shutting up of houses was a method first taken, as I understand,

in the plague which happened in 1603, at the coming of King James

the First to the crown; and the power of shutting people up in their

own houses was granted by Act of Parliament, entitled, 'An Act for the

charitable Relief and Ordering of Persons infected with the Plague';

on which Act of Parliament the Lord Mayor and aldermen of the city

of London founded the order they made at this time, and which took

place the 1st of July 1665, when the numbers infected within the city

were but few, the last bill for the ninety-two parishes being but four;

and some houses having been shut up in the city, and some people

being removed to the pest-house beyond Bunhill Fields, in the way to

Islington, - I say, by these means, when there died near one thousand a

week in the whole, the number in the city was but twenty-eight, and

the city was preserved more healthy in proportion than any other place

all the time of the infection.



These orders of my Lord Mayor's were published, as I have said, the

latter end of June, and took place from the 1st of July, and were as

follows, viz.: -



ORDERS CONCEIVED AND PUBLISHED BY THE LORD

MAYOR AND ALDERMEN OF THE CITY OF LONDON

CONCERNING THE INFECTION OF THE PLAGUE, 1665.





'WHEREAS in the reign of our late Sovereign King James, of happy

memory, an Act was made for the charitable relief and ordering of

persons infected with the plague, whereby authority was given to

justices of the peace, mayors, bailiffs, and other head-officers to

appoint within their several limits examiners, searchers, watchmen,

keepers, and buriers for the persons and places infected, and to

minister unto them oaths for the performance of their offices.  And the

same statute did also authorise the giving of other directions, as unto

them for the present necessity should seem good in their directions.  It

is now, upon special consideration, thought very expedient for

preventing and avoiding of infection of sickness (if it shall so please

Almighty God) that these officers following be appointed, and these

orders hereafter duly observed.



  Examiners to be appointed in every Parish.





'First, it is thought requisite, and so ordered, that in every parish

there be one, two, or more persons of good sort and credit chosen and

appointed by the alderman, his deputy, and common council of every

ward, by the name of examiners, to continue in that office the space of

two months at least.  And if any fit person so appointed shall refuse to

undertake the same, the said parties so refusing to be committed to

prison until they shall conform themselves accordingly.



  The Examiner's Office.





'That these examiners he sworn by the aldermen to inquire and learn

from time to time what houses in every parish be visited, and what

persons be sick, and of what diseases, as near as they can inform

themselves; and upon doubt in that case, to command restraint of

access until it appear what the disease shall prove.  And if they find

any person sick of the infection, to give order to the constable that the

house be shut up; and if the constable shall be found remiss or

negligent, to give present notice thereof to the alderman of the ward.



  Watchmen.





'That to every infected house there be appointed two watchmen, one

for every day, and the other for the night; and that these watchmen

have a special care that no person go in or out of such infected houses

whereof they have the charge, upon pain of severe punishment.  And

the said watchmen to do such further offices as the sick house shall

need and require: and if the watchman be sent upon any business, to

lock up the house and take the key with him; and the watchman by

day to attend until ten of the clock at night, and the watchman by

night until six in the morning.



  Searchers.





'That there be a special care to appoint women searchers in every

parish, such as are of honest reputation, and of the best sort as can be

got in this kind; and these to be sworn to make due search and true

report to the utmost of their knowledge whether the persons whose

bodies they are appointed to search do die of the infection, or of what

other diseases, as near as they can.  And that the physicians who shall

be appointed for cure and prevention of the infection do call before

them the said searchers who are, or shall be, appointed for the several

parishes under their respective cares, to the end they may consider

whether they are fitly qualified for that employment, and charge them

from time to time as they shall see cause, if they appear defective in

their duties.



'That no searcher during this time of visitation be permitted to use

any public work or employment, or keep any shop or stall, or be

employed as a laundress, or in any other common employment

whatsoever.



  Chirurgeons.





'For better assistance of the searchers, forasmuch as there hath been

heretofore great abuse in misreporting the disease, to the further

spreading of the infection, it is therefore ordered that there be chosen

and appointed able and discreet chirurgeons, besides those that do

already belong to the pest-house, amongst whom the city and Liberties

to be quartered as the places lie most apt and convenient; and every of

these to have one quarter for his limit; and the said chirurgeons in

every of their limits to join with the searchers for the view of the

body, to the end there may be a true report made of the disease.



'And further, that the said chirurgeons shall visit and search such-

like persons as shall either send for them or be named and directed

unto them by the examiners of every parish, and inform themselves of

the disease of the said parties.



'And forasmuch as the said chirurgeons are to be sequestered from

all other cures, and kept only to this disease of the infection, it is

ordered that every of the said chirurgeons shall have twelve-pence a

body searched by them, to be paid out of the goods of the party

searched, if he be able, or otherwise by the parish.



  Nurse-keepers.





'If any nurse-keeper shall remove herself out of any infected house

before twenty-eight days after the decease of any person dying of the

infection, the house to which the said nurse-keeper doth so remove

herself shall be shut up until the said twenty-eight days be expired.'





ORDERS CONCERNING INFECTED HOUSES AND PERSONS SICK OF THE PLAGUE.



  Notice to be given of the Sickness.





'The master of every house, as soon as any one in his house

complaineth, either of blotch or purple, or swelling in any part of his

body, or falleth otherwise dangerously sick, without apparent cause of

some other disease, shall give knowledge thereof to the examiner of

health within two hours after the said sign shall appear.



  Sequestration of the Sick.





'As soon as any man shall be found by this examiner, chirurgeon, or

searcher to be sick of the plague, he shall the same night be

sequestered in the same house; and in case he be so sequestered, then

though he afterwards die not, the house wherein he sickened should

be shut up for a month, after the use of the due preservatives taken by

the rest.

     

  Airing the Stuff.





'For sequestration of the goods and stuff of the infection, their

bedding and apparel and hangings of chambers must be well aired

with fire and such perfumes as are requisite within the infected house

before they be taken again to use.  This to be done by the appointment

of an examiner.



  Shutting up of the House.





'If any person shall have visited any man known to be infected of the

plague, or entered  willingly into any known infected house, being not

allowed, the house wherein he inhabiteth shall be shut up for certain

days by the examiner's direction.



  None to be removed out of infected Houses, but, &C.





'Item, that none be removed out of the house where he falleth sick of

the infection into any other house in the city (except it be to the pest-

house or a tent, or unto some such house which the owner of the said

visited house holdeth in his own hands and occupieth by his own

servants); and so as security be given to the parish whither such

remove is made, that the attendance and charge about the said visited

persons shall be observed and charged in all the particularities before

expressed, without any cost of that parish to which any such remove

shall happen to be made, and this remove to be done by night.  And it

shall be lawful to any person that hath two houses to remove either his

sound or his infected people to his spare house at his choice, so as, if

he send away first his sound, he not after send thither his sick, nor

again unto the sick the sound; and that the same which he sendeth be

for one week at the least shut up and secluded from company, for fear

of some infection at the first not appearing.



  Burial of the Dead.





'That the burial of the dead by this visitation be at most convenient

hours, always either before sun-rising or after sun-setting, with the

privity of the churchwardens or constable, and not otherwise; and that

no neighbours nor friends be suffered to accompany the corpse to

church, or to enter the house visited, upon pain of having his house

shut up or be imprisoned.



'And that no corpse dying of infection shall be buried, or remain in

any church in time of common prayer, sermon, or lecture.  And that

no children be suffered at time of burial of any corpse in any church,

churchyard, or burying-place to come near the corpse, coffin, or grave.

And that all the graves shall be at least six feet deep.



'And further, all public assemblies at other burials are to be

foreborne during the continuance of this visitation.



  No infected Stuff to be uttered.





'That no clothes, stuff, bedding, or garments be suffered to be

carried or conveyed out of any infected houses, and that the criers and

carriers abroad of bedding or old apparel to be sold or pawned be

utterly prohibited and restrained, and no brokers of bedding or old

apparel be permitted to make any outward show, or hang forth on

their stalls, shop-boards, or windows, towards any street, lane,

common way, or passage, any old bedding or apparel to be sold, upon

pain of imprisonment.  And if any broker or other person shall buy

any bedding, apparel, or other stuff out of any infected house within

two months after the infection hath been there, his house shall be shut

up as infected, and so shall continue shut up twenty days at the least.



  No Person to be conveyed out of any infected House.





'If any person visited do fortune, by negligent looking unto, or by

any other means, to come or be conveyed from a place infected to any

other place, the parish from whence such party hath come or been

conveyed, upon notice thereof given, shall at their charge cause the

said party so visited and escaped to be carried and brought back again

by night, and the parties in this case offending to be punished at the

direction of the alderman of the ward, and the house of the receiver of

such visited person to be shut up for twenty days.



  Every visited House to be marked.





'That every house visited be marked with a red cross of a foot long

in the middle of the door, evident to be seen, and with these usual

printed words, that is to say, "Lord, have mercy upon us," to be set

close over the same cross, there to continue until lawful opening of

the same house.



  Every visited House to be watched.





'That the constables see every house shut up, and to be attended with

watchmen, which may keep them in, and minister necessaries unto

them at their own charges, if they be able, or at the common charge, if

they are unable; the shutting up to be for the space of four weeks after

all be whole.



'That precise order to be taken that the searchers, chirurgeons,

keepers, and buriers are not to pass the streets without holding a red

rod or wand of three feet in length in their hands, open and evident to

be seen, and are not to go into any other house than into their own, or

into that whereunto they are directed or sent for; but to forbear and

abstain from company, especially when they have been lately used in

any such business or attendance.



 Inmates.





'That where several inmate,-c are in one and the same house, and

any person in that house happens to be infected, no other person or

family of such house shall be suffered to remove him or themselves

without a certificate from the examiners of health of that parish; or in

default thereof, the house whither he or they so remove shall be shut

up as in case of visitation.



  Hackney-Coaches.





'That care be taken of hackney-coachmen, that they may not (as

some of them have been observed to do after carrying of infected

persons to the pest-house and other places) be admitted to common

use till their coaches be well aired, and have stood unemployed by the

space of five or six days after such service.'



ORDERS FOR CLEANSING AND KEEPING OF THE STREETS SWEET.



  The Streets to be kept Clean.





'First, it is thought necessary, and so ordered, that every householder

do cause the street to be daily prepared before his door, and so to keep

it clean swept all the week long.



  That Rakers take it from out the Houses.





'That the sweeping and filth of houses be daily carried away by the

rakers, and that the raker shall give notice of his coming by the

blowing of a horn, as hitherto hath been done.



  Laystalls to be made far off from the City.





'That the laystalls be removed as far as may be out of the city and

common passages, and that no nightman or other be suffered to empty

a vault into any garden near about the city.



  Care to be had of unwholesome Fish or Flesh, and of musty Corn.





'That special care be taken that no stinking fish, or unwholesome

flesh, or musty corn, or other corrupt fruits of what sort soever, be

suffered to be sold about the city, or any part of the same.



'That the brewers and tippling-houses he looked unto for musty and

unwholesome casks.



'That no hogs, dogs, or cats, or tame pigeons, or conies, be suffered to

be kept within any part of the city, or any swine to be or stray in the

streets or lanes, but that such swine be impounded by the beadle or

any other officer, and the owner punished according to Act of

Common Council, and that the dogs be killed by the dog-killers

appointed for that purpose.'





ORDERS CONCERNING LOOSE PERSONS AND IDLE

ASSEMBLIES.



  Beggars.





'Forasmuch as nothing is more complained of than the multitude of

rogues and wandering beggars that swarm in every place about the

city, being a great cause of the spreading of the infection, and will not

be avoided, notwithstanding any orders that have been given to the

contrary: It is therefore now ordered, that such constables, and others

whom this matter may any way concern, take special care that no

wandering beggars be suffered in the streets of this city in any fashion

or manner whatsoever, upon the penalty provided by the law, to be

duly and severely executed upon them.



  Plays.





'That all plays, bear-baitings, games, singing of ballads, buckler-

play, or such-like causes of assemblies of people be utterly prohibited,

and the parties offending severely punished by every

alderman in his ward.



   Feasting prohibited.





'That all public feasting, and particularly by the companies of this

city, and dinners at taverns, ale-houses, and other places of common

entertainment, be forborne till further order and allowance; and that

the money thereby spared be preserved and employed for the benefit

and relief of the poor visited with the infection.



  Tippling-houses.





'That disorderly tippling in taverns, ale-houses, coffee-houses, and

cellars be severely looked unto, as the common sin of this time and

greatest occasion of dispersing the plague.  And that no company or

person be suffered to remain or come into any tavern, ale-house, or

coffee-house to drink after nine of the clock in the evening, according

to the ancient law and custom of this city, upon the penalties ordained

in that behalf.



'And for the better execution of these orders, and such other rules

and directions as, upon further consideration, shall be found needful:

It is ordered and enjoined that the aldermen, deputies, and common

councilmen shall meet together weekly, once, twice, thrice or oftener

(as cause shall require), at some one general place accustomed in their

respective wards (being clear from infection of the plague), to consult

how the said orders may be duly put in execution; not intending that

any dwelling in or near places infected shall come to the said meeting

while their coming may be doubtful.  And the said aldermen, and

deputies, and common councilmen in their several wards may put in

execution any other good orders that by them at their said meetings

shall be conceived and devised for preservation of his Majesty's

subjects from the infection.



'SIR JOHN LAWRENCE, Lord Mayor.

SIR GEORGE WATERMAN

SIR CHARLES DoE, Sheriffs.'





I need not say that these orders extended only to such places as were

within the Lord Mayor's jurisdiction, so it is requisite to observe that

the justices of Peace within those parishes and places as were called

the Hamlets and out-parts took the same method.  As I remember, the

orders for shutting up of houses did not take Place so soon on our

side, because, as I said before, the plague did not reach to these

eastern parts of the town at least, nor begin to be very violent, till the

beginning of August.  For example, the whole bill from the 11th to the

18th of July was 1761, yet there died but 71 of the plague in all those

parishes we call the Tower Hamlets, and they were as follows: -



                            The next week   And to the 1st

                              was thus:     of Aug. thus:

Aldgate               14          34               65

Stepney               33          58               76

Whitechappel          21          48               79

St Katherine, Tower    2           4                4

Trinity, Minories      1           1                4

                     ---         ---              ---

                      71         145              228





It was indeed coming on amain, for the burials that same week were

in the next adjoining parishes thus: -



                                 The next week

                                 prodigiously    To the 1st of

                                 increased, as:   Aug. thus:

St Leonard's, Shoreditch      64       84          110

St Botolph's, Bishopsgate     65      105          116

St Giles's, Cripplegate      213      421          554

                             ---      ---          ---

                             342      610          780





This shutting up of houses was at first counted a very cruel and

unchristian method, and the poor people so confined made bitter

lamentations.  Complaints of the severity of it were also daily brought

to my Lord Mayor, of houses causelessly (and some maliciously) shut

up.  I cannot say; but upon inquiry many that complained so loudly

were found in a condition to be continued; and others again,

inspection being made upon the sick person, and the sickness not

appearing infectious, or if uncertain, yet on his being content to be

carried to the pest-house, were released.



It is true that the locking up the doors of people's houses, and setting

a watchman there night and day to prevent their stirring out or any

coming to them, when perhaps the sound people in the family might

have escaped if they had been removed from the sick, looked very

hard and cruel; and many people perished in these miserable

confinements which, 'tis reasonable to believe, would not have been

distempered if they had had liberty, though the plague was in the

house; at which the people were very clamorous and uneasy at first,

and several violences were committed and injuries offered to the men

who were set to watch the houses so shut up; also several people

broke out by force in many places, as I shall observe by-and-by.  But it

was a public good that justified the private mischief, and there was no

obtaining the least mitigation by any application to magistrates or

government at that time, at least not that I heard of.  This put the

people upon all manner of stratagem in order, if possible, to get out;

and it would fill a little volume to set down the arts used by the people

of such houses to shut the eyes of the watchmen who were employed,

to deceive them, and to escape or break out from them, in which

frequent scuffles and some mischief happened; of which by itself.



As I went along Houndsditch one morning about eight o'clock there

was a great noise.  It is true, indeed, there was not much crowd,

because people were not very free to gather together, or to stay long

together when they were there; nor did I stay long there.  But the

outcry was loud enough to prompt my curiosity, and I called to one

that looked out of a window, and asked what was the matter.



A watchman, it seems, had been employed to keep his post at the

door of a house which was infected, or said to be infected, and was

shut up.  He had been there all night for two nights together, as he told

his story, and the day-watchman had been there one day, and was now

come to relieve him.  All this while no noise had been heard in the

house, no light had been seen; they called for nothing, sent him of no

errands, which used to be the chief business of the watchmen; neither

had they given him any disturbance, as he said, from the Monday

afternoon, when he heard great crying and screaming in the house,

which, as he supposed, was occasioned by some of the family dying

just at that time.  It seems, the night before, the dead-cart, as it was

called, had been stopped there, and a servant-maid had been brought

down to the door dead, and the buriers or bearers, as they were called,

put her into the cart, wrapt only in a green rug, and carried her away.



The watchman had knocked at the door, it seems, when he heard

that noise and crying, as above, and nobody answered a great while;

but at last one looked out and said with an angry, quick tone, and yet a

kind of crying voice, or a voice of one that was crying, 'What d'ye

want, that ye make such a knocking?' He answered, 'I am the

watchman!  How do you do?  What is the matter?' The person

answered, 'What is that to you?  Stop the dead-cart.' This, it seems,

was about one o'clock.  Soon after, as the fellow said, he stopped the

dead-cart, and then knocked again, but nobody answered.  He

continued knocking, and the bellman called out several times, 'Bring

out your dead'; but nobody answered, till the man that drove the cart,

being called to other houses, would stay no longer, and drove away.



The watchman knew not what to make of all this, so he let them

alone till the morning-man or day-watchman, as they called him,

came to relieve him.  Giving him an account of the particulars,

they knocked at the door a great while, but nobody answered; and they

observed that the window or casement at which the person had looked

out who had answered before continued open, being up two pair of stairs.



Upon this the two men, to satisfy their curiosity, got a long ladder,

and one of them went up to the window and looked into the room,

where he saw a woman lying dead upon the floor in a dismal manner,

having no clothes on her but her shift.  But though he called aloud,

and putting in his long staff, knocked hard on the floor, yet nobody

stirred or answered; neither could he hear any noise in the house.



He came down again upon this, and acquainted his fellow, who

went up also; and finding it just so, they resolved to acquaint either

the Lord Mayor or some other magistrate of it, but did not offer to go

in at the window.  The magistrate, it seems, upon the information of

the two men, ordered the house to be broke open, a constable and

other persons being appointed to be present, that nothing might be

plundered; and accordingly it was so done, when nobody was found in

the house but that young woman, who having been infected and past

recovery, the rest had left her to die by herself, and were every one

gone, having found some way to delude the watchman, and to get

open the door, or get out at some back-door, or over the tops of the

houses, so that he knew nothing of it; and as to those cries and shrieks

which he heard, it was supposed they were the passionate cries of the

family at the bitter parting, which, to be sure, it was to them all, this

being the sister to the mistress of the family.  The man of the house,

his wife, several children, and servants, being all gone and fled,

whether sick or sound, that I could never learn; nor, indeed, did I

make much inquiry after it.



Many such escapes were made out of infected houses, as

particularly when the watchman was sent of some errand; for it was

his business to go of any errand that the family sent him of; that is to

say, for necessaries, such as food and physic; to fetch physicians, if

they would come, or surgeons, or nurses, or to order the dead-cart, and

the like; but with this condition, too, that when he went he was to lock

up the outer door of the house and take the key away with him, To

evade this, and cheat the watchmen, people got two or three keys

made to their locks, or they found ways to unscrew the locks such as

were screwed on, and so take off the lock, being in the inside of the

house, and while they sent away the watchman to the market, to the

bakehouse, or for one trifle or another, open the door and go out as

often as they pleased.  But this being found out, the officers

afterwards had orders to padlock up the doors on the outside, and

place bolts on them as they thought fit.



At another house, as I was informed, in the street next within

Aldgate, a whole family was shut up and locked in because the maid-

servant was taken sick.  The master of the house had complained by

his friends to the next alderman and to the Lord Mayor, and had

consented to have the maid carried to the pest-house, but was refused;

so the door was marked with a red cross, a padlock on the outside, as

above, and a watchman set to keep the door, according to public order.



After the master of the house found there was no remedy, but that

he, his wife, and his children were to be locked up with this poor

distempered servant, he called to the watchman, and told him he must

go then and fetch a nurse for them to attend this poor girl, for that it

would be certain death to them all to oblige them to nurse her; and

told him plainly that if he would not do this, the maid must perish

either of the distemper or be starved for want of food, for he was

resolved none of his family should go near her; and she lay in the

garret four storey high, where she could not cry out, or call to anybody

for help.



The watchman consented to that, and went and fetched a nurse, as

he was appointed, and brought her to them the same evening.  During

this interval the master of the house took his opportunity to break a

large hole through his shop into a bulk or stall, where formerly a

cobbler had sat, before or under his shop-window; but the tenant, as

may be supposed at such a dismal time as that, was dead or removed,

and so he had the key in his own keeping.  Having made his way into

this stall, which he could not have done if the man had been at the

door, the noise he was obliged to make being such as would have

alarmed the watchman; I say, having made his way into this stall, he

sat still till the watchman returned with the nurse, and all the next day

also.  But the night following, having contrived to send the watchman

of another trifling errand, which, as I take it, was to an apothecary's

for a plaister for the maid, which he was to stay for the making up, or

some other such errand that might secure his staying some time; in

that time he conveyed himself and all his family out of the house, and

left the nurse and the watchman to bury the poor wench - that is,

throw her into the cart - and take care of the house.



I could give a great many such stories as these, diverting enough,

which in the long course of that dismal year I met with - that is, heard

of - and which are very certain to be true, or very near the truth; that is

to say, true in the general: for no man could at such a time learn all

the particulars.  There was likewise violence used with the watchmen,

as was reported, in abundance of places; and I believe that from the

beginning of the visitation to the end, there was not less than eighteen

or twenty of them killed, or so wounded as to be taken up for dead,

which was supposed to be done by the people in the infected houses

which were shut up, and where they attempted to come out and were opposed.



Nor, indeed, could less be expected, for here were so many prisons

in the town as there were houses shut up; and as the people shut up or

imprisoned so were guilty of no crime, only shut up because

miserable, it was really the more intolerable to them.



It had also this difference, that every prison, as we may call it, had

but one jailer, and as he had the whole house to guard, and that many

houses were so situated as that they had several ways out, some more,

some less, and some into several streets, it was impossible for one

man so to guard all the passages as to prevent the escape of people

made desperate by the fright of their circumstances, by the resentment

of their usage, or by the raging of the distemper itself; so that they

would talk to the watchman on one side of the house, while the family

made their escape at another.



For example, in Coleman Street there are abundance of alleys, as

appears still.  A house was shut up in that they call White's Alley;

and this house had a back-window, not a door, into a court which had a

passage into Bell Alley.  A watchman was set by the constable at the

door of this house, and there he stood, or his comrade, night and day,

while the family went all away in the evening out at that window into the

court, and left the poor fellows warding and watching for near a fortnight.



Not far from the same place they blew up a watchman with

gunpowder, and burned the poor fellow dreadfully; and while he made

hideous cries, and nobody would venture to come near to help him,

the whole family that were able to stir got out at the windows one

storey high, two that were left sick calling out for help.  Care was

taken to give them nurses to look after them, but the persons fled were

never found, till after the plague was abated they returned; but as

nothing could be proved, so nothing could be done to them.



It is to be considered, too, that as these were prisons without bars

and bolts, which our common prisons are furnished with, so the

people let themselves down out of their windows, even in the face of

the watchman, bringing swords or pistols in their hands, and threatening

the poor wretch to shoot him if he stirred or called for help.



In other cases, some had gardens, and walls or pales, between them

and their neighbours, or yards and back-houses; and these, by

friendship and entreaties, would get leave to get over those walls or

pales, and so go out at their neighbours' doors; or, by giving money to

their servants, get them to let them through in the night; so that in

short, the shutting up of houses was in no wise to be depended upon.

Neither did it answer the end at all, serving more to make the people

desperate, and drive them to such extremities as that they would break

out at all adventures.



And that which was still worse, those that did thus break out spread

the infection farther by their wandering about with the distemper upon

them, in their desperate circumstances, than they would otherwise

have done; for whoever considers all the particulars in such cases

must acknowledge, and we cannot doubt but the severity of those

confinements made many people desperate, and made them run out of

their houses at all hazards, and with the plague visibly upon them, not

knowing either whither to go or what to do, or, indeed, what they did;

and many that did so were driven to dreadful exigencies and

extremities, and perished in the streets or fields for mere want, or

dropped down by the raging violence of the fever upon them.  Others

wandered into the country, and went forward any way, as their

desperation guided them, not knowing whither they went or would go:

till, faint and tired, and not getting any relief, the houses and villages

on the road refusing to admit them to lodge whether infected or no,

they have perished by the roadside or gotten into barns and died there,

none daring to come to them or relieve them, though perhaps not

infected, for nobody would believe them.



On the other hand, when the plague at first seized a family that is to

say, when any body of the family had gone out and unwarily or

otherwise catched the distemper and brought it home - it was certainly

known by the family before it was known to the officers, who, as you

will see by the order, were appointed to examine into the

circumstances of all sick persons when they heard of their being sick.



In this interval, between their being taken sick and the examiners

coming, the master of the house had leisure and liberty to remove

himself or all his family, if he knew whither to go, and many did so.

But the great disaster was that many did thus after they were really

infected themselves, and so carried the disease into the houses of

those who were so hospitable as to receive them; which, it must be

confessed, was very cruel and ungrateful.



And this was in part the reason of the general notion, or scandal

rather, which went about of the temper of people infected: namely,

that they did not take the least care or make any scruple of infecting

others, though I cannot say but there might be some truth in it too, but

not so general as was reported. What natural reason could be given for

so wicked a thing at a time when they might conclude themselves just

going to appear at the bar of Divine justice I know not.  I am very well

satisfied that it cannot be reconciled to religion and principle any

more than it can be to generosity and Humanity, but I may speak of

that again.



I am speaking now of people made desperate by the apprehensions

of their being shut up, and their breaking out by stratagem or force,

either before or after they were shut up, whose misery was not

lessened when they were out, but sadly increased.  On the other hand,

many that thus got away had retreats to go to and other houses, where

they locked themselves up and kept hid till the plague was over; and

many families, foreseeing the approach of the distemper, laid up

stores of provisions sufficient for their whole families, and shut

themselves up, and that so entirely that they were neither seen or

heard of till the infection was quite ceased, and then came abroad

sound and well.  I might recollect several such as these, and give you

the particulars of their management; for doubtless it was the most

effectual secure step that could be taken for such whose

circumstances would not admit them to remove, or who had not

retreats abroad proper for the case; for in being thus shut up they were

as if they had been a hundred miles off.  Nor do I remember that any

one of those families miscarried.  Among these, several Dutch

merchants were particularly remarkable, who kept their houses like

little garrisons besieged suffering none to go in or out or come near

them, particularly one in a court in Throgmorton Street whose house

looked into Draper's Garden.



But I come back to the case of families infected and shut up by the

magistrates.  The misery of those families is not to be expressed; and

it was generally in such houses that we heard the most dismal shrieks

and outcries of the poor people, terrified and even frighted to death by

the sight of the condition of their dearest relations, and by the terror of

being imprisoned as they were.



I remember, and while I am writing this story I think I hear the very

sound of it, a certain lady had an only daughter, a young maiden about

nineteen years old, and who was possessed of a very considerable

fortune.  They were only lodgers in the house where they were.  The

young woman, her mother, and the maid had been abroad on some

occasion, I do not remember what, for the house was not shut up; but

about two hours after they came home the young lady complained she

was not well; in a quarter of an hour more she vomited and had a

violent pain in her head.  'Pray God', says her mother, in a terrible

fright, 'my child has not the distemper!' The pain in her head

increasing, her mother ordered the bed to be warmed, and resolved to

put her to bed, and prepared to give her things to sweat, which was the

ordinary remedy to be taken when the first apprehensions of the

distemper began.



While the bed was airing the mother undressed the young woman,

and just as she was laid down in the bed, she, looking upon her body

with a candle, immediately discovered the fatal tokens on the inside

of her thighs.  Her mother, not being able to contain herself, threw

down her candle and shrieked out in such a frightful manner that it

was enough to place horror upon the stoutest heart in the world; nor

was it one scream or one cry, but the fright having seized her spirits,

she -fainted first, then recovered, then ran all over the house, up the

stairs and down the stairs, like one distracted, and indeed really was

distracted, and continued screeching and crying out for several hours

void of all sense, or at least government of her senses, and, as I was

told, never came thoroughly to herself again.  As to the young maiden,

she was a dead corpse from that moment, for the gangrene which

occasions the spots had spread [over] her whole body, and she died in

less than two hours.  But still the mother continued crying out, not

knowing anything more of her child, several hours after she was dead.

It is so long ago that I am not certain, but I think the mother never

recovered, but died in two or three weeks after.



This was an extraordinary case, and I am therefore the more

particular in it, because I came so much to the knowledge of it; but

there were innumerable such-like cases, and it was seldom that the

weekly bill came in but there were two or three put in, 'frighted'; that

is, that may well be called frighted to death.  But besides those who

were so frighted as to die upon the spot, there

were great numbers frighted to other extremes, some frighted out of

their senses, some out of their memory, and some out of their

understanding.  But I return to the shutting up of houses.



As several people, I say, got out of their houses by stratagem after

they were shut UP, so others got out by bribing the watchmen, and

giving them money to let them go privately out in the night.  I must

confess I thought it at that time the most innocent corruption or

bribery that any man could be guilty of, and therefore could not but

pity the poor men, and think it was hard when three of those

watchmen were publicly whipped through the streets for suffering

people to go out of houses shut up.



But notwithstanding that severity, money prevailed with the poor

men, and many families found means to make sallies out, and escape

that way after they had been shut up; but these were generally such as

had some places to retire to; and though there was no easy passing the

roads any whither after the 1st of August, yet there were many ways of

retreat, and particularly, as I hinted, some got tents and set them up in

the fields, carrying beds or straw to lie on, and provisions to eat, and

so lived in them as hermits in a cell, for nobody would venture to

come near them; and several stories were told of such, some comical,

some tragical, some who lived like wandering pilgrims in the deserts,

and escaped by making themselves exiles in such a manner as is

scarce to be credited, and who yet enjoyed more liberty than was to be

expected in such cases.



I have by me a story of two brothers and their kinsman, who being single men,

but that had stayed in the city too long to get away, and indeed not knowing

where to go to have any retreat, nor having wherewith to travel far,

took a course for their own preservation, which though in itself at

first desperate, yet was so natural that it may be wondered that no more

did so at that time.  They were but of mean condition, and yet not so very

poor as that they could not furnish themselves with some little conveniences

such as might serve to keep life and soul together; and finding the distemper

increasing in a terrible manner, they resolved to shift as well as they could,

and to be gone.



One of them had been a soldier in the late wars, and before that in

the Low Countries, and having been bred to no particular employment

but his arms, and besides being wounded, and not able to work very hard,

had for some time been employed at a baker's of sea-biscuit in Wapping.



The brother of this man was a seaman too, but somehow or other

had been hurt of one leg, that he could not go to sea, but had worked

for his living at a sailmaker's in Wapping, or thereabouts; and being a

good husband, had laid up some money, and was the richest of the three.



The third man was a joiner or carpenter by trade, a handy fellow,

and he had no wealth but his box or basket of tools, with the help of

which he could at any time get his living, such a time as this excepted,

wherever he went - and he lived near Shadwell.



They all lived in Stepney parish, which, as I have said, being the last

that was infected, or at least violently, they stayed there till they

evidently saw the plague was abating at the west part of the town, and

coming towards the east, where they lived.



The story of those three men, if the reader will be content to have

me give it in their own persons, without taking upon me to either vouch

the particulars or answer for any mistakes, I shall give as distinctly

as I can, believing the history will be a very good pattern for any poor

man to follow, in case the like public desolation should happen here;

and if there may be no such occasion, which God of His infinite mercy

grant us, still the story may have its- uses so many ways as that

it will, I hope, never be said that the relating has been unprofitable.



I say all this previous to the history, having yet, for the present,

much more to say before I quit my own part.



I went all the first part of the time freely about the streets, though

not so freely as to run myself into apparent danger, except when they

dug the great pit in the churchyard of our parish of Aldgate.  A terrible

pit it was, and I could not resist my curiosity to go and see it.  As near

as I may judge, it was about forty feet in length, and about fifteen or

sixteen feet broad, and at the time I first looked at it, about nine feet

deep; but it was said they dug it near twenty feet deep afterwards in

one part of it, till they could go no deeper for the water; for they had,

it seems, dug several large pits before this.  For though the plague was

long a-coming to our parish, yet, when it did come, there was no

parish in or about London where it raged with such violence as in the

two parishes of Aldgate and Whitechappel.



I say they had dug several pits in another ground, when the

distemper began to spread in our parish, and especially when the

dead-carts began to go about, which was not, in our parish, till the

beginning of August.  Into these pits they had put perhaps fifty or sixty

bodies each; then they made larger holes wherein they buried all that

the cart brought in a week, which, by the middle to the end of August,

came to from 200 to 400 a week; and they could not well dig them

larger, because of the order of the magistrates confining them to leave

no bodies within six feet of the surface; and the water coming on at

about seventeen or eighteen feet, they could not well, I say, put more

in one pit.  But now, at the beginning of September, the plague raging

in a dreadful manner, and the number of burials in our parish

increasing to more than was ever buried in any parish about London of

no larger extent, they ordered this dreadful gulf to be dug - for such

it was, rather than a pit.



They had supposed this pit would have supplied them for a month or

more when they dug it, and some blamed the churchwardens for

suffering such a frightful thing, telling them they were making

preparations to bury the whole parish, and the like; but time made it

appear the churchwardens knew the condition of the parish better than

they did: for, the pit being finished the 4th of September, I think, they

began to bury in it the 6th, and by the 20th, which was just two weeks,

they had thrown into it 1114 bodies when they were obliged to fill it

up, the bodies being then come to lie within six feet of the surface.  I

doubt not but there may be some ancient persons alive in the parish

who can justify the fact of this, and are able to show even in what

place of the churchyard the pit lay better than I can.  The mark of it

also was many years to be seen in the churchyard on the surface, lying

in length parallel with the passage which goes by the west wall of the

churchyard out of Houndsditch, and turns east again into Whitechappel,

coming out near the Three Nuns' Inn.



It was about the 10th of September that my curiosity led, or rather

drove, me to go and see this pit again, when there had been near 400

people buried in it; and I was not content to see it in the day-time,

as I had done before, for then there would have been nothing to have been

seen but the loose earth; for all the bodies that were thrown in were

immediately covered with earth by those they called the buriers,

which at other times were called bearers; but I resolved to go in the

night and see some of them thrown in.



There was a strict order to prevent people coming to those pits, and

that was only to prevent infection.  But after some time that order was

more necessary, for people that were infected and near their end, and

delirious also, would run to those pits, wrapt in blankets or rugs, and

throw themselves in, and, as they said, bury themselves.  I cannot say

that the officers suffered any willingly to lie there; but I have heard

that in a great pit in Finsbury, in the parish of Cripplegate, it lying

open then to the fields, for it was not then walled about, [many] came

and threw themselves in, and expired there, before they threw any

earth upon them; and that when they came to bury others and found

them there, they were quite dead, though not cold.



This may serve a little to describe the dreadful condition of that day,

though it is impossible to say anything that is able to give a true idea

of it to those who did not see it, other than this, that it was indeed

very, very, very dreadful, and such as no tongue can express.



I got admittance into the churchyard by being acquainted with the

sexton who attended; who, though he did not refuse me at all, yet

earnestly persuaded me not to go, telling me very seriously (for he was

a good, religious, and sensible man) that it was indeed their business

and duty to venture, and to run all hazards, and that in it they might

hope to be preserved; but that I had no apparent call to it but my own

curiosity, which, he said, he believed I would not pretend was

sufficient to justify my running that hazard.  I told him I had been

pressed in my mind to go, and

that perhaps it might be an instructing sight, that might not be without

its uses.  'Nay,' says the good man, 'if you will venture upon that score,

name of God go in; for, depend upon it, 'twill be a sermon to you, it

may be, the best that ever you heard in your life.  'Tis a speaking

sight,' says he, 'and has a voice with it, and a loud one, to call us all to

repentance'; and with that he opened the door and said, 'Go, if you will.'



His discourse had shocked my resolution a little, and I stood

wavering for a good while, but just at that interval I saw two links

come over from the end of the Minories, and heard the bellman, and

then appeared a dead-cart, as they called it, coming over the streets; so

I could no longer resist my desire of seeing it, and went in.  There was

nobody, as I could perceive at first, in the churchyard, or going into it,

but the buriers and the fellow that drove the cart, or rather led the

horse and cart; but when they came up to the pit they saw a man go to

and again, muffled up in a brown Cloak, and making motions with his

hands under his cloak, as if he was in great agony, and the buriers

immediately gathered about him, supposing he was one of those poor

delirious or desperate creatures that used to pretend, as I have said,

to bury themselves.  He said nothing as he walked about, but two or

three times groaned very deeply and loud, and sighed as he would

break his heart.





End of Part 2
