



Part 4




As I could not refrain contributing tears to this man's story, so

neither could I refrain my charity for his assistance.  So I called him,

'Hark thee, friend,' said I, 'come hither, for I believe thou art in health,

that I may venture thee'; so I pulled out my hand, which was in my

pocket before, 'Here,' says I, 'go and call thy Rachel once more, and

give her a little more comfort from me.  God will never forsake a

family that trust in Him as thou dost.' So I gave him four other

shillings, and bid him go lay them on the stone and call his wife.



I have not words to express the poor man's thankfulness, neither

could he express it himself but by tears running down his face.

He called his wife, and told her God had moved the heart of a stranger,

upon hearing their condition, to give them all that money, and a great

deal more such as that he said to her.  The woman, too, made signs of the

like thankfulness, as well to Heaven as to me, and joyfully picked it up;

and I parted with no money all that year that I thought better bestowed.



I then asked the poor man if the distemper had not reached to

Greenwich.  He said it had not till about a fortnight before; but that

then he feared it had, but that it was only at that end of the town

which lay south towards Deptford Bridge; that he went only to a

butcher's shop and a grocer's, where he generally bought such things

as they sent him for, but was very careful.



I asked him then how it came to pass that those people who had so

shut themselves up in the ships had not laid in sufficient stores of all

things necessary.  He said some of them had - but, on the other hand,

some did not come on board till they were frighted into it and till it

was too dangerous for them to go to the proper people to lay in

quantities of things, and that he waited on two ships, which he showed

me, that had laid in little or nothing but biscuit bread and ship beer,

and that he had bought everything else almost for them.  I asked him

if there was any more ships that had separated themselves as those

had done.  He told me yes, all the way up from the point, right against

Greenwich, to within the shore of Limehouse and Redriff, all the ships

that could have room rid two and two in the middle of the stream, and

that some of them had several families on board.  I asked him if the

distemper had not reached them.  He said he believed it had not,

except two or three ships whose people had not been so watchful to

keep the seamen from going on shore as others had been, and he said

it was a very fine sight to see how the ships lay up the Pool.



When he said he was going over to Greenwich as soon as the tide

began to come in, I asked if he would let me go with him and bring

me back, for that I had a great mind to see how the ships were ranged,

as he had told me.  He told me, if I would assure him on the word of a

Christian and of an honest man that I had not the distemper, he would.

I assured him that I had not; that it had pleased God to preserve me;

that I lived in Whitechappel, but was too impatient of being so long

within doors, and that I had ventured out so far for the refreshment

of a little air, but that none in my house had so much as been touched

with it.



Well, sir,' says he, 'as your charity has been moved to pity me and

my poor family, sure you cannot have so little pity left as to put

yourself into my boat if you were not sound in health which would be

nothing less than killing me and ruining my whole family.' The poor

man troubled me so much when he spoke of his family with such a

sensible concern and in such an affectionate manner, that I could not

satisfy myself at first to go at all.  I told him I would lay aside my

curiosity rather than make him uneasy, though I was sure, and very

thankful for it, that I had no more distemper upon me than the freshest

man in the world.  Well, he would not have me put it off neither, but

to let me see how confident he was that I was just to him, now

importuned me to go; so when the tide came up to his boat I went in,

and he carried me to Greenwich.  While he bought the things which

he had in his charge to buy, I walked up to the top of the hill under

which the town stands, and on the east side of the town, to get a

prospect of the river.  But it was a surprising sight to see the number

of ships which lay in rows, two and two, and some places two or three

such lines in the breadth of the river, and this not only up quite to the

town, between the houses which we call Ratcliff and Redriff, which

they name the Pool, but even down the whole river as far as the head

of Long Reach, which is as far as the hills give us leave to see it.



I cannot guess at the number of ships, but I think there must be

several hundreds of sail; and I could not but applaud the contrivance:

for ten thousand people and more who attended ship affairs were

certainly sheltered here from the violence of the contagion, and lived

very safe and very easy.



I returned to my own dwelling very well satisfied with my day's

journey, and particularly with the poor man; also I rejoiced to see that

such little sanctuaries were provided for so many families in a time of

such desolation.  I observed also that, as the violence of the plague

had increased, so the ships which had families on board removed and

went farther off, till, as I was told, some went quite away to sea, and

put into such harbours and safe roads on the north coast as they could

best come at.



But it was also true that all the people who thus left the land and

lived on board the ships were not entirely safe from the infection, for

many died and were thrown overboard into the river, some in coffins,

and some, as I heard, without coffins, whose bodies were seen

sometimes to drive up and down with the tide in the river.



But I believe I may venture to say that in those ships which were

thus infected it either happened where the people had recourse to

them too late, and did not fly to the ship till they had stayed too long

on shore and had the distemper upon them (though perhaps they might

not perceive it) and so the distemper did not come to them on board

the ships, but they really carried it with them; or it was in these ships

where the poor waterman said they had not had time to furnish

themselves with provisions, but were obliged to send often on shore to

buy what they had occasion for, or suffered boats to come to them

from the shore.  And so the distemper was brought insensibly among them.



And here I cannot but take notice that the strange temper of the

people of London at that time contributed extremely to their own

destruction.  The plague began, as I have observed, at the other end of

the town, namely, in Long Acre, Drury Lane, &c., and came on

towards the city very gradually and slowly.  It was felt at first in

December, then again in February, then again in April, and always but

a very little at a time; then it stopped till May, and even the last week

in May there was but seventeen, and all at that end of the town; and

all this while, even so long as till there died above 3000 a week, yet

had the people in Redriff, and in Wapping and Ratcliff, on both sides

of the river, and almost all Southwark side, a mighty fancy that they

should not be visited, or at least that it would not be so violent among

them.  Some people fancied the smell of the pitch and tar, and such

other things as oil and rosin and brimstone, which is so much used by

all trades relating to shipping, would preserve them.  Others argued it,

because it was in its extreamest violence in Westminster and the

parish of St Giles and St Andrew, &c., and began to abate again

before it came among them - which was true indeed, in part.  For

example -



From the 8th to the 15th August -

     St Giles-in-the-Fields               242

     Cripplegate                          886

     Stepney                              197

     St Margaret, Bermondsey               24

     Rotherhith                             3

     Total this week                     4030



From the 15th to the 22nd August -

     St Giles-in-the-Fields               175

     Cripplegate                          847

     Stepney                              273

     St Margaret, Bermondsey               36

     Rotherhith                             2

     Total this week                     5319





N.B. - That it was observed the numbers mentioned in Stepney

parish at that time were generally all on that side where Stepney

parish joined to Shoreditch, which we now call Spittlefields, where

the parish of Stepney comes up to the very wall of Shoreditch

Churchyard, and the plague at this time was abated at St Giles-in-the-

Fields, and raged most violently in Cripplegate, Bishopsgate, and

Shoreditch parishes; but there was not ten people a week that died of

it in all that part of Stepney parish which takes in Limehouse, Ratdiff

Highway, and which are now the parishes of Shadwell and Wapping,

even to St Katherine's by the Tower, till after the whole month of

August was expired.  But they paid for it afterwards, as I shall observe

by-and-by.



This, I say, made the people of Redriff and Wapping, Ratcliff and

Limehouse, so secure, and flatter themselves so much with the

plague's going off without reaching them, that they took no care either

to fly into the country or shut themselves up.  Nay, so far were they

from stirring that they rather received their friends and relations from

the city into their houses, and several from other places really took

sanctuary in that part of the town as a Place of safety, and as a place

which they thought God would pass over, and not visit as the rest was

visited.



And this was the reason that when it came upon -them they were

more surprised, more unprovided, and more at a loss what to do than

they were in other places; for when it came among them really and

with violence, as it did indeed in September and October, there was

then no stirring out into the country, nobody would suffer a stranger to

come near them, no, nor near the towns where they dwelt; and, as I

have been told, several that wandered into the country on Surrey side

were found starved to death in the woods and commons, that country

being more open and more woody than any other part so near London,

especially about Norwood and the parishes of Camberwell, Dullege,

and Lusum, where, it seems, nobody durst relieve the poor distressed

people for fear of the infection.



This notion having, as I said, prevailed with the people in that part

of the town, was in part the occasion, as I said before, that they had

recourse to ships for their retreat; and where they did this early and

with prudence, furnishing themselves so with provisions that they had

no need to go on shore for supplies or suffer boats to come on board

to bring them, - I say, where they did so they had certainly the safest

retreat of any people whatsoever; but the distress was such that people

ran on board, in their fright, without bread to eat, and some into ships

that had no men on board to remove them farther off, or to take the

boat and go down the river to buy provisions where it might be done

safely, and these often suffered and were infected on board as much as

on shore.



As the richer sort got into ships, so the lower rank got into hoys,

smacks, lighters, and fishing-boats; and many, especially watermen,

lay in their boats; but those made sad work of it, especially the latter,

for, going about for provision, and perhaps to get their subsistence, the

infection got in among them and made a fearful havoc; many of the

watermen died alone in their wherries as they rid at their roads, as

well as above bridge as below, and were not found sometimes till they

were not in condition for anybody to touch or come near them.



Indeed, the distress of the people at this seafaring end of the town

was very deplorable, and deserved the greatest commiseration.  But,

alas I this was a time when every one's private safety lay so near them

that they had no room to pity the distresses of others; for every one

had death, as it were, at his door, and many even in their families, and

knew not what to do or whither to fly.



This, I say, took away all compassion; self-preservation, indeed,

appeared here to be the first law.  For the children ran away from their

parents as they languished in the utmost distress.  And in some places,

though not so frequent as the other, parents did the like to their

children; nay, some dreadful examples there were, and particularly

two in one week, of distressed mothers, raving and distracted, killing

their own children; one whereof was not far off from where I dwelt,

the poor lunatic creature not living herself long enough to be sensible

of the sin of what she had done, much less to be punished for it.



It is not, indeed, to be wondered at: for the danger of immediate

death to ourselves took away all bowels of love, all concern for one

another.  I speak in general, for there were many instances of

immovable affection, pity, and duty in many, and some that came to

my knowledge, that is to say, by hearsay; for I shall not take upon me

to vouch the truth of the particulars.



To introduce one, let me first mention that one of the most

deplorable cases in all the present calamity was that of women with

child, who, when they came to the hour of their sorrows, and their

pains come upon them, could neither have help of one kind or

another; neither midwife or neighbouring women to come near them.

Most of the midwives were dead, especially of such as served the

poor; and many, if not all the midwives of note, were fled into the

country; so that it was next to impossible for a poor woman that could

not pay an immoderate price to get any midwife to come to her - and

if they did, those they could get were generally unskilful and ignorant

creatures; and the consequence of this was that a most unusual and

incredible number of women were reduced to the utmost distress.

Some were delivered and spoiled by the rashness and ignorance of

those who pretended to lay them.  Children without number were, I

might say, murdered by the same but a more justifiable ignorance:

pretending they would save the mother, whatever became of the child;

and many times both mother and child were lost in the same manner;

and especially where the mother had the distemper, there nobody

would come near them and both sometimes perished.  Sometimes the

mother has died of the plague, and the infant, it may be, half born, or

born but not parted from the mother.  Some died in the very pains of

their travail, and not delivered at all; and so many were the cases of

this kind that it is hard to judge of them.



Something of it will appear in the unusual numbers which are put

into the weekly bills (though I am far from allowing them to be able

to give anything of a full account) under the articles of -

  Child-bed.

  Abortive and Still-born.

  Christmas and Infants.



Take the weeks in which the plague was most violent, and compare

them with the weeks before the distemper began, even in the same

year.  For example: -



                             Child-bed. Abortive.  Still-born.

From January 3 to January  10     7        1           13

"     "   10       "       17     8        6           11

"     "   17       "       24     9        5           15

"     "   24       "       31     3        2            9

"     "   31 to February    7     3        3            8

" February7        "       14     6        2           11

"     "   14       "       21     5        2           13

"     "   21       "       28     2        2           10

"       "   28 to March     7     5        1           10

                                ---      ---         ---- 

                                 48       24          100



From August  1 to August    8    25        5           11

"     "    8       "       15    23        6            8

"     "   15       "       22    28        4            4

"     "   22       "       29    40        6           10

"     "   29 to September   5    38        2           11

September  5       "       12    39       23          ...

"     "   12       "       19    42        5           17

"     "   19       "       26    42        6           10

"     "   26 to October     3    14        4            9

                                ---       --          ---

                                291       61           80

     



To the disparity of these numbers it is to be considered and allowed

for, that according to our usual opinion who were then upon the spot,

there were not one-third of the people in the town during the months

of August and September as were in the months of January and

February.  In a word, the usual number that used to die of these three

articles, and, as I hear, did die of them the year before, was thus: -



1664.                               1665.

Child-bed                   189     Child-bed                   625

Abortive and still-born     458     Abortive and still-born     617

                           ----                                ----

                            647                                1242





This inequality, I say, is exceedingly augmented when the numbers

of people are considered.  I pretend not to make any exact calculation

of the numbers of people which were at this time in the city, but I

shall make a probable conjecture at that part by-and-by.  What I have

said now is to explain the misery of those poor creatures above; so

that it might well be said, as in the Scripture, Woe be to those who are

with child, and to those which give suck in that day.  For, indeed, it

was a woe to them in particular.



I was not conversant in many particular families where these things

happened, but the outcries of the miserable were heard afar off.  As to

those who were with child, we have seen some calculation made; 291

women dead in child-bed in nine weeks, out of one-third part of the

number of whom there usually died in that time but eighty-four of the

same disaster.  Let the reader calculate the proportion.



There is no room to doubt but the misery of those that gave suck

was in proportion as great.  Our bills of mortality could give but little

light in this, yet some it did.  There were several more than usual

starved at nurse, but this was nothing.  The misery was where they

were, first, starved for want of a nurse, the mother dying and all the

family and the infants found dead by them, merely for want; and, if I

may speak my opinion, I do believe that many hundreds of poor

helpless infants perished in this manner.  Secondly, not starved, but

poisoned by the nurse.  Nay, even where the mother has been nurse,

and having received the infection, has poisoned, that is, infected the

infant with her milk even before they knew they were infected

themselves; nay, and the infant has died in such a case before the

mother.  I cannot but remember to leave this admonition upon record,

if ever such another dreadful visitation should happen in this city, that

all women that are with child or that give suck should be gone, if they

have any possible means, out of the place, because their misery, if

infected, will so much exceed all other people's.



I could tell here dismal stories of living infants being found sucking

the breasts of their mothers, or nurses, after they have been dead of

the plague.  Of a mother in the parish where I lived, who, having a

child that was not well, sent for an apothecary to view the child; and

when he came, as the relation goes, was giving the child suck at her

breast, and to all appearance was herself very well; but when the

apothecary came close to her he saw the tokens upon that breast with

which she was suckling the child.  He was surprised enough, to be

sure, but, not willing to fright the poor woman too much, he desired

she would give the child into his hand; so he takes the child, and

going to a cradle in the room, lays it in, and opening its cloths, found

the tokens upon the child too, and both died before he could get home

to send a preventive medicine to the father of the child, to whom he

had told their condition.  Whether the child infected the nurse-mother

or the mother the child was not certain, but the last most likely.

Likewise of a child brought home to the parents from a nurse that had

died of the plague, yet the tender mother would not refuse to take in

her child, and laid it in her bosom, by which she was infected; and

died with the child in her arms dead also.



It would make the hardest heart move at the instances that were

frequently found of tender mothers tending and watching with their

dear children, and even dying before them, and sometimes taking the

distemper from them and dying, when the child for whom the

affectionate heart had been sacrificed has got over it and escaped.



The like of a tradesman in East Smithfield, whose wife was big with

child of her first child, and fell in labour, having the plague upon her.

He could neither get midwife to assist her or nurse to tend her, and

two servants which he kept fled both from her.  He ran from house to

house like one distracted, but could get no help; the utmost he could

get was, that a watchman, who attended at an infected house shut up,

promised to send a nurse in the morning.  The poor man, with his

heart broke, went back, assisted his wife what he could, acted the part

of the midwife, brought the child dead into the world, and his wife in

about an hour died in his arms, where he held her dead body fast till

the morning, when the watchman came and brought the nurse as he

had promised; and coming up the stairs (for he had left the door open,

or only latched), they found the man sitting with his dead wife in his

arms, and so overwhelmed with grief that he died in a few hours after

without any sign of the infection upon him, but merely sunk under the

weight of his grief.



I have heard also of some who, on the death of their relations, have

grown stupid with the insupportable sorrow; and of one, in particular,

who was so absolutely overcome with the pressure upon his spirits

that by degrees his head sank into his body, so between his shoulders

that the crown of his head was very little seen above the bone of his

shoulders; and by degrees losing both voice and sense, his face,

looking forward, lay against his collarbone and could not be kept up

any otherwise, unless held up by the hands of other people; and the

poor man never came to himself again, but languished near a year in

that condition, and died.  Nor was he ever once seen to lift up his eyes

or to look upon any particular object.



I cannot undertake to give any other than a summary of such

passages as these, because it was not possible to come at the

particulars, where sometimes the whole families where such things

happened were carried off by the distemper.  But there were

innumerable cases of this kind which presented to the eye and the ear,

even in passing along the streets, as I have hinted above.  Nor is it

easy to give any story of this or that family which there was not divers

parallel stories to be met with of the same kind.



But as I am now talking of the time when the plague raged at the

easternmost part of the town - how for a long time the people of those

parts had flattered themselves that they should escape, and how they

were surprised when it came upon them as it did; for, indeed, it came

upon them like an armed man when it did come; - I say, this brings me

back to the three poor men who wandered from Wapping, not

knowing whither to go or what to do, and whom I mentioned before;

one a biscuit-baker, one a sailmaker, and the other a joiner, all of

Wapping, or there-abouts.



The sleepiness and security of that part, as I have observed, was

such that they not only did not shift for themselves as others did, but

they boasted of being safe, and of safety being with them; and many

people fled out of the city, and out of the infected suburbs, to

Wapping, Ratcliff, Limehouse, Poplar, and such Places, as to Places

of security; and it is not at all unlikely that their doing this helped to

bring the plague that way faster than it might otherwise have come.

For though I am much for people flying away and emptying such a

town as this upon the first appearance of a like visitation, and that all

people who have any possible retreat should make use of it in time

and be gone, yet I must say, when all that will fly are gone, those that

are left and must stand it should stand stock-still where they are, and

not shift from one end of the town or one part of the town to the other;

for that is the bane and mischief of the whole, and they carry the

plague from house to house in their very clothes.



Wherefore were we ordered to kill all the dogs and cats, but because

as they were domestic animals, and are apt to run from house to house

and from street to street, so they are capable of carrying the effluvia or

infectious streams of bodies infected even in their furs and hair?  And

therefore it was that, in the beginning of the infection, an order was

published by the Lord Mayor, and by the magistrates, according to the

advice of the physicians, that all the dogs and cats should be

immediately killed, and an officer was appointed for the execution.



It is incredible, if their account is to be depended upon, what a

prodigious number of those creatures were destroyed.  I think they

talked of forty thousand dogs, and five times as many cats; few houses

being without a cat, some having several, sometimes five or six in a

house.  All possible endeavours were used also to destroy the mice

and rats, especially the latter, by laying ratsbane and other poisons for

them, and a prodigious multitude of them were also destroyed.



I often reflected upon the unprovided condition that the whole body

of the people were in at the first coming of this calamity upon them,

and how it was for want of timely entering into measures and

managements, as well public as private, that all the confusions that

followed were brought upon us, and that such a prodigious number of

people sank in that disaster, which, if proper steps had been taken,

might, Providence concurring, have been avoided, and which, if

posterity think fit, they may take a caution and warning from.  But I

shall come to this part again.



I come back to my three men.  Their story has a moral in every part

of it, and their whole conduct, and that of some whom they joined

with, is a pattern for all poor men to follow, or women either, if ever

such a time comes again; and if there was no other end in recording it,

I think this a very just one, whether my account be exactly according

to fact or no.



Two of them are said to be brothers, the one an old soldier, but now

a biscuit-maker; the other a lame sailor, but now a sailmaker; the third

a joiner.  Says John the biscuit-maker one day to Thomas his brother,

the sailmaker, 'Brother Tom, what will become of us?  The plague

grows hot in the city, and increases this way.  What shall we do?'



'Truly,' says Thomas, 'I am at a great loss what to do, for I find if it

comes down into Wapping I shall be turned out of my lodging.' And

thus they began to talk of it beforehand.



John.  Turned out of your lodging, Tom I If you are, I don't know

who will take you in; for people are so afraid of one another now,

there's no getting a lodging anywhere.



Thomas.  Why, the people where I lodge are good, civil people, and

have kindness enough for me too; but they say I go abroad every day

to my work, and it will be dangerous; and they talk of locking

themselves up and letting nobody come near them.



John.  Why, they are in the right, to be sure, if they resolve to

venture staying in town.



Thomas.  Nay, I might even resolve to stay within doors too, for,

except a suit of sails that my master has in hand, and which I am just

finishing, I am like to get no more work a great while.  There's no

trade stirs now.  Workmen and servants are turned off everywhere, so

that I might be glad to be locked up too; but I do not see they will be

willing to consent to that, any more than

to the other.



John.  Why, what will you do then, brother?  And what shall I do?

for I am almost as bad as you.  The people where I lodge are all gone

into the country but a maid, and she is to go next week, and to shut the

house quite up, so that I shall be turned adrift to the wide world before

you, and I am resolved to go away too, if I knew but where to go.



Thomas.  We were both distracted we did not go away at first; then

we might have travelled anywhere.  There's no stirring now; we shall

be starved if we pretend to go out of town.  They won't let us have

victuals, no, not for our money, nor let us come into the towns, much

less into their houses.



John.  And that which is almost as bad, I have but little money to

help myself with neither.



Thomas.  As to that, we might make shift, I have a little, though not

much; but I tell you there's no stirring on the road.  I know a couple of

poor honest men in our street have attempted to travel, and at Barnet,

or Whetstone, or thereabouts, the people offered to fire at them if they

pretended to go forward, so they are come back again quite

discouraged.



John.  I would have ventured their fire if I had been there.  If I had

been denied food for my money they should have seen me take it

before their faces, and if I had tendered money for it they could not

have taken any course with me by law.



Thomas.  You talk your old soldier's language, as if you were in the

Low Countries now, but this is a serious thing.  The people have good

reason to keep anybody off that they are not satisfied are sound, at

such a time as this, and we must not plunder them.



John.  No, brother, you mistake the case, and mistake me too.  I

would plunder nobody; but for any town upon the road to deny me

leave to pass through the town in the open highway, and deny me

provisions for my money, is to say the town has a right to starve me to

death, which cannot be true.



Thomas.  But they do not deny you liberty to go back again from

whence you came, and therefore they do not starve you.



John.  But the next town behind me will, by the same rule, deny me

leave to go back, and so they do starve me between them.  Besides,

there is no law to prohibit my travelling wherever I will on the road.



Thomas.  But there will be so much difficulty in disputing with

them at every town on the road that it is not for poor men to do it or

undertake it, at such a time as this is especially.



John.  Why, brother, our condition at this rate is worse than anybody

else's, for we can neither go away nor stay here.  I am of the same

mind with the lepers of Samaria: 'If we stay here we are sure to die', I

mean especially as you and I are stated, without a dwelling-house of

our own, and without lodging in anybody else's.  There is no lying in

the street at such a time as this; we had as good go into the dead-cart

at once.  Therefore I say, if we stay here we are sure to die, and if we

go away we can but die; I am resolved to be gone.



Thomas.  You will go away.  Whither will you go, and what can you

do?  I would as willingly go away as you, if I knew whither.  But we

have no acquaintance, no friends.  Here we were born, and here we

must die.



John.  Look you, Tom, the whole kingdom is my native country as

well as this town.  You may as well say I must not go out of my house

if it is on fire as that I must not go out of the town I was born in when

it is infected with the plague.  I was born in England, and have a right

to live in it if I can.



Thomas.  But you know every vagrant person may by the laws of

England be taken up, and passed back to their last legal settlement.



John.  But how shall they make me vagrant?  I desire only to travel

on, upon my lawful occasions.



Thomas.  What lawful occasions can we pretend to travel, or rather

wander upon?  They will not be put off with words.



John.  Is not flying to save our lives a lawful occasion?

And do they not all know that the fact is true?

We cannot be said to dissemble.



Thomas.  But suppose they let us pass, whither shall we go?



John.  Anywhere, to save our lives; it is time enough to consider that

when we are got out of this town.  If I am once out of this dreadful

place, I care not where I go.



Thomas.  We shall be driven to great extremities.  I know not what

to think of it.



John.  Well, Tom, consider of it a little.



This was about the beginning of July; and though the plague was

come forward in the west and north parts of the town, yet all

Wapping, as I have observed before, and Redriff, and Ratdiff, and

Limehouse, and Poplar, in short, Deptford and Greenwich, all both

sides of the river from the Hermitage, and from over against it, quite

down to Blackwall, was entirely free; there had not one person died of

the plague in all Stepney parish, and not one on the south side of

Whitechappel Road, no, not in any parish; and yet the weekly bill was

that very week risen up to 1006.



It was a fortnight after this before the two brothers met again, and

then the case was a little altered, and the' plague was exceedingly

advanced and the number greatly increased; the bill was up at 2785,

and prodigiously increasing, though still both sides of the river, as

below, kept pretty well.  But some began to die in Redriff, and about

five or six in Ratdiff Highway, when the sailmaker came to his

brother John express, and in some fright; for he was absolutely

warned out of his lodging, and had only a week to provide himself.

His brother John was in as bad a case, for he was quite out, and had

only begged leave of his master, the biscuit-maker, to lodge in an

outhouse belonging to his workhouse, where he only lay upon straw,

with some biscuit-sacks, or bread-sacks, as they called them, laid

upon it, and some of the same sacks to cover him.



Here they resolved (seeing all employment being at an end, and no

work or wages to be had), they would make the best of their way to

get out of the reach of the dreadful infection, and, being as good

husbands as they could, would endeavour to live upon what they had

as long as it would last, and then work for more if they could get work

anywhere, of any kind, let it be what it would.



While they were considering to put this resolution in practice in the

best manner they could, the third man, who was acquainted very well

with the sailmaker, came to know of the design, and got leave to be

one of the number; and thus they prepared to set out.



It happened that they had not an equal share of money; but as the

sailmaker, who had the best stock, was, besides his being lame, the

most unfit to expect to get anything by working in the country, so he

was content that what money they had should all go into one public stock,

on condition that whatever any one of them could gain more than another,

it should without any grudging be all added to the public stock.



They resolved to load themselves with as little baggage as possible

because they resolved at first to travel on foot, and to go a great way

that they might, if possible, be effectually safe; and a great many

consultations they had with themselves before they could agree about

what way they should travel, which they were so far from adjusting

that even to the morning they set out they were not resolved on it.



At last the seaman put in a hint that determined it.  'First,' says he,

'the weather is very hot, and therefore I am for travelling north, that

we may not have the sun upon our faces and beating on our breasts,

which will heat and suffocate us; and I have been told', says he, 'that it

is not good to overheat our blood at a time when, for aught we know,

the infection may be in the very air.  In the next place,' says he, 'I am

for going the way that may be contrary to the wind, as it may blow

when we set out, that we may not have the wind blow the air of the

city on our backs as we go.' These two cautions were approved of, if it

could be brought so to hit that the wind might not be in the south

when they set out to go north.



John the baker, who bad been a soldier, then put in his opinion.

'First,' says he, 'we none of us expect to get any lodging on the road,

and it will be a little too hard to lie just in the open air.  Though it be

warm weather, yet it may be wet and damp, and we have a double

reason to take care of our healths at such a time as this; and therefore,'

says he, 'you, brother Tom, that are a sailmaker, might easily make us

a little tent, and I will undertake to set it up every night, and take it

down, and a fig for all the inns in England; if we have a good tent

over our heads we shall do well enough.'



The joiner opposed this, and told them, let them leave that to him;

he would undertake to build them a house every night with his hatchet

and mallet, though he had no other tools, which should be fully to

their satisfaction, and as good as a tent.



The soldier and the joiner disputed that point some time, but at last

the soldier carried it for a tent.  The only objection against it was,

that it must be carried with them, and that would increase their baggage

too much, the weather being hot; but the sailmaker had a piece of

good hap fell in which made that easy, for his master whom he

worked for, having a rope-walk as well as sailmaking trade, had a

little, poor horse that he made no use of then; and being willing to

assist the three honest men, he gave them the horse for the carrying

their baggage; also for a small matter of three days' work that his man

did for him before he went, he let him have an old top-gallant sail that

was worn out, but was sufficient and more than enough to make a

very good tent.  The soldier showed how to shape it, and they soon by

his direction made their tent, and fitted it with poles or staves for the

purpose; and thus they were furnished for their journey, viz., three

men, one tent, one horse, one gun - for the soldier would not go

without arms, for now he said he was no more a biscuit-baker, but a trooper.



The joiner had a small bag of tools such as might be useful if he

should get any work abroad, as well for their subsistence as his own.

What money they had they brought all into one public stock, and thus

they began their journey.  It seems that in the morning when they set

out the wind blew, as the sailor said, by his pocket-compass, at N.W.

by W. So they directed, or rather resolved to direct, their course N.W.



But then a difficulty came in their way, that, as they set out from the

hither end of Wapping, near the Hermitage, and that the plague was

now very violent, especially on the north side of the city, as in

Shoreditch and Cripplegate parish, they did not think it safe for them

to go near those parts; so they went away east through Ratcliff

Highway as far as Ratcliff Cross, and leaving Stepney Church still on

their left hand, being afraid to come up from Ratcliff Cross to Mile

End, because they must come just by the churchyard, and because the

wind, that seemed to blow more from the west, blew directly from the

side of the city where the plague was hottest.  So, I say, leaving

Stepney they fetched a long compass, and going to Poplar and

Bromley, came into the great road just at Bow.



Here the watch placed upon Bow Bridge would have questioned

them, but they, crossing the road into a narrow way that turns out of

the hither end of the town of Bow to Old Ford, avoided any inquiry

there, and travelled to Old Ford.  The constables everywhere were

upon their guard not so much, It seems, to stop people passing by as to

stop them from taking up their abode in their towns, and withal

because of a report that was newly raised at that time: and that,

indeed, was not very improbable, viz., that the poor people in London,

being distressed and starved for want of work, and by that means for

want of bread, were up in arms and had raised a tumult, and that they

would come out to all the towns round to plunder for bread.  This, I

say, was only a rumour, and it was very well it was no more.  But it

was not so far off from being a reality as it has been thought, for in a

few weeks more the poor people became so desperate by the calamity

they suffered that they were with great difficulty kept from g out into

the fields and towns, and tearing all in pieces wherever they came;

and, as I have observed before, nothing hindered them but that the

plague raged so violently and fell in upon them so furiously that they

rather went to the grave by thousands than into the fields in mobs by

thousands; for, in the parts about the parishes of St Sepulcher,

Clarkenwell, Cripplegate, Bishopsgate, and Shoreditch, which were

the places where the mob began to threaten, the distemper came on so

furiously that there died in those few parishes even then, before the

plague was come to its height, no less than 5361 people in the first

three weeks in August; when at the same time the parts about

Wapping, Radcliffe, and Rotherhith were, as before described, hardly

touched, or but very lightly; so that in a word though, as I said before,

the good management of the Lord Mayor and justices did much to

prevent the rage and desperation of the people from breaking out in

rabbles and tumults, and in short from the poor plundering the rich, - I

say, though they did much, the dead-carts did more: for as I have said

that in five parishes only there died above 5000 in twenty days, so

there might be probably three times that number sick all that time; for

some recovered, and great numbers fell sick every day and died

afterwards.  Besides, I must still be allowed to say that if the bills of

mortality said five thousand, I always believed it was near twice as

many in reality, there being no room to believe that the account they

gave was right, or that indeed they were among such confusions as I

saw them in, in any condition to keep an exact account.



But to return to my travellers.  Here they were only examined, and

as they seemed rather coming from the country than from the city,

they found the people the easier with them; that they talked to them,

let them come into a public-house where the constable and his

warders were, and gave them drink and some victuals which greatly

refreshed and encouraged them; and here it came into their heads to

say, when they should be inquired of afterwards, not that they came

from London, but that they came out of Essex.



To forward this little fraud, they obtained so much favour of the

constable at Old Ford as to give them a certificate of their passing

from Essex through that village, and that they had not been at London;

which, though false in the common acceptance of London in the

county, yet was literally true, Wapping or Ratcliff being no part either

of the city or liberty.



This certificate directed to the next constable that was at Homerton,

one of the hamlets of the parish of Hackney, was so serviceable to

them that it procured them, not a free passage there only, but a full

certificate of health from a justice of the peace, who upon the

constable's application granted it without much difficulty; and thus

they passed through the long divided town of Hackney (for it lay then

in several separated hamlets), and travelled on till they came into the

great north road on the top of Stamford Hill.



By this time they began to be weary, and so in the back-road from

Hackney, a little before it opened into the said great road, they

resolved to set up their tent and encamp for the first night, which they

did accordingly, with this addition, that finding a barn, or a building

like a barn, and first searching as well as they could to be sure there

was nobody in it, they set up their tent, with the head of it against the

barn.  This they did also because the wind blew that night very high,

and they were but young at such a way of lodging, as well as at the

managing their tent.



Here they went to sleep; but the joiner, a grave and sober man, and

not pleased with their lying at this loose rate the first night, could not

sleep, and resolved, after trying to sleep to no purpose, that he would

get out, and, taking the gun in his hand, stand sentinel and guard his

companions.  So with the gun in his hand, he walked to and again

before the barn, for that stood in the field near the road, but within the

hedge.  He had not been long upon the scout but he heard a noise of

people coming on, as if it had been a great number, and they came on,

as he thought, directly towards the barn.  He did not presently awake

his companions; but in a few minutes more, their noise growing

louder and louder, the biscuit-baker called to him and asked him what

was the matter, and quickly started out too.  The other, being the lame

sailmaker and most weary, lay still in the tent.



As they expected, so the people whom they had heard came on

directly to the barn, when one of our travellers challenged, like

soldiers upon the guard, with 'Who comes there?' The people did not

answer immediately, but one of them speaking to another that was

behind him, 'Alas I alas I we are all disappointed,' says he. 'Here are

some people before us; the barn is taken up.'



They all stopped upon that, as under some surprise, and it seems

there was about thirteen of them in all, and some women among them.

They consulted together what they should do, and by their discourse

our travellers soon found they were poor, distressed people too, like

themselves, seeking shelter and safety; and besides, our travellers had

no need to be afraid of their coming up to disturb them, for as soon as-

they heard the words, 'Who comes there?' these could hear the women

say, as if frighted, 'Do not go near them.  How do you know but they

may have the plague?' And when one of the men said, 'Let us but

speak to them', the women said, 'No, don't by any means.  We have

escaped thus far by the goodness of God; do not let us run into danger

now, we beseech you.'



Our travellers found by this that they were a good, sober sort of

people, and flying for their lives, as they were; and, as they were

encouraged by it, so John said to the joiner, his comrade, 'Let us

encourage them too as much as we can'; so he called to them, 'Hark

ye, good people,' says the joiner, 'we find by your talk that you are

flying from the same dreadful enemy as we are.  Do not be afraid of

us; we are only three poor men of us.  If you are free from the

distemper you shall not be hurt by us.  We are not in the barn, but in a

little tent here in the outside, and we will remove for you; we can set

up our tent again immediately anywhere else'; and upon this a parley

began between the joiner, whose name was Richard, and one of their

men, who said his name was Ford.



Ford.  And do you assure us that you are all sound men?



Richard.  Nay, we are concerned to tell you of it, that you may not

be uneasy or think yourselves in danger; but you see we do not desire

you should put yourselves into any danger, and therefore I tell you that

we have not made use of the barn, so we will remove from it, that you

may be safe and we also.



Ford.  That is very kind and charitable; but if we have reason to be

satisfied that you are sound and free from the visitation, why should

we make you remove now you are settled in your lodging, and, it may

be, are laid down to rest?  We will go into the barn, if you please, to

rest ourselves a while, and we need not disturb you.



Richard.  Well, but you are more than we are.  I hope you will

assure us that you are all of you sound too, for the danger is as great

from you to us as from us to you.



Ford.  Blessed be God that some do escape, though it is but few;

what may be our portion still we know not, but hitherto we are

preserved.



Richard.  What part of the town do you come from?  Was the plague

come to the places where you lived?



Ford.  Ay, ay, in a most frightful and terrible manner, or else we had

not fled away as we do; but we believe there will be very few left

alive behind us.



Richard.  What part do you come from?



Ford.  We are most of us of Cripplegate parish, only two or three of

Clerkenwell parish, but on the hither side.



Richard.  How then was it that you came away no sooner?



Ford.  We have been away some time, and kept together as well as

we could at the hither end of Islington, where we got leave to lie in an

old uninhabited house, and had some bedding and conveniences of

our own that we brought with us; but the plague is come up into

Islington too, and a house next door to our poor dwelling was infected

and shut up; and we are come away in a fright.



Richard.  And what way are you going?



Ford.  As our lot shall cast us; we know not whither, but God will

guide those that look up to Him.



They parleyed no further at that time, but came all up to the barn,

and with some difficulty got into it.  There was nothing but hay in the

barn, but it was almost full of that, and they accommodated

themselves as well as they could, and went to rest; but our travellers

observed that before they went to sleep an ancient man who it seems

was father of one of the women, went to prayer with all the company,

recommending themselves to the blessing and direction of

Providence, before they went to sleep.



It was soon day at that time of the year, and as Richard the joiner

had kept guard the first part of the night, so John the soldier relieved

him, and he had the post in the morning, and they began to be

acquainted with one another.  It seems when they left Islington they

intended to have gone north, away to Highgate, but were stopped at

Holloway, and there they would not let them pass; so they crossed

over the fields and hills to the eastward, and came out at the Boarded

River, and so avoiding the towns, they left Hornsey on the left hand

and Newington on the right hand, and came into the great road about

Stamford Hill on that side, as the three travellers had done on the

other side.  And now they had thoughts of going over the river in the

marshes, and make forwards to Epping Forest, where they hoped they

should get leave to rest.  It seems they were not poor, at least not so

poor as to be in want; at least they had enough to subsist them

moderately for two or three months, when, as they said, they were in

hopes the cold weather would check the infection, or at least the

violence of it would have spent itself, and would abate, if it were only

for want of people left alive to he infected.



This was much the fate of our three travellers, only that they seemed

to be the better furnished for travelling, and had it in their view to go

farther off; for as to the first, they did not propose to go farther than

one day's journey, that so they might have intelligence every two or

three days how things were at London.



But here our travellers found themselves under an unexpected

inconvenience: namely that of their horse, for by means of the horse to

carry their baggage they were obliged to keep in the road, whereas the

people of this other band went over the fields or roads, path or no

path, way or no way, as they pleased; neither had they any occasion to

pass through any town, or come near any town, other than to buy such

things as they wanted for their necessary subsistence, and in that

indeed they were put to much difficulty; of which in its place.



But our three travellers were obliged to keep the road, or else they

must commit spoil, and do the country a great deal of damage in

breaking down fences and gates to go over enclosed fields, which they

were loth to do if they could help it.



Our three travellers, however, had a great mind to join themselves to

this company and take their lot with them; and after some discourse

they laid aside their first design which looked northward, and resolved

to follow the other into Essex; so in the morning they took up their

tent and loaded their horse, and away they travelled all together.



They had some difficulty in passing the ferry at the river-side, the

ferryman being afraid of them; but after some parley at a distance, the

ferryman was content to bring his boat to a place distant from the

usual ferry, and leave it there for them to take it; so putting

themselves over, he directed them to leave the boat, and he, having

another boat, said he would fetch it again, which it seems, however,

he did not do for above eight days.



Here, giving the ferryman money beforehand, they had a supply of

victuals and drink, which he brought and left in the boat for them; but

not without, as I said, having received the money beforehand.  But

now our travellers were at a great loss and difficulty how to get the

horse over, the boat being small and not fit for it: and at last could not

do it without unloading the baggage and making him swim over.



From the river they travelled towards the forest, but when they came

to Walthamstow the people of that town denied to admit them, as was

the case everywhere.  The constables and their watchmen kept them

off at a distance and parleyed with them.  They gave the same account

of themselves as before, but these gave no credit to what they said,

giving it for a reason that two or three companies had already come

that way and made the like pretences, but that they had given several

people the distemper in the towns where they had passed; and had

been afterwards so hardly used by the country (though with justice,

too, as they had deserved) that about Brentwood, or that way, several

of them perished in the fields - whether of the plague or of mere want

and distress they could not tell.



This was a good reason indeed why the people of Walthamstow

should be very cautious, and why they should resolve not to entertain

anybody that they were not well satisfied of.  But, as Richard the

joiner and one of the other men who parleyed with them told them, it

was no reason why they should block up the roads and refuse to let

people pass through the town, and who asked nothing of them but to

go through the street; that if their people were afraid of them, they

might go into their houses and shut their doors; they would neither

show them civility nor incivility, but go on about their business.



The constables and attendants, not to be persuaded by reason,

continued obstinate, and would hearken to nothing; so the two men

that talked with them went back to their fellows to consult what was

to be done.  It was very discouraging in the whole, and they knew not

what to do for a good while; but at last John the soldier and biscuit-

maker, considering a while, 'Come,' says he, 'leave the rest of the

parley to me.' He had not appeared yet, so he sets the joiner, Richard,

to work to cut some poles out of the trees and shape them as like guns

as he could, and in a little time he had five or six fair muskets, which

at a distance would not be known; and about the part where the lock

of a gun is he caused them to wrap cloth and rags such as they had, as

soldiers do in wet weather to preserve the locks of their pieces from

rust; the rest was discoloured with clay or mud, such as they could

get; and all this while the rest of them sat under the trees by his

direction, in two or three bodies, where they made fires at a good

distance from one another.



While this was doing he advanced himself and two or three with

him, and set up their tent in the lane within sight of the barrier which

the town's men had made, and set a sentinel just by it with the real

gun, the only one they had, and who walked to and fro with the gun on

his shoulder, so as that the people of the town might see them.  Also,

he tied the horse to a gate in the hedge just by, and got some dry sticks

together and kindled a fire on the other side of the tent, so that the

people of the town could see the fire and the smoke, but could not see

what they were doing at it.



After the country people had looked upon them very earnestly a

great while, and, by all that they could see, could not but suppose that

they were a great many in company, they began to be uneasy, not for

their going away, but for staying where they were; and above all,

perceiving they had horses and arms, for they had seen one horse and

one gun at the tent, and they had seen others of them walk about the

field on the inside of the hedge by the side of the lane with their

muskets, as they took them to be, shouldered; I say, upon such a sight

as this, you may be assured they were alarmed and terribly frighted,

and it seems they went to a justice of the peace to know what they

should do.  What the justice advised them to I know not, but towards

the evening they called from the barrier, as above, to the sentinel at

the tent.



'What do you want?' says John.*



'Why, what do you intend to do?' says the constable.  'To do,' says

John; 'what would you have us to do?' Constable.  Why don't you be

gone?  What do you stay there for?



John.  Why do you stop us on the king's highway, and pretend to

refuse us leave to go on our way?



Constable.  We are not bound to tell you our reason, though we did

let you know it was because of the plague.



John.  We told you we were all sound and free from the plague,

which we were not bound to have satisfied you of, and yet you pretend

to stop us on the highway.



Constable.  We have a right to stop it up, and our own safety obliges

us to it.  Besides, this is not the king's highway; 'tis a way upon

sufferance.  You see here is a gate, and if we do let people pass here,

we make them pay toll.



John.  We have a right to seek our own safety as well as you, and

you may see we are flying for our lives: and 'tis very unchristian and

unjust to stop us.



Constable.  You may go back from whence you came; we do not

hinder you from that.



John.  No; it is a stronger enemy than you that keeps us from doing

that, or else we should not have come hither.



Constable.  Well, you may go any other way, then.



John.  No, no; I suppose you see we are able to send you going, and

all the people of your parish, and come through your town when we

will; but since you have stopped us here, we are content.  You see we

have encamped here, and here we will live.  We hope you will furnish

us with victuals.



*It seems John was in the tent, but hearing them call, he steps out, and

taking the gun upon his shoulder, talked to them as if he had been the

sentinel placed there upon the guard by some officer that was his

superior. [Footnote in the original.]





Constable.  We furnish you I What mean you by that?



John.  Why, you would not have us starve, would you? If you stop us

here, you must keep us.



Constable.  You will be ill kept at our maintenance.



John. If you stint us, we shall make ourselves the better allowance.



Constable.  Why, you will not pretend to quarter upon us by force,

will you?



John.  We have offered no violence to you yet.  Why do you seem to

oblige us to it?  I am an old soldier, and cannot starve, and if you think

that we shall be obliged to go back for want of provisions, you are

mistaken.



Constable.  Since you threaten us, we shall take care to be strong

enough for you.  I have orders to raise the county upon you.



John.  It is you that threaten, not we.  And since you are for

mischief, you cannot blame us if we do not give you time for it; we

shall begin our march in a few minutes.*



Constable.  What is it you demand of us?



John.  At first we desired nothing of you but leave to go through the

town; we should have offered no injury to any of you, neither would

you have had any injury or loss by us.  We are not thieves, but poor

people in distress, and flying from the dreadful plague in London,

which devours thousands every week.  We wonder how you could be

so unmerciful!



Constable.  Self-preservation obliges us.



John.  What!  To shut up your compassion in a case of such distress

as this?



Constable.  Well, if you will pass over the fields on your left hand,

and behind that part of the town, I will endeavour to have gates

opened for you.

John.  Our horsemen ** cannot pass with our baggage that way; it

does not lead into the road that we want to go, and why should you

force us out of the road?  Besides, you have kept us here all



* This frighted the constable and the people that were with him, that

they immediately changed their note.

** They had but one horse among them. [Footnotes in the original.]



day without any provisions but such as we brought with us.  I think

you ought to send us some provisions for our relief.



Constable.  If you will go another way we will send you some

provisions.



John.  That is the way to have all the towns in the county stop up the

ways against us.



Constable.  If they all furnish you with food, what will you be the

worse?  I see you have tents; you want no lodging.



John.  Well, what quantity of provisions will you send us?



Constable.  How many are you?



John.  Nay, we do not ask enough for all our company; we are in

three companies.  If you will send us bread for twenty men and about

six or seven women for three days, and show us the way over the field

you speak of, we desire not to put your people into any fear for us; we

will go out of our way to oblige you, though we are as free from

infection as you are.*



Constable.  And will you assure us that your other people shall offer

us no new disturbance?



John.  No, no you may depend on it.



Constable.  You must oblige yourself, too, that none of your people

shall come a step nearer than where the provisions we send you shall

be set down.



John.  I answer for it we will not.



Accordingly they sent to the place twenty loaves of bread and three

or four large pieces of good beef, and opened some gates, through

which they passed; but none of them had courage so much as to look

out to see them go, and, as it was evening, if they had looked they

could not have seen them as to know how few they were.



This was John the soldier's management.  But this gave such an

alarm to the county, that had they really been two or three hundred the

whole county would have been raised upon them, and



* Here he called to one of his men, and bade him order Captain

Richard and his people to march the lower way on the side of the

marches, and meet them in the forest; which was all a sham, for they

had no Captain Richard, or any such company. [Footnote in the original.]



they would have been sent to prison, or perhaps knocked on the head.



They were soon made sensible of this, for two days afterwards they

found several parties of horsemen and footmen also about, in pursuit

of three companies of men, armed, as they said, with muskets, who

were broke out from London and had the plague upon them, and that

were not only spreading the distemper among the people, but

plundering the country.



As they saw now the consequence of their case, they soon saw the

danger they were in; so they resolved by the advice also of the old

soldier to divide themselves again.  John and his two comrades, with

the horse, went away, as if towards Waltham; the other in two

companies, but all a little asunder, and went towards Epping.



The first night they encamped all in the forest, and not far off of one

another, but not setting up the tent, lest that should discover them.  On

the other hand, Richard went to work with his axe and his hatchet, and

cutting down branches of trees, he built three tents or hovels, in which

they all encamped with as much convenience as they could expect.



The provisions they had at Walthamstow served them very

plentifully this night; and as for the next, they left it to Providence.

They had fared so well with the old soldier's conduct that they now

willingly made him their leader, and the first of his conduct appeared

to be very good.  He told them that they were now at a proper distance

enough from London; that as they need not be immediately beholden

to the country for relief, so they ought to be as careful the country did

not infect them as that they did not infect the country; that what little

money they had, they must be as frugal of as they could; that as he

would not have them think of offering the country any violence, so

they must endeavour to make the sense of their condition go as far

with the country as it could.  They all referred themselves to his

direction, so they left their three houses standing, and the next day

went away towards Epping.  The captain also (for so they now called

him), and his two fellow-travellers, laid aside their design of going to

Waltham, and all went together.



When they came near Epping they halted, choosing out a proper

place in the open forest, not very near the highway, but not far out of

it on the north side, under a little cluster of low pollard-trees.  Here

they pitched their little camp - which consisted of three large tents or

huts made of poles which their carpenter, and such as were his

assistants, cut down and fixed in the ground in a circle, binding all the

small ends together at the top and thickening the sides with boughs of

trees and bushes, so that they were completely close and warm.  They

had, besides this, a little tent where the women lay by themselves, and

a hut to put the horse in.



It happened that the next day, or next but one, was market-day at

Epping, when Captain John and one of the other men went to market

and bought some provisions; that is to say, bread, and some mutton

and beef; and two of the women went separately, as if they had not

belonged to the rest, and bought more.  John took the horse to bring it

home, and the sack which the carpenter carried his tools in, to put it

in.  The carpenter went to work and made them benches and stools to

sit on, such as the wood he could get would afford, and a kind of table

to dine on.



They were taken no notice of for two or three days, but after that

abundance of people ran out of the town to look at them, and all the

country was alarmed about them.  The people at first seemed afraid to

come near them; and, on the other hand, they desired the people to

keep off, for there was a rumour that the plague was at Waltham, and

that it had been in Epping two or three days; so John called out to

them not to come to them, 'for,' says he, 'we are all whole and sound

people here, and we would not have you bring the plague among us,

nor pretend we brought it among you.'



After this the parish officers came up to them and parleyed with

them at a distance, and desired to know who they were, and by what

authority they pretended to fix their stand at that place. John answered

very frankly, they were poor distressed people from London who,

foreseeing the misery they should be reduced to if plague spread into

the city, had fled out in time for their lives, and, having no

acquaintance or relations to fly to, had first taken up at Islington; but,

the plague being come into that town, were fled farther; and as they

supposed that the people of Epping might have refused them coming

into their town, they had pitched their tents thus in the open field and

in the forest, being willing to bear all the hardships of such a

disconsolate lodging rather than have any one think or be afraid that

they should receive injury by them.



At first the Epping people talked roughly to them, and told them

they must remove; that this was no place for them; and that they

pretended to be sound and well, but that they might be infected with

the plague for aught they knew, and might infect the whole country,

and they could not suffer them there.



John argued very calmly with them a great while, and told them that

London was the place by which they - that is, the townsmen of Epping

and all the country round them - subsisted; to whom they sold the

produce of their lands, and out of whom they made their rent of their

farms; and to be so cruel to the inhabitants of London, or to any of

those by whom they gained so much, was very hard, and they would

be loth to have it remembered hereafter, and have it told how

barbarous, how inhospitable, and how unkind they were to the people

of London when they fled from the face of the most terrible enemy in

the world; that it would be enough to make the name of an Epping

man hateful through all the city, and to have the rabble stone them in

the very streets whenever they came so much as to market; that they

were not yet secure from being visited themselves, and that, as he

heard, Waltham was already; that they would think it very hard that

when any of them fled for fear before they were touched, they should

be denied the liberty of lying so much as in the open fields.



The Epping men told them again, that they, indeed, said they were

sound and free from the infection, but that they had no assurance of it;

and that it was reported that there had been a great rabble of people at

Walthamstow, who made such pretences of being sound as they did,

but that they threatened to plunder the town and force their way,

whether the parish officers would or no; that there were near two

hundred of them, and had arms and tents like Low Country soldiers;

that they extorted provisions from the town, by threatening them with

living upon them at free quarter, showing their arms, and talking in

the language of soldiers; and that several of them being gone away

toward Rumford and Brentwood, the country had been infected by

them, and the plague spread into both those large towns, so that the

people durst not go to market there as usual; that it was very likely

they were some of that party; and if so, they deserved to be sent to the

county jail, and be secured till they had made satisfaction for the

damage they had done, and for the terror and fright they had put the

country into.



John answered that what other people had done was nothing to

them; that they assured them they were all of one company; that they

had never been more in number than they saw them at that time

(which, by the way, was very true); that they came out in two separate

companies, but joined by the way, their cases being the same; that

they were ready to give what account of themselves anybody could

desire of them, and to give in their names and places of abode, that so

they might be called to an account for any disorder that they might be

guilty of; that the townsmen might see they were content to live

hardly, and only desired a little room to breathe in on the forest where

it was wholesome; for where it was not they could not stay, and would

decamp if they found it otherwise there.



'But,' said the townsmen, 'we have a great charge of poor upon our

hands already, and we must take care not to increase it; we suppose

you can give us no security against your being chargeable to our

parish and to the inhabitants, any more than you can of being

dangerous to us as to the infection.'



'Why, look you,' says John, 'as to being chargeable to you, we hope

we shall not. If you will relieve us with provisions for our present

necessity, we will be very thankful; as we all lived without charity

when we were at home, so we will oblige ourselves fully to repay you,

if God pleases to bring us back to our own families and houses in

safety, and to restore health to the people of London.



'As to our dying here: we assure you, if any of us die, we that survive

will bury them, and put you to no expense, except it should be that we

should all die; and then, indeed, the last man not being able to bury

himself, would put you to that single expense which I am persuaded',

says John, 'he would leave enough behind him to pay you for the

expense of.



'On the other hand,' says John, 'if you shut up all bowels of

compassion, and not relieve us at all, we shall not extort anything by

violence or steal from any one; but when what little we have is spent,

if we perish for want, God's will be done.'



John wrought so upon the townsmen, by talking thus rationally and

smoothly to them, that they went away; and though they did not give

any consent to their staying there, yet they did not molest them; and

the poor people continued there three or four days longer without any

disturbance.  In this time they had got some remote acquaintance with

a victualling-house at the outskirts of the town, to whom they called at

a distance to bring some little things that they wanted, and which they

caused to be set down at a distance, and always paid for very honestly.



During this time the younger people of the town came frequently

pretty near them, and would stand and look at them, and sometimes

talk with them at some space between; and particularly it was

observed that the first Sabbath-day the poor people kept retired,

worshipped God together, and were heard to sing psalms.



These things, and a quiet, inoffensive behaviour, began to get them

the good opinion of the country, and people began to pity them and

speak very well of them; the consequence of which was, that upon the

occasion of a very wet, rainy night, a certain gentleman who lived in

the neighbourhood sent them a little cart with twelve trusses or

bundles of straw, as well for them to lodge upon as to cover and

thatch their huts and to keep them dry.  The minister of a parish not

far off, not knowing of the other, sent them also about two bushels of

wheat and half a bushel of white peas.



They were very thankful, to be sure, for this relief, and particularly

the straw was a -very great comfort to them; for though the ingenious

carpenter had made frames for them to lie in like troughs, and filled

them with leaves of trees, and such things as they could get, and had

cut all their tent-cloth out to make them coverlids, yet they lay damp

and hard and unwholesome till this straw came, which was to them

like feather-beds, and, as John said, more welcome than feather-beds

would have been at another time.



This gentleman and the minister having thus begun, and given an

example of charity to these wanderers, others quickly followed, and

they received every day some benevolence or other from the people,

but chiefly from the gentlemen who dwelt in the country round them.

Some sent them chairs, stools, tables, and such household things as

they gave notice they wanted; some sent them blankets, rugs, and

coverlids, some earthenware, and some kitchen ware for ordering

their food.



Encouraged by this good usage, their carpenter in a few days built

them a large shed or house with rafters, and a roof in form, and an

upper floor, in which they lodged warm: for the weather began to be

damp and cold in the beginning of September.  But this house, being

well thatched, and the sides and roof made very thick, kept out the

cold well enough.  He made, also, an earthen wall at one end with a

chimney in it, and another of the company, with a vast deal of trouble

and pains, made a funnel to the chimney to carry out the smoke.



Here they lived comfortably, though coarsely, till the beginning of

September, when they had the bad news to hear, whether true or not,

that the plague, which was very hot at Waltham Abbey on one side

and at Rumford and Brentwood on the other side, was also coming to

Epping, to Woodford, and to most of the towns upon the Forest, and

which, as they said, was brought down among them chiefly by the

higlers, and such people as went to and from London with provisions.



If this was true, it was an evident contradiction to that report which

was afterwards spread all over England, but which, as I have said, I

cannot confirm of my own knowledge: namely, that the market-people

carrying provisions to the city never got the infection or carried it

back into the country; both which, I have been assured, has been false.



It might be that they were preserved even beyond expectation,

though not to a miracle, that abundance went and came and were not

touched; and that was much for the encouragement of the poor people

of London, who had been completely miserable if the people that

brought provisions to the markets had not been many times

wonderfully preserved, or at least more preserved than could be

reasonably expected.



But now these new inmates began to be disturbed more effectually,

for the towns about them were really infected, and they began to be

afraid to trust one another so much as to go abroad for such things as

they wanted, and this pinched them very hard, for now they had little

or nothing but what the charitable gentlemen of the country supplied

them with.  But, for their encouragement, it happened that other

gentlemen in the country who had not sent them anything before,

began to hear of them and supply them, and one sent them a large pig

- that is to say, a porker another two sheep, and another sent them a

calf.  In short, they had meat enough, and sometimes had cheese and

milk, and all such things.  They were chiefly put to it for bread, for

when the gentlemen sent them corn they had nowhere to bake it or to

grind it. This made them eat the first two bushel of wheat that was

sent them in parched corn, as the Israelites of old did, without

grinding or making bread of it.



At last they found means to carry their corn to a windmill near

Woodford, where they bad it ground, and afterwards the biscuit-maker

made a hearth so hollow and dry that he could bake biscuit-cakes

tolerably well; and thus they came into a condition to live without any

assistance or supplies from the towns; and it was well they did, for the

country was soon after fully infected, and about 120 were said to have

died of the distemper in the villages near them, which was a terrible

thing to them.



On this they called a new council, and now the towns had no need to

be afraid they should settle near them; but, on the contrary, several

families of the poorer sort of the inhabitants quitted their houses and

built huts in the forest after the same manner as they had done.  But it

was observed that several of these poor people that had so removed

had the sickness even in their huts

or booths; the reason of which was plain, namely, not because they

removed into the air, but, () because they did not remove time enough;

that is to say, not till, by openly conversing with the other people their

neighbours, they had the distemper upon them, or (as may be said)

among them, and so carried it about them whither they went.  Or (2)

because they were not careful enough, after they were safely removed

out of the towns, not to come in again and mingle with the diseased people.



But be it which of these it will, when our travellers began to

perceive that the plague was not only in the towns, but even in the

tents and huts on the forest near them, they began then not only to be

afraid, but to think of decamping and removing; for had they stayed

they would have been in manifest danger of their lives.



It is not to be wondered that they were greatly afflicted at being

obliged to quit the place where they had been so kindly received, and

where they had been treated with so much humanity and charity; but

necessity and the hazard of life, which they came out so far to

preserve, prevailed with them, and they saw no remedy.  John,

however, thought of a remedy for their present misfortune: namely,

that he would first acquaint that gentleman who was their principal

benefactor with the distress they were in, and to crave his assistance

and advice.





End of Part 4
