



A JOURNAL OF THE PLAGUE YEAR

	by DANIEL DEFOE





Part 1




being observations or memorials

of the most remarkable occurrences,

as well public as private, which happened in

London during the last great visitation in 1665.

Written by a Citizen who continued

all the while in London.

Never made public before







It was about the beginning of September, 1664, that I, among the rest

of my neighbours, heard in ordinary discourse that the plague was

returned again in Holland; for it had been very violent there, and

particularly at Amsterdam and Rotterdam, in the year 1663, whither,

they say, it was brought, some said from Italy, others from the Levant,

among some goods which were brought home by their Turkey fleet;

others said it was brought from Candia; others from Cyprus.  It

mattered not from whence it came; but all agreed it was come into

Holland again.



We had no such thing as printed newspapers in those days to spread

rumours and reports of things, and to improve them by the invention

of men, as I have lived to see practised since.  But such things as these

were gathered from the letters of merchants and others who

corresponded abroad, and from them was handed about by word of

mouth only; so that things did not spread instantly over the whole

nation, as they do now.  But it seems that the Government had a true

account of it, and several councils were held about ways to prevent its

coming over; but all was kept very private.  Hence it was that this

rumour died off again, and people began to forget it as a thing we

were very little concerned in, and that we hoped was not true; till the

latter end of November or the beginning of December 1664 when two

men, said to be Frenchmen, died of the plague in Long Acre, or rather

at the upper end of Drury Lane.  The family they were in endeavoured

to conceal it as much as possible, but as it had gotten some vent in the

discourse of the neighbourhood, the Secretaries of State got

knowledge of it; and concerning themselves to inquire about it, in

order to be certain of the truth, two physicians and a surgeon were

ordered to go to the house and make inspection.  This they did; and

finding evident tokens of the sickness upon both the bodies that were

dead, they gave their opinions publicly that they died of the plague.

Whereupon it was given in to the parish clerk, and he also returned

them to the Hall; and it was printed in the weekly bill of mortality in

the usual manner, thus -

  

  Plague, 2. Parishes infected, 1.





The people showed a great concern at this, and began to be alarmed

all over the town, and the more, because in the last week in December

1664 another man died in the same house, and of the same distemper.

And then we were easy again for about six weeks, when none having

died with any marks of infection, it was said the distemper was gone;

but after that, I think it was about the 12th of February, another died in

another house, but in the same parish and in the same manner.



This turned the people's eyes pretty much towards that end of the

town, and the weekly bills showing an increase of burials in St Giles's

parish more than usual, it began to be suspected that the plague was

among the people at that end of the town, and that many had died of it,

though they had taken care to keep it as much from the knowledge of the

public as possible.  This possessed the heads of the people very much,

and few cared to go through Drury Lane, or the other streets suspected,

unless they had extraordinary business that obliged them to it



This increase of the bills stood thus: the usual number of burials in a

week, in the parishes of St Giles-in-the-Fields and St Andrew's,

Holborn, were from twelve to seventeen or nineteen each, few more

or less; but from the time that the plague first began in St Giles's

parish, it was observed that the ordinary burials increased in number

considerably.  For example: -



From December 27 to January 3  { St Giles's      16

                               { St Andrew's     17



"     January 3  "    "    10  { St Giles's      12

                               { St Andrew's     25



"     January 10 "    "    17  { St Giles's      18

                               { St Andrew's     28



"     January 17 "    "    24  { St Giles's      23

                               { St Andrew's     16



"     January 24 "    "    31  { St Giles's      24

                               { St Andrew's     15



"     January 30 " February 7  { St Giles's      21

                               { St Andrew's     23



"     February 7 "     "   14  { St Giles's      24





               Whereof one of the plague.





The like increase of the bills was observed in the parishes of St

Bride's, adjoining on one side of Holborn parish, and in the parish of

St James, Clerkenwell, adjoining on the other side of Holborn; in both

which parishes the usual numbers that died weekly were from four to

six or eight, whereas at that time they were increased as follows: -



From December 20 to December 27  { St Bride's     0

                                 { St James's     8



     December 27 to January   3  { St Bride's     6

                                 { St James's     9



"    January  3  "    "      10  { St Bride's    11

                                 { St James's     7



"    January 10  "    "      17  { St Bride's    12

                                 { St James's     9



"    January 17  "    "      24  { St Bride's     9

                                 { St James's    15



"    January 24  "    "      31  { St Bride's     8

                                 { St James's    12



"    January 31  " February   7  { St Bride's    13

                                 { St James's     5



"    February 7  "    "      14  { St Bride's     12

                                 { St James's     6



Besides this, it was observed with great uneasiness by the people that

the weekly bills in general increased very much during these weeks,

although it was at a time of the year when usually the bills are very

moderate.



The usual number of burials within the bills of mortality for a week

was from about 240 or thereabouts to 300.  The last was esteemed a

pretty high bill; but after this we found the bills successively

increasing as follows: -

                                          Buried.  Increased.

December the 20th to the 27th               291       ...

      "      27th  "     3rd January        349        58

January  the  3rd  "    10th   "            394        45

      "      10th  "    17th   "            415        21

      "      17th  "    24th   "            474        59

     



This last bill was really frightful, being a higher number than had

been known to have been buried in one week since the preceding

visitation of 1656.



However, all this went off again, and the weather proving cold, and

the frost, which began in December, still continuing very severe even

till near the end of February, attended with sharp though moderate

winds, the bills decreased again, and the city grew healthy, and

everybody began to look upon the danger as good as over; only that

still the burials in St Giles's continued high.  From the beginning of

April especially they stood at twenty-five each week, till the week

from the 18th to the 25th, when there was buried in St Giles's parish

thirty, whereof two of the plague and eight of the spotted-fever, which

was looked upon as the same thing; likewise the number that died of

the spotted-fever in the whole increased, being eight the week before,

and twelve the week above-named.



This alarmed us all again, and terrible apprehensions were among

the people, especially the weather being now changed and growing

warm, and the summer being at hand.  However, the next week there

seemed to be some hopes again; the bills were low, the number of the

dead in all was but 388, there was none of the plague, and but four of

the spotted-fever.



But the following week it returned again, and the distemper was

spread into two or three other parishes, viz., St Andrew's, Holborn; St

Clement Danes; and, to the great affliction of the city, one died within

the walls, in the parish of St Mary Woolchurch, that is to say, in

Bearbinder Lane, near Stocks Market; in all there were nine of the

plague and six. of the spotted-fever.  It was, however, upon inquiry

found that this Frenchman who died in Bearbinder Lane was one who,

having lived in Long Acre, near the infected houses, had removed for

fear of the distemper, not knowing that he was already infected.



This was the beginning of May, yet the weather was temperate,

variable, and cool enough, and people had still some hopes.  That

which encouraged them was that the city was healthy: the whole

ninety-seven parishes buried but fifty-four, and we began to hope that,

as it was chiefly among the people at that end of the town, it might go

no farther; and the rather, because the next week, which was from the

9th of May to the 16th, there died but three, of which not one within

the whole city or liberties; and St Andrew's buried but fifteen, which

was very low.  'Tis true St Giles's buried two-and-thirty, but still, as

there was but one of the plague, people began to be easy.  The whole

bill also was very low, for the week before the bill was but 347, and

the week above mentioned but 343.  We continued in these hopes for

a few days, but it was but for a few, for the people were no more to be

deceived thus; they searched the houses and found that the plague was

really spread every way, and that many died of it every day.  So that

now all our extenuations abated, and it was no more to be concealed;

nay, it quickly appeared that the infection had spread itself beyond all

hopes of abatement. that in the parish of St Giles it was gotten into

several streets, and several families lay all sick together; and,

accordingly, in the weekly bill for the next week the thing began to

show itself.  There was indeed but fourteen set down of the plague,

but this was all knavery and collusion, for in St Giles's parish they

buried forty in all, whereof it was certain most of them died of the

plague, though they were set down of other distempers; and though

the number of all the burials were not increased above thirty-two, and

the whole bill being but 385, yet there was fourteen of the spotted-

fever, as well as fourteen of the plague; and we took it for granted

upon the whole that there were fifty died that week of the plague.



The next bill was from the 23rd of May to the 30th, when the number

of the plague was seventeen.  But the burials in St Giles's were

fifty-three - a frightful number! - of whom they set down but nine

of the plague; but on an examination more strictly by the justices

of peace, and at the Lord Mayor's request, it was found there were

twenty more who were really dead of the plague in that parish,

but had been set down of the spotted-fever or other distempers,

besides others concealed.



But those were trifling things to what followed immediately after;

for now the weather set in hot, and from the first week in June the

infection spread in a dreadful manner, and the bills rose high; the

articles of the fever, spotted-fever, and teeth began to swell; for all

that could conceal their distempers did it, to prevent their neighbours

shunning and refusing to converse with them, and also to prevent

authority shutting up their houses; which, though it was not yet

practised, yet was threatened, and people were extremely terrified at

the thoughts of it.



The second week in June, the parish of St Giles, where still the

weight of the infection lay, buried 120, whereof though the bills said

but sixty-eight of the plague, everybody said there had been 100 at

least, calculating it from the usual number of funerals in that parish,

as above.



Till this week the city continued free, there having never any died,

except that one Frenchman whom I mentioned before, within the

whole ninety-seven parishes.  Now there died four within the city, one

in Wood Street, one in Fenchurch Street, and two in Crooked Lane.

Southwark was entirely free, having not one yet died on that side of

the water.



I lived without Aldgate, about midway between Aldgate Church and

Whitechappel Bars, on the left hand or north side of the street; and as

the distemper had not reached to that side of the city, our

neighbourhood continued very easy.  But at the other end of the town

their consternation was very great: and the richer sort of people,

especially the nobility and gentry from the west part of the city,

thronged out of town with their families and servants in an unusual

manner; and this was more particularly seen in Whitechappel; that is to

say, the Broad Street where I lived; indeed, nothing was to be seen but

waggons and carts, with goods, women, servants, children, &c.;

coaches filled with people of the better sort and horsemen attending

them, and all hurrying away; then empty waggons and carts appeared,

and spare horses with servants, who, it was apparent, were returning

or sent from the countries to fetch more people; besides innumerable

numbers of men on horseback, some alone, others with servants, and,

generally speaking, all loaded with baggage and fitted out for

travelling, as anyone might perceive by their appearance.



This was a very terrible and melancholy thing to see, and as it was a

sight which I could not but look on from morning to night (for indeed

there was nothing else of moment to be seen), it filled me with very

serious thoughts of the misery that was coming upon the city, and the

unhappy condition of those that would be left in it.



This hurry of the people was such for some weeks that there was no

getting at the Lord Mayor's door without exceeding difficulty; there

were such pressing and crowding there to get passes and certificates

of health for such as travelled abroad, for without these there was no

being admitted to pass through the towns upon the road, or to lodge in

any inn.  Now, as there had none died in the city for all this time, my

Lord Mayor gave certificates of health without any difficulty to all

those who lived in the ninety-seven parishes, and to those within the

liberties too for a while.



This hurry, I say, continued some weeks, that is to say, all the month

of May and June, and the more because it was rumoured that an order

of the Government was to be issued out to place turnpikes and barriers

on the road to prevent people travelling, and that the towns on the

road would not suffer people from London to pass for fear of bringing

the infection along with them, though neither of these rumours had

any foundation but in the imagination, especially at-first.



I now began to consider seriously with myself concerning my own

case, and how I should dispose of myself; that is to say, whether I

should resolve to stay in London or shut up my house and flee, as

many of my neighbours did.  I have set this particular down so fully,

because I know not but it may be of moment to those who come after

me, if they come to be brought to the same distress, and to the same

manner of making their choice; and therefore I desire this account

may pass with them rather for a direction to themselves to act by than

a history of my actings, seeing it may not he of one farthing value to

them to note what became of me.



I had two important things before me: the one was the carrying on

my business and shop, which was considerable, and in which was

embarked all my effects in the world; and the other was the

preservation of my life in so dismal a calamity as I saw apparently

was coming upon the whole city, and which, however great it was, my

fears perhaps, as well as other people's, represented to be much

greater than it could be.



The first consideration was of great moment to me; my trade was a

saddler, and as my dealings were chiefly not by a shop or chance

trade, but among the merchants trading to the English colonies in

America, so my effects lay very much in the hands of such.  I was a

single man, 'tis true, but I had a family of servants whom I kept at my

business; had a house, shop, and warehouses filled with goods; and, in

short, to leave them all as things in such a case must be left (that is to

say, without any overseer or person fit to be trusted with them), had

been to hazard the loss not only of my trade, but of my goods, and

indeed of all I had in the world.



I had an elder brother at the same time in London, and not many

years before come over from Portugal: and advising with him, his

answer was in three words, the same that was given in another case

quite different, viz., 'Master, save thyself.' In a word, he was for my

retiring into the country, as he resolved to do himself with his family;

telling me what he had, it seems, heard abroad, that the best

preparation for the plague was to run away from it.  As to my

argument of losing my trade, my goods, or debts, he quite confuted

me.  He told me the same thing which I argued for my staying, viz.,

that I would trust God with my safety and health, was the strongest

repulse to my pretensions of losing my trade and my goods; 'for', says

he, 'is it not as reasonable that you should trust God with the chance or

risk of losing your trade, as that you should stay in so eminent a point

of danger, and trust Him with your life?'



I could not argue that I was in any strait as to a place where to go,

having several friends and relations in Northamptonshire, whence our

family first came from; and particularly, I had an only sister in

Lincolnshire, very willing to receive and entertain me.



My brother, who had already sent his wife and two children into

Bedfordshire, and resolved to follow them, pressed my going very

earnestly; and I had once resolved to comply with his desires, but at

that time could get no horse; for though it is true all the people did not

go out of the city of London, yet I may venture to say that in a manner

all the horses did; for there was hardly a horse to be bought or hired in

the whole city for some weeks.  Once I resolved to travel on foot with

one servant, and, as many did, lie at no inn, but carry a soldier's tent

with us, and so lie in the fields, the weather being very warm, and no

danger from taking cold.  I say, as many did, because several did so at

last, especially those who had been in the armies in the war which had

not been many years past; and I must needs say that, speaking of

second causes, had most of the people that travelled done so, the plague

had not been carried into so many country towns and houses as it was,

to the great damage, and indeed to the ruin, of abundance of people.



But then my servant, whom I had intended to take down with me,

deceived me; and being frighted at the increase of the distemper, and

not knowing when I should go, he took other measures, and left me,

so I was put off for that time; and, one way or other, I always found

that to appoint to go away was always crossed by some accident or

other, so as to disappoint and put it off again; and this brings in

a story which otherwise might be thought a needless digression, viz.,

about these disappointments being from Heaven.



I mention this story also as the best method I can advise any person

to take in such a case, especially if he be one that makes conscience of

his duty, and would be directed what to do in it, namely, that he

should keep his eye upon the particular providences which occur at

that time, and look upon them complexly, as they regard one another,

and as all together regard the question before him: and then, I think,

he may safely take them for intimations from Heaven of what is his

unquestioned duty to do in such a case; I mean as to going away from

or staying in the place where we dwell, when visited with an

infectious distemper.



It came very warmly into my mind one morning, as I was musing on

this particular thing, that as nothing attended us without the direction

or permission of Divine Power, so these disappointments must have

something in them extraordinary; and I ought to consider whether it

did not evidently point out, or intimate to me, that it was the will of

Heaven I should not go.  It immediately followed in my thoughts, that

if it really was from God that I should stay, He was able effectually to

preserve me in the midst of all the death and danger that would

surround me; and that if I attempted to secure myself by fleeing from

my habitation, and acted contrary to these intimations, which I believe

to be Divine, it was a kind of flying from God, and that He could

cause His justice to overtake me when and where He thought fit.



These thoughts quite turned my resolutions again, and when I came

to discourse with my brother again I told him that I inclined to stay

and take my lot in that station in which God had placed me, and that

it seemed to be made more especially my duty, on the account of what

I have said.



My brother, though a very religious man himself, laughed at all I

had suggested about its being an intimation from Heaven, and told me

several stories of such foolhardy people, as he called them, as I was;

that I ought indeed to submit to it as a work of Heaven if I had been

any way disabled by distempers or diseases, and that then not being

able to go, I ought to acquiesce in the direction of Him, who, having

been my Maker, had an undisputed right of sovereignty in disposing

of me, and that then there had been no difficulty to determine which

was the call of His providence and which was not; but that I should

take it as an intimation from Heaven that I should not go out of town,

only because I could not hire a horse to go, or my fellow was run

away that was to attend me, was ridiculous, since at the time I had my

health and limbs, and other servants, and might with ease travel a day

or two on foot, and having a good certificate of being in perfect health,

might either hire a horse or take post on the road, as I thought fit.



Then he proceeded to tell me of the mischievous consequences

which attended the presumption of the Turks and Mahometans in Asia

and in other places where he had been (for my brother, being a

merchant, was a few years before, as I have already observed, returned

from abroad, coming last from Lisbon), and how, presuming upon

their professed predestinating notions, and of every man's end being

predetermined and unalterably beforehand decreed, they would go

unconcerned into infected places and converse with infected persons,

by which means they died at the rate of ten or fifteen thousand a

week, whereas the Europeans or Christian merchants, who kept

themselves retired and reserved, generally escaped the contagion.



Upon these arguments my brother changed my resolutions again,

and I began to resolve to go, and accordingly made all things ready;

for, in short, the infection increased round me, and the bills were risen

to almost seven hundred a week, and my brother told me he would

venture to stay no longer.  I desired him to let me consider of it but till

the next day, and I would resolve: and as I had already prepared

everything as well as I could as to MY business, and whom to entrust

my affairs with, I had little to do but to resolve.



I went home that evening greatly oppressed in my mind, irresolute,

and not knowing what to do.  I had set the evening wholly -apart to

consider seriously about it, and was all alone; for already people had,

as it were by a general consent, taken up the custom of not going out

of doors after sunset; the reasons I shall have occasion to say more of

by-and-by.



In the retirement of this evening I endeavoured to resolve, first, what

was my duty to do, and I stated the arguments with which my brother

had pressed me to go into the country, and I set, against them the

strong impressions which I had on my mind for staying; the visible

call I seemed to have from the particular circumstance of my calling,

and the care due from me for the preservation of my effects, which

were, as I might say, my estate; also the intimations which I thought I

had from Heaven, that to me signified a kind of direction to venture;

and it occurred to me that if I had what I might call a direction to stay,

I ought to suppose it contained a promise of being preserved if I obeyed.



This lay close to me, and my mind seemed more and more encouraged

to stay than ever, and supported with a secret satisfaction

that I should be kept.  Add to this, that, turning over the Bible which

lay before me, and while my thoughts were more than ordinarily

serious upon the question, I cried out, 'Well, I know not what to do;

Lord, direct me I' and the like; and at that juncture I happened to stop

turning over the book at the gist Psalm, and casting my eye on the

second verse, I read on to the seventh verse exclusive, and after that

included the tenth, as follows: 'I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge

and my fortress: my God, in Him will I trust.  Surely He shall deliver

thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome pestilence.

He shall cover thee with His feathers, and under His wings shalt thou

trust: His truth shall be thy shield and buckler.  Thou shalt not be

afraid for the terror by night; nor for the arrow that flieth by day; nor

for the pestilence that walketh in darkness; nor for the destruction that

wasteth at noonday.  A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten

thousand at thy right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee.  Only with

thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the reward of the wicked.

Because thou hast made the Lord, which is my refuge, even the most

High, thy habitation; there shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any

plague come nigh thy dwelling,' &C.



I scarce need tell the reader that from that moment I resolved that I

would stay in the town, and casting myself entirely upon the goodness

and protection of the Almighty, would not seek any other shelter

whatever; and that, as my times were in His hands, He was as able to

keep me in a time of the infection as in a time of health; and if He did

not think fit to deliver me, still I was in His hands, and it was meet He

should do with me as should seem good to Him.



With this resolution I went to bed; and I was further confirmed in it

the next day by the woman being taken ill with whom I had intended

to entrust my house and all my affairs.  But I had a further obligation

laid on me on the same side, for the next day I found myself very

much out of order also, so that if I would have gone away, I could

not," and I continued ill three or four days, and this entirely

determined my stay; so I took my leave of my brother, who went away

to Dorking, in Surrey, and afterwards fetched a round farther into

Buckinghamshire or Bedfordshire, to a retreat he had found out there

for his family.



It was a very ill time to be sick in, for if any one complained, it was

immediately said he had the plague; and though I had indeed no

symptom of that distemper, yet being very ill, both in my head and in

my stomach, I was not without apprehension that I really was

infected; but in about three days I grew better; the third night I rested

well, sweated a little, and was much refreshed.  The apprehensions of

its being the infection went also quite away with my illness, and I

went about my business as usual.



These things, however, put off all my thoughts of going into the

country; and my brother also being gone, I had no more debate either

with him or with myself on that subject.



It was now mid-July, and the plague, which had chiefly raged at the

other end of the town, and, as I said before, in the parishes of St Giles,

St Andrew's, Holborn, and towards Westminster, began to now come

eastward towards the part where I lived.  It was to be observed,

indeed, that it did not come straight on towards us; for the city, that is

to say, within the walls, was indifferently healthy still; nor was it got

then very much over the water into Southwark; for though there died

that week 1268 of all distempers, whereof it might be supposed above

600 died of the plague, yet there was but twenty-eight in the whole

city, within the walls, and but nineteen in Southwark, Lambeth parish

included; whereas in the parishes of St Giles and St Martin-in-the-

Fields alone there died 421.



But we perceived the infection kept chiefly in the out-parishes,

which being very populous, and fuller also of poor, the distemper

found more to prey upon than in the city, as I shall observe afterwards.

We perceived, I say, the distemper to draw our way, viz., by the

parishes of Clarkenwell, Cripplegate, Shoreditch, and Bishopsgate;

which last two parishes joining to Aldgate, Whitechappel, and Stepney,

the infection came at length to spread its utmost rage and violence in

those parts, even when it abated at the western parishes where it began.



It was very strange to observe that in this particular week, from the

4th to the 11th of July, when, as I have observed, there died near 400

of the plague in the two parishes of St Martin and St Giles-in-the-

Fields only, there died in the parish of Aldgate but four, in the parish

of Whitechappel three, in the parish of Stepney but one.



Likewise in the next week, from the 11th of July to the 18th, when

the week's bill was 1761, yet there died no more of the plague, on the

whole Southwark side of the water, than sixteen.

But this face of things soon changed, and it began to thicken in

Cripplegate parish especially, and in Clarkenwell; so that by the

second week in August, Cripplegate parish alone buried 886, and

Clarkenwell 155.  Of the first, 850 might well be reckoned to die of

the plague; and of the last, the bill itself said 145 were of the plague.



During the month of July, and while, as I have observed, our part of

the town seemed to be spared in comparison of the west part, I went

ordinarily about the streets, as my business required, and particularly

went generally once in a day, or in two days, into the city, to my

brother's house, which he had given me charge of, and to see if it was

safe; and having the key in my pocket, I used to go into the house, and

over most of the rooms, to see that all was well; for though it be

something wonderful to tell, that any should have hearts so hardened

in the midst of such a calamity as to rob and steal, yet certain it is that

all sorts of villainies, and even levities and debaucheries, were then

practised in the town as openly as ever - I will not say quite as

frequently, because the numbers of people were many ways lessened.



But the city itself began now to be visited too, I mean within the

walls; but the number of people there were indeed extremely lessened

by so great a multitude having been gone into the country; and even

all this month of July they continued to flee, though not in such

multitudes as formerly.  In August, indeed, they fled in such a manner

that I began to think there would be really none but magistrates and

servants left in the city.



As they fled now out of the city, so I should observe that the Court

removed early, viz., in the month of June, and went to Oxford, where

it pleased God to preserve them; and the distemper did not, as I heard

of, so much as touch them, for which I cannot say that I ever saw they

showed any great token of thankfulness, and hardly anything of

reformation, though they did not want being told that their crying

vices might without breach of charity be said to have gone far in

bringing that terrible judgement upon the whole nation.



The face of London was -now indeed strangely altered: I mean the

whole mass of buildings, city, liberties, suburbs, Westminster,

Southwark, and altogether; for as to the particular part called the city,

or within the walls, that was not yet much infected.  But in the whole

the face of things, I say, was much altered; sorrow and sadness sat

upon every face; and though some parts were not yet overwhelmed,

yet all looked deeply concerned; and, as we saw it apparently coming

on, so every one looked on himself and his family as in the utmost

danger.  Were it possible to represent those times exactly to those that

did not see them, and give the reader due ideas of the horror 'that

everywhere presented itself, it must make just impressions upon their

minds and fill them with surprise.  London might well be said to be all

in tears; the mourners did not go about the streets indeed, for nobody

put on black or made a formal dress of mourning for their nearest

friends; but the voice of mourners was truly heard in the streets.  The

shrieks of women and children at the windows and doors of their

houses, where their dearest relations were perhaps dying, or just dead,

were so frequent to be heard as we passed the streets, that it was

enough to pierce the stoutest heart in the world to hear them.  Tears

and lamentations were seen almost in every house, especially in the

first part of the visitation; for towards the latter end men's hearts were

hardened, and death was so always before their eyes, that they did not

so much concern themselves for the loss of their friends, expecting

that themselves should be summoned the next hour.



Business led me out sometimes to the other end of the town, even

when the sickness was chiefly there; and as the thing was new to me,

as well as to everybody else, it was a most surprising thing to see

those streets which were usually so thronged now grown desolate, and

so few people to be seen in them, that if I had been a stranger and at a

loss for my way, I might sometimes have gone the length of a whole

street (I mean of the by-streets), and seen nobody to direct me except

watchmen set at the doors of such houses as were shut up, of which I

shall speak presently.



One day, being at that part of the town on some special business,

curiosity led me to observe things more than usually, and indeed I

walked a great way where I had no business.  I went up Holborn, and

there the street was full of people, but they walked in the middle of

the great street, neither on one side or other, because, as I suppose,

they would not mingle with anybody that came out of houses, or meet

with smells and scent from houses that might be infected.



The Inns of Court were all shut up; nor were very many of the

lawyers in the Temple, or Lincoln's Inn, or Gray's Inn, to be seen

there.  Everybody was at peace; there was no occasion for lawyers;

besides, it being in the time of the vacation too, they were generally

gone into the country.  Whole rows of houses in some places were

shut close up, the inhabitants all fled, and only a watchman or two left.



When I speak of rows of houses being shut up, I do not mean shut

up by the magistrates, but that great numbers of persons followed the

Court, by the necessity of their employments and other dependences;

and as others retired, really frighted with the distemper, it was a mere

desolating of some of the streets.  But the fright was not yet near so

great in the city, abstractly so called, and particularly because, though

they were at first in a most inexpressible consternation, yet as I have

observed that the distemper intermitted often at first, so they were, as

it were, alarmed and unalarmed again, and this several times, till it

began to be familiar to them; and that even when it appeared violent,

yet seeing it did not presently spread into the city, or the east and

south parts, the people began to take courage, and to be, as I may say,

a little hardened.  It is true a vast many people fled, as I have

observed, yet they were chiefly from the west end of the town, and

from that we call the heart of the city: that is to say, among the

wealthiest of the people, and such people as were unencumbered with

trades and business.  But of the rest, the generality stayed, and seemed

to abide the worst; so that in the place we calf the Liberties, and in the

suburbs, in Southwark, and in the east part, such as Wapping, Ratcliff,

Stepney, Rotherhithe, and the like, the people generally stayed, except

here and there a few wealthy families, who, as above, did not depend

upon their business.



It must not be forgot here that the city and suburbs were

prodigiously full of people at the time of this visitation, I mean at the

time that it began; for though I have lived to see a further increase,

and mighty throngs of people settling in London more than ever, yet

we had always a notion that the numbers of people which, the wars

being over, the armies disbanded, and the royal family and the

monarchy being restored, had flocked to London to settle in business,

or to depend upon and attend the Court for rewards of services,

preferments, and the like, was such that the town was computed to

have in it above a hundred thousand people more than ever it held

before; nay, some took upon them to say it had twice as many,

because all the ruined families of the royal party flocked hither.  All

the old soldiers set up trades here, and abundance of families settled

here.  Again, the Court brought with them a great flux of pride, and

new fashions.  All people were grown gay and luxurious, and the joy

of the Restoration had brought a vast many families to London.



I often thought that as Jerusalem was besieged by the Romans when

the Jews were assembled together to celebrate the Passover - by which

means an incredible number of people were surprised there who

would otherwise have been in other countries - so the plague entered

London when an incredible increase of people had happened

occasionally, by the particular circumstances above-named.  As this

conflux of the people to a youthful and gay Court made a great trade

in the city, especially in everything that belonged to fashion and

finery, so it drew by consequence a great number of workmen,

manufacturers, and the like, being mostly poor people who depended

upon their labour.  And I remember in particular that in a

representation to my Lord Mayor of the condition of the poor, it was

estimated that there were no less than an hundred thousand riband-

weavers in and about the city, the chiefest number of whom lived then

in the parishes of Shoreditch, Stepney, Whitechappel, and Bishopsgate,

that, namely, about Spitalfields; that is to say, as Spitalfields was then,

for it was not so large as now by one fifth part.



By this, however, the number of people in the whole may be judged

of; and, indeed, I often wondered that, after the prodigious numbers of

people that went away at first, there was yet so great a multitude left

as it appeared there was.



But I must go back again to the beginning of this surprising time.

While the fears of the people were young, they were increased

strangely by several odd accidents which, put altogether, it was really

a wonder the whole body of the people did not rise as one man and

abandon their dwellings, leaving the place as a space of ground

designed by Heaven for an Akeldama, doomed to be destroyed from

the face of the earth, and that all that would be found in it would

perish with it.  I shall name but a few of these things; but sure they

were so many, and so many wizards and cunning people propagating

them, that I have often wondered there was any (women especially)

left behind.



In the first place, a blazing star or comet appeared for several

months before the plague, as there did the year after another, a little

before the fire.  The old women and the phlegmatic hypochondriac

part of the other sex, whom I could almost call old women too,

remarked (especially afterward, though not till both those judgements

were over) that those two comets passed directly over the city, and

that so very near the houses that it was plain they imported something

peculiar to the city alone; that the comet before the pestilence was of

a faint, dull, languid colour, and its motion very heavy, Solemn, and

slow; but that the comet before the fire was bright and sparkling, or,

as others said, flaming, and its motion swift and furious; and that,

accordingly, one foretold a heavy judgement, slow but severe, terrible

and frightful, as was the plague; but the other foretold a stroke,

sudden, swift, and fiery as the conflagration.  Nay, so particular some

people were, that as they looked upon that comet preceding the fire,

they fancied that they not only saw it pass swiftly and fiercely, and

could perceive the motion with their eye, but even they heard it; that it

made a rushing, mighty noise, fierce and terrible, though at a distance,

and but just perceivable.






End of Part 1
