




CHAPTER THE SEVENTEENTH



IN PERSPECTIVE





Part 1





About four years and a quarter later--to be exact, it was four

years and four months--Mr. and Mrs. Capes stood side by side upon

an old Persian carpet that did duty as a hearthrug in the

dining-room of their flat and surveyed a shining dinner-table set

for four people, lit by skilfully-shaded electric lights,

brightened by frequent gleams of silver, and carefully and simply

adorned with sweet-pea blossom.  Capes had altered scarcely at

all during the interval, except for a new quality of smartness in

the cut of his clothes, but Ann Veronica was nearly half an inch

taller; her face was at once stronger and softer, her neck firmer

and rounder, and her carriage definitely more womanly than it had

been in the days of her rebellion.  She was a woman now to the

tips of her fingers; she had said good-bye to her girlhood in the

old garden four years and a quarter ago.  She was dressed in a

simple evening gown of soft creamy silk, with a yoke of dark old

embroidery that enhanced the gentle gravity of her style, and her

black hair flowed off her open forehead to pass under the control

of a simple ribbon of silver.  A silver necklace enhanced the

dusky beauty of her neck.  Both husband and wife affected an

unnatural ease of manner for the benefit of the efficient

parlor-maid, who was putting the finishing touches to the

sideboard arrangements.



"It looks all right," said Capes.



"I think everything's right," said Ann Veronica, with the roaming

eye of a capable but not devoted house-mistress.



"I wonder if they will seem altered," she remarked for the third

time.



"There I can't help," said Capes.



He walked through a wide open archway, curtained with deep-blue

curtains, into the apartment that served as a reception-room. 

Ann Veronica, after a last survey of the dinner appointments,

followed him, rustling, came to his side by the high brass

fender, and touched two or three ornaments on the mantel above

the cheerful fireplace.



"It's still a marvel to me that we are to be forgiven," she said,

turning.



"My charm of manner, I suppose.  But, indeed, he's very human."



"Did you tell him of the registry office?"



"No--o--certainly not so emphatically as I did about the play."



"It was an inspiration--your speaking to him?"



"I felt impudent.  I believe I am getting impudent. I had not

been near the Royal Society since--since you disgraced me. 

What's that?"



They both stood listening.  It was not the arrival of the guests,

but merely the maid moving about in the hall.



"Wonderful man!" said Ann Veronica, reassured, and stroking his

cheek with her finger.



Capes made a quick movement as if to bite that aggressive digit,

but it withdrew to Ann Veronica's side.



"I was really interested in his stuff.  I WAS talking to him

before I saw his name on the card beside the row of microscopes. 

Then, naturally, I went on talking. He--he has rather a poor

opinion of his contemporaries.  Of course, he had no idea who I

was."



"But how did you tell him?  You've never told me. Wasn't it--a

little bit of a scene?"



"Oh! let me see.  I said I hadn't been at the Royal Society

soiree for four years, and got him to tell me about some of the

fresh Mendelian work.  He loves the Mendelians because he hates

all the big names of the eighties and nineties.  Then I think I

remarked that science was disgracefully under-endowed, and

confessed I'd had to take to more profitable courses. 'The fact

of it is,' I said, 'I'm the new playwright, Thomas More.  Perhaps

you've heard--?'  Well, you know, he had."



"Fame!"



"Isn't it?  'I've not seen your play, Mr. More,' he said, 'but

I'm told it's the most amusing thing in London at the present

time.  A friend of mine, Ogilvy'--I suppose that's Ogilvy &

Ogilvy, who do so many divorces, Vee?--'was speaking very highly

of it--very highly!' "  He smiled into her eyes.



"You are developing far too retentive a memory for praises," said

Ann Veronica.



"I'm still new to them.  But after that it was easy. I told him

instantly and shamelessly that the play was going to be worth ten

thousand pounds.  He agreed it was disgraceful.  Then I assumed a

rather portentous manner to prepare him."



"How?  Show me."



"I can't be portentous, dear, when you're about. It's my other

side of the moon.  But I was portentous, I can assure you.  'My

name's NOT More, Mr. Stanley,' I said.  'That's my pet name.' "



"Yes?"



"I think--yes, I went on in a pleasing blend of the casual and

sotto voce, 'The fact of it is, sir, I happen to be your

son-in-law, Capes.  I do wish you could come and dine with us

some evening.  It would make my wife very happy.' "



"What did he say?"



"What does any one say to an invitation to dinner point-blank? 

One tries to collect one's wits.  'She is constantly thinking of

you,' I said."



"And he accepted meekly?"



"Practically.  What else could he do?  You can't kick up a scene

on the spur of the moment in the face of such conflicting values

as he had before him.  With me behaving as if everything was

infinitely matter-of-fact, what could he do?  And just then

Heaven sent old Manningtree--I didn't tell you before of the

fortunate intervention of Manningtree, did I?  He was looking

quite infernally distinguished, with a wide crimson ribbon across

him--what IS a wide crimson ribbon? Some sort of knight, I

suppose.  He is a knight.  'Well, young man,' he said, 'we

haven't seen you lately,' and something about 'Bateson &

Co.'--he's frightfully anti-Mendelian--having it all their own

way.  So I introduced him to my father-in-law like a shot.  I

think that WAS decision.  Yes, it was Manningtree really secured

your father.  He--"



"Here they are!" said Ann Veronica as the bell sounded.







Part 2





They received the guests in their pretty little hall with genuine

effusion.  Miss Stanley threw aside a black cloak to reveal a

discreet and dignified arrangement of brown silk, and then

embraced Ann Veronica with warmth.  "So very clear and cold," she

said. "I feared we might have a fog."  The housemaid's presence

acted as a useful restraint.  Ann Veronica passed from her aunt

to her father, and put her arms about him and kissed his cheek. 

"Dear old daddy!" she said, and was amazed to find herself

shedding tears. She veiled her emotion by taking off his

overcoat. "And this is Mr. Capes?" she heard her aunt saying.



All four people moved a little nervously into the drawing-room,

maintaining a sort of fluttered amiability of sound and movement.



Mr. Stanley professed a great solicitude to warm his hands. 

"Quite unusually cold for the time of year," he said. 

"Everything very nice, I am sure," Miss Stanley murmured to Capes

as he steered her to a place upon the little sofa before the

fire. Also she made little pussy-like sounds of a reassuring

nature.



"And let's have a look at you, Vee!" said Mr. Stanley, standing

up with a sudden geniality and rubbing his hands together.



Ann Veronica, who knew her dress became her, dropped a curtsy to

her father's regard.



Happily they had no one else to wait for, and it heartened her

mightily to think that she had ordered the promptest possible

service of the dinner.  Capes stood beside Miss Stanley, who was

beaming unnaturally, and Mr. Stanley, in his effort to seem at

ease, took entire possession of the hearthrug.



"You found the flat easily?" said Capes in the pause. "The

numbers are a little difficult to see in the archway. They ought

to put a lamp."



Her father declared there had been no difficulty.



"Dinner is served, m'm," said the efficient parlor-maid in the

archway, and the worst was over.



"Come, daddy," said Ann Veronica, following her husband and Miss

Stanley; and in the fulness of her heart she gave a friendly

squeeze to the parental arm.



"Excellent fellow!" he answered a little irrelevantly. "I didn't

understand, Vee."



"Quite charming apartments," Miss Stanley admired; "charming! 

Everything is so pretty and convenient."



The dinner was admirable as a dinner; nothing went wrong, from

the golden and excellent clear soup to the delightful iced

marrons and cream; and Miss Stanley's praises died away to an

appreciative acquiescence. A brisk talk sprang up between Capes

and Mr. Stanley, to which the two ladies subordinated themselves

intelligently.  The burning topic of the Mendelian controversy

was approached on one or two occasions, but avoided dexterously;

and they talked chiefly of letters and art and the censorship of

the English stage.  Mr. Stanley was inclined to think the

censorship should be extended to the supply of what he styled

latter-day fiction; good wholesome stories were being ousted, he

said, by "vicious, corrupting stuff" that "left a bad taste in

the mouth."  He declared that no book could be satisfactory that

left a bad taste in the mouth, however much it seized and

interested the reader at the time.  He did not like it, he said,

with a significant look, to be reminded of either his books or

his dinners after he had done with them.  Capes agreed with the

utmost cordiality.



"Life is upsetting enough, without the novels taking a share,"

said Mr. Stanley.



For a time Ann Veronica's attention was diverted by her aunt's

interest in the salted almonds.



"Quite particularly nice," said her aunt. "Exceptionally so."



When Ann Veronica could attend again she found the men were

discussing the ethics of the depreciation of house property

through the increasing tumult of traffic in the West End, and

agreeing with each other to a devastating extent.  It came into

her head with real emotional force that this must be some

particularly fantastic sort of dream.  It seemed to her that her

father was in some inexplicable way meaner-looking than she had

supposed, and yet also, as unaccountably, appealing.  His tie had

demanded a struggle; he ought to have taken a clean one after his

first failure.  Why was she noting things like this?  Capes

seemed self-possessed and elaborately genial and commonplace, but

she knew him to be nervous by a little occasional clumsiness, by

the faintest shadow of vulgarity in the urgency of his

hospitality.  She wished he could smoke and dull his nerves a

little.  A gust of irrational impatience blew through her being. 

Well, they'd got to the pheasants, and in a little while he would

smoke. What was it she had expected?  Surely her moods were

getting a little out of hand.



She wished her father and aunt would not enjoy their dinner with

such quiet determination.  Her father and her husband, who had

both been a little pale at their first encounter, were growing

now just faintly flushed.  It was a pity people had to eat food.



"I suppose," said her father, "I have read at least half the

novels that have been at all successful during the last twenty

years.  Three a week is my allowance, and, if I get short ones,

four.  I change them in the morning at Cannon Street, and take my

book as I come down."



It occurred to her that she had never seen her father dining out

before, never watched him critically as an equal.  To Capes he

was almost deferential, and she had never seen him deferential in

the old time, never. The dinner was stranger than she had ever

anticipated. It was as if she had grown right past her father

into something older and of infinitely wider outlook, as if he

had always been unsuspectedly a flattened figure, and now she had

discovered him from the other side.



It was a great relief to arrive at last at that pause when she

could say to her aunt, "Now, dear?" and rise and hold back the

curtain through the archway.  Capes and her father stood up, and

her father made a belated movement toward the curtain.  She

realized that he was the sort of man one does not think much

about at dinners.  And Capes was thinking that his wife was a

supremely beautiful woman.  He reached a silver cigar and

cigarette box from the sideboard and put it before his

father-in-law, and for a time the preliminaries of smoking

occupied them both.  Then Capes flittered to the hearthrug and

poked the fire, stood up, and turned about.  "Ann Veronica is

looking very well, don't you think?" he said, a little awkwardly.



"Very," said Mr. Stanley.  "Very," and cracked a walnut

appreciatively.



"Life--things--I don't think her prospects now--Hopeful

outlook."



"You were in a difficult position," Mr. Stanley pronounced, and

seemed to hesitate whether he had not gone too far.  He looked at

his port wine as though that tawny ruby contained the solution of

the matter. "All's well that ends well," he said; "and the less

one says about things the better."



"Of course," said Capes, and threw a newly lit cigar into the

fire through sheer nervousness.  "Have some more port wine, sir?"



"It's a very sound wine," said Mr. Stanley, consenting with dignity.



"Ann Veronica has never looked quite so well, I think," said

Capes, clinging, because of a preconceived plan, to the

suppressed topic.







Part 3





At last the evening was over, and Capes and his wife had gone

down to see Mr. Stanley and his sister into a taxicab, and had

waved an amiable farewell from the pavement steps.



"Great dears!" said Capes, as the vehicle passed out of sight.



"Yes, aren't they?" said Ann Veronica, after a thoughtful pause. 

And then, "They seem changed."



"Come in out of the cold," said Capes, and took her arm.



"They seem smaller, you know, even physically smaller," she said.



"You've grown out of them. . . .  Your aunt liked the pheasant."



"She liked everything.  Did you hear us through the archway,

talking cookery?"



They went up by the lift in silence.



"It's odd," said Ann Veronica, re-entering the flat.



"What's odd?"



"Oh, everything!"



She shivered, and went to the fire and poked it.  Capes sat down

in the arm-chair beside her.



"Life's so queer," she said, kneeling and looking into the

flames.  "I wonder--I wonder if we shall ever get like that."



She turned a firelit face to her husband.  "Did you tell him?"



Capes smiled faintly.  "Yes."



"How?"



"Well--a little clumsily."



"But how?"



"I poured him out some port wine, and I said--let me see--oh,

'You are going to be a grandfather!' "



"Yes.  Was he pleased?"



"Calmly!  He said--you won't mind my telling you?"



"Not a bit."



"He said, 'Poor Alice has got no end!' "



"Alice's are different," said Ann Veronica, after an interval. 

"Quite different.  She didn't choose her man. . . .  Well, I told

aunt. . . .  Husband of mine, I think we have rather overrated

the emotional capacity of those--those dears."



"What did your aunt say?"



"She didn't even kiss me.  She said"--Ann Veronica shivered

again--"  'I hope it won't make you uncomfortable, my dear'--like

that--'and whatever you do, do be careful of your hair!'  I

think--I judge from her manner--that she thought it was just a

little indelicate of us--considering everything; but she tried to

be practical and sympathetic and live down to our standards."



Capes looked at his wife's unsmiling face.



"Your father," he said, "remarked that all's well that ends well,

and that he was disposed to let bygones be bygones.  He then

spoke with a certain fatherly kindliness of the past. . . ."



"And my heart has ached for him!"



"Oh, no doubt it cut him at the time.  It must have cut him."



"We might even have--given it up for them!"



"I wonder if we could."



"I suppose all IS well that ends well.  Somehow to-night--I don't

know."



"I suppose so.  I'm glad the old sore is assuaged. Very glad. 

But if we had gone under--!"



They regarded one another silently, and Ann Veronica had one of

her penetrating flashes.



"We are not the sort that goes under," said Ann Veronica, holding

her hands so that the red reflections vanished from her eyes. 

"We settled long ago--we're hard stuff.  We're hard stuff!"



Then she went on:  "To think that is my father!  Oh, my dear!  He

stood over me like a cliff; the thought of him nearly turned me

aside from everything we have done.  He was the social order; he

was law and wisdom. And they come here, and they look at our

furniture to see if it is good; and they are not glad, it does

not stir them, that at last, at last we can dare to have

children."



She dropped back into a crouching attitude and began to weep. 

"Oh, my dear!" she cried, and suddenly flung herself, kneeling,

into her husband's arms.



"Do you remember the mountains?  Do you remember how we loved one

another?  How intensely we loved one another!  Do you remember

the light on things and the glory of things?  I'm greedy, I'm

greedy!  I want children like the mountains and life like the

sky.  Oh! and love--love!  We've had so splendid a time, and

fought our fight and won.  And it's like the petals falling from

a flower.  Oh, I've loved love, dear!  I've loved love and you,

and the glory of you; and the great time is over, and I have to

go carefully and bear children, and--take care of my hair--and

when I am done with that I shall be an old woman.  The petals

have fallen --the red petals we loved so.  We're hedged about

with discretions--and all this furniture--and successes!  We are

successful at last!  Successful!  But the mountains, dear!  We

won't forget the mountains, dear, ever.  That shining slope of

snow, and how we talked of death!  We might have died!  Even when

we are old, when we are rich as we may be, we won't forget the

tune when we cared nothing for anything but the joy of one

another, when we risked everything for one another, when all the

wrappings and coverings seemed to have fallen from life and left

it light and fire.  Stark and stark!  Do you remember it all? . . .

Say you will never forget!  That these common things and secondary

things sha'n't overwhelm us.  These petals!  I've been wanting

to cry all the evening, cry here on your shoulder for my petals.

Petals! . . .  Silly woman! . . .  I've never had these crying

fits before. . . ."



"Blood of my heart!" whispered Capes, holding her close to him. 

"I know.  I understand."









End 
