




                 DR. MARK TWAIN, FARMEOPATH.



     ADDRESS AT THE ANNUAL DINNER OF THE NEW YORK POST-GRADUATE

          MEDICAL SCHOOL AND HOSPITAL, JANUARY 21, 1909.



  The president, Dr. George N. Miller, in introducing Mr. Clemens,

referred to his late experience with burglars.



  GENTLEMEN AND DOCTORS,- I am glad to be among my own kind

to-night. I was once a sharpshooter, but now I practise a much

higher and equally as deadly a profession. It wasn't so very long

ago that I became a member of your cult, and for the time I've been in

the business my record is one that can't be scoffed at.

  As to the burglars, I am perfectly familiar with these people. I

have always had a good deal to do with burglars- not officially, but

through their attentions to me. I never suffered anything at the hands

of a burglar. They have invaded my house time and time again. They

never got anything. Then those people who burglarized our house in

September- we got back the plated ware they took off, we jailed

them, and I have been sorry ever since. They did us a great service-

they scared off all the servants in the place.

  I consider the Children's Theatre, of which I am president, and

the Post-Graduate Medical School as the two greatest institutions in

the country. This school, in bringing its twenty thousand physicians

from all parts of the country, bringing them up to date, and sending

them back with renewed confidence, has surely saved hundreds of

thousands of lives which otherwise would have been lost.

  I have been practising now for seven months. When I settled on my

farm in Connecticut in June I found the community very thinly settled-

and since I have been engaged in practice it has become more thinly

settled still. This gratifies me, as indicating that I am making an

impression on my community. I suppose it is the same with all of you.

  I have always felt that I ought to do something for you, and so I

organized a Redding (Connecticut) branch of the Post-Graduate

School. I am only a country farmer up there, but I am doing the best I

can.

  Of course, the practice of medicine and surgery in a remote

country district has its disadvantages, but in my case I am happy in a

division of responsibility. I practise in conjunction with a

horse-doctor, a sexton, and an undertaker. The combination is

air-tight, and once a man is stricken in our district escape is

impossible for him.

  These four of us- three in the regular profession and the fourth

an undertaker- are all good men. There is Bill Ferguson, the Redding

undertaker. Bill is there in every respect. He is a little lukewarm on

general practice, and writes his name with a rubber stamp. Like my old

Southern friend, he is one of the finest planters anywhere.

  Then there is Jim Ruggles, the horse-doctor. Ruggles is one of the

best men I have got. He also is not much on general medicine, but he

is a fine horse-doctor. Ferguson doesn't make any money off him.

  You see, the combination started this way. When I got up to

Redding and had become a doctor, I looked around to see what my

chances were for aiding in the great work. The first thing I did was

to determine what manner of doctor I was to be. Being a Connecticut

farmer, I naturally consulted my farmacopia, and at once decided to

become a farmeopath.

  Then I got circulating about, and got in touch with Ferguson and

Ruggles. Ferguson joined readily in my ideas, but Ruggles kept

saying that, while it was all right for an undertaker to get aboard,

he couldn't see where it helped horses.

  Well, we started to find out what was the trouble with the

community, and it didn't take long to find out that there was just one

disease, and that was race-suicide. And driving about the country-side

I was told by my fellow-farmers that it was the only rational human

and valuable disease. But it is cutting into our profits so that we'll

either have to stop it or we'll have to move.

  We've had some funny experiences up there in Redding. Not long ago a

fellow came along with a rolling gait and a distressed face. We

asked him what was the matter. We always hold consultations on every

case, as there isn't business enough for four. He said he didn't know,

but that he was a sailor, and perhaps that might help us to give a

diagnosis. We treated him for that, and I never saw a man die more

peacefully.

  That same afternoon my dog Tige treed an African gentleman. We

chained up the dog, and then the gentleman came down and said he had

appendicitis. We asked him if he wanted to be cut open, and he said

yes, that he'd like to know if there was anything in it. So we cut him

open and found nothing in him but darkness. So we diagnosed his case

as infidelity, because he was dark inside. Tige is a very clever

dog, and aids us greatly.

  The other day a patient came to me and inquired if I was old

Doctor Clemens-

  As a practitioner I have given a great deal of my attention to

Bright's disease. I have made some rules for treating it that may be

valuable. Listen:

  Rule 1. When approaching the bedside of one whom an all-wise

President- I mean an all-wise Providence- well, anyway, it's the

same thing- has seen fit to afflict with disease- well, the rule is

simple, even if it is old-fashioned.

  Rule 2. I've forgotten just what it is, but-

  Rule 3. This is always indispensable: Bleed your patient.







                 MISSOURI UNIVERSITY SPEECH.



       ADDRESS DELIVERED JUNE 4, 1902, AT COLUMBIA, MO.



  When the name of Samuel L. Clemens was called the humorist stepped

forward, put his hand to his hair, and apparently hesitated. There was

a dead silence for a moment. Suddenly the entire audience rose and

stood in silence. Some one began to spell out the word Missouri with

an interval between the letters. All joined in. Then the house again

became silent. Mr. Clemens broke the spell:



  AS you are all standing [he drawled in his characteristic voice],

I guess, I suppose I had better stand too.

  [Then came a laugh and loud cries for a speech. As the great

humorist spoke of his recent visit to Hannibal, his old home, his

voice trembled.]

  You cannot know what a strain it was on my emotions [he said]. In

fact, when I found myself shaking hands with persons I had not seen

for fifty years and looking into wrinkled faces that were so young and

joyous when I last saw them, I experienced emotions that I had never

expected, and did not know were in me. I was profoundly moved and

saddened to think that this was the last time, perhaps, that I would

ever behold those kind old faces and dear old scenes of childhood.

  [The humorist then changed to a lighter mood, and for a time the

audience was in a continual roar of laughter. He was particularly

amused at the eulogy on himself read by Gardiner Lathrop in conferring

the degree.] He has a fine opportunity to distinguish himself [said

Mr. Clemens] by telling the truth about me.

  I have seen it stated in print that as a boy I had been guilty of

stealing peaches, apples, and watermelons. I read a story to this

effect very closely not long ago, and I was convinced of one thing,

which was that the man who wrote it was of the opinion that it was

wrong to steal, and that I had not acted right in doing so. I wish

now, however, to make an honest statement, which is that I do not

believe, in all my checkered career, I stole a ton of peaches.

  One night I stole- I mean I removed- a watermelon from a wagon while

the owner was attending to another customer. I crawled off to a

secluded spot, where I found that it was green. It was the greenest

melon in the Mississippi Valley. Then I began to reflect. I began to

be sorry. I wondered what George Washington would have done had he

been in my place. I thought a long time, and then suddenly felt that

strange feeling which comes to a man with a good resolution, and

took up that watermelon and took it back to its owner. I handed him

the watermelon and told him to reform. He took my lecture much to

heart, and, when he gave me a good one in place of the green melon,

I forgave him.

  I told him that I would still be a customer of his, and that I

cherished no ill-feeling because of the incident- that would remain

green in my memory.







BUSINESS

                        BUSINESS.



  The alumni of Eastman College gave their annual banquet, March 30,

1901, at the Y. M. C. A. Building. Mr. James G. Cannon, of the

Fourth National Bank, made the first speech of the evening, after

which Mr. Clemens was introduced by Mr. Bailey as the personal

friend of Tom Sawyer, who was one of the types of successful

business men.



  MR. CANNON has furnished me with texts enough to last as slow a

speaker as myself all the rest of the night. I took exception to the

introducing of Mr. Cannon as a great financier, as if he were the only

great financier present. I am a financier. But my methods are not

the same as Mr. Cannon's.

  I cannot say that I have turned out the great business man that I

thought I was when I began life. But I am comparatively young yet, and

may learn. I am rather inclined to believe that what troubled me was

that I got the big-head early in the game. I want to explain to you

a few points of difference between the principles of business as I see

them and those that Mr. Cannon believes in.

  He says that the primary rule of business success is loyalty to your

employer. That's all right- as a theory. What is the matter with

loyalty to yourself? As nearly as I can understand Mr. Cannon's

methods, there is one great drawback to them. He wants you to work a

great deal. Diligence is a good thing, but taking things easy is

much more- restful. My idea is that the employer should be the busy

man, and the employee the idle one. The employer should be the worried

man, and the employee the happy one. And why not? He gets the

salary. My plan is to get another man to do the work for me. In that

there's more repose. What I want is repose first, last, and all the

time.

  Mr. Cannon says that there are three cardinal rules of business

success; they are diligence, honesty, and truthfulness. Well,

diligence is all right. Let it go as a theory. Honesty is the best

policy- when there is money in it. But truthfulness is one of the most

dangerous- why, this man is misleading you.

  I had an experience to-day with my wife which illustrates this. I

was acknowledging a belated invitation to another dinner for this

evening, which seemed to have been sent about ten days ago. It only

reached me this morning. I was mortified at the discourtesy into which

I had been brought by this delay, and wondered what was being

thought of me by my hosts. As I had accepted your invitation, of

course I had to send regrets to my other friends.

  When I started to write this note my wife came up and stood

looking over my shoulder. Women always want to know what is going

on. Said she: "Should not that read in the third person?" I conceded

that it should, put aside what I was writing, and commenced over

again. That seemed to satisfy her, and so she sat down and let me

proceed. I then finished my first note- and so sent what I intended. I

never could have done this if I had let my wife know the truth about

it. Here is what I wrote:



  TO THE OHIO SOCIETY,- I have at this moment received a most kind

invitation (eleven days old) from Mr. Southard, president; and a

like one (ten days old) from Mr. Bryant, president of the Press

Club. I thank the society cordially for the compliment of these

invitations, although I am booked elsewhere and cannot come.

  But, oh, I should like to know the name of the Lightning Express

by which they were forwarded; for I owe a friend a dozen chickens, and

I believe it will be cheaper to send eggs instead, and let them

develop on the road.

                            Sincerely yours, MARK TWAIN.



  I want to tell you of some of my experiences in business, and then I

will be in a position to lay down one general rule for the guidance of

those who want to succeed in business. My first effort was about

twenty-five years ago. I took hold of an invention- I don't know now

what it was all about, but some one came to me and told me it was a

good thing, and that there was lots of money in it. He persuaded me to

invest $15,000, and I lived up to my beliefs by engaging a man to

develop it. To make a long story short, I sunk $40,000 in it.

  Then I took up the publication of a book. I called in a publisher

and said to him: "I want you to publish this book along lines which

I shall lay down. I am the employer, and you are the employee. I am

going to show them some new kinks in the publishing business. And I

want you to draw on me for money as you go along," which he did. He

drew on me for $56,000. Then I asked him to take the book and call

it off. But he refused to do that.

  My next venture was with a machine for doing something or other. I

knew less about that than I did about the invention. But I sunk

$170,000 in the business, and I can't for the life of me recollect

what it was the machine was to do.

  I was still undismayed. You see, one of the strong points about my

business life was that I never gave up. I undertook to publish General

Grant's book, and made $140,000 in six months. My axiom is, to succeed

in business: avoid my example.







                 CARNEGIE THE BENEFACTOR.



  At the dinner given in honor of Andrew Carnegie by the Lotos Club,

March 17, 1909, Mr. Clemens appeared in a white suit from head to

feet. He wore a white double-breasted coat, white trousers, and

white shoes. The only relief was a big black cigar, which he

confidentially informed the company was not from his usual stack

bought at $3 per barrel.



  THE State of Missouri has for its coat of arms a barrel-head with

two Missourians, one on each side of it, and mark the motto- "United

We Stand, Divided We Fall." Mr. Carnegie, this evening, has suffered

from compliments. It is interesting to hear what people will say about

a man. Why, at the banquet given by this club in my honor, Mr.

Carnegie had the inspiration for which the club is now honoring him.

If Dunfermline contributed so much to the United States in

contributing Mr. Carnegie, what would have happened if all Scotland

had turned out? These Dunfermline folk have acquired advantages in

coming to America.

  Doctor McKelway paid the top compliment, the cumulation, when he

said of Mr. Carnegie: "There is a man who wants to pay more taxes than

he is charged." Richard Watson Gilder did very well for a poet. He

advertised his magazine. He spoke of hiring Mr. Carnegie- the next

thing he will be trying to hire me.

  If I undertook to pay compliments I would do it stronger than any

others have done it, for what Mr. Carnegie wants are strong

compliments. Now, the other side of seventy, I have preserved, as my

chiefest virtue, modesty.







               ON POETRY, VERACITY, AND SUICIDE.



      ADDRESS AT A DINNER OF THE MANHATTAN DICKENS FELLOWSHIP,

                NEW YORK CITY, FEBRUARY 7, 1906.



  This dinner was in commemoration of the ninety-fourth anniversary of

the birth of Charles Dickens. On another occasion Mr. Clemens told the

same story with variations and a different conclusion to the

University Settlement Society.



  I ALWAYS had taken an interest in young people who wanted to

become poets. I remember I was particularly interested in one

budding poet when I was a reporter. His name was Butter.

  One day he came to me and said, disconsolately, that he was going to

commit suicide- he was tired of life, not being able to express his

thoughts in poetic form. Butter asked me what I thought of the idea.

  I said I would; that it was a good idea. "You can do me a friendly

turn. You go off in a private place and do it there, and I'll get it

all. You do it, and I'll do as much for you some time."

  At first he determined to drown himself. Drowning is so nice and

clean, and writes up so well in a newspaper.

  But things ne'er do go smoothly in weddings, suicides, or

courtships. Only there at the edge of the water, where Butter was to

end himself, lay a life-preserver- a big round canvas one, which would

float after the scrap-iron was soaked out of it.

  Butter wouldn't kill himself with the life-preserver in sight, and

so I had an idea. I took it to a pawnshop, and soaked it for a

revolver. The pawnbroker didn't think much of the exchange, but when I

explained the situation he acquiesced. We went up on top of a high

building, and this is what happened to the poet:

  He put the revolver to his forehead and blew a tunnel straight

through his head. The tunnel was about the size of your finger. You

could look right through it. The job was complete; there was nothing

in it.

  Well, after that that man never could write prose, but he could

write poetry. He could write it after he had blown his brains out.

There is lots of that talent all over the country, but the trouble

is they don't develop it.

  I am suffering now from the fact that I, who have told the truth a

good many times in my life, have lately received more letters than

anybody else urging me to lead a righteous life. I have more friends

who want to see me develop on a high level than anybody else.

  Young John D. Rockefeller, two weeks ago, taught his Bible class all

about veracity, and why it was better that everybody should always

keep a plentiful supply on hand. Some of the letters I have received

suggest that I ought to attend his class and learn, too. Why, I know

Mr. Rockefeller, and he is a good fellow. He is competent in many ways

to teach a Bible class, but when it comes to veracity he is only

thirty-five years old. I'm seventy years old. I have been familiar

with veracity twice as long as he.

  And the story about George Washington and his little hatchet has

also been suggested to me in these letters- in a fugitive way, as if I

needed some of George Washington and his hatchet in my constitution.

Why, dear me, they overlook the real point in that story. The point is

not the one that is usually suggested, and you can readily see that.

  The point is not that George said to his father, "Yes, father, I cut

down the cheery-tree; I can't tell a lie," but that the little boy-

only seven years old- should have his sagacity developed under such

circumstances. He was a boy wise beyond his years. His conduct then

was a prophecy of later years. Yes, I think he was the most remarkable

man the country ever produced- up to my time, anyway.

  Now then, little George realized that circumstantial evidence was

against him. He knew that his father would know from the size of the

chips that no full-grown hatchet cut that tree down, and that no man

would have haggled it so. He knew that his father would send around

the plantation and inquire for a small boy with a hatchet, and he

had the wisdom to come out and confess it. Now, the idea that his

father was overjoyed when he told little George that he would rather

have him cut down a thousand cheery-trees than tell a lie is all

nonsense. What did he really mean? Why, that he was absolutely

astonished that he had a son who had the chance to tell a lie and

didn't.

  I admire old George- if that was his name- for his discernment. He

knew when he said that his son couldn't tell a lie that he was

stretching it a good deal. He wouldn't have to go to John D.

Rockefeller's Bible class to find that out. The way the old George

Washington story goes down it doesn't do anybody any good. It only

discourages people who can- tell a lie.







                     WELCOME HOME.



        ADDRESS AT THE DINNER IN HIS HONOR AT THE

             LOTOS CLUB, NOVEMBER 10, 1900.



  In August, 1895, just before sailing for Australia, Mr. Clemens

issued the following statement:



  "It has been reported that I sacrificed, for the benefit of the

creditors, the property of the publishing firm whose financial

backer I was, and that I am now lecturing for my own benefit.

  "This is an error. I intend the lectures, as well as the property,

for the creditors. The law recognizes no mortgage on a man's brains,

and a merchant who has given up all he has may take advantage of the

laws of insolvency and may start free again for himself. But I am

not a business man, and honor is a harder master than the law. It

cannot compromise for less than one hundred cents on a dollar, and its

debts are never outlawed.

  "I had a two-thirds interest in the publishing firm whose capital

I furnished. If the firm had prospered I would have expected to

collect two-thirds of the profits. As it is, I expect to pay all the

debts. My partner has no resources, and I do not look for assistance

to my wife, whose contributions in cash from her own means have nearly

equalled the claims of all the creditors combined. She has taken

nothing; on the contrary, she has helped and intends to help me to

satisfy the obligations due to the rest of the creditors.

  "It is my intention to ask my creditors to accept that as a legal

discharge, and trust to my honor to pay the other fifty per cent. as

fast as I can earn it. From my reception thus far on my lecturing

tour, I am confident that if I live I can pay off the last debt within

four years.

  "After which, at the age of sixty-four, I can make a fresh and

unincumbered start in life. I am going to Australia, India, and

South Africa, and next year I hope to make a tour of the great

cities of the United States."



  I THANK you all out of my heart for this fraternal welcome, and it

seems almost too fine, almost too magnificent, for a humble Missourian

such as I am, far from his native haunts on the banks of the

Mississippi; yet my modesty is in a degree fortified by observing that

I am not the only Missourian who has been honored here to-night, for I

see at this very table- here is a Missourian [indicating Mr.

McKelway], and there is a Missourian [indicating Mr. Depew], and there

is another Missourian- and Hendrix and Clemens; and last but not

least, the greatest Missourian of them all- here he sits- Tom Reed,

who has always concealed his birth till now. And since I have been

away I know what has been happening in his case: he has deserted

politics, and now is leading a creditable life. He has reformed, and

God prosper him; and I judge, by a remark which he made up-stairs

awhile ago, that he had found a new business that is utterly suited to

his make and constitution, and all he is doing now is that he is

around raising the average of personal beauty.

  But I am grateful to the president for the kind words which he has

said of me, and it is not for me to say whether these praises were

deserved or not. I prefer to accept them just as they stand, without

concerning myself with the statistics upon which they have been built,

but only with that large matter, that essential matter, the

good-fellowship, the kindliness, the magnanimity, and generosity

that prompted their utterance. Well, many things have happened since I

sat here before, and now that I think of it, the president's reference

to the debts which were left by the bankrupt firm of Charles L.

Webster & Co. gives me an opportunity to say a word which I very

much wish to say, not for myself, but for ninety-five men and women

whom I shall always hold in high esteem and in pleasant remembrance-

the creditors of that firm. They treated me well; they treated me

handsomely. There were ninety-six of them, and by not a finger's

weight did ninety-five of them add to the burden of that time for

me. Ninety-five out of the ninety-six- they didn't indicate by any

word or sign that they were anxious about their money. They treated me

well, and I shall not forget it; I could not forget it if I wanted to.

Many of them said, "Don't you worry, don't you hurry"; that's what

they said. Why, if I could have that kind of creditors always, and

that experience, I would recognize it as a personal loss to be out

of debt. I owe those ninety-five creditors a debt of homage, and I pay

it now in such measure as one may pay so fine a debt in mere words.

Yes, they said that very thing. I was not personally acquainted with

ten of them, and yet they said, "Don't you worry, and don't you

hurry." I know that phrase by heart, and if all the other music should

perish out of the world it would still sing to me. I appreciate

that; I am glad to say this word; people say so much about me, and

they forget those creditors. They were handsomer than I was- or Tom

Reed.

  Oh, you have been doing many things in this time that I have been

absent; you have done lots of things, some that are well worth

remembering, too. Now, we have fought a righteous war since I have

gone, and that is rare in history- a righteous war is so rare that

it is almost unknown in history; but by the grace of that war we set

Cuba free, and we joined her to those three or four nations that exist

on this earth; and we started out to set those poor Filipinos free,

too, and why, why, why that most righteous purpose of ours has

apparently miscarried I suppose I never shall know.

  But we have made a most creditable record in China in these days-

our sound and level-headed administration has made a most creditable

record over there, and there are some of the Powers that cannot say

that by any means. The Yellow Terror is threatening this world to-day.

It is looming vast and ominous on that distant horizon. I do not

know what is going to be the result of that Yellow Terror, but our

government has had no hand in evoking it, and let's be happy in that

and proud of it.

  We have nursed free silver, we watched by its cradle; we have done

the best we could to raise that child, but those pestiferous

Republicans have- well, they keep giving it the measles every chance

they get, and we never shall raise that child. Well, that's no matter-

there's plenty of other things to do, and we must think of something

else. Well, we have tried a President four years, criticised him and

found fault with him the whole time, and turned around a day or two

ago with votes enough to spare to elect another. O consistency!

consistency! thy name- I don't know what thy name is- Thompson will

do- any name will do- but you see there is the fact, there is the

consistency. Then we have tried for governor an illustrious Rough

Rider, and we liked him so much in that great office that now we

have made him Vice-President- not in order that that office shall give

him distinction, but that he may confer distinction upon that

office. And it's needed, too- it's needed. And now, for a while

anyway, we shall not be stammering and embarrassed when a stranger

asks us, "What is the name of the Vice-President?" This one is

known; this one is pretty well known, pretty widely known, and in some

quarters favorably. I am not accustomed to dealing in these fulsome

compliments, and I am probably overdoing it a little; but- well, my

old affectionate admiration for Governor Roosevelt has probably

betrayed me into the complimentary excess; but I know him, and you

know him; and if you give him rope enough- I mean if- oh yes, he

will justify that compliment; leave it just as it is. And now we

have put in his place Mr. Odell, another Rough Rider, I suppose; all

the fat things go to that profession now. Why, I could have been a

Rough Rider myself if I had known that this political Klondike was

going to open up, and I would have been a Rough Rider if I could

have gone to war on an automobile- but not on a horse! No, I know

the horse too well; I have known the horse in war and in peace, and

there is no place where a horse is comfortable. The horse has too many

caprices, and he is too much given to initiative. He invents too

many new ideas. No, I don't want anything to do with a horse.

  And then we have taken Chauncey Depew out of a useful and active

life and made him a Senator- embalmed him, corked him up. And I am not

grieving. That man has said many a true thing about me in his time,

and I always said something would happen to him. Look at that

[pointing to Mr. Depew] gilded mummy! He has made my life a sorrow

to me at many a banquet on both sides of the ocean, and now he has got

it. Perish the hand that pulls that cork!

  All these things have happened, all these things have come to

pass, while I have been away, and it just shows how little a Mugwump

can be missed in a cold, unfeeling world, even when he is the last one

that is left- a GRAND OLD PARTY all by himself. And there is another

thing that has happened, perhaps the most imposing event of them

all: the institution called the Daughters of the Crown- the

Daughters of the Royal Crown- has established itself and gone into

business. Now, there's an American idea for you; there's an idea

born of God knows what kind of specialized insanity, but not softening

of the brain- you cannot soften a thing that doesn't exist- the

Daughters of the Royal Crown! Nobody eligible but American descendants

of Charles II. Dear me, how the fancy product of that old harem

still holds out!

  Well, I am truly glad to foregather with you again, and partake of

the bread and salt of this hospitable house once more. Seven years

ago, when I was your guest here, when I was old and despondent, you

gave me the grip and the word that lift a man up and make him glad

to be alive; and now I come back from my exile young again, fresh

and alive, and ready to begin life once more, and your welcome puts

the finishing touch .upon my restored youth and makes it real to me,

and not a gracious dream that must vanish with the morning. I thank

you.







                 AN UNDELIVERED SPEECH.



  The steamship St. Paul was to have been launched from Cramp's

shipyard in Philadelphia on March 25, 1895. After the launching a

luncheon was to have been given, at which Mr. Clemens was to make a

speech. Just before the final word was given a reporter asked Mr.

Clemens for a copy of his speech to be delivered at the luncheon. To

facilitate the work of the reporter he loaned him a typewritten copy

of the speech. It happened, however, that when the blocks were knocked

away the big ship refused to budge, and no amount of labor could

move her an inch. She had stuck fast upon the ways. As a result, the

launching was postponed for a week or two; but in the mean time Mr.

Clemens had gone to Europe. Years after a reporter called on Mr.

Clemens and submitted the manuscript of the speech, which was as

follows:



  DAY after to-morrow I sail for England in a ship of this line, the

Paris. It will be my fourteenth crossing in three years and a half.

Therefore, my presence here, as you see, is quite natural, quite

commercial. I am interested in ships. They interest me more now than

hotels do. When a new ship is launched I feel a desire to go and see

if she will be good quarters for me to live in, particularly if she

belongs to this line, for it is by this line that I have done most

of my ferrying.

  People wonder why I go so much. Well, I go partly for my health,

partly to familiarize myself with the road. I have gone over the

same road so many times now that I know all the whales that belong

along the route, and latterly it is an embarrassment to me to meet

them, for they do not look glad to see me, but annoyed, and they

seem to say: "Here is this old derelict again."

  Earlier in life this would have pained me and made me ashamed, but I

am older now, and when I am behaving myself, and doing right, I do not

care for a whale's opinion about me. When we are young we generally

estimate an opinion by the size of the person that holds it, but later

we find that that is an uncertain rule, for we realize that there

are times when a hornet's opinion disturbs us more than an emperor's.

  I do not mean that I care nothing at all for a whale's opinion,


for that would be going to too great a length. Of course, it is better

to have the good opinion of a whale than his disapproval; but my

position is that if you cannot have a whale's good opinion, except

at some sacrifice of principle or personal dignity, it is better to

try to live without it. That is my idea about whales.

  Yes, I have gone over that same route so often that I know my way

without a compass, just by the waves. I know all the large waves and a

good many of the small ones. Also the sunsets. I know every sunset and

where it belongs just by its color. Necessarily, then, I do not make

the passage now for scenery. That is all gone by.

  What I prize most is safety, and in the second place swift transit

and handiness. These are best furnished by the American line, whose

watertight compartments have no passage through them, no doors to be

left open, and consequently no way for water to get from one of them

to another in time of collision. If you nullify the peril which

collisions threaten you with, you nullify the only very serious

peril which attends voyages in the great liners of our day, and

makes voyaging safer than staying at home.

  When the Paris was half-torn to pieces some years ago, enough of the

Atlantic ebbed and flowed through one end of her, during her long

agony, to sink the fleets of the world if distributed among them;

but she floated in perfect safety, and no life was lost. In time of

collision the rock of Gibraltar is not safer than the Paris and

other great ships of this line. This seems to be the only great line

in the world that takes a passenger from metropolis to metropolis

without the intervention of tugs and barges or bridges- takes him

through without breaking bulk, so to speak.

  On the English side he lands at a dock; on the dock a special

train is waiting; in an hour and three-quarters he is in London.

Nothing could be handier. If your journey were from a sand-pit on

our side to a lighthouse on the other, you could make it quicker by

other lines, but that is not the case. The journey is from the city of

New York to the city of London, and no line can do that journey

quicker than this one, nor anywhere near as conveniently and

handily. And when the passenger lands on our side he lands on the

American side of the river, not in the provinces. As a very learned

man said on the last voyage (he is head quartermaster of the New

York land garboard streak of the middle watch): "When we land a

passenger on the American side there's nothing betwix him and his

hotel but hell and the hackman."

  I am glad, with you and the nation, to welcome the new ship. She

is another pride, another consolation, for a great country whose

mighty fleets have all vanished, and which has almost forgotten what

it is to fly its flag to sea. I am not sure as to which St. Paul she

is named for. Some think it is the one that is on the upper

Mississippi, but the head quartermaster told me it was the one that

killed Goliath. But it is not important. No matter which it is, let us

give her hearty welcome and godspeed.







                   SIXTY-SEVENTH BIRTHDAY.



    AT THE METROPOLITAN CLUB, NEW YORK, NOVEMBER 28, 1902.



  Address at a dinner given in honor of Mr. Clemens by Colonel Harvey,

President of Harper & Brothers.



  I THINK I ought to be allowed to talk as long as I want to, for

the reason that I have cancelled all my winter's engagements of

every kind, for good and sufficient reasons, and am making no new

engagements for this winter, and, therefore, this is the only chance I

shall have to disembowel my skull for a year- close the mouth in

that portrait for a year. I want to offer thanks and homage to the

chairman for this innovation which he has introduced here, which is an

improvement, as I consider it, on the old-fashioned style of

conducting occasions like this. That was bad- that was a bad, bad, bad

arrangement. Under that old custom the chairman got up and made a

speech, he introduced the prisoner at the bar, and covered him all

over with compliments, nothing but compliments, not a thing but

compliments, never a slur, and sat down and left that man to get up

and talk without a text. You cannot talk on compliments; that is not a

text. No modest person, and I was born one, can talk on compliments. A

man gets up and is filled to the eyes with happy emotions, but his

tongue is tied; he has nothing to say; he is in the condition of

Doctor Rice's friend who came home drunk and explained it to his wife,

and his wife said to him, "John, when you have drunk all the whiskey

you want, you ought to ask for sarsaparilla." He said, "Yes, but

when I have drunk all the whiskey I want I can't say sarsaparilla."

And so I think it is much better to leave a man unmolested until the

testimony and pleadings are all in. Otherwise he is dumb- he is at the

sarsaparilla stage.

  Before I get to the higgledy-piggledy point, as Mr. Howells

suggested I do, I want to thank you, gentlemen, for this very high

honor you are doing me, and I am quite competent to estimate it at its

value. I see around me captains of all the illustrious industries,

most distinguished men; there are more than fifty here, and I

believe I know thirty-nine of them well. I could probably borrow money

from- from the others, anyway. It is a proud thing to me, indeed, to

see such a distinguished company gather here on such an occasion as

this, when there is no foreign prince to be fated- when you have

come here not to do honor to hereditary privilege and ancient lineage,

but to do reverence to mere moral excellence and elemental veracity-

and, dear me, how old it seems to make me! I look around me and I

see three or four persons I have known so many, many years. I have

known Mr. Secretary Hay- John Hay, as the nation and the rest of his

friends love to call him- I have known John Hay and Tom Reed and the

Reverend Twichell close upon thirty-six years. Close upon thirty-six

years I have known those venerable men. I have known Mr. Howells

nearly thirty-four years, and I knew Chauncey Depew before he could

walk straight, and before he learned to tell the truth. Twenty-seven

years ago I heard him make the most noble and eloquent and beautiful

speech that has ever fallen from even his capable lips. Tom Reed

said that my principal defect was inaccuracy of statement. Well,

suppose that that is true. What's the use of telling the truth all the

time? I never tell the truth about Tom Reed- but that is his defect,

truth; he speaks the truth always. Tom Reed has a good heart, and he

has a good intellect, but he hasn't any judgment. Why, when Tom Reed

was invited to lecture to the Ladies' Society for the Procreation or

Procrastination, or something, of morals, I don't know what it was-

advancement, I suppose, of pure morals- he had the immortal

indiscretion to begin by saying that some of us can't be optimists,

but by judiciously utilizing the opportunities that Providence puts in

our way we can all be bigamists. You perceive his limitations.

Anything he has in his mind he states, if he thinks it is true.

Well, that was true, but that was no place to say it- so they fired

him out.

  A lot of accounts have been settled here tonight for me; I have held

grudges against some of these people, but they have all been wiped out

by the very handsome compliments that have been paid me. Even Wayne

MacVeagh- I have had a grudge against him many years. The first time I

saw Wayne MacVeagh was at a private dinner-party at Charles A. Dana's,

and when I got there he was clattering along, and I tried to get a

word in here and there; but you know what Wayne MacVeagh is when he is

started, and I could not get in five words to his one- or one word

to his five. I struggled along and struggled along, and- well, I

wanted to tell and I was trying to tell a dream I had had the night

before, and it was a remarkable dream, a dream worth people's while to

listen to, a dream recounting Sam Jones the revivalist's reception

in heaven. I was on a train, and was approaching the celestial

way-station- I had a through ticket- and I noticed a man sitting

alongside of me asleep, and he had his ticket in his hat. He was the

remains of the Archbishop of Canterbury; I recognized him by his

photograph. I had nothing against him, so I took his ticket and let

him have mine. He didn't object- he wasn't in a condition to object-

and presently when the train stopped at the heavenly station- well,

I got off, and he went on by request- but there they all were, the

angels, you know, millions of them, every one with a torch; they had

arranged for a torch-light procession; they were expecting the

Archbishop, and when I got off they started to raise a shout, but it

didn't materialize. I don't know whether they were disappointed. I

suppose they had a lot of superstitious ideas about the Archbishop and

what he should look like, and I didn't fill the bill, and I was trying

to explain to Saint Peter, and was doing it in the German tongue,

because I didn't want to be too explicit. Well, I found it was no use,

I couldn't get along, for Wayne MacVeagh was occupying the whole

place, and I said to Mr. Dana, "What is the matter with that man?

Who is that man with the long tongue? What's the trouble with him,

that long, lank cadaver, old oil-derrick out of a job- who is that?"

"Well, now," Mr. Dana said, "you don't want to meddle with him; you

had better keep quiet; just keep quiet, because that's a bad man.

Talk! He was born to talk. Don't let him get out with you; he'll

skin you." I said, "I have been skinned, skinned, and skinned for

years, there is nothing left." He said, "Oh, you'll find there is;

that man is the very seed and inspiration of that proverb which

says, 'No matter how close you skin an onion, a clever man can

always peel it again.'" Well, I reflected and I quieted down. That

would never occur to Tom Reed. He's got no discretion. Well,

MacVeagh is just the same man; he hasn't changed a bit in all those

years; he has been peeling Mr. Mitchell lately. That's the kind of man

he is.

  Mr. Howells- that poem of his is admirable; that's the way to

treat a person. Howells has a peculiar gift for seeing the merits of

people, and he has always exhibited them in my favor. Howells has

never written anything about me that I couldn't read six or seven

times a day; he is always just and always fair; he has written more

appreciatively of me than any one in this world, and published it in

the North American Review. He did me the justice to say that my

intentions- he italicized that- that my intentions were always good,

that I wounded people's conventions rather than their convictions.

Now, I wouldn't want anything handsomer than that said of me. I

would rather wait, with anything harsh I might have to say, till the

convictions become conventions. Bangs has traced me all the way

down. He can't find that honest man, but I will look for him in the

looking-glass when I get home. It was intimated by the Colonel that it

is New England that makes New York and builds up this country and

makes it great, overlooking the fact that there's a lot of people here

who came from elsewhere, like John Hay from away out West, and Howells

from Ohio, and St. Clair McKelway and me from Missouri, and we are

doing what we can to build up New York a little- elevate it. Why, when

I was living in that village of Hannibal, Missouri, on the banks of

the Mississippi, and Hay up in the town of Warsaw, also on the banks

of the Mississippi River- it is an emotional bit of the Mississippi,

and when it is low water you have to climb up to it on a ladder, and

when it floods you have to hunt for it with a deep-sea lead- but it is

a great and beautiful country. In that old time it was a paradise

for simplicity- it was a simple, simple life, cheap but comfortable,

and full of sweetness, and there was nothing of this rage of modern

civilization there at all. It was a delectable land. I went out

there last June, and I met in that town of Hannibal a schoolmate of

mine, John Briggs, whom I had not seen for more than fifty years. I

tell you, that was a meeting! That pal whom I had known as a little

boy long ago, and knew now as a stately man three or four inches

over six feet and browned by exposure to many climes, he was back

there to see that old place again. We spent a whole afternoon going

about here and there and yonder, and hunting up the scenes and talking

of the crimes which we had committed so long ago. It was a

heartbreaking delight, full of pathos, laughter, and tears, all

mixed together; and we called the roll of the boys and girls that we

picnicked and sweethearted with so many years ago, and there were

hardly half a dozen of them left; the rest were in their graves; and

we went up there on the summit of that hill, a treasured place in my

memory, the summit of Holiday's Hill, and looked out again over that

magnificent panorama of the Mississippi River, sweeping along league

after league, a level green paradise on one side, and retreating capes

and promontories as far as you could see on the other, fading away

in the soft, rich lights of the remote distance. I recognized then

that I was seeing now the most enchanting river view the planet

could furnish. I never knew it when I was a boy; it took an educated

eye that had travelled over the globe to know and appreciate it; and

John said, "Can you point out the place where Bear Creek used to be

before the railroad came?" I said, "Yes, it ran along yonder." "And

can you point out the swimming-hole?" "Yes, out there." And he said,

"Can you point out the place where we stole the skiff?" Well, I didn't

know which one he meant. Such a wilderness of events had intervened

since that day, more than fifty years ago, it took me more than five

minutes to call back that little incident, and then I did call it

back; it was a white skiff, and we painted it red to allay

suspicion. And the saddest, saddest man came along- a stranger he was-

and he looked that red skiff over so pathetically, and he said: "Well,

if it weren't for the complexion I'd know whose skiff that was." He

said it in that pleading way, you know, that appeals for sympathy

and suggestion; we were full of sympathy for him, but we weren't in

any condition to offer suggestions. I can see him yet as he turned

away with that same sad look on his face and vanished out of history

forever. I wonder what became of that man. I know what became of the

skiff. Well, it was a beautiful life, a lovely life. There was no

crime. Merely little things like pillaging orchards and

watermelon-patches and breaking the Sabbath- we didn't break the

Sabbath often enough to signify- once a week perhaps. But we were good

boys, good Presbyterian boys, all Presbyterian boys, and loyal and all

that; anyway, we were good Presbyterian boys when the weather was

doubtful; when it was fair, we did wander a little from the fold.

  Look at John Hay and me. There we were in obscurity, and look

where we are now. Consider the ladder which he has climbed, the

illustrious vocations he has served- and vocations is the right

word; he has in all those vocations acquitted himself with high credit

and honor to his country and to the mother that bore him. Scholar,

soldier, diplomat, poet, historian- now, see where we are. He is

Secretary of State and I am a gentleman. It could not happen in any

other country. Our institutions give men the positions that of right

belong to them through merit; all you men have won your places, not by

heredities, and not by family influence or extraneous help, but only

by the natural gifts God gave you at your birth, made effective by

your own energies; this is the country to live in.

  Now, there is one invisible guest here. A part of me is present; the

larger part, the better part, is yonder at her home; that is my

wife, and she has a good many personal friends here, and I think it

won't distress any one of them to know that, although she is going

to be confined to that bed for many months to come from that nervous

prostration, there is not any danger and she is coming along very

well- and I think it quite appropriate that I should speak of her. I

knew her for the first time just in the same year that I first knew

John Hay and Tom Reed and Mr. Twichell- thirty-six years ago- and

she has been the best friend I have ever had, and that is saying a

good deal; she has reared me she and Twichell together- and what I

am I owe to them. Twichell- why, it is such a pleasure to look upon

Twichell's face! For five-and-twenty years I was under the Rev. Mr.

Twichell's tuition, I was in his pastorate, occupying a pew in his

church, and held him in due reverence. That man is full of all the

graces that go to make a person companionable and beloved; and

wherever Twichell goes to start a church the people flock there to buy

the land; they find real estate goes up all around the spot, and the

envious and the thoughtful always try to get Twichell to move to their

neighborhood and start a church; and wherever you see him go you can

go and buy land there with confidence, feeling sure that there will be

a double price for you before very long. I am not saying this to

flatter Mr. Twichell; it is the fact. Many and many a time I have

attended the annual sale in his church, and bought up all the pews

on a margin- and it would have been better for me spiritually and

financially if I had stayed under his wing.

  I have tried to do good in this world, and it is marvellous in how

many different ways I have done good, and it is comfortable to

reflect- now, there's Mr. Rogers- just out of the affection I bear

that man many a time I have given him points in finance that he had

never thought of- and if he could lay aside envy, prejudice, and

superstition, and utilize those ideas in his business, it would make a

difference in his bank account.

  Well, I like the poetry. I like all the speeches and the poetry,

too. I liked Doctor Van Dyke's poem. I wish I could return thanks in

proper measure to you, gentlemen, who have spoken and violated your

feelings to pay me compliments; some were merited and some you

overlooked, it is true; and Colonel Harvey did slander every one of

you, and put things into my mouth that I never said, never thought

of at all.

  And now, my wife and I, out of our single heart, return you our

deepest and most grateful thanks, and- yesterday was her birthday.







                   TO THE WHITEFRIARS.



        ADDRESS AT THE DINNER GIVEN BY THE WHITEFRIARS

              CLUB IN HONOR OF MR. CLEMENS,

                 LONDON, JUNE 20, 1899.



  The Whitefriars Club was founded by Dr. Samuel Johnson, and Mr.

Clemens was made an honorary member in 1874. The members are

representative of literary and journalistic London. The toast of

"Our Guest" was proposed by Louis F. Austin, of the Illustrated London

News, and in the course of some humorous remarks he referred to the

vow and to the imaginary woes of the "Friars," as the members of the

club style themselves.



  MR. CHAIRMAN AND BRETHREN OF THE VOW- in whatever the vow is; for

although I have been a member of this club for five-and-twenty

years, I don't know any more about what that vow is than Mr. Austin

seems to. But whatever the vow is, I don't care what it is. I have

made a thousand vows.

  There is no pleasure comparable to making a vow in the presence of

one who appreciates that vow, in the presence of men who honor and

appreciate you for making the vow, and men who admire you for making

the vow.

  There is only one pleasure higher than that, and that is to get

outside and break the vow. A vow is always a pledge of some kind or

other for the protection of your own morals and principles or somebody

else's, and generally, by the irony of fate, it is for the

protection of your own morals.

  Hence we have pledges that make us eschew tobacco or wine, and while

you are taking the pledge there is a holy influence about that makes

you feel you are reformed, and that you can never be so happy again in

this world until- you get outside and take a drink.

  I had forgotten that I was a member of this club- it is so long ago.

But now I remember that I was here five-and-twenty years ago, and that

I was then at a dinner of the Whitefriars Club, and it was in those

old days when you had just made two great finds. All London was

talking about nothing else than that they had found Livingstone, and

that the lost Sir Roger Tichborne had been found- and they were trying

him for it.

  And at the dinner, Chairman- (I do not know who he was)- failed to

come to time. The gentleman who had been appointed to pay me the

customary compliments and to introduce me forgot the compliments,

and did not know what they were.

  And George Augustus Sala came in at the last moment, just when I was

about to go without compliments altogether. And that man was a

gifted man. They just called on him instantaneously, while he was

going to sit down, to introduce the stranger, and Sala made one of

those marvellous speeches which he was capable of making. I think no

man talked so fast as Sala did. One did not need wine while he was

making a speech. The rapidity of his utterance made a man drunk in a

minute. An incomparable speech was that, an impromptu speech, and an

impromptu speech is a seldom thing, and he did it so well.

  He went into the whole history of the United States, and made it

entirely new to me. He filled it with episodes and incidents that

Washington never heard of, and he did it so convincingly that although

I knew none of it had happened, from that day to this I do not know

any history but Sala's.

  I do not know anything so sad as a dinner where you are going to get

up and say something by-and-by, and you do not know what it is. You

sit and wonder and wonder what the gentleman is going to say who is

going to introduce you. You know that if he says something severe,

that if he will deride you, or traduce you, or do anything of that

kind, he will furnish you with a text, because anybody can get up

and talk against that.

  Anybody can get up and straighten out his character. But when a

gentleman gets up and merely tells the truth about you, what can you

do?

  Mr. Austin has done well. He has supplied so many texts that I

will have to drop out a lot of them, and that is about as difficult as

when you do not have any text at all. Now, he made a beautiful and

smooth speech without any difficulty at all, and I could have done

that if I had gone on with the schooling with which I began. I see

here a gentleman on my left who was my master in the art of oratory

more than twenty-five years ago.

  When I look upon the inspiring face of Mr. Depew, it carries me a

long way back. An old and valued friend of mine is he, and I saw his

career as it came along, and it has reached pretty well up to now,

when he, by another miscarriage of justice, is a United States

Senator. But those were delightful days when I was taking lessons in

oratory.

  My other master- the Ambassador- is not here yet. Under those two

gentlemen I learned to make after-dinner speeches, and it was

charming.

  You know the New England dinner is the great occasion on the other

side of the water. It is held every year to celebrate the landing of

the Pilgrims. Those Pilgrims were a lot of people who were not

needed in England, and you know they had great rivalry, and they

were persuaded to go elsewhere, and they chartered a ship called

Mayflower and set sail, and I have heard it said that they pumped

the Atlantic Ocean through that ship sixteen times.

  They fell in over there with the Dutch from Rotterdam, Amsterdam,

and a lot of other places with profane names, and it is from that gang

that Mr. Depew is descended.

  On the other hand, Mr. Choate is descended from those Puritans who

landed on a bitter night in December. Every year those people used

to meet at a great banquet in New York, and those masters of mind in

oratory had to make speeches. It was Doctor Depew's business to get up

there and apologize for the Dutch, and Mr. Choate had to get up

later and explain the crimes of the Puritans, and grand, beautiful

times we used to have.

  It is curious that after that long lapse of time I meet the

Whitefriars again, some looking as young and fresh as in the old days,

others showing a certain amount of wear and tear, and here, after

all this time, I find one of the masters of oratory and the others

named in the list.

  And here we three meet again as exiles on one pretext or another,

and you will notice that while we are absent there is a pleasing

tranquillity in America- a building up of public confidence. We are

doing the best we can for our country. I think we have spent our lives

in serving our country, and we never serve it to greater advantage

than when we get out of it.

  But impromptu speaking- that is what I was trying to learn. That

is a difficult thing. I used to do it in this way. I used to begin

about a week ahead, and write out my impromptu speech and get it by

heart. Then I brought it to the New England dinner printed on a

piece of paper in my pocket, so that I could pass it to the

reporters all cut and dried, and in order to do an impromptu speech as

it should be done you have to indicate the places for pauses and

hesitations. I put them all in it. And then you want the applause in

the right places.

  When I got to the place where it should come in, if it did not

come in I did not care, but I had it marked in the paper. And these

masters of mind used to wonder why it was my speech came out in the

morning in the first person, while theirs went through the butchery of

synopsis.

  I do that kind of speech (I mean an offhand speech), and do it well,

and make no mistake in such a way to deceive the audience completely

and make that audience believe it is an impromptu speech- that is art.

  I was frightened out of it at last by an experience of Doctor Hayes.

He was a sort of Nansen of that day. He had been to the North Pole,

and it made him celebrated. He had even seen the polar bear climb

the pole.

  He had made one of those magnificent voyages such as Nansen made,

and in those days when a man did anything which greatly

distinguished him for the moment he had to come on to the lecture

platform and tell all about it.

  Doctor Hayes was a great, magnificent creature like Nansen, superbly

built. He was to appear in Boston. He wrote his lecture out, and it

was his purpose to read it from manuscript; but in an evil hour he

concluded that it would be a good thing to preface it with something

rather handsome, poetical, and beautiful that he could get off by

heart and deliver as if it were the thought of the moment.

  He had not had my experience, and could not do that. He came on

the platform, held his manuscript down, and began with a beautiful

piece of oratory. He spoke something like this:

  "When a lonely human being, a pigmy in the midst of the architecture

of nature, stands solitary on those icy waters and looks abroad to the

horizon and sees mighty castles and temples of eternal ice raising

up their pinnacles tipped by the pencil of the departing sun-"

  Here a man came across the platform and touched him on the shoulder,

and said: "One minute." And then to the audience:

  "Is Mrs. John Smith in the house? Her husband has slipped on the ice

and broken his leg."

  And you could see the Mrs. John Smiths get up everywhere and drift

out of the house, and it made great gaps everywhere. Then Doctor Hayes

began again: "When a lonely man, a pigmy in the architecture-" The

janitor came in again and shouted: "It is not Mrs. John Smith! It is

Mrs. John Jones!"

  Then all the Mrs. Jones got up and left. Once more the speaker

started, and was in the midst of the sentence when he was

interrupted again, and the result was that the lecture was not

delivered. But the lecturer interviewed the janitor afterward in a

private room, and of the fragments of the janitor they took "twelve

basketsful."

  Now, I don't want to sit down just in this way. I have been

talking with so much levity that I have said no serious thing, and you

are really no better or wiser, although Robert Buchanan has

suggested that I am a person who deals in wisdom. I have said

nothing which would make you better than when you came here.

  I should be sorry to sit down without having said one serious word

which you can carry home and relate to your children and the old

people who are not able to get away.

  And this is just a little maxim which has saved me from many a

difficulty and many a disaster, and in times of tribulation and

uncertainty has come to my rescue, as it shall to yours if you observe

it as I do day and night.

  I always use it in an emergency, and you can take it home as a

legacy from me, and it is: "When in doubt, tell the truth."

