




                   POETS AS POLICEMEN.



  Mr. Clemens was one of the speakers at the Lotos Club dinner to

Governor Odell, March 24, 1900. The police problem was referred to

at length.



  LET us abolish policemen who carry clubs and revolvers, and put in a

squad of poets armed to the teeth with poems on Spring and Love. I

would be very glad to serve as commissioner, not because I think I

am especially qualified, but because I am too tired to work and

would like to take a rest.

  Howells would go well as my deputy. He is tired too, and needs a

rest badly.

  I would start in at once to elevate, purify, and depopulate the

red-light district. I would assign the most soulful poets to that

district, all heavily armed with their poems. Take Chauncey Depew as a

sample. I would station them on the corners after they had rounded

up all the depraved people of the district so they could not escape,

and then have them read from their poems to the poor unfortunates. The

plan would be very effective in causing an emigration of the

depraved element.





               PUDD'NHEAD WILSON DRAMATIZED.



  When Mr. Clemens arrived from Europe in 1895 one of the first things

he did was to see the dramatization of Pudd'nhead Wilson. The audience

becoming aware of the fact that Mr. Clemens was in the house called

upon him for a speech.



  NEVER in my life have I been able to make a speech without

preparation, and I assure you that this position in which I find

myself is one totally unexpected.

  I have been hemmed in all day by William Dean Howells and other

frivolous persons, and I have been talking about everything in the

world except that of which speeches are constructed. Then, too,

seven days on the water is not conducive to speech-making. I will only

say that I congratulate Mr. Mayhew; he has certainly made a delightful

play out of my rubbish. His is a charming gift. Confidentially I

have always had an idea that I was well equipped to write plays, but I

have never encountered a manager who has agreed with me.






                     DALY THEATRE.



       ADDRESS AT A DINNER AFTER THE ONE HUNDREDTH

        PERFORMANCE OF "THE TAMING OF THE SHREW."



  Mr. Clemens made the following speech, which he incorporated

afterward in Following the Equator.



  I AM glad to be here. This is the hardest theatre in New York to get

into, even at the front door. I never got in without hard work. I am

glad we have got so far in at last. Two or three years ago I had an

appointment to meet Mr. Daly on the stage of this theatre at eight

o'clock in the evening. Well, I got on a train at Hartford to come

to New York and keep the appointment. All I had to do was to come to

the back door of the theatre on Sixth Avenue. I did not believe

that; I did not believe it could be on Sixth Avenue, but that is

what Daly's note said- come to that door, walk right in, and keep

the appointment. It looked very easy. It looked easy enough, but I had

not much confidence in the Sixth Avenue door.

  Well, I was kind of bored on the train, and I bought some

newspapers- New Haven newspapers- and there was not much news in them,

so I read the advertisements. There was one advertisement of a

bench-show. I had heard of bench-shows, and I often wondered what

there was about them to interest people. I had seen bench-shows-

lectured to bench-shows, in fact- but I didn't want to advertise

them or to brag about them. Well, I read on a little, and learned that

a bench-show was not a bench-show- but dogs, not benches at all-

only dogs. I began to be interested, and as there was nothing else

to do I read every bit of the advertisement, and learned that the

biggest thing in this show was a St. Bernard dog that weighed one

hundred and forty-five pounds. Before I got to New York I was so

interested in the bench-shows that I made up my mind to go to one

the first chance I got. Down on Sixth Avenue, near where that back

door might be, I began to take things leisurely. I did not like to

be in too much of a hurry. There was not anything in sight that looked

like a back door. The nearest approach to it was a cigar store. So I

went in and bought a cigar, not too expensive, but it cost enough to

pay for any information I might get and leave the dealer a fair

profit. Well, I did not like to be too abrupt, to make the man think

me crazy, by asking him if that was the way to Daly's Theatre, so I

started gradually to lead up to the subject, asking him first if

that was the way to Castle Garden. When I got to the real question,

and he said he would show me the way, I was astonished. He sent me

through a long hallway, and I found myself in a back yard. Then I went

through a long passageway and into a little room, and there before

my eyes was a big St. Bernard dog lying on a bench. There was

another door beyond and I went there, and was met by a big, fierce man

with a fur cap on and coat off, who remarked, "Phwat do yez want?" I

told him I wanted to see Mr. Daly. "Yez can't see Mr. Daly this time

of night," he responded. I urged that I had an appointment with Mr.

Daly, and gave him my card, which did not seem to impress him much.

"Yez can't get in and yez can't shmoke here. Throw away that cigar. If

yez want to see Mr. Daly, yez'll have to be after going to the front

door and buy a ticket, and then if yez have luck and he's around

that way yez may see him." I was getting discouraged, but I had one

resource left that had been of good service in similar emergencies.

Firmly but kindly I told him my name was Mark Twain, and I awaited

results. There was none. He was not fazed a bit. "Phwere's your

order to see Mr. Daly?" he asked. I handed him the note, and he

examined it intently. "My friend," I remarked, "you can read that

better if you hold it the other side up." But he took no notice of the

suggestion, and finally asked: "Where's Mr. Daly's name?" "There it

is," I told him, "on the top of the page." "That's all right," he

said, "that's where he always puts it; but I don't see the 'W' in

his name," and he eyed me distrustfully. Finally he asked, "Phwat do

yez want to see Mr. Daly for?" "Business." "Business?" "Yes." It was

my only hope. "Pwhat kind- theatres?" That was too much. "No." "What

kind of shows, then?" "Bench-shows." It was risky, but I was

desperate. "Bench-shows, is it- where?" The big man's face changed,

and he began to look interested. "New Haven." "New Haven, it is? Ah,

that's going to be a fine show. I'm glad to see you. Did you see a big

dog in the other room?" "Yes." "How much do you think that dog

weighs?" "One hundred and forty-five pounds." "Look at that, now! He's

a good judge of dogs, and no mistake. He weighs all of one hundred and

thirty-eight. Sit down and shmoke- go on and shmoke your cigar, I'll

tell Mr. Daly you are here." In a few minutes I was on the stage

shaking hands with Mr. Daly, and the big man standing around glowing

with satisfaction. "Come around in front," said Mr. Daly, "and see the

performance. I will put you into my own box." And as I moved away I

heard my honest friend mutter, "Well, he desarves it."







               THE DRESS OF CIVILIZED WOMAN.



  A LARGE part of the daughter of civilization is her dress- as it

should be. Some civilized women would lose half their charm without

dress, and some would lose all of it. The daughter of modern

civilization dressed at her utmost best is a marvel of exquisite and

beautiful art and expense. All the lands, all the climes, and all

the arts are laid under tribute to furnish her forth. Her linen is

from Belfast, her robe is from Paris, her lace is from Venice, or

Spain, or France, her feathers are from the remote regions of Southern

Africa, her furs from the remoter region of the iceberg and the

aurora, her fan from Japan, her diamonds from Brazil, her bracelets

from California, her pearls from Ceylon, her cameos from Rome. She has

gems and trinkets from buried Pompeii, and others that graced comely

Egyptian forms that have been dust and ashes now for forty

centuries. Her watch is from Geneva, her card-case is from China,

her hair is from- from- I don't know where her hair is from; I never

could find out; that is, her other hair- her public hair, her Sunday

hair; I don't mean the hair she goes to bed with....

  And that reminds me of a trifle. Any time you want to you can glance

around the carpet of a Pullman car, and go and pick up a hair-pin; but

not to save your life can you get any woman in that car to acknowledge

that hair-pin. Now, isn't that strange? But it's true. The woman who

has never swerved from cast-iron veracity and fidelity in her whole

life will, when confronted with this crucial test, deny her

hair-pin. She will deny that hair-pin before a hundred witnesses. I

have stupidly got into more trouble and more hot water trying to

hunt up the owner of a hair-pin in a Pullman than by any other

indiscretion of my life.








                 DRESS REFORM AND COPYRIGHT.



  When the present copyright law was under discussion, Mr. Clemens

appeared before the committee. He had sent Speaker Cannon the

following letter:



  "DEAR UNCLE JOSEPH,- Please get me the thanks of Congress, not

next week but right away. It is very necessary. Do accomplish this for

your affectionate old friend right away- by persuasion if you can,

by violence if you must, for it is imperatively necessary that I get

on the floor of the House for two or three hours and talk to the

members, man by man, in behalf of support, encouragement, and

protection of one of the nation's most valuable assets and industries-

its literature. I have arguments with me- also a barrel with liquid in

it.

  "Give me a chance. Get me the thanks of Congress. Don't wait for

others- there isn't time; furnish them to me yourself and let Congress

ratify later. I have stayed away and let Congress alone for

seventy-one years and am entitled to the thanks. Congress knows this

perfectly well, and I have long felt hurt that this quite proper and

earned expression of gratitude has been merely felt by the House and

never publicly uttered.

  "Send me an order on the sergeant-at-arms quick. When shall I come?

  "With love and a benediction,






                           "MARK TWAIN."



  While waiting to appear before the committee, Mr. Clemens talked

to the reporters:



  WHY don't you ask why I am wearing such apparently unseasonable

clothes? I'll tell you. I have found that when a man reaches the

advanced age of seventy-one years, as I have, the continual sight of

dark clothing is likely to have a depressing effect upon him.

Light-colored clothing is more pleasing to the eye and enlivens the

spirit. Now, of course, I cannot compel every one to wear such

clothing just for my especial benefit, so I do the next best thing and

wear it myself.

  Of course, before a man reaches my years the fear of criticism might

prevent him from indulging his fancy. I am not afraid of that. I am

decidedly for pleasing color combinations in dress. I like to see

the women's clothes, say, at the opera. What can be more depressing

than the sombre black which custom requires men to wear upon state

occasions? A group of men in evening clothes looks like a flock of

crows, and is just about as inspiring.

  After all, what is the purpose of clothing? Are not clothes intended

primarily to preserve dignity and also to afford comfort to their

wearer? Now I know of nothing more uncomfortable than the

present-day clothes of men. The finest clothing made is a person's own

skin, but, of course, society demands something more than this.

  The best-dressed man I have ever seen, however, was a native of

the Sandwich Islands who attracted my attention thirty years ago. Now,

when that man wanted to don especial dress to honor a public

occasion or a holiday, why, he occasionally put on a pair of

spectacles. Otherwise the clothing with which God had provided him

sufficed.

  Of course, I have ideas of dress reform. For one thing, why not

adopt some of the women's styles? Goodness knows, they adopt enough of

ours. Take the peek-a-boo waist, for instance. It has the obvious

advantages of being cool and comfortable, and in addition it is almost

always made up in pleasing colors which cheer and do not depress.

  It is true that I dressed the Connecticut Yankee at King Arthur's

Court in a plug-hat, but, let's see, that was twenty-five years ago.

Then no man was considered fully dressed until he donned a plug-hat.

Nowadays I think that no man is dressed until he leaves it home.

Why, when I left home yesterday they trotted out a plug-hat for me

to wear.

  "You must wear it," they told me; "why, just think of going to

Washington without a plug-hat!" But I said no; I would wear a derby or

nothing. Why, I believe I could walk along the streets of New York-

I never do- but still I think I could- and I should never see a

well-dressed man wearing a plug-hat. If I did I should suspect him

of something. I don't know just what, but I would suspect him.

  Why, when I got up on the second story of that Pennsylvania

ferry-boat coming down here yesterday I saw Howells coming along. He

was the only man on the boat with a plug-hat, and I tell you he felt

ashamed of himself. He said he had been persuaded to wear it against

his better sense. But just think of a man nearly seventy years old who

has not a mind of his own on such matters!

  "Are you doing any work now?" the youngest and most serious reporter

asked.

  Work? I retired from work on my seventieth birthday. Since then I

have been putting in merely twenty-six hours a day dictating my

autobiography, which, as John Phoenix said in regard to his autograph,

may be relied upon as authentic, as it is written exclusively by me.

But it is not to be published in full until I am thoroughly dead. I

have made it as caustic, fiendish, and devilish as possible. It will

fill many volumes, and I shall continue writing it until the time

comes for me to join the angels. It is going to be a terrible

autobiography. It will make the hair of some folks curl. But it cannot

be published until I am dead, and the persons mentioned in it and

their children and grand-children are dead. It is something awful!

  "Can you tell us the names of some of the notables that are here

to see you off?"

  I don't know. I am so shy. My shyness takes a peculiar phase. I

never look a person in the face. The reason is that I am afraid they

may know me and that I may not know them, which makes it very

embarrassing for both of us. I always wait for the other person to

speak. I know lots of people, but I don't know who they are. It is all

a matter of ability to observe things. I never observe anything now. I

gave up the habit years ago. You should keep a habit up if you want to

become proficient in it. For instance, I was a pilot once, but I

gave it up, and I do not believe the captain of the Minneapolis

would let me navigate his ship to London. Still, if I think that he is

not on the job I may go up on the bridge and offer him a few

suggestions.







                     COLLEGE GIRLS.



  Five hundred undergraduates, under the auspices of the Woman's

University Club, New York, welcomed Mr. Clemens as their guest,

April 3, 1906, and gave him the freedom of the club, which the

chairman explained was freedom to talk individually to any girl

present.



  I'VE worked for the public good thirty years, so for the rest of

my life I shall work for my personal contentment. I am glad Miss Neron

has fed me, for there is no telling what iniquity I might wander

into on an empty stomach- I mean, an empty mind.

  I am going to tell you a practical story about how once upon a

time I was blind- a story I should have been using all these months,

but I never thought about telling it until the other night, and now it

is too late, for on the nineteenth of this month I hope to take formal

leave of the platform forever at Carnegie Hall- that is, take leave so

far as talking for money and for people who have paid money to hear me

talk. I shall continue to infest the platform on these conditions-

that there is nobody in the house who has paid to hear me, that I am

not paid to be heard, and that there will be none but young women

students in the audience. [Here Mr. Clemens told the story of how he

took a girl to the theatre while he was wearing tight boots, which

appears elsewhere in this volume, and ended by saying: "And now let

this be a lesson to you- I don't know what kind of a lesson; I'll

let you think it out."]








                        GIRLS.



  IN my capacity of publisher I recently received a manuscript from

a teacher which embodied a number of answers given by her pupils to

questions propounded. These answers show that the children had nothing

but the sound to go by- the sense was perfectly empty. Here are some

of their answers to words they were asked to define: Auriferous-

pertaining to an orifice; ammonia- the food of the gods; equestrian-

one who asks questions; parasite- a kind of umbrella; ipecac- a man

who likes a good dinner. And here is the definition of an ancient word

honored by a great party: Republican- a sinner mentioned in the Bible.

And here is an innocent deliverance of a zoological kind: "There are a

good many donkeys in the theological gardens." Here also is a

definition which really isn't very bad in its way: Demagogue- a vessel

containing beer and other liquids. Here, too, is a sample of a boy's

composition on girls, which, I must say, I rather like:

  "Girls are very stuckup and dignified in their manner and

behaveyour. They think more of dress than anything and like to play

with dowls and rags. They cry if they see a cow in a far distance

and are afraid of guns. They stay at home all the time and go to

church every Sunday. They are al-ways sick. They are al-ways funy

and making fun of boys hands and they say how dirty. They cant play

marbles. I pity them poor things. They make fun of boys and then

turn round and love them. I don't belave they ever killed a cat or

anything. They look out every nite and say, 'Oh, a'nt the moon

lovely!' Thir is one thing I have not told and that is they al-ways

now their lessons bettern boys."






                      THE LADIES.



       DELIVERED AT THE ANNIVERSARY FESTIVAL, 1872,

          OF THE SCOTTISH CORPORATION OF LONDON



  Mr. Clemens replied to the toast "The Ladies."



  I AM proud, indeed, of the distinction of being chosen to respond to

this especial toast, to "The Ladies," or to women if you please, for

that is the preferable term, perhaps; it is certainly the older, and

therefore the more entitled to reverence. I have noticed that the

Bible, with that plain, blunt honesty which is such a conspicuous

characteristic of the Scriptures, is always particular to never

refer to even the illustrious mother of all mankind as a "lady," but

speaks of her as a woman. It is odd, but you will find it is so. I

am peculiarly proud of this honor, because I think that the toast to

women is one which, by right and by every rule of gallantry, should

take precedence of all others- of the army, of the navy, of even

royalty itself- perhaps, though the latter is not necessary in this

day and in this land, for the reason that, tacitly, you do drink a

broad general health to all good women when you drink the health of

the Queen of England and the Princess of Wales. I have in mind a

poem just now which is familiar to you all, familiar to everybody. And

what an inspiration that was, and how instantly the present toast

recalls the verses to all our minds when the most noble, the most

gracious, the purest, and sweetest of all poets says:



              "Woman! O woman!- er-

               Wom-"



  However, you remember the lines; and you remember how feelingly, how

daintily, how almost imperceptibly the verses raise up before you,

feature by feature, the ideal of a true and perfect woman; and how, as

you contemplate the finished marvel, your homage grows into worship of

the intellect that could create so fair a thing out of mere breath,

mere words. And you call to mind now, as I speak, how the poet, with

stern fidelity to the history of all humanity, delivers this beautiful

child of his heart and his brain over to the trials and sorrows that

must come to all, sooner or later, that abide in the earth, and how

the pathetic story culminates in that apostrophe- so wild, so

regretful, so full of mournful retrospection. The lines run thus:



              "Alas!- alas!- a- alas!

               --Alas!---- alas!"



- and so on. I do not remember the rest; but, taken together, it seems

to me that poem is the noblest tribute to woman that human genius

has ever brought forth- and I feel that if I were to talk hours I

could not do my great theme completer or more graceful justice than

I have now done in simply quoting that poet's matchless words. The

phases of the womanly nature are infinite in their variety. Take any

type of woman, and you shall find in it something to respect,

something to admire, something to love. And you shall find the whole

joining you heart and hand. Who was more patriotic than Joan of Arc?

Who was braver? Who has given us a grander instance of

self-sacrificing devotion? Ah! you remember, you remember well, what a

throb of pain, what a great tidal wave of grief swept over us all when

Joan of Arc fell at Waterloo. Who does not sorrow for the loss of

Sappho, the sweet. singer of Israel? Who among us does not miss the

gentle ministrations, the softening influences, the humble piety of

Lucretia Borgia? Who can join in the heartless libel that says woman

is extravagant in dress when he can look back and call to mind our

simple and lowly mother Eve arrayed in her modification of the

Highland costume? Sir, women have been soldiers, women have been

painters, women have been poets. As long as language lives the name of

Cleopatra will live. And not because she conquered George III.- but

because she wrote those divine lines:



          "Let dogs delight to bark and bite,

           For God hath made them so."



  The story of the world is adorned with the names of illustrious ones

of our own sex- some of them sons of St. Andrew, too- Scott, Bruce,

Burns, the warrior Wallace, Ben Nevis- the gifted Ben Lomond, and

the great new Scotchman, Ben Disraeli.* Out of the great plains of

history tower whole mountain ranges of sublime women- the Queen of

Sheba, Josephine, Semiramis, Sairey Gamp; the list is endless- but I

will not call the mighty roll, the names rise up in your own

memories at the mere suggestion, luminous with the glory of deeds that

cannot die, hallowed by the loving worship of the good and the true of

all epochs and all climes. Suffice it for our pride and our honor that

we in our day have added to it such names as those of Grace Darling

and Florence Nightingale. Woman is all that she should be- gentle,

patient, long-suffering, trustful, unselfish, full of generous

impulses. It is her blessed mission to comfort the sorrowing, plead

for the erring, encourage the faint of purpose, succor the distressed,

uplift the fallen, befriend the friendless- in a word, afford the

healing of her sympathies and a home in her heart for all the

bruised and persecuted children of misfortune that knock at its

hospitable door. And when I say, God bless her, there is none among us

who has known the ennobling affection of a wife, or the steadfast

devotion of a mother but in his heart will say, Amen!



  * Mr. Benjamin Disraeli, at that time Prime Minister of England, had

just been elected Lord Rector of Glasgow University, and had made a

speech which gave rise to a world of discussion.







                   WOMAN'S PRESS CLUB.



  On October 27, 1900, the New York Woman's Press Club gave a tea in

Carnegie Hall. Mr. Clemens was the guest of honor.



  IF I were asked an opinion I would call this an ungrammatical

nation. There is no such thing as perfect grammar, and I don't

always speak good grammar myself. But I have been foregathering for

the past few days with professors of American universities, and I've

heard them all say things like this: "He don't like to do it."

[There was a stir.] Oh, you'll hear that to-night if you listen, or,

"He would have liked to have done it." You'll catch some educated

Americans saying that. When these men take pen in hand they write with

as good grammar as any. But the moment they throw the pen aside they

throw grammatical morals aside with it.

  To illustrate the desirability and possibility of concentration, I

must tell you a story of my little six-year-old daughter. The

governess had been teaching her about the reindeer, and, as the custom

was, she related it to the family. She reduced the history of that

reindeer to two or three sentences when the governess could not have

put it into a page. She said: "The reindeer is a very swift animal.

A reindeer once drew a sled four hundred miles in two hours." She

appended the comment: "This was regarded as extraordinary." And

concluded: "When that reindeer was done drawing that sled four hundred

miles in two hours it died."

  As a final instance of the force of limitations in the development

of concentration, I must mention that beautiful creature, Helen

Keller, whom I have known for these many years. I am filled with the

wonder of her knowledge, acquired because shut out from all

distraction. If I could have been deaf, dumb, and blind I also might

have arrived at something.







                   VOTES FOR WOMEN.



     AT THE ANNUAL MEETING OF THE HEBREW TECHNICAL

        SCHOOL FOR GIRLS, HELD IN THE TEMPLE

            EMMANUEL, JANUARY 20, 1901



  Mr. Clemens was introduced by President Meyer, who said: "In one

of Mr. Clemens's works he expressed his opinion of men, saying he

had no choice between Hebrew and Gentile, black men or white; to him

all men were alike. But I never could find that he expressed his

opinion of women; perhaps that opinion was so exalted that he could

not express it. We shall now be called to hear what he thinks of

women."



  LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,- It is a small help that I can afford, but

it is just such help that one can give as coming from the heart

through the mouth. The report of Mr. Meyer was admirable, and I was as

interested in it as you have been. Why, I'm twice as old as he, and

I've had so much experience that I would say to him, when he makes his

appeal for help: "Don't make it for to-day or to-morrow, but collect

the money on the spot."

  We are all creatures of sudden impulse. We must be worked up by

steam, as it were. Get them to write their wills now, or it may be too

late by-and-by. Fifteen or twenty years ago I had an experience I

shall never forget. I got into a church which was crowded by a

sweltering and panting multitude. The city missionary of our town-

Hartford- made a telling appeal for help. He told of personal

experiences among the poor in cellars and top lofts requiring

instances of devotion and help. The poor are always good to the

poor. When a person with his millions gives a hundred thousand dollars

it makes a great noise in the world, but he does not miss it; it's the

widow's mite that makes no noise but does the best work.

  I remember on that occasion in the Hartford church the collection

was being taken up. The appeal had so stirred me that I could hardly

wait for the hat or plate to come my way. I had four hundred dollars

in my pocket, and I was anxious to drop it in the plate and wanted

to borrow more. But the plate was so long in coming my way that the

fever-heat of beneficence was going down lower and lower- going down

at the rate of a hundred dollars a minute. The plate was passed too

late. When it finally came to me, my enthusiasm had gone down so

much that I kept my four hundred dollars- and stole a dime from the

plate. So, you see, time sometimes leads to crime.

  Oh, many a time have I thought of that and regretted it, and I

adjure you all to give while the fever is on you.

  Referring to woman's sphere in life, I'll say that woman is always

right. For twenty-five years I've been a woman's rights man. I have

always believed, long before my mother died, that, with her gray hairs

and admirable intellect, perhaps she knew as much as I did. Perhaps

she knew as much about voting as I.

  I should like to see the time come when women shall help to make the

laws. I should like to see that whip-lash, the ballot, in the hands of

women. As for this city's government, I don't want to say much, except

that it is a shame- a shame; but if I should live twenty-five years

longer- and there is no reason why I shouldn't- I think I'll see women

handle the ballot. If women had the ballot to-day, the state of things

in this town would not exist.

  If all the women in this town had a vote to-day they would elect a

mayor at the next election, and they would rise in their might and

change the awful state of things now existing here.






                   WOMAN- AN OPINION.



           ADDRESS AT AN EARLY BANQUET OF THE

            WASHINGTON CORRESPONDENTS' CLUB.



  The twelfth toast was as follows: "Woman- The pride of any

profession, and the jewel of ours."



  MR. PRESIDENT,- I do not know why I should be singled out to receive

the greatest distinction of the evening- for so the office of replying

to the toast of woman has been regarded in every age. I do not know

why I have received this distinction, unless it be that I am a

trifle less homely than the other members of the club. But be this

as it may, Mr. President, I am proud of the position, and you could

not have chosen any one who would have accepted it more gladly, or

labored with a heartier good-will to do the subject justice than I-

because, sir, I love the sex. I love all the women, irrespective of

age or color.

  Human intellect cannot estimate what we owe to woman, sir. She

sews on our buttons; she mends our clothes; she ropes us in at the

church fairs; she confides in us she tells us whatever she can find

out about the little private affairs of the neighbors; she gives us

good advice, and plenty of it; she soothes our aching brows; she bears

our children- ours as a general thing. In all relations of life,

sir, it is but a just and graceful tribute to woman to say of her that

she is a brick.

  Wheresoever you place woman, sir- in whatever position or estate-

she is an ornament to the place she occupies, and a treasure to the

world. [Here Mr. Clemens paused, looked inquiringly at his hearers,

and remarked that the applause should come in at this point. It came

in. He resumed his eulogy.] Look at Cleopatra!- look at Desdemona!-

look at Florence Nightingale!- look at Joan of Arc!- look at

Lucretia Borgia! [Disapprobation expressed.] Well [said Mr. Clemens,

scratching his head, doubtfully], suppose we let Lucretia slide.

Look at Joyce Heth!- Look at Mother Eve! You need not look at her

unless you want to, but [said Mr. Clemens, reflectively, after a

pause] Eve was ornamental, sir- particularly before the fashions

changed. I repeat, sir, look at the illustrious names of history. Look

at the Widow Machree!- Look at Lucy Stone!- look at Elizabeth Cady

Stanton!- Look at George Francis Train! And, sir, I say it with

bowed head and deepest veneration- look at the mother of Washington!

She raised a boy that could not tell a lie- could not tell a lie!

But he never had any chance. It might have been different if he had

belonged to the Washington Newspaper Correspondents' Club.

  I repeat, sir, that in whatever position you place a woman she is an

ornament to society and a treasure to the world. As a sweetheart,

she has few equals and no superiors; as a cousin, she is convenient;

as a wealthy grandmother with an incurable distemper, she is precious;

as a wet-nurse, she has no equal among men.

  What, sir, would the people of the earth be without woman? They

would be scarce, sir, almighty scarce. Then let us cherish her; let us

protect her; let us give her our support, our encouragement, our

sympathy, ourselves- if we get a chance.

  But, jesting aside, Mr. President, woman is lovable, gracious,

kind of heart, beautiful- worthy of all respect, of all esteem, of all

deference. Not any here will refuse to drink her health right

cordially in this bumper of wine, for each and every one has

personally known, and loved, and honored the very best one of them

all- his own mother.






                     ADVICE TO GIRLS.



  In 1907 a young girl whom Mr. Clemens met on the steamer Minnehaha

called him "grandpa," and he called her his granddaughter. She was

attending St. Timothy's School, at Catonsville, Maryland, and Mr.

Clemens promised her to see her graduate. He accordingly made the

journey from New York on June 10, 1909, and delivered a short address.



  I DON'T know what to tell you girls to do. Mr. Martin has told you

everything you ought to do, and now I must give you some don'ts.

  There are three things which come to my mind which I consider

excellent advice:

  First, girls, don't smoke- that is, don't smoke to excess. I am

seventy-three and a half years old, and have been smoking

seventy-three of them. But I never smoke to excess- that is, I smoke

in moderation, only one cigar at a time.

  Second, don't drink- that is, don't drink to excess.

  Third, don't marry- I mean, to excess.

  Honesty is the best policy. That is an old proverb; but you don't

want ever to forget it in your journey through life.

