




                      JOAN OF ARC.



    ADDRESS AT THE DINNER OF THE SOCIETY OF ILLUSTRATORS,

          GIVEN AT THE ALDINE ASSOCIATION CLUB,

                  DECEMBER 22, 1905.



  Just before Mr. Clemens made his speech, a young woman attired as

Joan of Arc, with a page bearing her flag of battle, courtesied

reverently and tendered Mr. Clemens a laurel wreath on a satin pillow.

He tried to speak, but his voice failed from excess of emotion. "I

thank you!" he finally exclaimed, and, pulling himself together, he

began his speech.



  NOW there is an illustration [pointing to the retreating Joan of

Arc]. That is exactly what I wanted- precisely what I wanted- when I

was describing to myself Joan of Arc, after studying her history and

her character for twelve years diligently.

  That was the product- not the conventional Joan of Arc. Wherever you

find the conventional Joan of Arc in history she is an offence to

anybody who knows the story of that wonderful girl.

  Why, she was- she was almost supreme in several details. She had a

marvellous intellect; she had a great heart, had a noble spirit, was

absolutely pure in her character, her feeling, her language, her

words, her everything- she was only eighteen years old.

  Now put that heart into such a breast- eighteen years old- and

give it that masterly intellect which showed in the fate, and

furnish it with that almost god-like spirit, and what are you going to

have? The conventional Joan of Arc? Not by any means. That is

impossible. I cannot comprehend any such thing as that.

  You must have a creature like that young and fair and beautiful girl

we just saw. And her spirit must look out of the eyes. The figure

should be- the figure should be in harmony with all that, but, oh,

what we get in the conventional picture, and it is always the

conventional picture!

  I hope you will allow me to say that your guild, when you take the

conventional, you have got it at second-hand. Certainly, if you had

studied and studied, then you might have something else as a result,

but when you have the common convention you stick to that.

  You cannot prevail upon the artist to do it; he always gives you a

Joan of Arc- that lovely creature that started a great career at

thirteen, but whose greatness arrived when she was eighteen; and

merely because she was a girl he cannot see the divinity in her, and

so he paints a peasant, a coarse and lubberly figure- the figure of

a cotton-bale, and he clothes that in the coarsest raiment of the

peasant region- just like a fish-woman, her hair cropped short like

a Russian peasant, and that face of hers, which should be beautiful

and which should radiate all the glories which are in the spirit and

in her heart- that expression in that face is always just the fixed

expression of a ham.

  But now Mr. Beard has intimated a moment ago, and so has Sir

Purdon-Clarke also, that the artist, the illustrator, does not often

get the idea of the man whose book he is illustrating. Here is a

very remarkable instance of the other thing in Mr. Beard, who

illustrated a book of mine. You may never have heard of it. I will

tell you about it now- A Yankee in King Arthur's Court.

  Now, Beard got everything that I put into that book and a little

more besides. Those pictures of Beard's in that book- oh, from the

first page to the last is one vast sardonic laugh at the trivialities,

the servilities of our poor human race, and also at the professions

and the insolence of priest-craft and king-craft- those creatures that

make slaves of themselves and have not the manliness to shake it

off. Beard put it all in that book. I meant it to be there. I put a

lot of it there and Beard put the rest.

  That publisher of mine in Hartford had an eye for the pennies, and

he saved them. He did not waste any on the illustrations. He had a

very good artist- Williams- who had never taken a lesson in drawing.

Everything he did was original. The publisher hired the cheapest

wood-engraver he could find, and in my early books you can see a trace

of that. You can see that if Williams had had a chance he would have

made some very good pictures. He had a good heart and good intentions.

  I had a character in the first book he illustrated- The Innocents

Abroad. That was a boy seventeen or eighteen years old- Jack Van

Nostrand- a New York boy, who, to my mind, was a very remarkable

creature. He and I tried to get Williams to understand that boy, and

make a picture of Jack that would be worthy of Jack.

  Jack was a most singular combination. He was born and reared in

New York here. He was as delicate in his feelings, as clean and pure

and refined in his feelings as any lovely girl that ever was, but

whenever he expressed a feeling he did it in Bowery slang, and it

was a most curious combination- that delicacy of his and that apparent

coarseness. There was no coarseness inside of Jack at all, and Jack,

in the course of seventeen or eighteen years, had acquired a capital

of ignorance that was marvellous- ignorance of various things, not

of all things. For instance, he did not know anything about the Bible.

He had never been in Sunday-school. Jack got more out of the Holy Land

than anybody else, because the others knew what they were expecting,

but it was a land of surprises to him.

  I said in the book that we found him watching a turtle on a log,

stoning that turtle, and he was stoning that turtle because he had

read that "The song of the turtle was heard in the land," and this

turtle wouldn't sing. It sounded absurd, but it was charged on Jack as

a fact, and as he went along through that country he had a proper foil

in an old rebel colonel, who was superintendent and head engineer in a

large Sunday-school in Wheeling, West Virginia. That man was full of

enthusiasm wherever he went, and would stand and deliver himself of

speeches, and Jack would listen to those speeches of the colonel and

wonder.

  Jack had made a trip as a child almost across this continent in

the first overland stage-coach. That man's name who ran that line of

stages- well, I declare that name is gone. Well, names will go.

  Halliday- ah, that's the name- Ben Halliday, your uncle [turning

to Mr. Carnegie]. That was the fellow- Ben Halliday- and Jack was full

of admiration at the prodigious speed that that line of stages made-

and it was good speed- one hundred and twenty-five miles a day,

going day and night, and it was the event of Jack's life, and there at

the Fords of the Jordan the colonel was inspired to a speech (he was

always making a speech), so he called us up to him. He called up

five sinners and three saints. It has been only lately that Mr.

Carnegie beatified me. And he said: "Here are the Fords of the Jordan-

a monumental place. At this very point, when Moses brought the

children of Israel through- he brought the children of Israel from

Egypt through the desert you see there- he guarded them through that

desert patiently, patiently during forty years, and brought them to

this spot safe and sound. There you see- there is the scene of what

Moses did."

  And Jack said: "Moses who?"

  "Oh," he says, "Jack, you ought not to ask that! Moses, the great

law-giver! Moses, the great patriot! Moses, the great warrior!

Moses, the great guide, who, as I tell you, brought these people

through these three hundred miles of sand in forty years, and landed

them safe and sound."

  Jack said: "There's nothin' in that three hundred miles in forty

years. Ben Halliday would have snaked 'em through in thirty-six

hours."

  Well, I was speaking of Jack's innocence, and it was beautiful. Jack

was not ignorant on all subjects. That boy was a deep student in the

history of Anglo-Saxon liberty, and he was a patriot all the way

through to the marrow. There was a subject that interested him all the

time. Other subjects were of no concern to Jack, but that quaint,

inscrutable innocence of his I could not get Williams to put into

the picture.

  Yes, Williams wanted to do it. He said: "I will make him as innocent

as a virgin." He thought a moment, and then said, "I will make him

as innocent as an unborn virgin," which covered the ground.

  I was reminded of Jack because I came across a letter to-day which

is over thirty years old that Jack wrote. Jack was doomed to

consumption. He was very long and slim, poor creature, and in a year

or two after he got back from that excursion to the Holy Land he

went on a ride on horseback through Colorado, and he did not last

but a year or two.

  He wrote this letter, not to me, but to a friend of mine, and he

said: "I have ridden horseback"- this was three years after- "I have

ridden horseback four hundred miles through a desert country where you

never see anything but cattle now and then, and now and then a

cattle station- ten miles apart, twenty miles apart. Now you tell

Clemens that in all that stretch of four hundred miles I have seen

only two books- the Bible and Innocents Abroad. Tell Clemens the Bible

was in a very good condition."

  I say that he had studied, and he had, the real Saxon liberty, the

acquirement of our liberty, and Jack used to repeat some verses- I

don't know where they came from, but I thought of them to-day when I

saw that letter- that that boy could have been talking of himself in

those quoted lines from that unknown poet:



          "For he had sat at Sidney's feet

             And walked with him in plain apart,

           And through the centuries heard the beat

             Of Freedom's march through Cromwell's heart."



  And he was that kind of a boy. He should have lived, and yet he

should not have lived, because he died at that early age- he

couldn't have been more than twenty- he had seen all there was to

see in the world that was worth the trouble of living in it; he had

seen all of this world that is valuable; he had seen all of this world

that was illusion, and illusion is the only valuable thing in it. He

had arrived at that point where presently the illusions would cease

and he would have entered upon the realities of life, and God help the

man that has arrived at that point.






                 ACCIDENT INSURANCE- ETC.



           DELIVERED IN HARTFORD, AT A DINNER TO

              CORNELIUS WALFORD, OF LONDON.



  GENTLEMEN,- I am glad, indeed, to assist in welcoming the

distinguished guest of this occasion to a city whose fame as an

insurance centre has extended to all lands, and given us the name of

being a quadruple band of brothers working sweetly hand in hand- the

Colt's arms company making the destruction of our race easy and

convenient, our life-insurance citizens paying for the victims when

they pass away, Mr. Batterson perpetuating their memory with his

stately monuments, and our fire-insurance comrades taking care of

their hereafter. I am glad to assist in welcoming our guest- first,

because he is an Englishman, and I owe a heavy debt of hospitality

to certain of his fellow-countrymen; and secondly, because he is in

sympathy with insurance, and has been the means of making many other

men cast their sympathies in the same direction.

  Certainly there is no nobler field for human effort than the

insurance line of business- especially accident insurance. Ever

since I have been a director in an accident-insurance company I have

felt that I am a better man. Life has seemed more precious.

Accidents have assumed a kindlier aspect. Distressing special

providences have lost half their horror. I look upon a cripple now

with affectionate interest- as an advertisement. I do not seem to care

for poetry any more. I do not care for politics even agriculture

does not excite me. But to me now there is a charm about a railway

collision that is unspeakable.

  There is nothing more beneficent than accident insurance. I have

seen an entire family lifted out of poverty and into affluence by

the simple boon of a broken leg. I have had people come to me on

crutches, with tears in their eyes, to bless this beneficent

institution. In all my experience of life, I have seen nothing so

seraphic as the look that comes into a freshly mutilated man's face

when he feels in his vest pocket with his remaining hand and finds his

accident ticket all right. And I have seen nothing so sad as the

look that came into another splintered customer's face when he found

he couldn't collect on a wooden leg.

  I will remark here, by way of advertisement, that that noble charity

which we have named the HARTFORD ACCIDENT INSURANCE COMPANY* is an

institution which is peculiarly to be depended upon. A man is bound to

prosper who gives it his custom. No man can take out a policy in it

and not get crippled before the year is out. Now there was one

indigent man who had been disappointed so often with other companies

that he had grown disheartened, his appetite left him, he ceased to

smile- said life was but a weariness. Three weeks ago I got him to

insure with us, and now he is the brightest, happiest spirit in this

land- has a good steady income and a stylish suit of new bandages

every day, and travels around on a shutter.



  * The speaker was a director of the company named.



  I will say, in conclusion, that my share of the welcome to our guest

is none the less hearty because I talk so much nonsense, and I know

that I can say the same for the rest of the speakers.






OSTEOPATHY

                       OSTEOPATHY.



  On February 27, 1901, Mr. Clemens appeared before the Assembly

Committee in Albany, New York, in favor of the Seymour bill legalizing

the practice of osteopathy.



  MR. CHAIRMAN AND GENTLEMEN,- Dr. Van Fleet is the gentleman who gave

me the character. I have heard my character discussed a thousand times

before you were born, sir, and shown the iniquities in it, and you did

not get more than half of them.

  I was touched and distressed when they brought that part of a

child in here, and proved that you cannot take a child to pieces in

that way. What remarkable names those diseases have! It makes me

envious of the man that has them all. I have had many diseases, and am

thankful for all I have had.

  One of the gentlemen spoke of the knowledge of something else

found in Sweden, a treatment which I took. It is, I suppose, a kindred

thing. There is apparently no great difference between them. I was a

year and a half in London and Sweden, in the hands of that grand old

man, Mr. Kildren.

  I cannot call him a doctor, for he has not the authority to give a

certificate if a patient should die, but fortunately they don't.

  The State stands as a mighty Gibraltar clothed with power. It stands

between me and my body, and tells me what kind of a doctor I must

employ. When my soul is sick unlimited spiritual liberty is given me

by the State. Now then, it doesn't seem logical that the State shall

depart from this great policy, the health of the soul, and change

about and take the other position in the matter of smaller

consequence- the health of the body.

  The Bell bill limitations would drive the osteopaths out of the

State. Oh, dear me! when you drive somebody out of the State you

create the same condition as prevailed in the Garden of Eden. You want

the thing that you can't have. I didn't care much about the

osteopaths, but as soon as I found they were going to drive them out I

got in a state of uneasiness, and I can't sleep nights now.

  I know how Adam felt in the Garden of Eden about the prohibited

apple. Adam didn't want the apple till he found out he couldn't have

it, just as he would have wanted osteopathy if he couldn't have it.

  Whose property is my body? Probably mine. I so regard it. If I

experiment with it, who must be answerable? I, not the State. If I

choose injudiciously, does the State die? Oh no.

  I was the subject of my mother's experiment. She was wise. She

made experiments cautiously. She didn't pick out just any child in the

flock. No, she chose judiciously. She chose one she could spare, and

she couldn't spare the others. I was the choice child of the flock, so

I had to take all of the experiments.

  In 1844 Kneipp filled the world with the wonder of the water cure.

Mother wanted to try it, but on sober second thought she put me

through. A bucket of ice-water was poured over to see the effect. Then

I was rubbed down with flannels, a sheet was dipped in the water,

and I was put to bed. I perspired so much that mother put a

life-preserver to bed with me.

  But this had nothing but a spiritual effect on me, and I didn't care

for that. When they took off the sheet it was yellow from the output

of my conscience, the exudation of sin. It purified me spiritually,

and it remains until this day.

  I have experimented with osteopathy and allopathy. I took a chance

at the latter for old times' sake, for, three times, when a boy,

mother's new methods got me so near death's door she had to call in

the family physician to pull me out.

  The physicians think they are moved by regard for the best interests

of the public. Isn't there a little touch of self-interest back of

it all? It seems to me there is, and I don't claim to have all the

virtues- only nine or ten of them.

  I was born in the "Banner State," and by "Banner State" I mean

Missouri. Osteopathy was born in the same State, and both of us are

getting along reasonably well. At a time during my younger days my

attention was attracted to a picture of a house which bore the

inscription, "Christ Disputing with the Doctors."

  I could attach no other meaning to it than that Christ was

actually quarrelling with the doctors. So I asked an old slave, who

was a sort of a herb doctor in a small way- unlicensed, of course-

what the meaning of the picture was. "What has he done?" I asked.

And the colored man replied:

  "Humph, he ain't got no license."






                      WATER-SUPPLY.



  Mr. Clemens visited Albany on February 27 and 28, 1901. The

privileges of the floor were granted to him, and he was asked to

make a short address to the Senate.



  MR. PRESIDENT AND GENTLEMEN,- I do not know how to thank you

sufficiently for this high honor which you are conferring upon me. I

have for the second time now enjoyed this kind of prodigal

hospitality- in the other House yesterday, to-day in this one. I am

a modest man, and diffident about appearing before legislative bodies,

and yet utterly and entirely appreciative of a courtesy like this when

it is extended to me, and I thank you very much for it.

  If I had the privilege, which unfortunately I have not got, of

suggesting things to the legislators in my individual capacity, I

would so enjoy the opportunity that I would not charge anything for it

at all. I would do that without a salary. I would give them the

benefit of my wisdom and experience in legislative bodies, and if I

could have had the privilege for a few minutes of giving advice to the

other House I should have liked to, but of course I could not

undertake it, as they did not ask me to do it- but if they had only

asked me!

  Now that the House is considering a measure which is to furnish a

water-supply to the city of New York, why, permit me to say I live

in New York myself. I know all about its ways, its desires, and its

residents, and- if I had the privilege- I should have urged them not

to weary themselves over a measure like that to furnish water to the

city of New York, for we never drink it.

  But I will not venture to advise this body, as I only venture to

advise bodies who are not present.






                   MISTAKEN IDENTITY.



           ADDRESS AT THE ANNUAL "LADIES' DAY,"

                  PAPYRUS CLUB, BOSTON.



  LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,- I am perfectly astonished-

a-s-t-o-n-i-s-h-e-d- ladies and gentlemen- astonished at the way

history repeats itself. I find myself situated at this moment

exactly and precisely as I was once before, years ago, to a jot, to

a tittle- to a very hair. There isn't a shade of difference. It is the

most astonishing coincidence that ever- but wait. I will tell you

the former instance, and then you will see it for yourself. Years

ago I arrived one day at Salamanca, New York, eastward bound; must

change cars there and take the sleeper train. There were crowds of

people there, and they were swarming into the long sleeper train and

packing it full, and it was a perfect purgatory of dust and

confusion and gritting of teeth and soft, sweet, and low profanity.

I asked the young man in the ticket-office if I could have a

sleeping-section, and he answered "No," with a snarl that shrivelled

me up like burned leather. I went off, smarting under this insult to

my dignity, and asked another local official, supplicatingly, if I

couldn't have some poor little corner somewhere in a sleeping-car; but

he cut me short with a venomous "No, you can't; every corner is

full. Now, don't bother me any more"; and he turned his back and

walked off. My dignity was in a state now which cannot be described. I

was so ruffled that- well, I said to my companion, "If these people

knew who I am they-" But my companion cut me short there- "Don't

talk such folly," he said; "if they did know who you are, do you

suppose it would help your high-mightiness to a vacancy in a train

which has no vacancies in it?"

  This did not improve my condition any to speak of, but just then I

observed that the colored porter of a sleeping-car had his eye on

me. I saw his dark countenance light up. He whispered to the uniformed

conductor, punctuating with nods and jerks toward me, and

straightway this conductor came forward, oozing politeness from

every pore.

  "Can I be of any service to you?" he asked. "Will you have a place

in the sleeper?"

  "Yes," I said, "and much oblige me, too. Give me anything-

anything will answer."

  "We have nothing left but the big family stateroom," he continued,

"with two berths and a couple of arm-chairs in it, but it is

entirely at your disposal. Here, Tom, take these satchels aboard!"

  Then he touched his hat and we and the colored Tom moved along. I

was bursting to drop just one little remark to my companion, but I

held in and waited. Tom made us comfortable in that sumptuous great

apartment, and then said, with many bows and a perfect affluence of

smiles:

  "Now, is dey anything you want, sah? Case you kin have jes' anything

you wants. It don't make no difference what it is."

  "Can I have some hot water and a tumbler at nine to-night- blazing

hot?" I asked. "You know about the right temperature for a hot

Scotch punch?"

  "Yes, sah, dat you kin; you kin pen on it; I'll get it myself."

  "Good! Now, that lamp is hung too high. Can I have a big coach

candle fixed up just at the head of my bed, so that I can read

comfortably?"

  "Yes, sah, you kin; I'll fix her up myself, an' I'll fix her so

she'll burn all night. Yes, sah; an' you can jes' call for anything

you want, and dish yer whole railroad 'll be turned wrong end up an'

inside out for to get it for you. Dat's so." And he disappeared.

  Well, I tilted my head back, hooked my thumbs in my armholes, smiled

a smile on my companion, and said, gently:

  "Well, what do you say now?"

  My companion was not in the humor to respond, and didn't. The next

moment that smiling black face was thrust in at the crack of the door,

and this speech followed:

  "Laws bless you, sah, I knowed you in a minute. I told de

conductah so. Laws! I knowed you de minute I sot eyes on you."

  "Is that so, my boy?" (Handing him a quadruple fee.) "Who am I?"

  "Jenuel McClellan," and he disappeared again.

  My companion said, vinegarishly, "Well, well! what do you say

now?" Right there comes in the marvellous coincidence I mentioned a

while ago- viz., I was speechless, and that is my condition now.

Perceive it?






                     CATS AND CANDY.



  The following address was delivered at a social meeting of

literary men in New York in 1874:



  WHEN I was fourteen I was living with my parents, who were very

poor- and correspondently honest. We had a youth living with us by the

name of Jim Wolfe. He was an excellent fellow, seventeen years old,

and very diffident. He and I slept together- virtuously; and one

bitter winter's night a cousin Mary- she's married now and gone-

gave what they call a candy-pulling in those days in the West, and

they took the saucers of hot candy outside of the house into the snow,

under a sort of old bower that came from the eaves- it was a sort of

an ell then, all covered with vines- to cool this hot candy in the

snow, and they were all sitting there. In the mean time we were gone

to bed. We were not invited to attend this party; we were too young.

  The young ladies and gentlemen were assembled there, and Jim and I

were in bed. There was about four inches of snow on the roof of this

ell, and our windows looked out on it, and it was frozen hard. A

couple of tom-cats- it is possible one might have been of the opposite

sex- were assembled on the chimney in the middle of this ell, and they

were growling at a fearful rate, and switching their tails about and

going on, and we couldn't sleep at all.

  Finally Jim said, "For two cents I'd go out and snake them cats

off that chimney." So I said, "Of course you would." He said, "Well, I

would; I have a mighty good notion to do it." Says I, "Of course you

have; certainly you have, you have a great notion to do it." I hoped

he might try it, but I was afraid he wouldn't.

  Finally I did get his ambition up, and he raised the window and

climbed out on the icy roof, with nothing on but his socks and a

very short shirt. He went climbing along on all fours on the roof

toward the chimney where the cats were. In the mean time these young

ladies and gentlemen were enjoying themselves down under the eaves,

and when Jim got almost to that chimney he made a pass at the cats,

and his heels flew up and he shot down and crashed through those

vines, and lit in the midst of the ladies and gentlemen, and sat

down in those hot saucers of candy.

  There was a stampede, of course, and he came up-stairs dropping

pieces of chinaware and candy all the way up, and when he got up

there- now anybody in the world would have gone into profanity or

something calculated to relieve the mind, but he didn't; he scraped

the candy off his legs, nursed his blisters a little, and said, "I

could have ketched them cats if I had had on a good ready."






                     OBITUARY POETRY.



             ADDRESS AT THE ACTORS' FUND FAIR,

                 PHILADELPHIA, in 1895.



  LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,- The- er- this- er- welcome occasion gives

me an- er- opportunity to make an- er- explanation that I have long

desired to deliver myself of. I rise to the highest honors before a

Philadelphia audience. In the course of my checkered career I have, on

divers occasions, been charged- er- maliciously with a more or less

serious offence. It is in reply to one of the more- er- important of

these that I wish to speak. More than once I have been accused of

writing obituary poetry in the Philadelphia Ledger.

  I wish right here to deny that dreadful assertion. I will admit that

once, when a compositor in the Ledger establishment, I did set up some

of that poetry, but for a worse offence than that no indictment can be

found against me. I did not write that poetry- at least, not all of

it.






                    CIGARS AND TOBACCO.



  MY friends for some years now have remarked that I am an

inveterate consumer of tobacco. That is true, but my habits with

regard to tobacco have changed. I have no doubt that you will say,

when I have explained to you what my present purpose is, that my taste

has deteriorated, but I do not so regard it.

  Whenever I held a smoking-party at my house, I found that my

guests had always just taken the pledge.

  Let me tell you briefly the history of my personal relation to

tobacco. It began, I think, when I was a lad, and took the form of a

quid, which I became expert in tucking under my tongue. Afterward I

learned the delights of the pipe, and I suppose there was no other

youngster of my age who could more deftly cut plug tobacco so as to

make it available for pipe-smoking.

  Well, time ran on, and there came a time when I was able to

gratify one of my youthful ambitions- I could buy the choicest

Havana cigars without seriously interfering with my income. I smoked a

good many, changing off from the Havana cigars to the pipe in the

course of a day's smoking.

  At last it occurred to me that something was lacking in the Havana

cigar. It did not quite fulfil my youthful anticipations. I

experimented. I bought what was called a seed-leaf cigar with a

Connecticut wrapper. After a while I became satiated of these, and I

searched for something else. The Pittsburg stogy was recommended to

me. It certainly had the merit of cheapness, if that be a merit in

tobacco, and I experimented with the stogy.

  Then, once more, I changed off, so that I might acquire the

subtler flavor of the Wheeling toby. Now that palled, and I looked

around New York in the hope of finding cigars which would seem to most

people vile, but which, I am sure, would be ambrosial to me. I

couldn't find any. They put into my hands some of those little

things that cost ten cents a box, but they are a delusion.

  I said to a friend, "I want to know if you can direct me to an

honest tobacco merchant who will tell me what is the worst cigar in

the New York market, excepting those made for Chinese consumption- I

want real tobacco. If you will do this and I find the man is as good

as his word, I will guarantee him a regular market for a fair amount

of his cigars."

  We found a tobacco dealer who would tell the truth- who, if a

cigar was bad, would boldly say so. He produced what he called the

very worst cigars he had ever had in his shop. He let me experiment

with one then and there. The test was satisfactory.

  This was, after all, the real thing. I negotiated for a box of

them and took them away with me, so that I might be sure of having

them handy when I want them.

  I discovered that the "worst cigars," so called, are the best for me

after all.






BILLIARDS

                        BILLIARDS.



  Mr. Clemens attended a billiard tourney on the evening of April

24, 1906, and was called on to tell a story.



  THE game of billiards has destroyed my naturally sweet

disposition. Once, when I was an underpaid reporter in Virginia

City, whenever I wished to play billiards I went out to look for an

easy mark. One day a stranger came to town and opened a billiard

parlor. I looked him over casually. When he proposed a game, I

answered, "All right."

  "Just knock the balls around a little so that I can get your

gait," he said; and when I had done so, he remarked: "I will be

perfectly fair with you. I'll play you left-handed." I felt hurt,

for he was cross-eyed, freckled, and had red hair, and I determined to

teach him a lesson. He won first shot, ran out, took my half-dollar,

and all I got was the opportunity to chalk my cue.

  "If you can play like that with your left hand," I said, "I'd like

to see you play with your right."

  "I can't, he said. "I'm left-handed."






                 THE UNION RIGHT OR WRONG?



                 REMINISCENCES OF NEVADA.



  I CAN assure you, ladies and gentlemen, that Nevada had lively

newspapers in those days.

  My great competitor among the reporters was Boggs, of the Union,

an excellent reporter.

  Once in three or four months he would get a little intoxicated; but,

as a general thing, he was a wary and cautious drinker, although

always ready to damp himself a little with the enemy.

  He had the advantage of me in one thing: he could get the monthly

public-school report and I could not, because the principal hated my

sheet- the Enterprise.

  One snowy night, when the report was due, I started out, sadly

wondering how I was to get it.

  Presently, a few steps up the almost deserted street, I stumbled

on Boggs, and asked him where he was going.

  "After the school report."

  "I'll go along with you."

  "No, sir. I'll excuse you."

  "Have it your own way."

  A saloon-keeper's boy passed by with a steaming pitcher of hot

punch, and Boggs snuffed the fragrance gratefully.

  He gazed fondly after the boy, and saw him start up the Enterprise

stairs.

  I said:

  "I wish you could help me get that school business, but since you

can't, I must run up to the Union office and see if I can get a

proof of it after it's set up, though I don't begin to suppose I

can. Good night."

  "Hold on a minute. I don't mind getting the report and sitting

around with the boys a little while you copy it, if you're willing

to drop down to the principal's with me."

  "Now you talk like a human being. Come along."

  We ploughed a couple of blocks through the snow, got the report- a

short document- and soon copied it in our office.

  Meantime, Boggs helped himself to the punch.

  I gave the manuscript back to him, and we started back to get an

inquest.

  At four o'clock in the morning, when we had gone to press and were

having a relaxing concert as usual (for some of the printers were good

singers and others good performers on the guitar and on that

atrocity the accordion), the proprietor of the Union strode in and

asked if anybody had heard anything of Boggs or the school report.

  We stated the case, and all turned out to help hunt for the

delinquent.

  We found him standing on a table in a saloon, with an old tin

lantern in one hand and the school report in the other, haranguing a

gang of "corned" miners on the iniquity of squandering the public

money on education "when hundreds and hundreds of honest, hard-working

men were literally starving for whiskey."

  He had been assisting in a regal spree with those parties for hours.

  We dragged him away, and put him into bed.

  Of course there was no school report in the Union, and Boggs held me

accountable, though I was innocent of any intention or desire to

compass its absence from that paper, and was as sorry as any one

that the misfortune had occurred. But we were perfectly friendly.

  The day the next school report was due the proprietor of the

Tennessee Mine furnished us a buggy, and asked us to go down and write

something about the property- a very common request, and one always

gladly acceded to when people furnished buggies, for we were as fond

of pleasure excursions as other people.

  The "mine" was a hole in the ground ninety feet deep, and no way

of getting down into it but by holding on to a rope and being

lowered with a windlass.

  The workmen had just gone off somewhere to dinner.

  I was not strong enough to lower Boggs's bulk, so I took an

unlighted candle in my teeth, made a loop for my foot in the end of

the rope, implored Boggs not to go to sleep or let the windlass get

the start of him, and then swung out over the shaft.

  I reached the bottom muddy and bruised about the elbows, but safe.

  I lit the candle, made an examination of the rock, selected some

specimens, and shouted to Boggs to hoist away.

  No answer.

  Presently a head appeared in the circle of daylight away aloft,

and a voice came down:

  "Are you all set?"

  "All set- hoist away!"

  "Are you comfortable?"

  "Perfectly."

  "Could you wait a little?"

  "Oh, certainly- no particular hurry."

  "Well- good-bye."

  "Why, where are you going?"

  "After the school report!"

  And he did.

  I stayed down there an hour, and surprised the workmen when they

hauled up and found a man on the rope instead of a bucket of rock.

  I walked home, too- five miles- up-hill.

  We had no school report next morning- but the Union had.






                 AN IDEAL FRENCH ADDRESS.


         EXTRACT FROM "PARIS NOTES," IN "TOM SAWYER

                     ABROAD," ETC.



  I AM told that a French sermon is like a French speech- it never

names an historical event, but only the date of it; if you are not

up in dates, you get left. A French speech is something like this:

  "Comrades, citizens, brothers, noble parts of the only sublime and

perfect nation, let us not forget that the 21st January cast off our

chains; that the 10th August relieved us of the shameful presence of

foreign spies; that the 5th September was its own justification before

heaven and humanity; that the 18th Brumaire contained the seeds of its

own punishment; that the 14th July was the mighty voice of liberty

proclaiming the resurrection, the new day, and inviting the

oppressed peoples of the earth to look upon the divine face of

France and live; and let us here record our everlasting curse

against the man of the 2d December, and declare in thunder tones,

the native tones of France, that but for him there had been no 17th

March in history, no 12th October, no 19th January, no 22d April, no

16th November, no 30th September, no 2d July, no 14th February, no

29th June, no 15th August, no 31st May- that but for him, France,

the pure, the grand, the peerless, had had a serene and vacant almanac

to-day."

  I have heard of one French sermon which closed in this odd yet

eloquent way:

  "My hearers, we have sad cause to remember the man of the 13th

January. The results of the vast crime of the 13th January have been

in just proportion to the magnitude of the act itself. But for it

there had been no 30th November- sorrowful spectacle! The grisly

deed of the 16th June had not been done but for it, nor had the man of

the 16th June known existence; to it alone the 3d September was due,

also the fatal 12th October. Shall we, then, be grateful for the

13th January, with its freight of death for you and me and all that

breathe? Yes, my friends, for it gave us also that which had never

come but for it, and it alone- the blessed 25th December."

  It may be well enough to explain. The man of the 13th January is

Adam; the crime of that date was the eating of the apple; the

sorrowful spectacle of the 30th November was the expulsion from

Eden; the grisly deed of the 16th June was the murder of Abel; the act

of the 3d September was the beginning of the journey to the land of

Nod; the 12th day of October, the last mountaintops disappeared

under the flood. When you go to church in France, you want to take

your almanac with you- annotated.






STATISTICS

                        STATISTICS.



       EXTRACT FROM "THE HISTORY OF THE SAVAGE CLUB."



  During that period of gloom when domestic bereavement had forced Mr.

Clemens and his dear ones to secure the privacy they craved until

their wounds should heal, his address was known to only a very few

of his closest friends. One old friend in New York, after vain efforts

to get his address, wrote him a letter addressed as follows:



                        MARK TWAIN,

                            God Knows Where,

                                      Try London.



  The letter found him, and Mr. Clemens replied to the letter

expressing himself surprised and complimented that the person who

was credited with knowing his whereabouts should take so much interest

in him, adding: "Had the letter been addressed to the care of the

'other party,' I would naturally have expected to receive it without

delay."

  His correspondent tried again, and addressed the second letter:



                       MARK TWAIN,

                         The Devil Knows Where,

                                      Try London.



  This found him also no less promptly.

  On June 9, 1899, he consented to visit the Savage Club, London, on

condition that there was to be no publicity and no speech was to be

expected from him. The toastmaster, in proposing the health of their

guest, said that as a Scotchman, and therefore as a born expert, he

thought Mark Twain had little or no claim to the title of humorist.

Mr. Clemens had tried to be funny but had failed, and his true role in

life was statistics; that he was a master of statistics, and loved

them for their own sake, and it would be the easiest task he ever

undertook if he would try to count all the real jokes he had ever

made. While the toastmaster was speaking, the members saw Mr.

Clemens's eyes begin to sparkle and his cheeks to flush. He jumped up,

and made a characteristic speech.



  PERHAPS I am not a. humorist, but I am a first-class fool- a

simpleton; for up to this moment I have believed Chairman MacAlister

to be a decent person whom I could allow to mix up with my friends and

relatives. The exhibition he has just made of himself reveals him to

be a scoundrel and a knave of the deepest dye. I have been cruelly

deceived, and it serves me right for trusting a Scotchman. Yes, I do

understand figures, and I can count. I have counted the words in

MacAlister's drivel (I certainly cannot call it a speech), and there

were exactly three thousand four hundred and thirty-nine. I also

carefully counted the lies- there were exactly three thousand four

hundred and thirty-nine. Therefore, I leave MacAlister to his fate.

  I was sorry to have my name mentioned as one of the great authors,

because they have a sad habit of dying off. Chaucer is dead, Spencer

is dead, so is Milton, so is Shakespeare, and I am not feeling very

well myself.






                 GALVESTON ORPHAN BAZAAR.



       ADDRESS AT A FAIR HELD AT THE WALDORF-ASTORIA,

           NEW YORK, IN OCTOBER, 1900, IN AID OF

                 THE ORPHANS AT GALVESTON.



  I EXPECTED that the Governor of Texas would occupy this place

first and would speak to you, and in the course of his remarks would

drop a text for me to talk from; but with the proverbial obstinacy

that is proverbial with governors, they go back on their duties, and

he has not come here, and has not furnished me with a text, and I am

here without a text. I have no text except what you furnish me with

your handsome faces, and- but I won't continue that, for I could go on

forever about attractive faces, beautiful dresses, and other things.

But, after all, compliments should be in order in a place like this.

  I have been in New York two or three days, and have been in a

condition of strict diligence night and day, the object of this

diligence being to regulate the moral and political situation on

this planet- put it on a sound basis- and when you are regulating

the conditions of a planet it requires a great deal of talk in a great

many kinds of ways, and when you have talked a lot the emptier you

get, and get also in a position of corking. When I am situated like

that, with nothing to say, I feel as though I were a sort of fraud;

I seem to be playing a part, and please consider I am playing a part

for want of something better, and this is not unfamiliar to me; I have

often done this before.

  When I was here about eight years ago I was coming up in a car of

the elevated road. Very few people were in that car, and on one end of

it there was no one, except on the opposite seat, where sat a man

about fifty years old, with a most winning face and an elegant eye-

a beautiful eye; and I took him from his dress to be a master

mechanic, a man who had a vocation. He had with him a very fine little

child of about four or five years. I was watching the affection

which existed between those two. I judged he was the grandfather,

perhaps. It was really a pretty child, and I was admiring her, and

as soon as he saw I was admiring her he began to notice me.

  I could see his admiration of me in his eye, and I did what

everybody else would do- admired the child four times as much, knowing

I would get four times as much of his admiration. Things went on

very pleasantly. I was making my way into his heart.

  By-and-by, when he almost reached the station where he was to get

off, he got up, crossed over, and he said: "Now I am going to say

something to you which I hope you will regard as a compliment." And

then he went on to say: "I have never seen Mark Twain, but I have seen

a portrait of him, and any friend of mine will tell you that when I

have once seen a portrait of a man I place it in my eye and store it

away in my memory, and I can tell you now that you look enough like

Mark Twain to be his brother. Now," he said, "I hope you take this

as a compliment. Yes, you are a very good imitation; but when I come

to look closer, you are probably not that man."

  I said: "I will be frank with you. In my desire to look like that

excellent character I have dressed for the character; I have been

playing a part."

  He said: "That is all right, that is all right; you look very well

on the outside, but when it comes to the inside you are not in it with

the original."

  So when I come to a place like this with nothing valuable to say I

always play a part. But I will say before I sit down that when it

comes to saying anything here I will express myself in this way: I

am heartily in sympathy with you in your efforts to help those who

were sufferers in this calamity, and in your desire to help those

who were rendered homeless, and in saying this I wish to impress on

you the fact that I am not playing a part.






                 SAN FRANCISCO EARTHQUAKE.



  After the address at the Robert Fulton Fund meeting, June 19,

1906, Mr. Clemens talked to the assembled reporters about the San

Francisco earthquake.



  I HAVEN'T been there since 1868, and that great city of San

Francisco has grown up since my day. When I was there she had one

hundred and eighteen thousand people, and of this number eighteen

thousand were Chinese. I was a reporter on the Virginia City

Enterprise in Nevada in 1862, and stayed there, I think, about two

years, when I went to San Francisco and got a job as a reporter on The

Call. I was there three or four years.

  I remember one day I was walking down Third Street in San Francisco.

It was a sleepy, dull Sunday afternoon, and no one was stirring.

Suddenly as I looked up the street about three hundred yards the whole

side of a house fell out. The street was full of bricks and mortar. At

the same time I was knocked against the side of a house, and stood

there stunned for a moment.

  I thought it was an earthquake. Nobody else had heard anything about

it and no one said earthquake to me afterward, but I saw it and I

wrote it. Nobody else wrote it, and the house I saw go into the street

was the only house in the city that felt it. I've always wondered if

it wasn't a little performance gotten up for my especial entertainment

by the nether regions.

