




                   CHARITY AND ACTORS.



     ADDRESS AT THE ACTORS' FUND FAIR IN THE METROPOLITAN

            OPERA HOUSE, NEW YORK, MAY 6, 1907.



  Mr. Clemens, in his white suit, formally declared the fair open. Mr.

Daniel Frohman, in introducing Mr. Clemens, said:

  "We intend to make this a banner week in the history of the Fund,

which takes an interest in every one on the stage, be he actor,

singer, dancer, or workman. We have spent more than $40,000 during the

past year. Charity covers a multitude of sins, but it also reveals a

multitude of virtues. At the opening of the former fair we had the

assistance of Edwin Booth and Joseph Jefferson. In their place we have

to-day that American institution and apostle of wide humanity- Mark

Twain."



  AS Mr. Frohman has said, charity reveals a multitude of virtues.

This is true, and it is to be proved here before the week is over. Mr.

Frohman has told you something of the object and something of the

character of the work. He told me he would do this- and he has kept

his word! I had expected to hear of it through the newspapers. I

wouldn't trust anything between Frohman and the newspapers- except

when it's a case of charity!

  You should all remember that the actor has been your benefactor many

and many a year. When you have been weary and downcast he has lifted

your heart out of gloom and given you a fresh impulse. You are all

under obligation to him. This is your opportunity to be his

benefactor- to help provide for him in his old age and when he suffers

from infirmities.

  At this fair no one is to be persecuted to buy. If you offer a

twenty-dollar bill in payment for a purchase of $1 you will receive

$19 in change. There is to be no robbery here. There is to be no creed

here- no religion except charity. We want to raise $250,000- and

that is a great task to attempt.

  The President has set the fair in motion by pressing the button in

Washington. Now your good wishes are to be transmuted into cash.

  By virtue of the authority in me vested I declare the fair open. I

call the ball game. Let the transmuting begin!






                     RUSSIAN REPUBLIC.



  The American auxiliary movement to aid the cause of freedom in

Russia was launched on the evening of April 11, 1906, at the Club A

house, 3 Fifth Avenue, with Mr. Clemens and Maxim Gorky as the

principal spokesmen. Mr. Clemens made an introductory address,

presenting Mr. Gorky.



  IF we can build a Russian republic to give to the persecuted

people of the Tsar's domain the same measure of freedom that we enjoy,

let us go ahead and do it. We need not discuss the methods by which

that purpose is to be attained. Let us hope that fighting will be

postponed or averted for a while, but if it must come-

  I am most emphatically in sympathy with the movement, now on foot in

Russia, to make that country free. I am certain that it will be

successful, as it deserves to be. Any such movement should have and

deserves our earnest and unanimous co-operation, and such a petition

for funds as has been explained by Mr. Hunter, with its just and

powerful meaning, should have the utmost support of each and every one

of us. Anybody whose ancestors were in this country when we were

trying to free ourselves from oppression, must sympathize with those

who now are trying to do the same thing in Russia.

  The parallel I have just drawn only goes to show that it makes no

difference whether the oppression is bitter or not; men with red, warm

blood in their veins will not endure it, but will seek to cast it off.

If we keep our hearts in this matter Russia will be free.






                     RUSSIAN SUFFERERS.



  On December 18, 1905, an entertainment was given at the Casino for

the benefit of the Russian sufferers. After the performance Mr.

Clemens spoke.



  LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,- It seems a sort of cruelty to inflict upon an

audience like this our rude English tongue, after we have heard that

divine speech flowing in that lucid Gallic tongue.

  It has always been a marvel to me- that French language; it has

always been a puzzle to me. How beautiful that language is. How

expressive it seems to be. How full of grace it is.

  And when it comes from lips like those, how eloquent and how

liquid it is. And, oh, I am always deceived- I always think I am going

to understand it.

  Oh, it is such a delight to me, such a delight to me, to meet Madame

Bernhardt, and laugh hand to hand and heart to heart with her.

  I have seen her play, as we all have, and oh, that is divine; but

I have always wanted to know Madame Bernhardt herself- her fiery self.

I have wanted to know that beautiful character.

  Why, she is the youngest person I ever saw, except myself- for I

always feel young when I come in the presence of young people.

  I have a pleasant recollection of an incident so many years ago-

when Madame Bernhardt came to Hartford, where I lived, and she was

going to play and the tickets were three dollars, and there were two

lovely women- a widow and her daughter- neighbors of ours, highly

cultivated ladies they were; their tastes were fine and elevated,

but they were very poor, and they said: "Well, we must not spend six

dollars on a pleasure of the mind, a pleasure of the intellect; we

must spend it, if it must go at all, to furnish to somebody bread to

eat."

  And so they sorrowed over the fact that they had to give up that

great pleasure of seeing Madame Bernhardt, but there were two

neighbors equally highly cultivated and who could not afford bread,

and those good-hearted Joneses sent that six dollars- deprived

themselves of it- and sent it to those poor Smiths to buy bread

with. And those Smiths took it and bought tickets with it to see

Madame Bernhardt.

  Oh yes, some people have tastes and intelligence also.

  Now, I was going to make a speech- I supposed I was, but I am not.

It is late, late; and so I am going to tell a story; and there is this

advantage about a story, anyway, that whatever moral or valuable thing

you put into a speech, why, it gets diffused among those involuted

sentences and possibly your audience goes away without finding out

what that valuable thing was that you were trying to confer upon it;

but, dear me, you put the same jewel into a story and it becomes the

keystone of that story, and you are bound to get it- it flashes, it

flames, it is the jewel in the toad's head- you don't overlook that.

  Now, if I am going to talk on such a subject as, for instance, the

lost opportunity- oh, the lost opportunity. Anybody in this house

who has reached the turn of life- sixty or seventy, or even fifty,

or along there- when he goes back along his history, there he finds it

mile-stoned all the way with the lost opportunity, and you know how

pathetic that is.

  You younger ones cannot know the full pathos that lies in those

words- the lost opportunity; but anybody who is old, who has really

lived and felt this life, he knows the pathos of the lost opportunity.

  Now, I will tell you a story whose moral is that, whose lesson is

that, whose lament is that.

  I was in a village which is a suburb of New Bedford several years

ago- well, New Bedford is a suburb of Fair Haven, or perhaps it is the

other way; in any case, it took both of those towns to make a great

centre of the great whaling industry of the first half of the

nineteenth century, and I was up there at Fair Haven some years ago

with a friend of mine.

  There was a dedication of a great town-hall, a public building,

and we were there in the afternoon. This great building was filled,

like this great theatre, with rejoicing villagers, and my friend and I

started down the centre aisle. He saw a man standing in that aisle,

and he said:

  "Now, look at that bronzed veteran- at that mahogany-faced man. Now,

tell me, do you see anything about that man's face that is

emotional? Do you see anything about it that suggests that inside that

man anywhere there are fires that can be started? Would you ever

imagine that that is a human volcano?"

  "Why, no," I said, "I would not. He looks like a wooden Indian in

front of a cigar store."

  "Very well," said my friend, "I will show you that there is

emotion even in that unpromising place. I will just go to that man and

I will just mention in the most casual way an incident in his life.

That man is getting along toward ninety years old. He is past

eighty. I will mention an incident of fifty or sixty years ago. Now,

just watch the effect, and it will be so casual that if you don't

watch you won't know when I do say that thing- but you just watch

the effect."

  He went on down there and accosted this antiquity, and made a remark

or two. I could not catch up. They were so casual I could not

recognize which one it was that touched that bottom, for in an instant

that old man was literally in eruption and was filling the whole place

with profanity of the most exquisite kind. You never heard such

accomplished profanity. I never heard it also delivered with such

eloquence.

  I never enjoyed profanity as I enjoyed it then- more than if I had

been uttering it myself. There is nothing like listening to an artist-

all his passions passing away in lava, smoke, thunder, lightning,

and earthquake.

  Then this friend said to me: "Now, I will tell you about that. About

sixty years ago that man was a young fellow of twenty-three, and had

just come home from a three years' whaling voyage. He came into that

village of his, happy and proud because now, instead of being chief

mate, he was going to be master of a whaleship, and he was proud and

happy about it.

  "Then he found that there had been a kind of a cold frost come

upon that town and the whole region roundabout; for while he had

been away the Father Mathew temperance excitement had come upon the

whole region. Therefore, everybody had taken the pledge; there

wasn't anybody for miles and miles around that had not taken the

pledge.

  "So you can see what a solitude it was to this young man, who was

fond of his grog. And he was just an outcast, because when they

found he would not join Father Mathew's Society they ostracized him,

and he went about that town three weeks, day and night, in utter

loneliness- the only human being in the whole place who ever took

grog, and he had to take it privately.

  "If you don't know what it is to be ostracized, to be shunned by

your fellow-man, may you never know it. Then he recognized that

there was something more valuable in this life than grog, and that

is the fellowship of your fellow-man. And at last he gave it up, and

at nine o'clock one night he went down to the Father Mathew Temperance

Society, and with a broken heart he said: 'Put my name down for

membership in this society.'

  "And then he went away crying, and at earliest dawn the next morning

they came for him and routed him out, and they said that new ship of

his was ready to sail on a three years' voyage. In a minute he was

on board that ship and gone.

  "And he said- well, he was not out of sight of that town till he

began to repent, but he had made up his mind that he would not take

a drink, and so that whole voyage of three years was a three years'

agony to that man because he saw all the time the mistake he had made.

  "He felt it all through; he had constant reminders of it, because

the crew would pass him with their grog, come out on the deck and take

it, and there was the torturous smell of it.

  "He went through the whole three years of suffering, and at last

coming into port it was snowy, it was cold, he was stamping through

the snow two feet deep on the deck and longing to get home, and

there was his crew torturing him to the last minute with hot grog, but

at last he had his reward. He really did get to shore at last, and

jumped and ran and bought a jug and rushed to the society's office,

and said to the secretary:

  "'Take my name off your membership books, and do it right away! I

have got a three years' thirst on.'

  "And the secretary said: 'It is not necessary. You were

blackballed!'"







               WATTERSON AND TWAIN AS REBELS.



      ADDRESS AT THE CELEBRATION OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN'S 92D

       BIRTHDAY ANNIVERSARY, CARNEGIE HALL, FEBRUARY 11,

         1901, TO RAISE FUNDS FOR THE LINCOLN MEMORIAL

             UNIVERSITY AT CUMBERLAND GAP, TENN.



  LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,- The remainder of my duties as presiding

chairman here this evening are but two- only two. One of them is easy,

and the other difficult. That is to say, I must introduce the

orator, and then keep still and give him a chance. The name of Henry

Watterson carries with it its own explanation. It is like an

electric light on top of Madison Square Garden; you touch the button

and the light flashes up out of the darkness. You mention the name

of Henry Watterson, and your minds are at once illuminated with the

splendid radiance of his fame and achievements. A journalist, a

soldier, an orator, a statesman, a rebel. Yes, he was a rebel; and,

better still, now he is a reconstructed rebel.

  It is a curious circumstance, a circumstance brought about without

any collusion or prearrangement, that he and I, both of whom were

rebels related by blood to each other, should be brought here together

this evening bearing a tribute in our hands and bowing our heads in

reverence to that noble soul who for three years we tried to

destroy. I don't know as the fact has ever been mentioned before,

but it is a fact, nevertheless. Colonel Watterson and I were both

rebels, and we are blood relations. I was a second lieutenant in a

Confederate company- for a while- oh, I could have stayed on if I

had wanted to. I made myself felt, I left tracks all around the

country. I could have stayed on, but it was such weather. I never

saw such weather to be out-of-doors in, in all my life.

  The Colonel commanded a regiment, and did his part, I suppose, to

destroy the Union. He did not succeed, yet if he had obeyed me he

would have done so. I had a plan, and I fully intended to drive

General Grant into the Pacific Ocean- if I could get transportation. I

told Colonel Watterson about it. I told him what he had to do. What

I wanted him to do was to surround the Eastern army and wait until I

came up. But he was insubordinate; he stuck on some quibble of

military etiquette about a second lieutenant giving orders to a

colonel or something like that. And what was the consequence? The

Union was preserved. This is the first time I believe that that secret

has ever been revealed.

  No one outside of the family circle, I think, knew it before; but

there the facts are. Watterson saved the Union; yes, he saved the

Union. And yet there he sits, and not a step has been taken or a

movement made toward granting him a pension. That is the way things

are done. It is a case where some blushing ought to be done. You ought

to blush, and I ought to blush, and he- well, he's a little out of

practice now.







                   ROBERT FULTON FUND.



       ADDRESS MADE ON THE EVENING OF APRIL 19, 1906.



  Mr. Clemens had been asked to address the association by Gen.

Frederick D. Grant, president. He was offered a fee of $1000, but

refused it, saying:



  "I shall be glad to do it, but I must stipulate that you keep the

$1000, and add it to the Memorial Fund as my contribution to erect a

monument in New York to the memory of the man who applied steam to

navigation."



  At this meeting Mr. Clemens made this formal announcement from the

platform:



  "This is my last appearance on the paid platform. I shall not retire

from the gratis platform until I am buried, and courtesy will compel

me to keep still and not disturb the others. Now, since I must, I

shall say good-bye. I see many faces in this audience well known to

me. They are all my friends, and I feel that those I don't know are my

friends, too. I wish to consider that you represent the nation, and

that in saying good-bye to you I am saying good-bye to the nation.

In the great name of humanity, let me say this final word: I offer

an appeal in behalf of that vast, pathetic multitude of fathers,

mothers, and helpless little children. They were sheltered and happy

two days ago. Now they are wandering, forlorn, hopeless, and homeless,

the victims of a great disaster. So I beg of you, I beg of you, to

open your hearts and open your purses and remember San Francisco,

the smitten city."



  I WISH to deliver a historical address. I've been studying the

history of- er- a- let me see- a [then he stopped in confusion, and

walked over to Gen. Fred D. Grant, who sat at the head of the

platform. He leaned over in a whisper, and then returned to the

front of the stage and continued]. Oh yes! I've been studying Robert

Fulton. I've been studying a biographical sketch of Robert Fulton, the

inventor of- er- a- let's see- oh yes, the inventor of the electric

telegraph and the Morse sewing-machine. Also, I understand he invented

the air- diria- pshaw! I have it at last- the dirigible balloon.

Yes, the dirigible but it is a difficult word, and I don't see why

anybody should marry a couple of words like that when they don't

want to be married at all and are likely to quarrel with each other

all the time. I should put that couple of words under the ban of the

United States Supreme Court, under its decision of a few days ago, and

take 'em out and drown 'em.

  I used to know Fulton. It used to do me good to see him dashing

through the town on a wild broncho.

  And Fulton was born in er- a- well, it doesn't make much

difference where he was born, does it? I remember a man who came to

interview me once, to get a sketch of my life. I consulted with a

friend- a practical man- before he came, to know how I should treat

him.

  "Whenever you give the interviewer a fact," he said, "give him

another fact that will contradict it. Then he'll go away with a jumble

that he can't use at all. Be gentle, be sweet, smile like an idiot-

just be natural." That's what my friend told me to do, and I did it.

  "Where were you born?" asked the interviewer.

  "Well- er- a," I began, "I was born in Alabama, or Alaska, or the

Sandwich Islands; I don't know where, but right around there

somewhere. And you had better put it down before you forget it."

  "But you weren't born in all those places," he said.

  "Well, I've offered you three places. Take your choice. They're

all at the same price."

  "How old are you?" he asked.

  "I shall be nineteen in June," I said.

  "Why, there's such a discrepancy between your age and your looks,"

he said.

  "Oh, that's nothing," I said, "I was born discrepantly."

  Then we got to talking about my brother Samuel, and he told me my

explanations were confusing.

  "I suppose he is dead," I said. "Some said that he was dead and some

said that he wasn't."

  "Did you bury him without knowing whether he was dead or not?" asked

the reporter.

  "There was a mystery," said I. "We were twins, and one day when we

were two weeks old- that is, he was one week old, and I was one week

old- we got mixed up in the bath-tub, and one of us drowned. We

never could tell which. One of us had a strawberry birthmark on the

back of his hand. There it is on my hand. This is the one that was

drowned. There's no doubt about it."

  "Where's the mystery?" he said.

  "Why, don't you see how stupid it was to bury the wrong twin?" I

answered. I didn't explain it any more because he said the explanation

confused him. To me it is perfectly plain.

  But, to get back to Fulton. I'm going along like an old man I used

to know who used to start to tell a story about his grandfather. He

had an awfully retentive memory, and he never finished the story,

because he switched off into something else. He used to tell about how

his grandfather one day went into a pasture, where there was a ram.

The old man dropped a silver dime in the grass, and stooped over to

pick it up. The ram was observing him, and took the old man's action

as an invitation.

  Just as he was going to finish about the ram this friend of mine

would recall that his grandfather had a niece who had a glass eye. She

used to loan that glass eye to another lady friend, who used it when

she received company. The eye didn't fit the friend's face, and it was

loose. And whenever she winked it would turn over.

  Then he got on the subject of accidents, and he would tell a story

about how he believed accidents never happened.

  "There was an Irishman coming down a ladder with a hod of bricks,"

he said, "and a Dutchman was standing on the ground below. The

Irishman fell on the Dutchman and killed him. Accident? Never! If

the Dutchman hadn't been there the Irishman would have been killed.

Why didn't the Irishman fall on a dog which was next to the

Dutchman? Because the dog would have seen him coming."

  Then he'd get off from the Dutchman to an uncle named Reginald

Wilson. Reginald went into a carpet factory one day, and got twisted

into the machinery's belt. He went excursioning around the factory

until he was properly distributed and was woven into sixty-nine

yards of the best three-ply carpet. His wife bought the carpet, and

then she erected a monument to his memory. It read:



                 Sacred to the memory

                          of

      sixty-nine yards of the best three-ply carpet

          containing the mortal remainders of



                   REGINALD WILSON



               Go thou and do likewise



  And so on he would ramble about telling the story of his grandfather

until we never were told whether he found the ten-cent piece or

whether something else happened.






                 FULTON DAY, JAMESTOWN.



           ADDRESS DELIVERED SEPTEMBER 23, 1907.



  Lieutenant-Governor Ellyson, of Virginia, in introducing Mr.

Clemens, said:

  "The people have come here to bring a tribute of affectionate

recollection for the man who has contributed so much to the progress

of the world and the happiness of mankind." As Mr. Clemens came down

to the platform the applause became louder and louder, until Mr.

Clemens held out his hand for silence. It was a great triumph, and

it was almost a minute after the applause ceased before Mr. Clemens

could speak. He attempted it once, and when the audience noticed his

emotion, it cheered again loudly.



  LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,- I am but human, and when you give me a

reception like that I am obliged to wait a little while I get my

voice. When you appeal to my head, I don't feel it; but when you

appeal to my heart, I do feel it.

  We are here to celebrate one of the greatest events of American

history, and not only in American history, but in the world's history.

  Indeed it was- the application of steam by Robert Fulton.

  It was a world event- there are not many of them. It is peculiarly

an American event, that is true, but the influence was very broad in

effect. We should regard this day as a very great American holiday. We

have not many that are exclusively American holidays. We have the

Fourth of July, which we regard as an American holiday, but it is

nothing of the kind. I am waiting for a dissenting voice. All great

efforts that led up to the Fourth of July were made, not by Americans,

but by English residents of America, subjects of the King of England.

  They fought all the fighting that was done, they shed and spilt

all the blood that was spilt, in securing to us the invaluable

liberties which are incorporated in the Declaration of Independence;

but they were not Americans. They signed the Declaration of

Independence; no American's name is signed to that document at all.

There never was an American such as you and I are until after the

Revolution, when it had all been fought out and liberty secured, after

the adoption of the Constitution, and the recognition of the

Independence of America by all powers.

  While we revere the Fourth of July- and let us always revere it, and

the liberties it conferred upon us- yet it was not an American

event, a great American day.

  It was an American who applied that steam successfully. There are

not a great many world events, and we have our full share. The

telegraph, telephone, and the application of steam to navigation-

these are great American events.

  To-day I have been requested, or I have requested myself, not to

confine myself to furnishing you with information, but to remind you

of things, and to introduce one of the nation's celebrants.

  Admiral Harrington here is going to tell you all that I have left

untold. I am going to tell you all that I know, and then he will

follow up with such rags and remnants as he can find, and tell you

what he knows.

  No doubt you have heard a great deal about Robert Fulton and the

influences that have grown from his invention, but the little

steamboat is suffering neglect.

  You probably do not know a great deal about that boat. It was the

most important steamboat in the world. I was there and saw it. Admiral

Harrington was there at the time. It need not surprise you, for he

is not as old as he looks. That little boat was interesting in every

way. The size of it. The boat was one [consults Admiral], he said

ten feet long. The breadth of that boat [consults Admiral], two

hundred feet. You see, the first and most important detail is the

length, then the breadth, and then the depth; the depth of that boat

was [consults again]- the Admiral says it was a flat boat. Then her

tonnage- you know nothing about a boat until you know two more things:

her speed and her tonnage. We know the speed she made. She made four

miles- and sometimes five miles. It was on her initial trip, on August

11, 1807, that she made her initial trip, when she went from [consults

Admiral] Jersey City- to Chicago. That's right. She went by way of

Albany. Now comes the tonnage of that boat. Tonnage of a boat means

the amount of displacement; displacement means the amount of water a

vessel can shove in a day. The tonnage of man is estimated by the

amount of whiskey he can displace in a day.

  Robert Fulton named the Clermont in honor of his bride, that is,

Clermont was the name of the county-seat.

  I feel that it surprises you that I know so much. In my remarks of

welcome of Admiral Harrington I am not going to give him

compliments. Compliments always embarrass a man. You do not know

anything to say. It does not inspire you with words. There is

nothing you can say in answer to a compliment. I have been

complimented myself a great many times, and they always embarrass

me- I always feel that they have not said enough.

  The Admiral and myself have held public office, and were

associated together a great deal in a friendly way in the time of

Pocahontas. That incident where Pocahontas saves the life of Smith

from her father, Powhatan's club, was gotten up by the Admiral and

myself to advertise Jamestown.

  At that time the Admiral and myself did not have the facilities of

advertising that you have.

  I have known Admiral Harrington in all kinds of situations- in

public service, on the platform, and in the chain-gang now and then-

but it was a mistake. A case of mistaken identity. I do not think it

is at all a necessity to tell you Admiral Harrington's public history.

You know that it is in the histories. I am not here to tell you

anything about his public life, but to expose his private life.

  I am something of a poet. When the great poet laureate, Tennyson,

died, and I found that the place was open, I tried to get it- but I

did not get it. Anybody can write the first line of a poem, but it

is a very difficult task to make the second line rhyme with the first.

When I was down in Australia there were two towns named Johnswood

and Par-am. I made this rhyme:



      "The people of Johnswood are pious and good;

       The people of Par-am they don't care a-"



  I do not want to compliment Admiral Harrington, but as long as

such men as he devote their lives to the public service the credit

of the country will never cease. I will say that the same high

qualities, the same moral and intellectual attainments, the same

graciousness of manner, of conduct, of observation, and expression

have caused Admiral Harrington to be mistaken for me- and I have

been mistaken for him.

  A mutual compliment can go no further, and I now have the honor

and privilege of introducing to you Admiral Harrington.







               LOTOS CLUB DINNER IN HONOR

                    OF MARK TWAIN.



   ADDRESS AT THE FIRST FORMAL DINNER IN THE NEW CLUB-HOUSE,

                   NOVEMBER 11, 1893.



  In introducing the guest of the evening, Mr. Lawrence said:

  "To-night the old faces appear once more amid new surroundings.

The place where last we met about the table has vanished, and to-night

we have our first Lotos dinner in a home that is all our own. It is

peculiarly fitting that the board should now be spread in honor of one

who has been a member of the club for full a score of years, and it is

a happy augury for the future that our fellow-member whom we

assemble to greet should be the bearer of a most distinguished name in

the world of letters; for the Lotos Club is ever at its best when

paying homage to genius in literature or in art. Is there a

civilized being who has not heard the name of Mark Twain? We knew

him long years ago, before he came out of the boundless West,

brimful of wit and eloquence, with no reverence for anything, and went

abroad to educate the untutored European in the subtleties of the

American joke. The world has looked on and applauded while he has

broken many images. He has led us in imagination all over the globe.

With him as our guide we have traversed alike the Mississippi and

the Sea of Galilee. At his bidding we have laughed at a thousand

absurdities. By a laborious process of reasoning he has convinced us

that the Egyptian mummies are actually dead. He has held us spellbound

upon the plain at the foot of the great Sphinx, and we have joined him

in weeping bitter tears at the tomb of Adam. To-night we greet him

in the flesh. What name is there in literature that can be likened

to his? Perhaps some of the distinguished gentlemen about this table

can tell us, but I know of none. Himself his only parallel!"



  MR. PRESIDENT, GENTLEMEN, AND FELLOW-MEMBERS OF THE LOTOS CLUB,- I

have seldom in my lifetime listened to compliments so felicitously

phrased or so well deserved. I return thanks for them from a full

heart and an appreciative spirit, and I will say this in self-defence:

While I am charged with having no reverence for anything, I wish to

say that I have reverence for the man who can utter such truths, and I

also have a deep reverence and a sincere one for a club that can do

such justice to me. To be the chief guest of such a club is

something to be envied, and if I read your countenances rightly I am

envied. I am glad to see this club in such palatial quarters. I

remember it twenty years ago when it was housed in a stable.

  Now when I was studying for the ministry there were two or three

things that struck my attention particularly. At the first banquet

mentioned in history that other prodigal son who came back from his

travels was invited to stand up and have his say. They were all there,

his brethren, David and Goliath, and er, and if he had had such

experience as I have had he would have waited until those other people

got through talking. He got up and testified to all his failings.

Now if he had waited before telling all about his riotous living until

the others had spoken he might not have given himself away as he

did, and I think that I would give myself away if I should go on. I

think I'd better wait until the others hand in their testimony; then

if it is necessary for me to make an explanation, I will get up and

explain, and if I cannot do that, I'll deny it happened.



  Later in the evening Mr. Clemens made another speech, replying to

a fire of short speeches by Charles Dudley Warner, Charles A. Dana,

Seth Low, General Porter, and many others, each welcoming the guest of

honor.



  I don't see that I have a great deal to explain. I got off very

well, considering the opportunities that these other fellows had. I

don't see that Mr. Low said anything against me, and neither did Mr.

Dana. However, I will say that I never heard so many lies told in

one evening as were told by Mr. McKelway- and I consider myself very

capable; but even in his case, when he got through, I was gratified by

finding how much he hadn't found out. By accident he missed the very

things that I didn't want to have said, and now, gentlemen, about

Americanism.

  I have been on the continent of Europe for two and a half years. I

have met many Americans there, some sojourning for a short time

only, others making protracted stays, and it has been very

gratifying to me to find that nearly all preserved their

Americanism. I have found they all like to see the Flag fly, and

that their hearts rise when they see the Stars and Stripes. I met only

one lady who had forgotten the land of her birth and glorified

monarchical institutions.

  I think it is a great thing to say that in two and a half years I

met only one person who had fallen a victim to the shams- I think we

may call them shams- of nobilities and of heredities. She was entirely

lost in them. After I had listened to her for a long time, I said to

her: "At least you must admit that we have one merit. We are not

like the Chinese, who refuse to allow their citizens who are tired

of the country to leave it. Thank God, we don't!"







COPYRIGHT

                        COPYRIGHT.



  With Mr. Howells, Edward Everett Hale, Thomas Nelson Page, and a

number of other authors, Mr. Clemens appeared before the committee

December 6, 1906. The new Copyright Bill contemplated an author's

copyright for the term of his life and for fifty years thereafter,

applying also for the benefit of artists, musicians, and others, but

the authors did most of the talking. F. D. Millet made a speech for

the artists, and John Philip Sousa for the musicians.

  Mr. Clemens was the last speaker of the day, and its chief

feature. He made a speech, the serious, parts of which created a

strong impression, and the humorous parts set the Senators and

Representatives in roars of laughter.



  I HAVE read this bill. At least I have read such portions as I could

understand. Nobody but a practised legislator can read the bill and

thoroughly understand it, and I am not a practised legislator.

  I am interested particularly and especially in the part of the

bill which concerns my trade. I like that extension of copyright

life to the author's life and fifty years afterward. I think that

would satisfy any reasonable author, because it would take care of his

children. Let the grand-children take care of themselves. That would

take care of my daughters, and after that I am not particular. I shall

then have long been out of this struggle, independent of it,

indifferent to it.

  It isn't objectionable to me that all the trades and professions

in the United States are protected by the bill. I like that. They

are all important and worthy, and if we can take care of them under

the Copyright law I should like to see it done. I should like to see

oyster culture added, and anything else.

  I am aware that copyright must have a limit, because that is

required by the Constitution of the United States, which sets aside

the earlier Constitution, which we call the decalogue. The decalogue

says you shall not take away from any man his profit. I don't like

to be obliged to use the harsh term. What the decalogue really says

is, "Thou shalt not steal," but I am trying to use more polite

language.

  The laws of England and America do take it away, do select but one


class, the people who create the literature of the land. They always

talk handsomely about the literature of the land, always what a

fine, great, monumental thing a great literature is, and in the

midst of their enthusiasm they turn around and do what they can to

discourage it.

  I know we must have a limit, but forty-two years is too much of a

limit. I am quite unable to guess why there should be a limit at all

to the possession of the product of a man's labor. There is no limit

to real estate.

  Doctor Hale has suggested that a man might just as well, after

discovering a coal-mine and working it forty-two years, have the

Government step in and take it away.

  What is the excuse? It is that the author who produced that book has

had the profit of it long enough, and therefore the Government takes a

profit which does not belong to it and generously gives it to the

88,000,000 of people. But it doesn't do anything of the kind. It

merely takes the author's property, takes his children's bread, and

gives the publisher double profit. He goes on publishing the book

and as many of his confederates as choose to go into the conspiracy do

so, and they rear families in affluence.

  And they continue the enjoyment of those ill-gotten gains generation

after generation forever, for they never die. In a few weeks or months

or years I shall be out of it, I hope under a monument. I hope I shall

not be entirely forgotten, and I shall subscribe to the monument

myself. But I shall not be caring what happens if there are fifty

years left of my copyright. My copyright produces annually a good deal

more than I can use, but my children can use it. I can get along; I

know a lot of trades. But that goes to my daughters, who can't get

along as well as I can because I have carefully raised them as young

ladies, who don't know anything and can't do anything. I hope Congress

will extend to them the charity which they have failed to get from me.

  Why, if a man who is not even mad, but only strenuous- strenuous

about race- suicide- should come to me and try to get me to use my

large political and ecclesiastical influence to get a bill passed by

this Congress limiting families to twenty-two children by one

mother, I should try to calm him down. I should reason with him. I

should say to him, "Leave it alone. Leave it alone and it will take

care of itself. Only one couple a year in the United States can

reach that limit. If they have reached that limit let them go right

on. Let them have all the liberty they want. In restricting that

family to twenty-two children you are merely conferring discomfort and

unhappiness on one family per year in a nation of 88,000,000, which is

not worth while."

  It is the very same with copyright. One author per year produces a

book which can outlive the forty-two-year limit; that's all. This

nation can't produce two authors a year that can do it; the thing is

demonstrably impossible. All that the limited copyright can do is to

take the bread out of the mouths of the children of that one author

per year.

  I made an estimate some years ago, when I appeared before a

committee of the House of Lords, that we had published in this country

since the Declaration of Independence 220,000 books. They have all

gone. They had all perished before they were ten years old. It is only

one book in 1000 that can outlive the forty-two-year limit.

Therefore why put a limit at all? You might as well limit the family

to twenty-two children.

  If you recall the Americans in the nineteenth century who wrote

books that lived forty-two years you will have to begin with Cooper;

you can follow with Washington Irving, Harriet Beecher Stowe, Edgar

Allan Poe, and there you have to wait a long time. You come to

Emerson, and you have to stand still and look further. You find

Howells and T. B. Aldrich, and, then your numbers begin to run

pretty thin, and you question if you can name twenty persons in the

United States who in a whole century have written books that would

live forty-two years. Why, you could take them all and put them on one

bench there [pointing]. Add the wives and children and you could put

the result on two or three more benches.

  One hundred persons- that is the little, insignificant crowd whose

bread-and-butter is to be taken away for what purpose, for what profit

to anybody? You turn these few books into the hands of the pirate

and of the legitimate publisher, too, and they get the profit that

should have gone to the wife and children.

  When I appeared before that committee of the House of Lords the

chairman asked me what limit I would propose. I said, "Perpetuity."

I could see some resentment in his manner, and he said the idea was

illogical, for the reason that it has long ago been decided that there

can be no such thing as property in ideas. I said there was property

in ideas before Queen Anne's time; they had perpetual copyright. He

said, "What is a book? A book is just built from base to roof on

ideas, and there can be no property in it."

  I said I wished he could mention any kind of property on this planet

that had a pecuniary value which was not derived from an idea or

ideas. He said real estate. I put a supposititious case, a dozen

Englishmen who travel through South Africa and camp out, and eleven of

them see nothing at all; they are mentally blind. But there is one

in the party who knows what this harbor means and what the lay of

the land means. To him it means that some day a railway will go

through here, and there on that harbor a great city will spring up.

That is his idea. And he has another idea, which is to go and trade

his last bottle of Scotch whiskey and his last horse-blanket to the

principal chief of that region and buy a piece of land the size of

Pennsylvania. That was the value of an idea that the day would come

when the Cape to Cairo Railway would be built.

  Every improvement that is put upon the real estate is the result

of an idea in somebody's head. The skyscraper is another idea; the

railroad is another; the telephone and all those things are merely

symbols which represent ideas. An andiron, a wash-tub, is the result

of an idea that did not exist before.

  So if, as that gentleman said, a book does consist solely of

ideas, that is the best argument in the world that it is property, and

should not be under any limitation at all. We don't ask for that.

Fifty years from now we shall ask for it.

  I hope the bill will pass without any deleterious amendments. I do

seem to be extraordinarily interested in a whole lot of arts and

things that I have got nothing to do with. It is a part of my

generous, liberal nature; I can't help it. I feel the same sort of

charity to everybody that was manifested by a gentleman who arrived at

home at two o'clock in the morning from the club and was feeling so

perfectly satisfied with life, so happy, and so comfortable, and there

was his house weaving, weaving, weaving around. He watched his chance,

and by and by when the steps got in his neighborhood he made a jump

and climbed up and got on the portico.

  And the house went on weaving and weaving and weaving, but he

watched the door, and when it came around his way he plunged through

it. He got to the stairs, and when he went up on all fours the house

was so unsteady that he could hardly make his way, but at last he

got to the top and raised his foot and put it on the top step. But

only the toe hitched on the step, and he rolled down and fetched up on

the bottom step, with his arm around the newel-post, and he said: "God

pity the poor sailors out at sea on a night like this."







                 IN AID OF THE BLIND.



      ADDRESS AT A PUBLIC MEETING OF THE NEW YORK

        ASSOCIATION FOR PROMOTING THE INTERESTS

          OF THE BLIND AT THE WALDORF-ASTORIA,

                   MARCH 29, 1906.



  IF You detect any awkwardness in my movements and infelicities in my

conduct I will offer the explanation that I never presided at a

meeting of any kind before in my life, and that I do find it out of my

line. I supposed I could do anything anybody else could, but I

recognize that experience helps, and I do feel the lack of that

experience. I don't feel as graceful and easy as I ought to be

in-order to impress an audience. I shall not pretend that I know how

to umpire a meeting like this, and I shall just take the humble

place of the Essex band.

  There was a great gathering in a small New England town about

twenty-five years ago. I remember that circumstance because there

was something that happened at that time. It was a great occasion.

They gathered in the militia and orators and everybody from all the

towns around. It was an extraordinary occasion.

  The little local paper threw itself into ecstasies of admiration and

tried to do itself proud from beginning to end. It praised the

orators, the militia, and all the bands that came from everywhere, and

all this in honest country newspaper detail, but the writer ran out of

adjectives toward the end. Having exhausted his whole magazine of

praise and glorification, he found he still had one band left over. He

had to say something about it, and he said: "The Essex band done the

best it could."

  I am an Essex band on this occasion, and I am going to get through

as well as inexperience and good intentions will enable me. I have got

all the documents here necessary to instruct you in the objects and

intentions of this meeting and also of the association which has

called the meeting. But they are too voluminous. I could not pack

those statistics into my head, and I had to give it up. I shall have

to just reduce all that mass of statistics to a few salient facts.

There are too many statistics and figures for me. I never could do

anything with figures, never had any talent for mathematics, never

accomplished anything in my efforts at that rugged study, and to-day

the only mathematics I know is multiplication, and the minute I get

away up in that, as soon as I reach nine times seven-

  [Mr. Clemens lapsed into deep thought for a moment. He was trying to

figure out nine times seven, but it was a hopeless task, and he turned

to St. Clair McKelway, who sat near him. Mr. McKelway whispered the

answer, and the speaker resumed:]

  I've got it now. It's eighty-four. Well, I can get that far all

right with a little hesitation. After that I am uncertain, and I can't

manage a statistic.

  "This association for the"-

  [Mr. Clemens was in another dilemma. Again he was obliged to turn to

Mr. McKelway.]

  Oh yes, for promoting the interests of the blind. It's a long

name. If I could I would write it out for you and let you take it home

and study it, but I don't know how to spell it. And Mr. Carnegie is

down in Virginia somewhere. Well, anyway, the object of that

association which has been recently organized, five months ago, in

fact, is in the hands of very, very energetic, intelligent, and

capable people, and they will push it to success very surely, and

all the more surely if you will give them a little of your

assistance out of your pockets.

  The intention, the purpose, is to search out all the blind and

find work for them to do so that they may earn their own bread. Now it

is dismal enough to be blind- it is dreary, dreary life at best, but

it can be largely ameliorated by finding something for these poor

blind people to do with their hands. The time passes so heavily that

it is never day or night with them, it is always night, and when

they have to sit with folded hands and with nothing to do to amuse

or entertain or employ their minds, it is drearier and drearier.

  And then the knowledge they have that they must subsist on

charity, and so often reluctant charity, it would renew their lives if

they could have something to do with their hands and pass their time

and at the same time earn their bread, and know the sweetness of the

bread which is the result of the labor of one's own hands. They need

that cheer and pleasure. It is the only way you can turn their night

into day, to give them happy hearts, the only thing you can put in the

place of the blessed sun. That you can do in the way I speak of.

  Blind people generally who have seen the light know what it is to

miss the light. Those who have gone blind since they were twenty years

old- their lives are unendingly dreary. But they can be taught to

use their hands and to employ themselves at a great many industries.

That association from which this draws its birth in Cambridge,

Massachusetts, has taught its blind to make many things. They make

them better than most people, and more honest than people who have the

use of their eyes. The goods they make are readily salable. People

like them. And so they are supporting themselves, and it is a matter

of cheer, cheer. They pass their time now not too irksomely as they

formerly did.

  What this association needs and wants is $15,000. The figures are

set down, and what the money is for, and there is no graft in it or

I would not be here. And they hope to beguile that out of your

pockets, and you will find affixed to the programme an opportunity,

that little blank which you will fill out and promise so much money

now or to-morrow or some time. Then, there is another opportunity

which is still better, and that is that you shall subscribe an

annual sum.

  I have invented a good many useful things in my time, but never

anything better than that of getting money out of people who don't

want to part with it. It is always for good objects, of course. This

is the plan: When you call upon a person to contribute to a great

and good object, and you think he should furnish about $1000, he

disappoints you as like as not. Much the best way to work him to

supply that thousand dollars is to split it into parts and contribute,

say a hundred dollars a year, or fifty, or whatever the sum may be.

Let him contribute ten or twenty a year. He doesn't feel that, but

he does feel it when you call upon him to contribute a large amount.

When you get used to it you would rather contribute than borrow money.

  I tried it in Helen Keller's case. Mr. Hutton wrote me in 1896 or

1897 when I was in London and said: "The gentleman who has been so

liberal in taking care of Helen Keller has died without making

provision for her in his will, and now they don't know what to do."

They were proposing to raise a fund, and he thought $50,000 enough

to furnish an income of $2400 or $2500 a year for the support of

that wonderful girl and her wonderful teacher, Miss Sullivan, now Mrs.

Macy. I wrote to Mr. Hutton and said: "Go on, get up your fund. It

will be slow, but if you want quick work, I propose this system,"

the system I speak of, of asking people to contribute such and such

a sum from year to year and drop out whenever they please, and he

would find there wouldn't be any difficulty, people wouldn't feel

the burden of it. And he wrote back saying he had raised the $2400 a

year indefinitely by that system in a single afternoon. We would

like to do something just like that to-night. We will take as many

checks as you care to give. You can leave your donations in the big

room outside.

  I knew once what it was to be blind. I shall never forget that

experience. I have been as blind as anybody ever was for three or four

hours, and the sufferings that I endured and the mishaps and the

accidents that are burning in my memory make my sympathy rise when I

feel for the blind and always shall feel. I once went to Heidelberg on

an excursion. I took a clergyman along with me, the Rev. Joseph

Twichell, of Hartford, who is still among the living despite that

fact. I always travel with clergymen when I can. It is better for

them, it is better for me. And any preacher who goes out with me in

stormy weather and without a lightning rod is a good one. The Reverend

Twichell is one of those people filled with patience and endurance,

two good ingredients for a man travelling with me, so we got along

very well together. In that old town they have not altered a house nor

built one in 1500 years. We went to the inn and they placed Twichell

and me in a most colossal bedroom, the largest I ever saw or heard of.

It was as big as this room.

  I didn't take much notice of the place. I didn't really get my

bearings. I noticed Twichell got a German bed about two feet wide, the

kind in which you've got to lie on your edge, because there isn't room

to lie on your back, and he was way down south in that big room, and I

was way up north at the other end of it, with a regular Sahara in

between.

  We went to bed. Twichell went to sleep, but then he had his

conscience loaded and it was easy for him to get to sleep. I

couldn't get to sleep. It was one of those torturing kinds of lovely

summer nights when you hear various kinds of noises now and then. A

mouse away off in the southwest. You throw things at the mouse. That

encourages the mouse. But I couldn't stand it, and about two o'clock I

got up and thought I would give it up and go out in the square where

there was one of those tinkling fountains, and sit on its brink and

dream, full of romance.

  I got out of bed, and I ought to have lit a candle, but I didn't

think of it until it was too late. It was the darkest place that

ever was. There has never been darkness any thicker than that. It just

lay in cakes.

  I thought that before dressing I would accumulate my clothes. I

pawed around in the dark and found everything packed together on the

floor except one sock. I couldn't get on the track of that sock. It

might have occurred to me that maybe it was in the wash. But I

didn't think of that. I went excursioning on my hands and knees.

Presently I thought, "I am never going to find it; I'll go back to bed

again." That is what I tried to do during the next three hours. I

had lost the bearings of that bed. I was going in the wrong

direction all the time. By-and-by I came in collision with a chair and

that encouraged me.

  It seemed to me, as far as I could recollect, there was only a chair

here and there and yonder, five or six of them scattered over this

territory, and I thought maybe after I found that chair I might find

the next one. Well, I did. And I found another and another and

another. I kept going around on my hands and knees, having those

sudden collisions, and finally when I banged into another chair I

almost lost my temper. And I raised up, garbed as I was, not for

public exhibition, right in front of a mirror fifteen or sixteen

feet high.

  I hadn't noticed the mirror; didn't know it was there. And when I

saw myself in the mirror I was frightened out of my wits. I don't

allow any ghosts to bite me, and I took up a chair and smashed at

it. A million pieces. Then I reflected. That's the way I always do,

and it's unprofitable unless a man has had much experience that way

and has clear judgment. And I had judgment, and I would have had to

pay for that mirror if I hadn't recollected to say it was Twichell who

broke it.

  Then I got down on my hands and knees and went on another

exploring expedition.

  As far as I could remember there were six chairs in that Oklahoma,

and one table, a great big heavy table, not a good table to hit with

your head when rushing madly along. In the course of time I collided

with thirty-five chairs and tables enough to stock that dining-room

out there. It was a hospital for decayed furniture, and it was in a

worse condition when I got through with it. I went on and on, and at

last got to a place where I could feel my way up, and there was a

shelf. I knew that wasn't in the middle of the room. Up to that time I

was afraid I had gotten out of the city.

  I was very careful and pawed along that shelf, and there was a

pitcher of water about a foot high, and it was at the head of

Twichell's bed, but I didn't know it. I felt that pitcher going and

I grabbed at it, but it didn't help any and came right down in

Twichell's face and nearly drowned him. But it woke him up. I was

grateful to have company on any terms. He lit a match, and there I

was, way down south when I ought to have been back up yonder. My bed

was out of sight it was so far away. You needed a telescope to find

it. Twichell comforted me and I scrubbed him off and we got sociable.

  But that night wasn't wasted. I had my pedometer on my leg. Twichell

and I were in a pedometer match. Twichell had longer legs than I.

The only way I could keep up was to wear my pedometer to bed. I always

walk in my sleep, and on this occasion I gained sixteen miles on

him. After all, I never found that sock. I never have seen it from

that day to this. But that adventure taught me what it is to be blind.

That was one of the most serious occasions of my whole life, yet I

never can speak of it without somebody thinking it isn't serious.

You try it and see how serious it is to be as the blind are and I

was that night.

  [Mr. Clemens read several letters of regret. He then introduced

Joseph H. Choate, saying:]

  It is now my privilege to present to you Mr. Choate. I don't have to

really introduce him. I don't have to praise him, or to flatter him. I

could say truly that in the forty-seven years I have been familiarly

acquainted with him he has always been the handsomest man America

has ever produced. And I hope and believe he will hold the belt

forty-five years more. He has served his country ably, faithfully, and

brilliantly. He stands at the summit, at the very top in the esteem

and regard of his countrymen, and if I could say one word which

would lift him any higher in his countrymen's esteem and affection,

I would say that word whether it was true or not.

