




LITERATURE

                       LITERATURE.



         ADDRESS AT THE ROYAL LITERARY FUND BANQUET,

                   LONDON, MAY 4, 1900.



  Anthony Hope introduced Mr. Clemens to make the response to the

toast "Literature."



  MR. HOPE has been able to deal adequately with this toast without

assistance from me. Still, I was born generous. If he had advanced any

theories that needed refutation or correction I would have attended to

them, and if he had made any statements stronger than those which he

is in the habit of making I would have dealt with them.

  In fact, I was surprised at the mildness of his statements. I

could not have made such statements if I had preferred to, because

to exaggerate is the only way I can approximate to the truth. You

cannot have a theory without principles. Principles is another name

for prejudices. I have no prejudices in politics, religion,

literature, or anything else.

  I am now on my way to my own country to run for the presidency

because there are not yet enough candidates in the field, and those

who have entered are too much hampered by their own principles,

which are prejudices.

  I propose to go there to purify the political atmosphere. I am in

favor of everything everybody is in favor of. What you should do is to

satisfy the whole nation, not half of it, for then you would only be

half a President.

  There could not be a broader platform than mine. I am in favor of

anything and everything- of temperance and intemperance, morality

and qualified immorality, gold standard and free silver.

  I have tried all sorts of things, and that is why I want to try

the great position of ruler of a country. I have been in turn

reporter, editor, publisher, author, lawyer, burglar. I have worked my

way up, and wish to continue to do so.

  I read to-day in a magazine article that Christendom issued last

year fifty-five thousand new books. Consider what that means!

Fifty-five thousand new books meant fifty-four thousand new authors.

We are going to have them all on our hands to take care of sooner or

later. Therefore, double your subscriptions to the literary fund!






               DISAPPEARANCE OF LITERATURE.



    ADDRESS AT THE DINNER OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY CLUB,

        AT SHERRY'S, NEW YORK, NOVEMBER 20, 1900.



  Mr. Clemens spoke to the toast "The Disappearance of Literature."

Doctor Gould presided, and in introducing Mr. Clemens said that he

(the speaker), when in Germany, had to do a lot of apologizing for a

certain literary man who was taking what the Germans thought undue

liberties with their language.



  IT wasn't necessary for your chairman to apologize for me in

Germany. It wasn't necessary at all. Instead of that he ought to

have impressed upon those poor benighted Teutons the service I

rendered them. Their language had needed untangling for a good many

years. Nobody else seemed to want to take the job, and so I took it,

and I flatter myself that I made a pretty good job of it. The

Germans have an inhuman way of cutting up their verbs. Now a verb

has a hard time enough of it in this world when it's all together.

It's downright inhuman to split it up. But that's just what those

Germans do. They take part of a verb and put it down here, like a

stake, and they take the other part of it and put it away over

yonder like another stake, and between these two limits they just

shovel in German. I maintain that there is no necessity for

apologizing for a man who helped in a small way to stop such

mutilation.

  We have heard a discussion to-night on the disappearance of

literature. That's no new thing. That's what certain kinds of

literature have been doing for several years. The fact is, my friends,

that the fashion in literature changes, and the literary tailors

have to change their cuts or go out of business. Professor

Winchester here, if I remember fairly correctly what he said, remarked

that few, if any, of the novels produced to-day would live as long

as the novels of Walter Scott. That may be his notion. Maybe he is

right; but so far as I am concerned, I don't care if they don't.

  Professor Winchester also said something about there being no modern

epics like Paradise Lost. I guess he's right. He talked as if he was

pretty familiar with that piece of literary work, and nobody would

suppose that he never had read it. I don't believe any of you have

ever read Paradise Lost, and you don't want to. That's something

that you just want to take on trust. It's a classic, just as Professor

Winchester says, and it meets his definition of a classic- something

that everybody wants to have read and nobody wants to read.

  Professor Trent also had a good deal to say about the

disappearance of literature. He said that Scott would outlive all

his critics. I guess that's true. The fact of the business is,

you've got to be one of two ages to appreciate Scott. When you're

eighteen you can read Ivanhoe, and you want to wait until you are

ninety to read some of the rest. It takes a pretty well-regulated,

abstemious critic to live ninety years.

  But as much as these two gentlemen have talked about the

disappearance of literature, they didn't say anything about my

books. Maybe they think they've disappeared. If they do, that just

shows their ignorance on the general subject of literature. I am not

as young as I was several years ago, and maybe I'm not so fashionable,

but I'd be willing to take my chances with Mr. Scott to-morrow morning

in selling a piece of literature to the Century Publishing Company.

And I haven't got much of a pull here, either. I often think that

the highest compliment ever paid to my poor efforts was paid by Darwin

through President Eliot, of Harvard College. At least, Eliot said it

was a compliment, and I always take the opinion of great men like

college presidents on all such subjects as that.

  I went out to Cambridge one day a few years ago and called on

President Eliot. In the course of the conversation he said that he had

just returned from England, and that he was very much touched by

what he considered the high compliment Darwin was paying to my

books, and he went on to tell me something like this:

  "Do you know that there is one room in Darwin's house, his

bedroom, where the housemaid is never allowed to touch two things? One

is a plant he is growing and studying while it grows" (it was one of

those insect-devouring plants which consumed bugs and beetles and

things for the particular delectation of Mr. Darwin) "and the other

some books that lie on the night table at the head of his bed. They

are your books, Mr. Clemens, and Mr. Darwin reads them every night

to lull him to sleep."

  My friends, I thoroughly appreciated that compliment, and considered

it the highest one that was ever paid to me. To be the means of

soothing to sleep a brain teeming with bugs and squirming things

like Darwin's was something that I had never hoped for, and now that

he is dead I never hope to be able to do it again.






               THE NEW YORK PRESS CLUB DINNER.



            AT THE ANNUAL DINNER, NOVEMBER 13, 1900.



  Col. William L. Brown, the former editor of the Daily News, as

president of the club, introduced Mr. Clemens as the principal

ornament of American literature.



  I MUST say that I have already begun to regret that I left my gun at

home. I've said so many times when a chairman has distressed me with

just such compliments that the next time such a thing occurs I will

certainly use a gun on that chairman. It is my privilege to compliment

him in return. You behold before you a very, very old man. A cursory

glance at him would deceive the most penetrating. His features seem to

reveal a person dead to all honorable instincts- they seem to bear the

traces of all the known crimes, instead of the marks of a life spent

for the most part, and now altogether, in the Sunday-school- of a life

that may well stand as an example to all generations that have risen

or will riz- I mean to say, will rise. His private character is

altogether suggestive of virtues which to all appearances he has

not. If you examine his past history you will find it as deceptive

as his features, because it is marked all over with waywardness and

misdemeanor- mere effects of a great spirit upon a weak body- mere

accidents of a great career. In his heart he cherishes every virtue on

the list of virtues, and he practises them all- secretly- always

secretly. You all know him so well that there is no need for him to be

introduced here. Gentlemen, Colonel Brown.






            THE ALPHABET AND SIMPLIFIED SPELLING.



      ADDRESS AT THE DINNER GIVEN TO MR. CARNEGIE AT THE

         DEDICATION OF THE NEW YORK ENGINEERS' CLUB,

                     DECEMBER 9, 1907.



  Mr. Clemens was introduced by the president of the club, who,

quoting from the Mark Twain autobiography, recalled the day when the

distinguished writer came to New York with $3 in small change in his

pockets and a $10 bill sewed in his clothes.



  IT seems to me that I was around here in the neighborhood of the

Public Library about fifty or sixty years ago. I don't deny the

circumstance, although I don't see how you got it out of my

autobiography, which was not to be printed until I am dead, unless I'm

dead now. I had that $3 in change, and I remember well the $10 which

was sewed in my coat. I have prospered since. Now I have plenty of

money and a disposition to squander it, but I can't. One of those

trust companies is taking care of it.

  Now, as this is probably the last time that I shall be out after

nightfall this winter, I must say that I have come here with a

mission, and I would make my errand of value.

  Many compliments have been paid to Mr. Carnegie to-night. I was

expecting them. They are very gratifying to me.

  I have been a guest of honor myself, and I know what Mr. Carnegie is

experiencing now. It is embarrassing to get compliments and

compliments and only compliments, particularly when he knows as well

as the rest of us that on the other side of him there are all sorts of

things worthy of our condemnation.

  Just look at Mr. Carnegie's face. It is fairly scintillating with

fictitious innocence. You would think, looking at him, that he had

never committed a crime in his life. But no- look at his

pestiferious simplified spelling. You can't any of you imagine what

a crime that has been. Torquemada was nothing to Mr. Carnegie. That

old fellow shed some blood in the Inquisition, but Mr. Carnegie has

brought destruction to the entire race. I know he didn't mean it to be

a crime, but it was, just the same. He's got us all so we can't

spell anything.

  The trouble with him is that he attacked orthography at the wrong

end. He meant well, but he attacked the symptoms and not the cause

of the disease. He ought to have gone to work on the alphabet. There's

not a vowel in it with a definite value, and not a consonant that

you can hitch anything to. Look at the "h's" distributed all around.

There's "gherkin." What are you going to do with the "h" in that? What

the devil's the use of "h" in gherkin, I'd like to know. It's one

thing I admire the English for: they just don't mind anything about

them at all.

  But look at the "pneumatics" and the "pneumonias" and the rest of

them. A real reform would settle them once and for all, and wind up by

giving us an alphabet that we wouldn't have to spell with at all,

instead of this present silly alphabet, which I fancy was invented

by a drunken thief. Why, there isn't a man who doesn't have to throw

out about fifteen hundred words a day when he writes his letters

because he can't spell them! It's like trying to do a St. Vitus's

dance with wooden legs.

  Now I'll bet there isn't a man here who can spell "pterodactyl," not

even the prisoner at the bar. I'd like to hear him try once- but not

in public, for it's too near Sunday, when all extravagant histrionic

entertainments are barred. I'd like to hear him try in private, and

when he got through trying to spell "pterodactyl" you wouldn't know

whether it was a fish or a beast or a bird, and whether it flew on its

legs or walked with its wings. The chances are that he would give it

tusks and make it lay eggs.

  Let's get Mr. Carnegie to reform the alphabet, and we'll pray for

him- if he'll take the risk.

  If we had adequate, competent vowels, with a system of accents,

giving to each vowel its own soul and value, so every shade of that

vowel would be shown in its accent, there is not a word in any

tongue that we could not spell accurately. That would be competent,

adequate, simplified spelling, in contrast to the clipping, the hair

punching, the carbuncles, and the cancers which go by the name of

simplified spelling. If I ask you what b-o-w spells you can't tell

me unless you know which b-o-w I mean, and it is the same with

r-o-w, b-o-r-e, and the whole family of words which were born out of

lawful wedlock and don't know their own origin.

  Now, if we had an alphabet that was adequate and competent,

instead of inadequate and incompetent, things would be different.

Spelling reform has only made it bald-headed and unsightly. There is

the whole tribe of them, "row" and "read" and "lead"- a whole family

who don't know who they are. I ask you to pronounce s-o-w, and you ask

me what kind of a one.

  If we had a sane, determinate alphabet, instead of a hospital of

comminuted eunuchs, you would know whether one referred to the act

of a man casting the seed over the ploughed land or whether one wished

to recall the lady hog and the future ham.

  It's a rotten alphabet. I appoint Mr. Carnegie to get after it,

and leave simplified spelling alone. Simplified spelling brought about

sun-spots, the San Francisco earthquake, and the recent business

depression, which we would never have had if spelling had been left

all alone.

  Now, I hope I have soothed Mr. Carnegie and made him more

comfortable than he would have been had he received only compliment

after compliment, and I wish to say to him that simplified spelling is

all right, but, like chastity, you can carry it too far.






                 SPELLING AND PICTURES.



     ADDRESS AT THE ANNUAL DINNER OF THE ASSOCIATED PRESS,

        AT THE WALDORF-ASTORIA, SEPTEMBER 18, 1906.



  I AM here to make an appeal to the nations in behalf of the

simplified spelling. I have come here because they cannot all be

reached except through you. There are only two forces that can carry

light to all the corners of the globe- only two- the sun in the

heavens and the Associated Press down here. I may seem to be

flattering the sun, but I do not mean it so; I am meaning only to be

just and fair all around. You speak with a million voices; no one

can reach so many races, so many hearts and intellects, as you- except

Rudyard Kipling, and he cannot do it without your help. If the

Associated Press will adopt and use our simplified forms, and thus

spread them to the ends of the earth, covering the whole spacious

planet with them as with a garden of flowers, our difficulties are

at an end.

  Every day of the three hundred and sixty-five the only pages of

the world's countless newspapers that are read by all the human beings

and angels and devils that can read, are these pages that are built

out of Associated Press despatches. And so I beg you, I beseech you-

oh, I implore you to spell them in our simplified forms. Do this

daily, constantly, persistently, for three months- only three

months- it is all I ask. The infallible result?- victory, victory

all down the line. For by that time all eyes here and above and

below will have become adjusted to the change and in love with it, and

the present clumsy and ragged forms will be grotesque to the eye and

revolting to the soul. And we shall be rid of phthisis and phthisic

and pneumonia and pneumatics, and diphtheria and pterodactyl, and

all those other insane words which no man addicted to the simple

Christian life can try to spell and not lose some of the bloom of

his piety in the demoralizing attempt. Do not doubt it. We are

chameleons, and our partialities and prejudices change places with

an easy and blessed facility, and we are soon wonted to the change and

happy in it. We do not regret our old, yellow fangs and snags and

tushes after we have worn nice, fresh, uniform store teeth a while.

  Do I seem to be seeking the good of the world? That is the idea.

It is my public attitude; privately I am merely seeking my own profit.

We all do it, but it is sound and it is virtuous, for no public

interest is anything other or nobler than a massed accumulation of

private interests. In 1883, when the simplified-spelling movement

first tried to make a noise, I was indifferent to it; more- I even

irreverently scoffed at it. What I needed was an object-lesson, you

see. It is the only way to teach some people. Very well, I got it.

At that time I was scrambling along, earning the family's bread on

magazine work at seven cents a word, compound words at single rates,

just as it is in the dark present. I was the property of a magazine, a

seven-cent slave under a boiler-iron contract. One day there came a

note from the editor requiring me to write ten pages on this revolting

text: "Considerations concerning the alleged subterranean holophotal

extemporaneousness of the conchyliaceous superimbrication of the

Ornithorhyncus, as foreshadowed by the unintelligibility of its

plesiosaurian anisodactylous aspects."

  Ten pages of that. Each and every word a seventeen-jointed

vestibuled railroad train. Seven cents a word. I saw starvation

staring the family in the face. I went to the editor, and I took a

stenographer along so as to have the interview down in black and

white, for no magazine editor can ever remember any part of a business

talk except the part that's got graft in it for him and the

magazine. I said, "Read that text, Jackson, and let it go on the

record; read it out loud." He read it: "Considerations concerning

the alleged subterranean holophotal extemporaneousness of the

conchyliaceous superimbrication of the Ornithorhyncus, as foreshadowed

by the unintelligibility of its plesiosaurian anisodactylous aspects."

  I said, "You want ten pages of those rumbling, great, long, summer

thunderpeals, and you expect to get them at seven cents a peal?"

  He said, "A word's a word, and seven cents is the contract; what are

you going to do about it?" I said, "Jackson, this is cold-blooded

oppression. What's an average English word?"

  He said, "Six letters."

  I said, "Nothing of the kind; that's French, and includes the spaces

between the words; an average English word is four letters and a half.

By hard, honest labor I've dug all the large words out of my

vocabulary and shaved it down till the average is three letters and

a half. I can put one thousand and two hundred words on your page, and

there's not another man alive that can come within two hundred of

it. My page is worth eighty-four dollars to me. It takes exactly as

long to fill your magazine page with long words as it does with

short ones- four hours. Now, then, look at the criminal injustice of

this requirement of yours. I am careful, I am economical of my time

and labor. For the family's sake I've got to be so. So I never write

'metropolis' for seven cents, because I can get the same money for

'city.' I never write 'policeman,' because I can get the same price

for 'cop.' And so on and so on. I never write 'valetudinarian' at all,

for not even hunger and wretchedness can humble me to the point

where I will do a word like that for seven cents; I wouldn't do it for

fifteen. Examine your obscene text, please, count the words."

  He counted and said it was twenty-four. I asked him to count the

letters. He made it two hundred and three.

  I said, "Now, I hope you see the whole size of your crime. With my

vocabulary I would make sixty words out of those two hundred and

five letters, and get four dollars and twenty cents for it; whereas

for your inhuman twenty-four I would get only one dollar and

sixty-eight cents. Ten pages of these sky-scrapers of yours would

pay me only about three hundred dollars; in my simplified vocabulary

the same space and the same labor would pay me eight hundred and forty

dollars. I do not wish to work upon this scandalous job by the

piece. I want to be hired by the year." He coldly refused. I said:

  "Then for the sake of the family, if you have no feeling for me, you

ought at least to allow me overtime on that word

extemporaneousness." Again he coldly refused. I seldom say a harsh

word to any one, but I was not master of myself then, and I spoke

right out and called him an anisodactylous plesiosaurian

conchyliaceous Ornithorhyneus, and rotten to the heart with holophotal

subterranean extemporaneousness. God forgive me for that wanton crime;

he lived only two hours.

  From that day to this I have been a devoted and hard-working

member of the heaven-born institution, the International Association

for the Prevention of Cruelty to Authors, and now I am laboring with

Carnegie's Simplified Committee, and with my heart in the work....

  Now then, let us look at this mighty question reasonably,

rationally, sanely- yes, and calmly, not excitedly. What is the real

function, the essential function, the supreme function, of language?

Isn't it merely to convey ideas and emotions? Certainly. Then if we

can do it with words of fonetic brevity and compactness, why keep

the present cumbersome forms? But can we? Yes. I hold in my hand the

proof of it. Here is a letter written by a woman, right out of her

heart of hearts. I think she never saw a spelling-book in her life.

The spelling is her own. There isn't a waste letter in it anywhere. It

reduces the fonetics to the last gasp- it squeezes the surplusage

out of every word- there's no spelling that can begin with it on

this planet outside of the White House. And as for the punctuation,

there isn't any. It is all one sentence, eagerly and breathlessly

uttered, without break or pause in it anywhere. The letter is

absolutely genuine- I have the proofs of that in my possession. I

can't stop to spell the words for you, but you can take the letter

presently and comfort your eyes with it. I will read the letter:

  "Miss- dear friend I took some Close into the armerry and give

them to you to Send too the suffrers out to California and i Hate to

truble you but i got to have one of them Back it was a black oll wolle

Shevyott With a jacket to Mach trimed Kind of Fancy no 38 Burst

measure and passy menterry acrost the front And the color i woodent

Trubble you but it belonged to my brothers wife and she is Mad about

it i thoght she was willin but she want she says she want done with it

and she was going to Wear it a Spell longer she ant so free harted

as what i am and she Has got more to do with Than i have having a

Husband to Work and slave For her i gess you remember Me I am shot and

stout and light complected i torked with you quite a spell about the

suffrars and said it was orful about that erth quake I shoodent wondar

if they had another one rite off seeine general Condision of the

country is Kind of Explossive i hate to take that Black dress away

from the suffrars but i will hunt round And see if i can get another

One if i can i will call to the armerry for it if you will jest lay it

asside so no more at present from your True friend

  i liked your

  appearance very Much"

  Now you see what simplified spelling can do.

  It can convey any fact you need to convey; and it can pour out

emotions like a sewer. I beg you, I beseech you, to adopt our

spelling, and print all your despatches in it.

  Now I wish to say just one entirely serious word:

  I have reached a time of life, seventy years and a half, where

none of the concerns of this world have much interest for me

personally. I think I can speak dispassionately upon this matter,

because in the little while that I have got to remain here I can get

along very well with these old-fashioned forms, and I don't propose to

make any trouble about it at all. I shall soon be where they won't

care how I spell so long as I keep the Sabbath.

  There are eighty-two millions of us people that use this

orthography, and it ought to be simplified in our behalf, but it is

kept in its present condition to satisfy one million people who like

to have their literature in the old form. That looks to me to be

rather selfish, and we keep the forms as they are while we have got

one million people coming in here from foreign countries every year

and they have got to struggle with this orthography of ours, and it

keeps them back and damages their citizenship for years until they

learn to spell the language, if they ever do learn. This is merely

sentimental argument.

  People say it is the spelling of Chaucer and Spenser and Shakespeare

and a lot of other people who do not know how to spell anyway, and

it has been transmitted to us and we preserved it and wish to preserve

it because of its ancient and hallowed associations.

  Now, I don't see that there is any real argument about that. If that

argument is good, then it would be a good argument not to banish the

flies and the cockroaches from hospitals because they have been

there so long that the patients have got used to them and they feel

a tenderness for them on account of the associations. Why, it is

like preserving a cancer in a family because it is a family cancer,

and we are bound to it by the test of affection and reverence and old,

mouldy antiquity.

  I think that this declaration to improve this orthography of ours is

our family cancer, and I wish we could reconcile ourselves to have

it cut out and let the family cancer go.

  Now, you see before you the wreck and ruin of what was once a

young person like yourselves. I am exhausted by the heat of the day. I

must take what is left of this wreck and run out of your presence

and carry it away to my home and spread it out there and sleep the

sleep of the righteous. There is nothing much left of me but my age

and my righteousness, but I leave with you my love and my blessing,

and may you always keep your youth.






                    BOOKS AND BURGLARS.



     ADDRESS TO THE REDDING (CONN.) LIBRARY ASSOCIATION,

                    OCTOBER 28, 1908.



  SUPPOSE this library had been in operation a few weeks ago, and

the burglars who happened along and broke into my house- taking a

lot of things they didn't need, and for that matter which I didn't

need- had first made entry into this institution.

  Picture them seated here on the floor, poring by the light of

their dark-lanterns over some of the books they found, and thus

absorbing moral truths and getting a moral uplift. The whole course of

their lives would have been changed. As it was, they kept straight

on in their immoral way and were sent to jail.

  For all we know, they may next be sent to Congress.

  And, speaking of burglars, let us not speak of them too harshly.

Now, I have known so many burglars- not exactly known, but so many

of them have come near me in my various dwelling-places, that I am

disposed to allow them credit for whatever good qualities they

possess.

  Chief among these, and, indeed, the only one I just now think of, is

their great care while doing business to avoid disturbing people's

sleep.

  Noiseless as they may be while at work, however, the effect of their

visitation is to murder sleep later on.

  Now we are prepared for these visitors. All sorts of alarm devices

have been put in the house, and the ground for half a mile around it

has been electrified. The burglar who steps within this danger zone

will set loose a bedlam of sounds, and spring into readiness for

action our elaborate system of defences. As for the fate of the

trespasser, do not seek to know that. He will never be heard of more.






                     AUTHORS' CLUB.



    ADDRESS AT THE DINNER GIVEN IN HONOR OF MR. CLEMENS,

                   LONDON, JUNE, 1899.



  Mr. Clemens was introduced by Sir Walter Besant.



  IT does not embarrass me to hear my books praised so much. It only

pleases and delights me. I have not gone beyond the age when

embarrassment is possible, but I have reached the age when I know

how to conceal it. It is such a satisfaction to me to hear Sir

Walter Besant, who is much more capable than I to judge of my work,

deliver a judgment which is such a contentment to my spirit.

  Well, I have thought well of the books myself, but I think more of

them now. It charms me also to hear Sir Spencer Walpole deliver a

similar judgment, and I shall treasure his remarks also. I shall not

discount the praises in any possible way. When I report them to my

family they shall lose nothing. There are, however, certain heredities

which come down to us which our writings of the present day may be

traced to. I, for instance, read the Walpole Letters when I was a boy.

I absorbed them, gathered in their grace, wit, and humor, and put them

away to be used by-and-by. One does that so unconsciously with

things one really likes. I am reminded now of what use those letters

have been to me.

  They must not claim credit in America for what was really written in

another form so long ago. They must only claim that I trimmed this,

that, and the other, and so changed their appearance as to make them

seem to be original. You now see what modesty I have in stock. But

it has taken long practice to get it there.

  But I must not stand here talking. I merely meant to get up and give

my thanks for the pleasant things that preceding speakers have said of

me. I wish also to extend my thanks to the Authors' Club for

constituting me a member, at a reasonable price per year, and for

giving me the benefit of your legal adviser.

  I believe you keep a lawyer. I have always kept a lawyer, too,

though I have never made anything out of him. It is service to an

author to have a lawyer. There is something so disagreeable in

having a personal contact with a publisher. So it is better to work

through a lawyer- and lose your case. I understand that the publishers

have been meeting together also like us. I don't know what for, but

possibly they are devising new and mysterious ways for remunerating

authors. I only wish now to thank you for electing me a member of this

club- I believe I have paid my dues- and to thank you again for the

pleasant things you have said of me.

  Last February, when Rudyard Kipling was ill in America, the sympathy

which was poured out to him was genuine and sincere, and I believe

that which cost Kipling so much will bring England and America

closer together. I have been proud and pleased to see this growing

affection and respect between the two countries. I hope it will

continue to grow, and, please God, it will continue to grow. I trust

we authors will leave to posterity, if we have nothing else to

leave, a friendship between England and America that will count for

much. I will now confess that I have been engaged for the past eight

days in compiling a publication. I have brought it here to lay at your

feet. I do not ask your indulgence in presenting it, but for your

applause.

  Here it is: "Since England and America may be joined together in

Kipling, may they not be severed in 'Twain.'"






BOOKSELLERS

                       BOOKSELLERS.



  Address at banquet on Wednesday evening, May 20, 1908, of the

American Booksellers' Association, which included most of the

leading booksellers of America, held at the rooms of the Aldine

Association, New York.



  THIS annual gathering of booksellers from all over America comes

together ostensibly to eat and drink, but really to discuss

business; therefore I am required to talk shop. I am required to

furnish a statement of the indebtedness under which I lie to you

gentlemen for your help in enabling we to earn my living. For

something over forty years I have acquired my bread by print,

beginning with The Innocents Abroad, followed at intervals of a year

or so by Roughing It, Tom Sawyer, Gilded Age, and so on. For

thirty-six years my books were sold by subscription. You are not

interested in those years, but only in the four which have since

followed. The books passed into the hands of my present publishers

at the beginning of 1904, and you then became the providers of my

diet. I think I may say, without flattering you, that you have done

exceedingly well by me. Exceedingly well is not too strong a phrase,

since the official statistics show that in four years you have sold

twice as many volumes of my venerable books as my contract with my

publishers bound you and them to sell in five years. To your sorrow

you are aware that frequently, much too frequently, when a book gets

to be five or ten years old its annual sale shrinks to two or three

hundred copies, and after an added ten or twenty years ceases to sell.

But you sell thousands of my moss-backed old books every year- the

youngest of them being books that range from fifteen to twenty-seven

years old, and the oldest reaching back to thirty-five and forty.

  By the terms of my contract my publishers had to account to me for

50,000 volumes per year for five years, and pay me for them whether

they sold them or not. It is at this point that you gentlemen come in,

for it was your business to unload 250,000 volumes upon the public

in five years if you possibly could. Have you succeeded? Yes, you

have- and more. For in four years, with a year still to spare, you

have sold the 250,000 volumes, and 240,000 besides.

  Your sales have increased each year. In the first year you sold

90,328, in the second year, 104,851; in the third, 133,975; in the

fourth year- which was last year- you sold 160,000. The aggregate

for the four years is 500,000 volumes lacking 11,000.

  Of the oldest book, The Innocents Abroad,- now forty years old-

you sold upward of 46,000 copies in the four years; of Roughing It-

now thirty-eight years old, I think- you sold 40,334; of Tom Sawyer,

41,000. And so on.

  And there is one thing that is peculiarly gratifying to me: the

Personal Recollections of Joan of Arc is a serious book; I wrote it

for love, and never expected it to sell, but you have pleasantly

disappointed me in that matter. In youth hands its sale has

increased each year. In 1904 you sold 1726 copies; in 1905, 2445; in

1906, 5381; and last year, 6574.






               "MARK TWAIN'S FIRST APPEARANCE."



  On October 5, 1906, Mr. Clemens, following a musical recital by

his daughter in Norfolk, Conn., addressed her audience on the

subject of stage-fright. He thanked the people for making things as

easy as possible for his daughter's American debut as a contralto, and

then told of his first experience before the public.



  MY heart goes out in sympathy to any one who is making his first

appearance before an audience of human beings. By a direct process

of memory I go back forty years, less one month- for I'm older than

I look.

  I recall the occasion of my first appearance. San Francisco knew

me then only as a reporter, and I was to make my bow to San

Francisco as a lecturer. I knew that nothing short of compulsion would

get me to the theatre. So I bound myself by a hard-and-fast contract

so that I could not escape. I got to the theatre forty-five minutes

before the hour set for the lecture. My knees were shaking so that I

didn't know whether I could stand up. If there is an awful, horrible

malady in the world, it is stage-fright- and sea-sickness. They are

a pair. I had stage-fright then for the first and last time. I was

only seasick once, too. It was on a little ship on which there were

two hundred other passengers. I- was- sick. I was so sick that there

wasn't any left for those other two hundred passengers.

  It was dark and lonely behind the scenes in that theatre, and I

peeked through the little peek-holes they have in theatre curtains and

looked into the big auditorium. That was dark and empty, too.

By-and-by it lighted up, and the audience began to arrive.

  I had got a number of friends of mine, stalwart men, to sprinkle

themselves through the audience armed with big clubs. Every time I

said anything they could possibly guess I intended to be funny they

were to pound those clubs on the floor. Then there was a kind lady

in a box up there, also a good friend of mine, the wife of the

Governor. She was to watch me intently, and whenever I glanced

toward her she was going to deliver a gubernatorial laugh that would

lead the whole audience into applause.

  At last I began. I had the manuscript tucked under a United States

flag in front of me where I could get at it in case of need. But I

managed to get started without it. I walked up and down- I was young

in those days and needed the exercise- and talked and talked.

  Right in the middle of the speech I had placed a gem. I had put in a

moving, pathetic part which was to get at the hearts and souls of my

hearers. When I delivered it they did just what I hoped and

expected. They sat silent and awed. I had touched them. Then I

happened to glance up at the box where the Governor's wife was- you

know what happened.

  Well, after the first agonizing five minutes, my stage-fright left

me, never to return. I know if I was going to be hanged I could get up

and make a good showing, and I intend to. But I shall never forget

my feelings before the agony left me, and I got up here to thank you

for her for helping my daughter, by your kindness, to live through her

first appearance. And I want to thank you for your appreciation of her

singing, which is, by-the-way, hereditary.






                   MORALS AND MEMORY.



  Mr. Clemens was the guest of honor at a reception held at Barnard

College (Columbia University), March 7, 1906, by the Barnard Union.

One of the young ladies presented Mr. Clemens, and thanked him for his

amiability in coming to make them an address. She closed with the

expression of the great joy it gave her fellow-collegians, "because we

all love you."



  IF any one here loves me, she has my sincere thanks. Nay, if any one

here is so good as to love me- why, I'll be a brother to her. She

shall have my sincere, warm, unsullied affection. When I was coming up

in the car with the very kind young lady who was delegated to show

me the way, she asked me what I was going to talk about. And I said

I wasn't sure. I said I had some illustrations, and I was going to

bring them in. I said I was certain to give those illustrations, but

that I hadn't the faintest notion what they were going to illustrate.

  Now, I've been thinking it over in this forest glade [indicating the

woods of Arcady on the scene setting], and I've decided to work them

in with something about morals and the caprices of memory. That

seems to me to be a pretty good subject. You see, everybody has a

memory and it's pretty sure to have caprices. And, of course,

everybody has morals.

  It's my opinion that every one I know has morals, though I

wouldn't like to ask. I know I have. But I'd rather teach them than

practice them any day. "Give them to others"- that's my motto. Then

you never have any use for them when you're left without. Now,

speaking of the caprices of memory in general, and of mine in

particular, it's strange to think of all the tricks this little mental

process plays on us. Here we're endowed with a faculty of mind that

ought to be more supremely serviceable to us than them all. And what

happens? This memory of ours stores up a perfect record of the most

useless facts and anecdotes and experiences. And all the things that

we ought to know- that we need to know- that we'd profit by knowing-

it casts aside with the careless indifference of a girl refusing her

true lover. It's terrible to think of this phenomenon. I tremble in

all my members when I consider all the really valuable things that

I've forgotten in seventy years- when I meditate upon the caprices

of my memory.

  There's a bird out in California that is one perfect symbol of the

human memory. I've forgotten the bird's name (just because it would be

valuable for me to know it- to recall it to your own minds, perhaps).

  But this fool of a creature goes around collecting the most

ridiculous things you can imagine and storing them up. He never

selects a thing that could ever prove of the slightest help to him;

but he goes about gathering iron forks, and spoons, and tin cans,

and broken mouse-traps- all sorts of rubbish that is difficult for him

to carry and yet be any use when he gets it. Why, that bird will go by

a gold watch to bring back one of those patent cake-pans.

  Now, my mind is just like that, and my mind isn't very different

from yours- and so our minds are just like that bird. We pass by

what would be of inestimable value to us, and pack our memories with

the most trivial odds and ends that never by any chance, under any

circumstances whatsoever, could be of the slightest use to any one.

  Now, things that I have remembered are constantly popping into my

head. And I am repeatedly startled by the vividness with which they

recur to me after the lapse of years and their utter uselessness in

being remembered at all.

  I was thinking over some on my way up here. They were the

illustrations I spoke about to the young lady on the way up. And

I've come to the conclusion, curious though it is, that I can use

every one of these freaks of memory to teach you all a lesson. I'm

convinced that each one has its moral. And I think it's my duty to

hand the moral on to you.

  Now, I recall that when I was a boy I was a good boy- I was a very

good boy. Why, I was the best boy in my school. I was the best boy

in that little Mississippi town where I lived. The population was only

about twenty million. You may not believe it, but I was the best boy

in that State- and in the United States, for that matter.

  But I don't know why I never heard any one say that but myself. I

always recognized it. But even those nearest and dearest to me

couldn't seem to see it. My mother, especially, seemed to think

there was something wrong with that estimate. And she never got over

that prejudice.

  Now, when my mother got to be eighty-five years old her memory

failed her. She forgot little threads that hold life's patches of

meaning together. She was living out West then, and I went on to visit

her.

  I hadn't seen my mother in a year or so. And when I got there she

knew my face; knew I was married; knew I had a family, and that I

was living, with them. But she couldn't, for the life of her, tell

my name or who I was. So I told her I was her boy.

  "But you don't live with me," she said.

  "No," said I, "I'm living in Rochester."

  "What are you doing there?"

  "Going to school."

  "Large school?"

  "Very large."

  "All boys?"

  "All boys."

  "And how do you stand?" said my mother.

  "I'm the best boy in that school," I answered.

  "Well," said my mother, with a return of her old fire, "I'd like

to know what the other boys are like."

  Now, one point in this story is the fact that my mother's mind

went back to my school days, and remembered my little youthful

self-prejudice when she'd forgotten everything else about me.

  The other point is the moral. There's one there that you will find

if you search for it.

  Now, here's something else I remember. It's about the first time I

ever stole a watermelon. "Stole" is a strong word. Stole? Stole? No, I

don't mean that. It was the first time I ever withdrew a watermelon.

It was the first time I ever extracted a watermelon. That is exactly

the word I want- "extracted." It is definite. It is precise. It

perfectly conveys my idea. Its use in dentistry connotes the

delicate shade of meaning I am looking for. You know we never

extract our own teeth.

  And it was not my watermelon that I extracted. I extracted that

watermelon from a farmer's wagon while he was inside negotiating

with another customer. I carried that watermelon to one of the

secluded recesses of the lumber-yard, and there I broke it open.

  It was a green watermelon.

  Well, do you know when I saw that I began to feel sorry- sorry-

sorry. It seemed to me that I had done wrong. I reflected deeply. I

reflected that I was young- I think I was just eleven. But I knew that

though immature I did not lack moral advancement. I knew what a boy

ought to do who had extracted a watermelon like that.

  I considered George Washington, and what action he would have

taken under similar circumstances. Then I knew there was just one

thing to make me feel right inside, and that was- Restitution.

  So I said to myself: "I will do that. I will take that green

watermelon back where I got it from." And the minute I had said it I

felt that great moral uplift that comes to you when you've made a

noble resolution.

  So I gathered up the biggest fragments, and I carried them back to

the farmer's wagon, and I restored the watermelon- what was left of

it. And I made him give me a good one in place of it, too.

  And I told him he ought to be ashamed of himself going around

working off his worthless, old, green watermelons on trusting

purchasers who had to rely on him. How could they tell from the

outside whether the melons were good or not? That was his business.

And if he didn't reform, I told him I'd see that he didn't get my more

of my trade- nor anybody else's I knew, if I could help it.

  You know that man was as contrite as a revivalist's last convert. He

said be was all broken up to think I'd gotten a green watermelon. He

promised me he would never carry another green watermelon if he

starved for it. And he drove off- a better man.

  Now, do you see what I did for that man? He was on a downward

path, and I rescued him. But all I got out of it was a watermelon.

  Yet I'd rather have that memory- just that memory of the good I

did for that depraved farmer- than all the material gain you can think

of. Look at the lesson he got! I never got anything like that from it.

But I ought to be satisfied. I was only eleven years old, but I

secured everlasting benefit to other people.

  The moral in this is perfectly clear, and I think there's one in the

next memory I'm going to tell you about.

  To go back to my childhood, there's another little incident that

comes to me from which you can draw even another moral. It's about one

of the times I went fishing. You see, in our house there was a sort of

family prejudice against going fishing if you hadn't permission. But

it would frequently be bad judgment to ask. So I went fishing

secretly, as it were- way up the Mississippi. It was an exquisitely

happy trip, I recall, with a very pleasant sensation.

  Well, while I was away there was a tragedy in our town. A

stranger, stopping over on his way East from California, was stabbed

to death in an unseemly brawl.

  Now, my father was justice of the peace, and because he was

justice of the peace he was coroner; and since he was coroner he was

also constable; and being constable he was sheriff; and out of

consideration for his holding the office of sheriff he was likewise

county clerk and a dozen other officials I don't think of just this

minute.

  I thought he had power of life or death; only he didn't use it

over other boys. He was sort of an austere man. Somehow I didn't

like being round him when I'd done anything he disapproved of. So

that's the reason I wasn't often around.

  Well, when this gentleman got knifed they communicated with the

proper authority, the coroner, and they laid the corpse out in the

coroner's office- our front sitting-room- in preparation for the

inquest the next morning.

  About 9 or 10 o'clock I got back from fishing. It was a little too

late for me to be received by my folks, so I took my shoes off and

slipped noiselessly up the back way to the sitting-room. I was very

tired, and I didn't wish to disturb my people. So I groped my way to

the sofa and lay down.

  Now, I didn't know anything of what had happened during my

absence. But I was sort of nervous on my own account- afraid of

being caught, and rather dubious about the morning affair. And I had

been lying there a few moments when my eyes gradually got used to

the darkness, and I became aware of something on the other side of the

room.

  It was something foreign to the apartment. It had an uncanny

appearance. And I sat up looking very hard, and wondering what in

heaven this long, formless, vicious-looking thing might be.

  First I thought I'd go and see. Then I thought, "Never mind that."

  Mind you, I had no cowardly sensations whatever, but it didn't

seem exactly prudent to investigate. But I somehow couldn't keep my

eyes off the thing. And the more I looked at it the more

disagreeably it grew on me. But I was resolved to play the man. So I

decided to turn over and count a hundred, and let the patch of

moonlight creep up and show me what the dickens it was.

  Well, I turned over and tried to count, but I couldn't keep my

mind on it. I kept thinking of that grewsome mass. I was losing

count all the time, and going back and beginning over again. Oh no;

I wasn't frightened- just annoyed. But by the time I'd gotten to the

century mark I turned cautiously over and opened my eyes with great

fortitude.

  The moonlight revealed to me a marble-white human hand. Well,

maybe I wasn't embarrassed! But then that changed to a creepy

feeling again, and I thought I'd try the counting again. I don't

know how many hours or weeks it was that I lay there counting hard.

But the moonlight crept up that white arm, and it showed me a lead

face and a terrible wound over the heart.

  I could scarcely say that I was terror-stricken or anything like

that. But somehow his eyes interested me so that I went right out of

the window. I didn't need the sash. But it seemed easier to take it

than leave it behind.

  Now, let that teach you a lesson- I don't know just what it is.

But at seventy years old I find that memory of peculiar value to me. I

have been unconsciously guided by it all these years. Things that

seemed pigeon-holed and remote are a perpetual influence. Yes,

you're taught in so many ways. And you're so felicitously taught

when you don't know it.

  Here's something else that taught me a good deal.

  When I was seventeen I was very bashful, and a sixteen-year-old girl

came to stay a week with us. She was a peach, and I was seized with

a happiness not of this world.

  One evening my mother suggested that, to entertain her, I take I

take her to the theatre. I didn't really like to, because I was

seventeen and sensitive about appearing in the streets With a girl.

I couldn't see my way to enjoying my delight in public. But we went.

  I didn't feel very happy. I couldn't seem to keep my mind on the

play. I became unconscious after a while, that that was due less to my

lovely company than my boots. They were sweet to look upon, as

smooth as skin, but fitted ten times as close. I got oblivious to

the play and the girl and the other people and everything but my boots

until I hitched one partly off. The sensation was sensuously

perfect. I couldn't help it. I had to get the other off, partly.

Then I was obliged to get them off altogether, except that I kept my

feet in the legs so they couldn't get away.

  From that time I enjoyed the play. But the first thing I knew the

curtain came down, like that, without my notice, and I hadn't any

boots on. I tugged strenuously. And the people in our row got up and

fussed and said things until the peach and I simply had to move on.

  We moved- the girl on one arm and the boots under the other.

  We walked home that way, sixteen blocks, with a retinue a mile long.

Every time we passed a lamp-post death gripped me at the throat. But

we got home- and I had on white socks.

  If I live to be nine hundred and ninety-nine years old I don't

suppose I could ever forget that walk. I remember it about as keenly

as the chagrin I suffered on another occasion.

  At one time in our domestic history we had a colored butler who

had a failing. He could never remember to ask people who came to the

door to state their business. So I used to buffer a good many calls

unnecessarily.

  One morning when I was especially busy he brought me a card engraved

With a name I did not know. So I said, "What does he wish to see me

for?" and Sylvester said, "Ah couldn't ask him, sah; he wuz a

genlmun." "Return instantly," I thundered, "and inquire his mission.

Ask him what's his game." Well, Sylvester returned with the

announcement that he had lightning-rods to sell. "Indeed," said I,

"things are coming to a fine pass when lightning-rod agents send up

engraved cards." "He has pictures," added Sylvester. "Pictures,

indeed! He may be peddling etchings. Has he a Russia leather case?"

But Sylvester was too frightened to remember. I said, "I am going down

to make it hot for that upstart!"

  I went down the stairs, working up my temper all the way. When I got

to the parlor I was in a fine frenzy concealed beneath a veneer of

frigid courtesy. And when I looked in the door, sure enough he had a

Russia leather case in his hand. But I didn't happen to notice that it

was our Russia leather case.

  And if you'd believe me, that man was sitting with a whole gallery

of etchings spread out before him. But I didn't happen to notice

that they were our etchings, spread out by some member of my family

for some unguessed purpose.

  Very curtly I asked the gentleman his business. With a surprised,

timid manner he faltered that he had met my wife and daughter at

Onteora, and they had asked him to call. Fine lie, I thought, and I

froze him.

  He seemed to be kind of nonplussed, and sat there fingering the

etchings in the case until I told him he needn't bother, because we

had those. That pleased him so much that he leaned over, in an

embarrassed way, to pick up another from the floor. But I stopped him.

I said, "We've got that, too." He seemed pitifully amazed, but I was

congratulating myself on my great success.

  Finally the gentleman asked where Mr. Winton lived; he'd met him

in the mountains, too. So I said I'd show him gladly. And I did on the

spot. And when he was gone I felt queer, because there were all his

etchings spread out on the floor.

  Well, my wife came in and asked me who had been in. I showed her the

card, and told her all exultantly. To my dismay she nearly fainted.

She told me he had been a most kind friend to them in the country, and

had forgotten to tell me that he was expected our way. And she

pushed me out of the door, and commanded me to get over to the Wintons

in a hurry and get him back.

  I came into the drawing-room, where Mrs. Winton was sitting up

very stiff in a chair, beating me at my own game. Well, I began to put

another light on things. Before many seconds Mrs. Winton saw it was

time to change her temperature. In five minutes I had asked the man to

luncheon, and she to dinner, and so on.

  We made that fellow change his trip and stay a week, and we gave him

the time of his life. Why, I don't believe we let him get sober the

whole time.

  I trust that you will carry away some good thought from these

lessons I have given you, and that the memory of them will inspire you

to higher things, and elevate you to plans far above the old- and-

and-

  And I tell you one thing, young ladies: I've had a better time

with you to-day than with that peach fifty-three years ago.






                     QUEEN VICTORIA.



     ADDRESS TO THE BRITISH SCHOOLS AND UNIVERSITIES CLUB

      AT DELMONICO'S, MONDAY, MAY 25, 1908, IN HONOR OF

               QUEEN VICTORIA'S BIRTHDAY.



  Mr. Clemens told the story of his duel with a rival editor: how he

practised firing at a barn door and failed to hit it; but a friend

of his took off the head of a little bird at thirty-five yards and

attributed the shot to Mark Twain. The duel did not take place. Mr.

Clemens continued as follows:



  IT also happened that I was the means of stopping the duelling in

Nevada, for a law was passed sending all duellists to jail for two

years, and the governor, hearing of my marksmanship, said that if he

got me I should go to prison for the full term. That's why I left

Nevada, and I have not been there since.

  You do me a high honor, indeed, in selecting me to speak of my

country in this commemoration of the birthday of that noble lady whose

life was consecrated to the virtues and the humanities and to the

promotion of lofty ideals, and was a model upon which many a humbler

life was formed and made beautiful while she lived, and upon which

many such lives will still be formed in the generations that are to

come- life which finds its just image in the star which falls out of

its place in the sky and out of existence, but whose light still

streams with unfaded lustre across the abysses of space long after its

fires have been extinguished at their source.

  As a woman the Queen was all that the most exacting standards

could require. As a far-reaching and effective beneficent moral

force she had no peer in her time among either monarchs or

commoners. As a monarch she was without reproach in her great

office. We may not venture, perhaps, to say so sweeping a thing as

this in cold blood about any monarch that preceded her upon either her

own throne or upon any other. It is a colossal eulogy, but it is

justified.

  In those qualities of the heart which beget affection in all sorts

and conditions of men she was rich, surprisingly rich, and for this

she will still be remembered and revered in the far-off ages when

the political glories of her reign shall have faded from vital history

and fallen to a place in that scrap-heap of unverifiable odds and ends

which we call tradition. Which is to say, in briefer phrase, that

her name will live always. And with it her character- a fame rare in

the history of thrones, dominions, principalities, and powers, since

it will not rest upon harvested selfish and sordid ambitions, but upon

love, earned and freely vouchsafed. She mended broken hearts where she

could, but she broke none.

  What she did for us in America in our time of storm and stress we

shall not forget, and whenever we call it to mind we shall always

remember the wise and righteous mind that guided her in it and

sustained and supported her- Prince Albert's. We need not talk any

idle talk here to-night about either possible or impossible war

between the two countries; there will be no war while we remain sane

and the son of Victoria and Albert sits upon the throne. In

conclusion, I believe I may justly claim to utter the voice of my

country in saying that we hold him in deep honor, and also in

cordially wishing him a long life and a happy reign.

