




               EDUCATION AND CITIZENSHIP.



  On the evening of May 14, 1908, the alumni of the College of the

City of New York celebrated the opening of the new college buildings

at a banquet in the Waldorf-Astoria. Mr. Clemens followed Mayor

McClellan.



  I AGREED when the Mayor said that there was not a man within hearing

who did not agree that citizenship should be placed above everything

else, even learning.

  Have you ever thought about this? Is there a college in the whole

country where there is a chair of good citizenship? There is a kind of

bad citizenship which is taught in the schools, but no real good

citizenship taught. There are some which teach insane citizenship,

bastard citizenship, but that is all. Patriotism! Yes; but

patriotism is usually the refuge of the scoundrel. He is the man who

talks the loudest.

  You can begin that chair of citizenship in the College of the City

of New York. You can place it above mathematics and literature, and

that is where it belongs.

  We used to trust in God. I think it was in 1863 that some genius

suggested that it be put upon the gold and silver coins which

circulated among the rich. They didn't put it on the nickels and

coppers because they didn't think the poor folks had any trust in God.

  Good citizenship would teach accuracy of thinking and accuracy of

statement. Now, that motto on the coin is an overstatement. Those

Congressmen had no right to commit this whole country to a theological

doctrine. But since they did, Congress ought to state what our creed

should be.

  There was never a nation in the world that put its whole trust in

God. It is a statement made on insufficient evidence. Leaving out

the gamblers, the burglars, and the plumbers, perhaps we do put our

trust in God after a fashion. But, after all, it is an overstatement.

  If the cholera or black plague should come to these shores,

perhaps the bulk of the nation would pray to be delivered from it, but

the rest would put their trust in the Health Board of the City of

New York.

  I read in the papers within the last day or two of a poor young girl

who they said was a leper. Did the people in that populous section

of the country where she was- did they put their trust in God? The

girl was afflicted with the leprosy, a disease which cannot be

communicated from one person to another.

  Yet, instead of putting their trust in God, they harried that poor

creature, shelterless and friendless, from place to place, exactly

as they did in the Middle Ages, when they made lepers wear bells, so

that people could be warned of their approach and avoid them.

Perhaps those people in the Middle Ages thought they were putting

their trust in God.

  The President ordered the removal of that motto from the coin, and I

thought that it was well. I thought that overstatement should not stay

there. But I think it would better read, "Within certain judicious

limitations we trust in God," and if there isn't enough room on the

coin for this, why, enlarge the coin.

  Now I want to tell a story about jumping at conclusions. It was told

to me by Bram Stoker, and it concerns a christening. There was a

little clergyman who was prone to jump at conclusions sometimes. One

day he was invited to officiate at a christening. He went. There sat

the relatives- intelligent-looking relatives they were. The little

clergyman's instinct came to him to make a great speech. He was

given to flights of oratory that way- a very dangerous thing, for

often the wings which take one into clouds of oratorical enthusiasm

are wax and melt up there, and down you come.

  But the little clergyman couldn't resist. He took the child in his

arms, and, holding it, looked at it a moment. It wasn't much of a

child. It was little, like a sweet-potato. Then the little clergyman

waited impressively, and then: "I see in your countenances," he

said, "disappointment of him. I see you are disappointed with this

baby. Why? Because he is so little. My friends, if you had but the

power of looking into the future you might see that great things may

come of little things. There is the great ocean, holding the navies of

the world, which comes from little drops of water no larger than a

woman's tears. There are the great constellations in the sky, made

up of little bits of stars. Oh, if you could consider his future you

might see that he might become the greatest poet of the universe,

the greatest warrior the world has ever known, greater than Caesar,

than Hannibal, than- er- er" (turning to the father)- "what's his

name?"

  The father hesitated, then whispered back: "His name? Well, his name

is Mary Ann."






COURAGE

                        COURAGE.



  At a beefsteak dinner, given by artists, caricaturists, and

humorists of New York City, April 18, 1908, Mr. Clemens, Mr. H. H.

Rogers, and Mr. Patrick McCarren were the guests of honor. Each wore a

white apron, and each made a short speech.



  IN the matter of courage we all have our limits. There never was a

hero who did not have his bounds. I suppose it may be said of Nelson

and all the others whose courage has been advertised that there came

times in their lives when their bravery knew it had come to its limit.

  I have found mine a good many times. Sometimes this was expected-

often it was unexpected. I know a man who is not afraid to sleep

with a rattlesnake, but you could not get him to sleep with a

safety-razor.

  I never had the courage to talk across a long, narrow room I

should be at the end of the room facing all the audience. If I attempt

to talk across a room I find myself turning this way and that, and

thus at alternate periods I have part of the audience behind me. You

ought never to have any part of the audience behind you; you never can

tell what they are going to do.

  I'll sit down.






                 THE DINNER TO MR. CHOATE.



          AT A DINNER GIVEN IN HONOR OF AMBASSADOR

             JOSEPH H. CHOATE AT THE LOTOS CLUB,

                    NOVEMBER 24, 1901.



 The speakers, among others, were: Senator Depew, William Henry White,

Speaker Thomas Reed, and Mr. Choate. Mr. Clemens spoke, in part, as

follows:



  THE greatness of this country rests on two anecdotes. The first

one is that of Washington and his hatchet, representing the foundation

of true speaking, which is the characteristic of our people. The

second one is an old one, and I've been waiting to hear it to-night,

but as nobody has told it yet, I will tell it.

  You've heard it before, and you'll hear it many, many times more. It

is an anecdote of our guest, of the time when he was engaged as a

young man with a gentle Hebrew, in the process of skinning the client.

The main part in that business is the collection of the bill for

services in skinning the man. "Services" is the term used in that

craft for the operation of that kind- diplomatic in its nature.

  Choate's- co-respondent- made out a bill for $500 for his

services, so called. But Choate told him he had better leave the

matter to him, and the next day he collected the bill for the services

and handed the Hebrew $5000, saying, "That's your half of the loot,"

and inducing that memorable response: "Almost thou persuadest me to be

a Christian.'

  The deep-thinkers didn't merely laugh when that happened. They

stopped to think, and said: "There's a rising man. He must be

rescued from the law and consecrated to diplomacy. The commercial

advantages of a great nation lie there in that man's keeping. We no

longer require a man to take care of our moral character before the

world. Washington and his anecdote have done that. We require a man to

take care of our commercial prosperity."

  Mr. Choate has carried that trait with him, and, as Mr. Carnegie has

said, he has worked like a mole underground.

  We see the result when American railroad iron is sold so cheap in

England that the poorest family can have it. He has so beguiled that

Cabinet of England.

  He has been spreading the commerce of this nation, and has depressed

English commerce in the same ratio. This was the principle

underlying that anecdote, and the wise men saw it; the principle of

give and take- give one and take ten- the principle of diplomacy.






                  ON STANLEY AND LIVINGSTONE.



  Mr. Clemens was entertained at dinner by the White-friars' Club,

London, at the Mitre Tavern, on the evening of August 6, 1872. In

reply to the toast in his honor he said:



  GENTLEMEN,- I thank you very heartily indeed for this expression

of kindness toward me. What I have done for England and civilization

in the arduous affairs which I have engaged in (that is good: that

is so smooth that I will say it again and again)- what I have done for

England and civilization in the arduous part I have performed I have

done with a single-hearted devotion and with no hope of reward. I am

proud, I am very proud, that it was reserved for me to find Doctor

Livingstone and for Mr. Stanley to get all the credit. I hunted for

that man in Africa all over seventy-five or one hundred parishes,

thousands and thousands of miles in the wilds and deserts all over the

place, sometimes riding negroes and sometimes travelling by rail. I

didn't mind the rail or anything else, so that I didn't come in for

the tar and feathers. I found that man at Ujiji- a place you may

remember if you have ever been there- and it was a very great

satisfaction that I found him just in the nick of time. I found that

poor old man deserted by his niggers and by his geographers,

deserted by all of his kind except the gorillas- dejected,

miserable, famishing, absolutely famishing- but he was eloquent.

Just as I found him he had eaten his last elephant, and he said to me:

"God knows where I shall get another." He had nothing to wear except

his venerable and honorable naval suit, and nothing to eat but his

diary.

  But I said to him: "It is all right; I have discovered you, and

Stanley will be here by the four-o'clock train and will discover you

officially, and then we will turn to and have a reg'lar good time."

I said: "Cheer up, for Stanley has got corn, ammunition, glass

beads, hymn-books, whiskey, and everything which the human heart can

desire; he has got all kinds of valuables, including telegraph-poles

and a few cart-loads of money. By this time communication has been

made with the land of Bibles and civilization, and property will

advance." And then we surveyed all that country, from Ujiji, through

Unanogo and other places, to Unyanyembe. I mention these names

simply for your edification, nothing more- do not expect it-

particularly as intelligence to the Royal Geographical Society. And

then, having filled up the old man, we were all too full for utterance

and departed. We have since then feasted on honors.

  Stanley has received a snuff-box and I have received considerable

snuff; he has got to write a book and gather in the rest of the

credit, and I am going to levy on the copyright and to collect the

money. Nothing comes amiss to me- cash or credit; but, seriously, I do

feel that Stanley is the chief man and an illustrious one, and I do

applaud him with all my heart. Whether he is an American or a Welshman

by birth, or one, or both, matter's not to me. So far as I am

personally concerned, I am simply here to stay a few months, and to

see English people and to learn English manners and customs, and to

enjoy myself; so the simplest thing I can do is to thank you for the

toast you have honored me with and for the remarks you have made,

and to wish health and prosperity to the White-friar's' Club, and to

sink down to my accustomed level.






                     HENRY M. STANLEY.



         ADDRESS DELIVERED IN BOSTON, NOVEMBER, 1886.



  Mr. Clemens introduced Mr. Stanley.



  LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, if any should ask, Why is it that you are here

as introducer of the lecturer? I should answer that I happened to be

around and was asked to perform this function. I was quite willing

to do so, and, as there was no sort of need of an introduction,

anyway, it could be necessary only that some person come forward for a

moment and do an unnecessary thing, and this is quite in my line. Now,

to introduce so illustrious a name as Henry M. Stanley by any detail

of what the man has done is clear aside from my purpose; that would be

stretching the unnecessary to an unconscionable degree. When I

contrast what I have achieved in my measurably brief life with what he

has achieved in his possibly briefer one, the effect is to sweep

utterly away the ten-story edifice of my own self-appreciation and

leave nothing behind but the cellar. When you compare these

achievements of his with the achievements of really great men who

exist in history, the comparison, I believe, is in his favor. I am not

here to disparage Columbus.

  No, I won't do that; but when you come to regard the achievements of

these two men, Columbus and Stanley, from the standpoint of the

difficulties their encountered, the advantage is with Stanley and

against Columbus. Now, Columbus started out to discover America. Well,

he didn't need to do anything at all but sit in the cabin of his

ship and hold his grip and sail straight on, and America would

discover itself. Here it was, barring his passage the whole length and

breadth of the South American continent, and he couldn't get by it.

He'd got to discover it. But Stanley started out to find Doctor

Livingstone, who was scattered abroad, as you may say, over the length

and breadth of a vast slab of Africa as big as the United States.

  It was a blind kind of search. He was the worst scattered of men.

But I will throw the weight of this introduction upon one very

peculiar feature of Mr. Stanley's character, and that is his

indestructible Americanism- an Americanism which he is proud of. And

in this day and time, when it is the custom to ape and imitate English

methods and fashion, it is like a breath of fresh air to stand in

the presence of this untainted American citizen who has been

caressed and complimented by half of the crowned heads of Europe,

who could clothe his body from his head to his heels with the orders

and decorations lavished upon him. And yet, when the untitled

myriads of his own country put out their hands in welcome to him and

greet him, "Well done," through the Congress of the United States,

that is the crown that is worth all the rest to him. He is a product

of institutions which exist in no other country on earth- institutions

that bring out all that is best and most heroic in a man. I

introduce Henry M. Stanley.






                   DINNER TO MR. JEROME.



  A dinner to express their confidence in the integrity and good

judgment of District-Attorney Jerome was given as Delmonico's by

over three hundred of his admirers on the evening of May 7, 1909.



  INDEED, that is very sudden. I was not informed that the verdict was

going to depend upon my judgment, but that makes not the least

difference in the world when you already know all about it. It is

not any matter when you are called upon to express it; you can get

up and do it, and my verdict has already been recorded in my heart and

in my head as regards Mr. Jerome and his administration of the

criminal affairs of this county.

  I agree with everything Mr. Choate has said in his letter

regarding Mr. Jerome; I agree with everything Mr. Shepard has said;

and I agree with everything Mr. Jerome has said in his own

commendation. And I thought Mr. Jerome was modest in that. If he had

been talking about another officer of this county, he could have

painted the joys and sorrows of office and his victories in even

stronger language than he did.

  I voted for Mr. Jerome in those old days, and I should like to

vote for him again if he runs for any office. I moved out of New York,

and that is the reason, I suppose, I cannot vote for him again.

There may be some way, but I have not found it out. But now I am a

farmer- a farmer up in Connecticut, and winning laurels. Those

people already speak with such high favor, admiration, of my

farming, and they say that I am the only man that has ever come to

that region who could make two blades of grass grow where only three

grew before.

  Well, I cannot vote for him. You see that. As it stands now, I

cannot. I am crippled in that way and to that extent, for I would ever

so much like to do it. I am not a Congress, and I cannot distribute

pensions, and I don't know any other legitimate way to buy a vote. But

if I should think of any legitimate way, I shall make use of it, and

then I shall vote for Mr. Jerome.






                     HENRY IRVING.



  The Dramatic and Literary Society of London gave a welcome-home

dinner to Sir Henry Irving at the Savoy Hotel, London, June 9, 1900.

In proposing the toast of "The Drama" Mr. Clemens said:



  I FIND my task a very easy one. I have been a dramatist for thirty

years. I have had an ambition in all that time to overdo the work of

the Spaniard who said he left behind him four hundred dramas when he

died. I leave behind me four hundred and fifteen, and am not yet dead.

  The greatest of all the arts is to write a drama. It is a most

difficult thing. It requires the highest talent possible and the

rarest gifts. No, there is another talent that ranks with it- for

anybody can write a drama- I had four hundred of them- but to get

one accepted requires real ability. And I have never had that felicity

yet.

  But human nature is so constructed, we are so persistent, that

when we know that we are born to a thing we do not care what the world

thinks about it. We go on exploiting that talent year after year, as I

have done. I shall go on writing dramas, and some day the impossible

may happen, but I am not looking for it.

  In writing plays the chief thing is novelty. The world grows tired

of solid forms in all the arts. I struck a new idea myself years

ago. I was not surprised at it. I was always expecting it would

happen. A person who has suffered disappointment for many years

loses confidence, and I thought I had better make inquiries before I

exploited my new idea of doing a drama in the form of a dream, so I

wrote to a great authority on knowledge of all kinds, and asked him

whether it was new.

  I could depend upon him. He lived in my dear home in America- that

dear home, dearer to me through taxes. He sent me a list of plays in

which that old device had been used, and he said that there was also a

modern lot. He travelled back to China and to a play dated two

thousand six hundred years before the Christian era. He said he

would follow it up with a list of the previous plays of the kind,

and in his innocence would have carried them back to the Flood.

  That is the most discouraging thing that has ever happened to me

in my dramatic career. I have done a world of good in a silent and

private way, and have furnished Sir Henry Irving with plays and

plays and plays. What has he achieved through that influence? See

where he stands now- on the summit of his art in two worlds- and it

was I who put him there- that partly put him there.

  I need not enlarge upon the influence the drama has exerted upon

civilization. It has made good morals entertaining. I am to be

followed by Mr. Pinero. I conceive that we stand at the head of the

profession. He has not written as many plays as I have, but he has had

that God-given talent, which I lack, of working them off on the

manager. I couple his name with this toast, and add the hope that

his influence will be supported in exercising his masterly

handicraft in that great gift, and that he will long live to

continue his fine work.






                 DINNER TO HAMILTON W. MABIE.



               ADDRESS DELIVERED APRIL 29, 1901.



  In introducing Mr. Clemens, Doctor Van Dyke said:

  "The longer the speaking goes on to-night the more I wonder how I

got this job, and the only explanation I can give for it is that it is

the same kind of compensation for the number of articles I have sent

to The Outlook, to be rejected by Hamilton W. Mabie. There is one

man here to-night that has a job cut out for him that none of you

would have had- a man whose humor has put a girdle of light around the

globe, and whose sense of humor has been an example for all five

continents. He is going to speak to you. Gentlemen, you know him

best as Mark Twain."



  MR. CHAIRMAN AND GENTLEMEN,- This man knows now how it feels to be

the chief guest, and if he has enjoyed it he is the first man I have

ever seen in that position that did enjoy it. And I know, by

side-remarks which he made to me before his ordeal came upon him, that

he was feeling as some of the rest of us have felt under the same

circumstances. He was afraid that he would not do himself justice; but

he did- to my surprise. It is a most serious thing to be a chief guest

on an occasion like this, and it is admirable, it is fine. It is a

great compliment to a man that he shall come out of it so gloriously

as Mr. Mabie came out of it to-night- to my surprise. He did it well.

  He appears to be editor of The Outlook, and notwithstanding that,

I have every admiration, because when everything is said concerning

The Outlook, after all one must admit that it is frank in its

delinquencies, that it is outspoken in its departures from fact,

that it is vigorous in its mistaken criticisms of men like me. I

have lived in this world a long, long time, and I know you must not

judge a man by the editorials that he puts in his paper. A man is

always better than his printed opinions. A man always reserves to

himself on the inside a purity and an honesty and a justice that are a

credit to him, whereas the things that he prints are just the reverse.

  Oh yes, you must not judge a man by what he writes in his paper.

Even in an ordinary secular paper a man must observe some care about

it; he must be better than the principles which he puts in print.

And that is the case with Mr. Mabie. Why, to see what he writes

about me and the missionaries you would think he did not have any

principles. But that is Mr. Mabie in his public capacity. Mr. Mabie in

his private capacity is just as clean a man as I am.

  In this very room, a month or two ago, some people admired that

portrait; some admired this, but the great majority fastened on

that, and said, "There is a portrait that is a beautiful piece of

art." When that portrait is a hundred years old it will suggest what

were the manners and customs in our time. Just as they talk about

Mr. Mabie to-night, in that enthusiastic way, pointing out the various

virtues of the man and the grace of his spirit, and all that, so was

that portrait talked about. They were enthusiastic, just as we men

have been over the character and the work of Mr. Mabie. And when

they were through they said that portrait, fine as it is, that work,

beautiful as it is, that piece of humanity on that canvas, gracious

and fine as it is, does not rise to those perfections that exist in

the man himself. Come up, Mr. Alexander. [The reference was to James

W. Alexander, who happened to be sitting beneath the portrait of

himself on the wall.] Now, I should come up and show myself. But he

cannot do it, he cannot do it. He was born that way, he was reared

in that way. Let his modesty be an example, and I wish some of you had

it, too. But that is just what I have been saying- that portrait, fine

as it is, is not as fine as the man it represents, and all the

things that have been said about Mr. Mabie, and certainly they have

been very nobly worded and beautiful, still fall short of the real

Mabie.






                 INTRODUCING NYE AND RILEY.



  James Whitcomb Riley and Edgar Wilson Nye (Bill Nye) were to give

readings in Tremont Temple, Boston, November, 1888. Mr. Clemens was

induced to introduce Messrs. Riley and Nye. His appearance on the

platform was a surprise to the audience, and when they recognized

him there was a tremendous demonstration.



  I AM very glad indeed to introduce these young people to you, and at

the same time get acquainted with them myself. I have seen them more

than once for a moment, but have not had the privilege of knowing them

personally as intimately as I wanted to. I saw them first, a great

many years ago, when Mr. Barnum had them, and they were just fresh

from Siam. The ligature was their best hold then, the literature

became their best hold later, when one of them committed an

indiscretion, and they had to cut the old bond to accommodate the

sheriff.

  In that old former time this one was Chang, that one was Eng. The

sympathy existing between the two was most extraordinary; it was so

fine, so strong, so subtle, that what the one ate the other

digested; when one slept, the other snored; if one sold a thing, the

other scooped the usufruct. This independent and yet dependent

action was observable in all the details of their daily life- I mean

this quaint and arbitrary distribution of originating cause and

resulting effect between the two- between, I may say, this dynamo

and the other always motor, or, in other words, that the one was

always the creating force, the other always the utilizing force; no,

no, for while it is true that within certain well-defined zones of

activity the one was always dynamo and the other always motor,

within certain other well-defined zones these positions became exactly

reversed.

  For instance, in moral matters Mr. Chang Riley was always dynamo,

Mr. Eng Nye was always motor; for while Mr. Chang Riley had a high- in

fact, an abnormally high and fine- moral sense, he had no machinery to

work it with; whereas, Mr. Eng Nye, who hadn't any moral sense at all,

and hasn't yet, was equipped with all the necessary plant for

putting a noble deed through, if he could only get the inspiration

on reasonable terms outside.

  In intellectual matters, on the other hand, Mr. Eng Nye was always

dynamo, Mr. Chang Riley was always motor; Mr. Eng Nye had a stately

intellect, but couldn't make it go; Mr. Chang Riley hadn't, but could.

That is to say, that while Mr. Chang Riley couldn't think things

himself, he had a marvellous natural grace in setting them down and

weaving them together when his pal furnished the raw material.

  Thus, working together, they made a strong team; laboring

together, they could do miracles; but break the circuit, and both were

impotent. It has remained so to this day: they must travel together,

hoe, and plant, and plough, and reap, and sell their public

together, or there's no result.

  I have made this explanation, this analysis, this vivisection, so to

speak, in order that you may enjoy these delightful adventurers

understandingly. When Mr. Eng Nye's deep and broad and limpid

philosophies flow by in front of you, refreshing all the regions round

about with their gracious floods, you will remember that it isn't

his water; it's the other man's, and he is only working the pump.

And when Mr. Chang Riley enchants your ear, and soothes your spirit,

and touches your heart with the sweet and genuine music of his poetry-

as sweet and as genuine as any that his friends, the birds and the

bees, make about his other friends, the woods and the flowers- you

will remember, while placing justice where justice is due, that it

isn't his music, but the other man's- he is only turning the crank.

  I beseech for these visitors a fair field, a single-minded, one-eyed

umpire, and a score bulletin barren of goose-eggs if they earn it- and

I judge they will and hope they will. Mr. James Whitcomb Chang Riley

will now go to the bat.






                 DINNER TO WHITELAW REID.



      ADDRESS AT THE DINNER IN HONOR OF AMBASSADOR REID,

           GIVEN BY THE PILGRIMS' CLUB OF NEW YORK

                  ON FEBRUARY 19, 1908.



  I AM very proud to respond to this toast, as it recalls the proudest

day of my life. The delightful hospitality shown me at the time of

my visit to Oxford I shall cherish until I die. In that long and

distinguished career of mine I value that degree above all other

honors. When the ship landed even the stevedores gathered on the shore

and gave an English cheer. Nothing could surpass in my life the

pleasure of those four weeks. No one could pass by me without taking

my hand, even the policemen. I've been in all the principal capitals

of Christendom in my life, and have always been an object of

interest to policemen. Sometimes there was suspicion in their eyes,

but not always. With their puissant hand they would hold up the

commerce of the world to let me pass.

  I noticed in the papers this afternoon a despatch from Washington,

saying that Congress would immediately pass a bill restoring to our

gold coinage the motto "In God We Trust." I'm glad of that; I'm glad

of that. I was troubled when that motto was removed. Sure enough,

the prosperities of the whole nation went down in a heap when we

ceased to trust in God in that conspicuously advertised way. I knew

there would be trouble. And if Pierpont Morgan hadn't stepped in-

Bishop Lawrence may now add to his message to the old country that

we are now trusting in God again. So we can discharge Mr. Morgan

from his office with honor.

  Mr. Reid said an hour or so ago something about my ruining my

activities last summer. They are not ruined, they are renewed. I am

stronger now- much stronger. I suppose that the spiritual uplift I

received increased my physical power more than anything I ever had

before. I was dancing last night at 12.30 o'clock.

  Mr. Choate has mentioned Mr. Reid's predecessors. Mr. Choate's

head is full of history, and some of it is true, too. I enjoyed

hearing him tell about the list of the men who had the place before he

did. He mentioned a long list of those predecessors, people I never

heard of before, and elected five of them to the Presidency by his own

vote. I'm glad and proud to find Mr. Reid in that high position,

because he didn't look it when I knew him forty years ago. I was

talking to Reid the other day, and he showed me my autograph on an old

paper twenty years old. I didn't know I had an autograph twenty

years ago. Nobody ever asked me for it.

  I remember a dinner I had long ago with Whitelaw Reid and John Hay

at Reid's expense. I had another last summer when I was in London at

the embassy that Choate blackguards so. I'd like to live there.

  Some people say they couldn't live on the salary, but I could live

on the salary and the nation together. Some of us don't appreciate

what this country can do. There's John Hay, Reid, Choate, and me. This

is the only country in the world where youth, talent, and energy can

reach such heights. It shows what we could do without means, and

what people can do with talent and energy when they find it in

people like us.

  When I first came to New York they were all struggling young men,

and I am glad to see that they have got on in the world. I knew John

Hay when I had no white hairs in my head and more hair than Reid has

now. Those were days of joy and hope. Reid and Hay were on the staff

of the Tribune. I went there once in that old building, and I looked

all around, and I finally found a door ajar and looked in. It wasn't

Reid or Hay there, but it was Horace Greeley. Those were in the days

when Horace Greeley was a king. That was the first time I ever saw him

and the last.

  I was admiring him when he stopped and seemed to realize that

there was a fine presence there somewhere. He tried to smile, but he

was out of smiles. He looked at me a moment, and said:

  "What in H- do you want?"

  He began with that word "H." That's a long word and a profane

word. I don't remember what the word was now, but I recognized the

power of it. I had never used that language myself, but at that moment

I was converted. It has been a great refuge for me in time of trouble.

If a man doesn't know that language he can't express himself on

strenuous occasions. When you have that word at your command let

trouble come.

  But later Hay rose, and you know what summit Whitelaw Reid has

reached, and you see me. Those two men have regulated troubles of

nations and conferred peace upon mankind. And in my humble way, of

which I am quite vain, I was the principal moral force in all those

great international movements. These great men illustrated what I say.

Look at us great people- we all come from the dregs of society. That's

what can be done in this country. That's what this country does for

you.

  Choate here- he hasn't got anything to say, but he says it just

the same, and he can do it so felicitously, too. I said long ago he

was the handsomest man America ever produced. May the progress of

civilization always rest on such distinguished men as it has in the

past!






                   ROGERS AND RAILROADS.



      AT A BANQUET GIVEN MR. H. H. ROGERS BY THE BUSINESS

         MEN OF NORFOLK, VA., CELEBRATING THE OPENING

           OF THE VIRGINIAN RAILWAY, APRIL, 3, 1909.



  Toastmaster:

  "I have often thought that when the time comes, which must come to

all of us, when we reach that Great Way in the Great Beyond, and the

question is propounded, 'What have you done to gain admission into

this great realm?' if the answer could be sincerely made, 'I have made

men laugh,' it would be the surest passport to a welcome entrance.

We have here to-night one who has made millions laugh- not the loud

laughter that bespeaks the vacant mind, but the laugh of intelligent

mirth that helps the human heart and the human mind. I refer, of

course, to Doctor Clemens. I was going to say Mark Twain, his literary

title, which is a household phrase in more homes than that of any

other man, and you know him best by that dear old title."



  I THANK you, Mr. Toastmaster, for the compliment which you have paid

me, and I am sure I would rather have made people laugh than cry,

yet in my time I have made some of them cry; and before I stop

entirely I hope to make some more of them cry. I like compliments. I

deal in them myself. I have listened with the greatest pleasure to the

compliments which the chairman has paid to Mr. Rogers and that road of

his to-night, and I hope some of them are deserved.

  It is no small distinction to a man like that to sit here before

an intelligent crowd like this and to be classed with Napoleon and

Caesar. Why didn't he say that this was the proudest day of his

life? Napoleon and Caesar are dead, and they can't be here to defend

themselves. But I'm here!

  The chairman said, and very truly, that the most lasting thing in

the hands of man are the roads which Caesar built, and it is true that

he built a lot of them; and they are there yet.

  Yes, Caesar built a lot of roads in England, and you can find

them. But Rogers has only built one road, and he hasn't finished

that yet. I like to hear my old friend complimented, but I don't

like to hear it overdone.

  I didn't go around to-day with the others to see what he is doing. I

will do that in a quiet time, when there is not anything going on, and

when I shall not be called upon to deliver intemperate compliments

on a railroad in which I own no stock.

  They proposed that I go along with the committee and help inspect

that dump down yonder. I didn't go. I saw that dump. I saw that

thing when I was coming in on the steamer, and I didn't go because I

was diffident, sentimentally diffident, about going and looking at

that thing again- that great, long, bony thing; it looked just like

Mr. Rogers's foot.

  The chairman says Mr. Rogers is full of practical wisdom, and he is.

It is intimated here that he is a very ingenious man, and he is a very

competent financier. Maybe he is now, but it was not always so. I know

lots of private things in his life which people don't know, and I know

how he started; and it was not a very good start. I could have done

better myself. The first time he crossed the Atlantic he had just made

the first little strike in oil, and he was so young he did not like to

ask questions. He did not like to appear ignorant. To this day he

don't like to appear ignorant, but he can look as ignorant as anybody.

On board the ship they were betting on the run of the ship, betting

a couple of shillings, or half a crown, and they proposed that this

youth from the oil regions should bet on the run of the ship. He did

not like to ask what a half-crown was, and he didn't know; but

rather than be ashamed of himself he did bet half a crown on the run

of the ship, and in bed he could not sleep. He wondered if he could

afford that outlay in case he lost. He kept wondering over it, and

said to himself: "A king's crown must be worth $20,000, so half a

crown would cost $10,000." He could not afford to bet away $10,000

on the run of the ship, so he went up to the stakeholder and gave

him $150 to let him off.

  I like to hear Mr. Rogers complimented. I am not stingy in

compliments to him myself. Why, I did it to-day when I sent his wife a

telegram to comfort her. That is the kind of person I am. I knew she

would be uneasy about him. I knew she would be solicitous about what

he might do down here, so I did it to quiet her and to comfort her.

I said he was doing well for a person out of practice. There is

nothing like it. He is like I used to be. There were times when I

was careless- careless in my dress when I got older. You know how

uncomfortable your wife can get when you are going away without her

superintendence. Once when my wife could not go with me (she always

went with me when she could- I always did meet that kind of luck), I

was going to Washington once, a long time ago, in Mr. Cleveland's

first administration, and she could not go; but, in her anxiety that I

should not desecrate the house, she made preparation. She knew that

there was to be a reception of those authors at the White House at

seven o'clock in the evening. She said, "If I should tell you now what

I want to ask of you, you would forget it before you get to

Washington, and, therefore, I have written it on a card, and you

will find it in your dress-vest pocket when you are dressing at the

Arlington- when you are dressing to see the President." I never

thought of it again until I was dressing, and I felt in that pocket

and took it out, and it said, in a kind of imploring way, "Don't

wear your arctics in the White House."

  You complimented Mr. Rogers on his energy, his foresightedness,

complimented him in various ways, and he has deserved those

compliments, although I say it myself; and I enjoy them all. There

is one side of Mr. Rogers that has not been mentioned. If you will

leave that to me I will touch upon that. There was a note in an

editorial in one of the Norfolk papers this morning that touched

upon that very thing, that hidden side of Mr. Rogers, where it spoke

of Helen Keller and her affection for Mr. Rogers, to whom she

dedicated her life book. And she has a right to feel that way,

because, without the public knowing anything about it, he rescued,

if I may use that term, that marvellous girl, that wonderful

Southern girl, that girl who was stone deaf, blind, and dumb from

scarlet-fever when she was a baby eighteen months old; and who now

is as well and thoroughly educated as any woman on this planet at

twenty-nine years of age. She is the most marvellous person of her sex

that has existed on this earth since Joan of Arc.

  That is not all Mr. Rogers has done; but you never see that side

of his character, because it is never protruding; but he lends a

helping hand daily out of that generous heart of his. You never hear

of it. He is supposed to be a moon which has one side dark and the

other bright. But the other side, though you don't see it, is not

dark; it is bright, and its rays penetrate, and others do see it who

are not God.

  I would take this opportunity to tell something that I have never

been allowed to tell by Mr. Rogers, either by my mouth or in print,

and if I don't look at him I can tell it now.

  In 1893, when the publishing company of Charles L. Webster, of which

I was financial agent, failed, it left me heavily in debt. If you will

remember what commerce was at that time you will recall that you could

not sell anything, and could not buy anything, and I was on my back;

my books were not worth anything at all, and I could not give away

my copyrights. Mr. Rogers had long enough vision ahead to say, "Your

books have supported you before, and after the panic is over they will

support you again," and that was a correct proposition. He saved my

copyrights, and saved me from financial ruin. He it was who arranged

with my creditors to allow me to roam the face of the earth for four

years and persecute the nations thereof with lectures, promising

that at the end of four years I would pay dollar for dollar. That

arrangement was made; otherwise I would now be living out-of-doors

under an umbrella, and a borrowed one at that.

  You see his white mustache and his head trying to get white (he is

always trying to look like me- I don't blame him for that). These

are only emblematic of his character, and that is all. I say,

without exception, hair and all, he is the whitest man I have ever

known.






                 THE OLD-FASHIONED PRINTER.



    ADDRESS AT THE TYPOTHETAE DINNER GIVEN AT DELMONICO'S,

       JANUARY 18, 1886, COMMEMORATING THE BIRTHDAY

                   OF BENJAMIN FRANKLIN.



  Mr. Clemens responded to the toast "The Compositor."



  THE chairman's historical reminiscences of Gutenberg have caused

me to fall into reminiscences, for I myself am something of an

antiquity. All things change in the procession of years, and it may be

that I am among strangers. It may be that the printer of to-day is not

the printer of thirty-five years ago. I was no stranger to him. I knew

him well. I built his fire for him in the winter mornings; I brought

his water from the village pump; I swept out his office; I picked up

his type from under his stand; and, if he were there to see, I put the

good type in his case and the broken ones among the "hell matter"; and

if he wasn't there to see, I dumped it all with the "pi" on the

imposing-stone- for that was the furtive fashion of the cub, and I was

a cub. I wetted down the paper Saturdays, I turned it Sundays- for

this was a country weekly; I rolled, I washed the rollers, I washed

the forms, I folded the papers, I carried them around at dawn Thursday

mornings. The carrier was then an object of interest to all the dogs

in town. If I had saved up all the bites I ever received, I could keep

M. Pasteur busy for a year. I enveloped the papers that were for the

mail- we had a hundred town subscribers and three hundred and fifty

country ones; the town subscribers paid in groceries and the country

ones in cabbages and cord-wood- when they paid at all, which was

merely sometimes, and then we always stated the fact in the paper, and

gave them a puff; and if we forgot it they stopped the paper. Every

man on the town list helped edit the thing- that is, he gave orders as

to how it was to be edited; dictated its opinions, marked out its

course for it, and every time the boss failed to connect he stopped

his paper. We were just infested with critics, and we tried to satisfy

them all over. We had one subscriber who paid cash, and he was more

trouble than all the rest. He bought us once a year, body and soul,

for two dollars. He used to modify our politics every which way, and

he made us change our religion four times in five years. If we ever

tried to reason with him, he would threaten to stop his paper, and, of

course, that meant bankruptcy and destruction. That man used to

write articles a column and a half long, leaded long primer, and

sign them "Junius," or "Veritas," or "Vox Populi," or some other

high-sounding rot; and then, after it was set up, he would come in and

say he had changed his mind- which was a gilded figure of speech,

because he hadn't any- and order it to be left out. We couldn't afford

"bogus" in that office, so we always took the leads out, altered the

signature, credited the article to the rival paper in the next

village, and put it in. Well, we did have one or two kinds of "bogus."

Whenever there was a barbecue, or a circus, or a baptizing, we knocked

off for half a day, and then to make up for short matter we would

"turn over ads"- turn over the whole page and duplicate it. The

other "bogus" was deep philosophical stuff, which we judged nobody

ever read; so we kept a galley of it standing, and kept on slapping

the same old batches of it in, every now and then, till it got

dangerous. Also, in the early days of the telegraph we used to

economize on the news. We picked out the items that were pointless and

barren of information and stood them on a galley, and changed the

dates and localities, and used them over and over again till the

public interest in them was worn to the bone. We marked the ads, but

we seldom paid any attention to the marks afterward; so the life of

a "td" ad and a "tf" ad was equally eternal. I have seen a "td" notice

of a sheriffs sale still booming serenely along two years after the

sale was over, the sheriff dead, and the whole circumstance become

ancient history. Most of the yearly ads were patent-medicine

stereotypes, and we used to fence with them.

  I can see that printing-office of prehistoric times yet, with its

horse bills on the walls, its "d" boxes clogged with tallow, because

we always stood the candle in the "k" box nights, its towel, which was

not considered soiled until it could stand alone, and other signs

and symbols that marked the establishment of that kind in the

Mississippi Valley; and I can see, also, the tramping "jour," who

flitted by in the summer and tarried a day, with his wallet stuffed

with one shirt and a hatful of handbills; for if he couldn't get any

type to set he would do a temperance lecture. His way of life was

simple, his needs not complex; all he wanted was plate and bed and

money enough to get drunk on, and he was satisfied. But it may be,

as I have said, that I am among strangers, and sing the glories of a

forgotten age to unfamiliar ears, so I will "make even" and stop.






               SOCIETY OF AMERICAN AUTHORS.



  On November 15, 1900, the society gave a reception to Mr. Clemens,

who came with his wife and daughter. So many members surrounded the

guests that Mr. Clemens asked: "Is this genuine popularity or is it

all a part of a prearranged programme?"



  CHAIRMAN, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,- It seems a most difficult thing for

any man to say anything about me that is not complimentary. I don't

know what the charm is about me which makes it impossible for a person

to say a harsh thing about me and say it heartily, as if he was glad

to say it.

  If this thing keeps on it will make me believe that I am what

these kind chairmen say of me. In introducing me, Judge Ransom spoke

of my modesty as if he was envious of me. I would like to have one man

come out flat-footed and say something harsh and disparaging of me,

even if it were true. I thought at one time, as the learned judge

was speaking, that I had found that man; but he wound up, like all the

others, by saying complimentary things.

  I am constructed like everybody else, and enjoy a compliment as well

as any other fool, but I do like to have the other side presented. And

there is another side. I have a wicked side. Estimable friends who

know all about it would tell you and take a certain delight in telling

you things that I have done, and things further that I have not

repented.

  The real life that I live, and the real life that I suppose all of

you live, is a life of interior sin. That is what makes life

valuable and pleasant. To lead a life of undiscovered sin! That is

true joy.

  Judge Ransom seems to have all the virtues that he ascribes to me.

But, oh my! if you could throw an X-ray through him. We are a pair.

I have made a life-study of trying to appear to be what he seems to

think I am. Everybody believes that I am a monument of all the

virtues, but it is nothing of the sort. I am living two lives, and

it keeps me pretty busy.

  Some day there will be a chairman who will forget some of these

merits of mine, and then he will make a speech.

  I have more personal vanity than modesty, and twice as much veracity

as the two put together.

  When that fearless and forgetful chairman is found there will be

another story told. At the Press Club recently I thought that I had

found him. He started in in the way that I knew I should be painted

with all sincerity, and was leading to things that would not be to

my credit; but when he said that he never read a book of mine I knew

at once that he was a liar, because he never could have had all the

wit and intelligence with which he was blessed unless he had read my

works as a basis.

  I like compliments. I like to go home and tell them all over again

to the members of my family. They don't believe them, but I like to

tell them in the home circle, all the same. I like to dream of them if

I can.

  I thank everybody for their compliments, but I don't think that I am

praised any more than I am entitled to be.






                  READING-ROOM OPENING.



  On October 13, 1900. Mr. Clemens made his last address preceding his

departure for America at Kensal Rise, London.



  I FORMALLY declare this reading-room open, and I think that the

legislature should not compel a community to provide itself with

intelligent food, but give it the privilege of providing it if the

community so desires.

  If the community is anxious to have a reading-room it would put

its hand in its pocket and bring out the penny tax. I think it a proof

of the healthy, moral, financial, and mental condition of the

community if it taxes itself for its mental food.

  A reading-room is the proper introduction to a library, leading up

through the newspapers and magazines to other literature. What would

we do without newspapers?

  Look at the rapid manner in which the news of the Galveston disaster

was made known to the entire world. This reminds me of an episode

which occurred fifteen years ago when I was at church in Hartford,

Connecticut.

  The clergyman decided to make a collection for the survivors, if

any. He did not include me among the leading citizens who took the

plates around for collection. I complained to the governor of his lack

of financial trust in me, and he replied: "I would trust you myself-

if you had a bell-punch."

  You have paid me many compliments, and I like to listen to

compliments. I indorse all your chairman has said to you about the

union of England and America. He also alluded to my name, of which I

am rather fond.

  A little girl wrote me from New Zealand in a letter I received

yesterday, stating that her father said my proper name was not Mark

Twain but Samuel Clemens, but that she knew better, because Clemens

was the name of the man who sold the patent medicine, and his name was

not Mark. She was sure it was Mark Twain, because Mark is in the Bible

and Twain is in the Bible.

  I was very glad to get that expression of confidence in my origin,

and as I now know my name to be a scriptural one, I am not without

hopes of making it worthy.

