





                   TAXES AND MORALS.



    ADDRESS DELIVERED IN NEW YORK, JANUARY 22, 1906.



  At the twenty-fifth anniversary of the founding of Tuskeegee

Institute by Booker T. Washington, Mr. Choate presided, and in

introducing Mr. Clemens made fun of him because he made play his work,

and that when he worked hardest he did so lying in bed.



  I CAME here in the responsible capacity of policeman to watch Mr.

Choate. This is an occasion of grave and serious importance, and it

seems necessary for me to be present, so that if he tried to work

off any statement that required correction, reduction, refutation,

or exposure, there would be a tried friend of the public to protect

the house. He has not made one statement whose veracity fails to tally

exactly with my own standard. I have never seen a person improve so.

This makes me thankful and proud of a country that can produce such

men- two such men. And all in the same country. We can't be with you

always; we are passing away, and then- well, everything will have to

stop, I reckon. It is a sad thought. But in spirit I shall still be

with you. Choate, too- if he can.

  Every born American among the eighty millions, let his creed or

destitution of creed be what it may, is indisputably a Christian to

this degree- that his moral constitution is Christian.

  There are two kinds of Christian morals, one private and the other

public. These two are so distinct, so unrelated, that they are no more

akin to each other than are archangels and politicians. During three

hundred and sixty-three days in the year the American citizen is

true to his Christian private morals, and keeps undefiled the nation's

character at its best and highest; then in the other two days of the

year he leaves his Christian private morals at home and carries his

Christian public morals to the tax office and the polls, and does

the best he can to damage and undo his whole year's faithful and

righteous work. Without a blush he will vote for an unclean boss if

that boss is his party's Moses, without compunction he will vote

against the best man in the whole land if he is on the other ticket.

Every year in a number of cities and States he helps put corrupt men

in office, whereas if he would but throw away his Christian public

morals, and carry his Christian private morals to the polls, he

could promptly purify the public service and make the possession of

office a high and honorable distinction.

  Once a year he lays aside his Christian private morals and hires a

ferry-boat and piles up his bonds in a warehouse in New Jersey for

three days, and gets out his Christian public morals and goes to the

tax office and holds up his hands and swears he wishes he may never-

never if he's got a cent in the world, so help him. The next day the

list appears in the papers- a column and a quarter of names, in fine

print, and every man in the list a billionaire and member of a

couple of churches. I know all those people. I have friendly,

social, and criminal relations with the whole lot of them. They

never miss a sermon when they are so's to be around, and they never

miss swearing-off day, whether they are so's to be around or not.

  I used to be an honest man. I am crumbling. No- I have crumbled.

When they assessed me at $75,000 a fortnight ago I went out and

tried to borrow the money, and couldn't; then when I found they were

letting a whole crop of millionaires live in New York at a third of

the price they were charging me I was hurt, I was indignant, and said:

"This is the last feather. I am not going to run this town all by

myself." In that moment- in that memorable moment- I began to crumble.

In fifteen minutes the disintegration was complete. In fifteen minutes

I had become just a mere moral sand-pile; and I lifted up my hand

along with those seasoned and experienced deacons and swore off

every rag of personal property I've got in the world, clear down to

cork leg, glass eye, and what is left of my wig.

  Those tax officers were moved; they were profoundly moved. They

had long been accustomed to seeing hardened old grafters act like

that, and they could endure the spectacle; but they were expecting

better things of me, a chartered, professional moralist, and they were

saddened.

  I fell visibly in their respect and esteem, and I should have fallen

in my own, except that I had already struck bottom, and there wasn't

any place to fall to.

  At Tuskeegee they will jump to misleading conclusions from

insufficient evidence, along with Doctor Parkhurst, and they will

deceive the student with the superstition that no gentleman ever

swears.

  Look at those good millionaires; aren't they gentlemen? Well, they

swear. Only once in a year, maybe, but there's enough, bulk to it to

make up for the lost time. And do they lose anything by it? No, they

don't; they save enough in three minutes to support the family seven

years. When they swear, do we shudder? No- unless they say "damn!"

Then we do. It shrivels us all up. Yet we ought not to feel so about

it, because we all swear- everybody. Including the ladies. Including

Doctor Parkhurst, that strong and brave and excellent citizen, but

superficially educated.

  For it is not the word that is the sin, it is the spirit back of the

word. When an irritated lady says "oh!" the spirit back of it is

"damn!" and that is the way it is going to be recorded against her. It

always makes me so sorry when I hear a lady swear like that. But if

she says "damn," and says it in an amiable, nice way, it isn't going

to be recorded at all.

  The idea that no gentleman ever swears is all wrong; he can swear

and still be a gentleman if he does it in a nice and benevolent and

affectionate way. The historian, John Fiske, whom I knew well and

loved, was a spotless and most noble and upright Christian

gentleman, and yet he swore once. Not exactly that, maybe; still,

he- but I will tell you about it.

  One day, when he was deeply immersed in his work, his wife came

in, much moved and profoundly distressed, and said: "I am sorry to

disturb you, John, but I must, for this is a serious matter, and needs

to be attended to at once."

  Then, lamenting, she brought a grave accusation against their little

son. She said: "He has been saying his Aunt Mary is a fool and his

Aunt Martha is a damned fool." Mr. Fiske reflected upon the matter a

minute, then said: "Oh, well, it's about the distinction I should make

between them myself."

  Mr. Washington, I beg you to convey these teachings to your great

and prosperous and most beneficent educational institution, and add

them to the prodigal mental and moral riches wherewith you equip

your fortunate proteges for the struggle of life.






                   TAMMANY AND CROKER.



  Mr. Clemens made his debut as a campaign orator on October 7,

1901, advocating the election of Seth Low for Mayor, not as a

Republican, but as a member of the "Acorns," which he described as a

"third party having no political affiliation, but was concerned only

in the selection of the best candidates and the best member."



  GREAT BRITAIN had a Tammany and a Croker a good while ago. This

Tammany was in India, and it began its career with the spread of the

English dominion after the Battle of Plassey. Its first boss was

Clive, a sufficiently crooked person sometimes, but straight as a

yardstick when compared with the corkscrew crookedness of the second

boss, Warren Hastings.

  That old-time Tammany was the East India Company's government, and

had its headquarters at Calcutta. Ostensibly it consisted of a Great

Council of four persons, of whom one was the Governor-General,

Warren Hastings; really it consisted of one person- Warren Hastings;

for by usurpation he concentrated all authority in himself and

governed the country like an autocrat.

  Ostensibly the Court of Directors, sitting in London and

representing the vast interests of the stockholders, was supreme in

authority over the Calcutta Great Council, whose membership it

appointed and removed at pleasure, whose policies it dictated, and

to whom it conveyed its will in the form of sovereign commands; but

whenever it suited Hastings, he ignored even that august body's

authority and conducted the mighty affairs of the British Empire in

India to suit his own notions.

  At his mercy was the daily bread of every official, every trader,

every clerk, every civil servant, big and little, in the whole huge

India Company's machine, and the man who hazarded his bread by any

failure of subserviency to the boss lost it.

  Now then, let the supreme masters of British India, the giant

corporation of the India Company of London, stand for the voters of

the city of New York; let the Great Council of Calcutta stand for

Tammany; let the corrupt and money-grubbing great hive of serfs

which served under the Indian Tammany's rod stand for New York

Tammany's serfs; let Warren Hastings stand for Richard Croker, and

it seems to me that the parallel is exact and complete. And so let

us be properly grateful and thank God and our good luck that we didn't

invent Tammany.

  Edmund Burke, regarded by many as the greatest orator of all

times, conducted the case against Warren Hastings in that renowned

trial which lasted years, and which promises to keep its renown for

centuries to come. I wish to quote some of the things he said. I

wish to imagine him arrainging Mr. Croker and Tammany before the

voters of New York City and pleading with them for the overthrow of

that combined iniquity of the 5th of November, and will substitute for

"My Lords," read "Fellow-Citizens"; for "Kingdom," read "City"; for

"Parliamentary Process," read "Political Campaign"; for "Two

Houses," read "Two Parties," and so it reads:

  "Fellow-citizens, I must look upon it as an auspicious

circumstance to this cause, in which the honor of the city is

involved, that from the first commencement of our political campaign

to this the hour of solemn trial not the smallest difference of

opinion has arisen between the two parties.

  "You will see, in the progress of this cause, that there is not only

a long, connected, systematic series of misdemeanors, but an equally

connected system of maxims and principles invented to justify them.

Upon both of these you must judge.

  "It is not only the interest of the city of New York, now the most

considerable part of the city of the Americans, which is concerned,

but the credit and honor of the nation itself will be decided by

this decision."



  At a later meeting of the Acorn Club, Mr. Clemens said:



  Tammany is dead, and there's no use in blackguarding a corpse.

  The election makes me think of a story of a man who was dying. He

had only two minutes to live, so he sent for a clergyman and asked

him, "Where is the best place to go to?" He was undecided about it. So

the minister. told him that each place had its advantages- heaven

for climate, and hell for society.






                   MUNICIPAL CORRUPTION.



     ADDRESS AT THE CITY CLUB DINNER, JANUARY 4, 1901.



  Bishop Potter told how an alleged representative of Tammany Hall

asked him in effect if he would cease his warfare upon the Police

Department if a certain captain and inspector were dismissed. He

replied that he would never be satisfied until the "man at the top"

and the "system" which permitted evils in the Police Department were

crushed.



  THE Bishop has just spoken of a condition of things which none of us

can deny, and which ought not to exist; that is, the lust of gain- a

lust which does not stop short of the penitentiary or the jail to

accomplish its ends. But we may be sure of one thing, and that is that

this sort of thing is not universal. If it were, this country would

not be. You may put this down as a fact: that out of every fifty

men, forty-nine are clean. Then why is it, you may ask, that the

forty-nine don't have things the way they want them? I'll tell you why

it is. A good deal has been said here to-night about what is to be

accomplished by organization. That's just the thing. It's because

the fiftieth fellow and his pals are organized and the other

forty-nine are not that the dirty one rubs it into the clean fellows

every time.

  You may say organize, organize, organize; but there may be so much

organization that it will interfere with the work to be done. The

Bishop here had an experience of that sort, and told all about it

down-town the other night. He was painting a barn- it was his own

barn- and yet he was informed that his work must stop; he was a

non-union painter, and couldn't continue at that sort of job.

  Now, all these conditions of which you complain should be

remedied, and I am here to tell you just how to do it. I've been a

statesman without salary for many years, and I have accomplished great

and widespread good. I don't know that it has benefited anybody very

much, even if it was good; but I do know that it hasn't harmed me very

much, and is hasn't made me any richer.

  We hold the balance of power. Put up your best men for office, and

we shall support the better one. With the election of the best man for

Mayor would follow the selection of the best man for Police

Commissioner and Chief of Police.

  My first lesson in the craft of statesmanship was taken at an

early age. Fifty-one years ago I was fourteen years old, and we had

a society in the town I lived in, patterned after the Free-masons,

or the Ancient Order of United Farmers, or some such thing- just

what it was patterned after doesn't matter. It had an inside guard and

an outside guard, and a past-grand warden, and a lot of such things,

so as to give dignity to the organization and offices to the members.

  Generally speaking it was a pretty good sort of organization, and

some of the very best boys in the village, including- but I mustn't

get personal on an occasion like this- and the society would have

got along pretty well had it not been for the fact that there were a

certain number of the members who could be bought. They got to be an

infernal nuisance. Every time we had an election the candidates had to

go around and see the purchasable members. The price per vote was paid

in doughnuts, and it depended somewhat on the appetites of the

individuals as to the price of the votes.

  This thing ran along until some of us, the really very best boys

in the organization, decided that these corrupt practices must stop,

and for the purpose of stopping them we organized a third party. We

had a name, but we were never known by that name. Those who didn't

like us called us the Anti-Doughnut party, but we didn't mind that.

  We said: "Call us what you please; the name doesn't matter. We are

organized for a principle." By-and-by the election came around, and we

made a big mistake. We were triumphantly beaten. That taught us a

lesson. Then and there we decided never again to nominate anybody

for anything. We decided simply to force the other two parties in

the society to nominate their very best men. Although we were

organized for a principle, we didn't care much about that.

Principles aren't of much account anyway, except at election-time.

After that you hang them up to let them season.

  The next time we had an election we told both the other parties that

we'd beat any candidates put up by any one of them of whom we didn't

approve. In that election we did business. We got the man we wanted. I

suppose they called us the Anti-Doughnut party because they couldn't

buy us with their doughnuts. They didn't have enough of them. Most

reformers arrive at their price sooner or later, and I suppose we

would have had our price; but our opponents weren't offering

anything but doughnuts, and those we spurned.

  Now it seems to me that an Anti-Doughnut party is just what is

wanted in the present emergency. I would have the Anti-Doughnuts

felt in every city and hamlet and school district in this State and in

the United States. I was an Anti-Doughnut in my boyhood, and I'm an

Anti-Doughnut still. The modern designation is Mugwump. There used

to be quite a number of us Mugwumps, but I think I'm the only one

left. I had a vote this fall, and I began to make some inquiries as to

what I had better do with it.

  I don't know anything about finance, and I never did, but I know

some pretty shrewd financiers, and they told me that Mr. Bryan

wasn't safe on any financial question. I said to myself, then, that it

wouldn't do for me to vote for Bryan, and I rather thought- I know

now- that McKinley wasn't just right on this Philippine question,

and so I just didn't vote for anybody. I've got that vote yet, and

I've kept it clean, ready to deposit at some other election. It wasn't

cast for any wildcat financial theories, and it wasn't cast to support

the man who sends our boys as volunteers out into the Philippines to

get shot down under a polluted flag.






                 MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT.



     ADDRESS AT THE ANNUAL DINNER OF THE ST. NICHOLAS

          SOCIETY, NEW YORK, DECEMBER 6, 1900.



  Doctor Mackay, in his response to the toast "St. Nicholas," referred

to Mr. Clemens, saying: "Mark Twain is as true a preacher of true

righteousness as any bishop, priest, or minister of any church to-day,

because he moves men to forget their faults by cheerful well-doing

instead of making them sour and morbid by everlastingly bending

their attention to the seamy and sober side of life."



  MR. CHAIRMAN AND GENTLEMEN OF THE ST. NICHOLAS SOCIETY,- These

are, indeed, prosperous days for me. Night before last, in a speech,

the Bishop of the Diocese of New York complimented me for my

contribution to theology, and to-night the Reverend Doctor Mackay

has elected me to the ministry. I thanked Bishop Potter then for his

compliment, and I thank Doctor Mackay now for that promotion. I

think that both have discerned in me what I long ago discerned, but

what I was afraid the world would never learn to recognize.

  In this absence of nine years I find a great improvement in the city

of New York. I am glad to speak on that as a toast- "The City of New

York." Some say it has improved because I have been away. Others,

and I agree with them, say it has improved because I have come back.

We must judge of a city, as of a man, by its external appearances

and by its inward character. In externals the foreigner coming to

these shores is more impressed at first by our sky-scrapers. They

are new to him. He has not done anything of the sort since he built

the tower of Babel. The foreigner is shocked by them.

  In the daylight they are ugly. They are- well, too chimneyfied and

too snaggy- like a mouth that needs attention from a dentist; like a

cemetery that is all monuments and no gravestones. But at night,

seen from the river where they are columns towering against the sky,

all sparkling with light, they are fairylike; they are beauty more

satisfactory to the soul and more enchanting than anything that man

has dreamed of since the Arabian nights. We can't always have the

beautiful aspect of things. Let us make the most of our sights that

are beautiful and let the others go. When your foreigner makes

disagreeable comments on New York by daylight, float him down the

river at night.

  What has made these sky-scrapers possible is the elevator. The

cigar-box which the European calls a "lift" needs but to be compared

with our elevators to be appreciated. The lift stops to reflect

between floors. That is all right in a hearse, but not in elevators.

The American elevator acts like the man's patent purge- it worked.

As the inventor said, "This purge doesn't waste any time fooling

around; it attends strictly to business."

  That New-Yorkers have the cleanest, quickest, and most admirable

system of street railways in the world has been forced upon you by the

abnormal appreciation you have of your hackman. We ought always to

be grateful to him for that service. Nobody else would have brought

such a system into existence for us. We ought to build him a monument.

We owe him one as much as we owe one to anybody. Let it be a tall one.

Nothing permanent, of course; build it of plaster, say. Then gaze at

it and realize how grateful we are- for the time being- and then

pull it down and throw it on the ash-heap. That's the way to honor

your public heroes.

  As to our streets, I find them cleaner than they used to be. I

miss those dear old landmarks, the symmetrical mountain ranges of dust

and dirt that used to be piled up along the streets for the wind and

rain to tear down at their pleasure. Yes, New York is cleaner than

Bombay. I realize that I have been in Bombay, that I now am in New

York; that it is not my duty to flatter Bombay, but rather to

flatter New York.

  Compared with the wretched attempts of London to light that city,

New York may fairly be said to be a well-lighted city. Why, London's

attempt at good lighting is almost as bad as London's attempt at rapid

transit. There is just one good system of rapid transit in London- the

"Tube," and that, of course, had been put in by Americans. Perhaps,

after a while, those Americans will come back and give New York also a

good underground system. Perhaps they have already begun. I have

been so busy since I came back that I haven't had time as yet to go

down cellar.

  But it is by the laws of the city, it is by the manners of the city,

it is by the ideals of the city, it is by the customs of the city

and by the municipal government which all these elements correct,

support, and foster, by which the foreigner judges the city. It is

by these that he realizes that New York may, indeed, hold her head

high among the cities of the world. It is by these standards that he

knows whether to class the city higher or lower than the other

municipalities of the world.

  Gentlemen, you have the best municipal government in the world-

the purest and the most fragrant. The very angels envy you, and wish

they could establish a government like it in heaven. You got it by a

noble fidelity to civic duty. You got it by stern and ever-watchful

exertion of the great powers with which you are charged by the

rights which were handed down to you by your forefathers, by your

manly refusal to let base men invade the high places of your

government, and by instant retaliation when any public officer has

insulted you in the city's name by swerving in the slightest from

the upright and full performance of his duty. It is you who have

made this city the envy of the cities of the world. God will bless you

for it- God will bless you for it. Why, when you approach the final

resting-place the angels of heaven will gather at the gates and cry

out:

  "Here they come! Show them to the archangel's box, and turn the

lime-light on them!"






                 CHINA AND THE PHILIPPINES.



        AT A DINNER GIVEN IN THE WALDORF-ASTORIA HOTEL,

                     DECEMBER, 1900.



  Winston Spencer Churchill was introduced by Mr. Clemens



  FOR years I've been a self-appointed missionary to bring about the

union of America and the motherland. They ought to be united. Behold

America, the refuge of the oppressed from everywhere (who can pay

fifty dollars' admission)- any one except a Chinaman- standing up

for human rights everywhere, even helping China let people in free

when she wants to collect fifty dollars upon them. And how unselfishly

England has wrought for the open door for all! And how piously America

has wrought for that open door in all cases where it was not her own!

  Yes, as a missionary I've sung my songs of praise. And yet I think

that England sinned when she got herself into a war in South Africa

which she could have avoided, just as we sinned in getting into a

similar war in the Philippines. Mr. Churchill, by his father, is an

Englishman; by his mother he is an American- no doubt a blend that

makes the perfect man. England and America; yes, we are kin. And now

that we are also kin in sin, there is nothing more to be desired.

The harmony is complete, the blend is perfect.






              THEORETICAL AND PRACTICAL MORALS.



  The New Vagabonds Club of London, made up of the leading younger

literary men of the day, gave a dinner in honor of Mr. and Mrs.

Clemens, July 8, 1899.



  IT has always been difficult- leave that word difficult- not

exceedingly difficult, but just difficult, nothing more than that, not

the slightest shade to add to that- just difficult- to respond

properly, in the right phraseology, when compliments are paid to me;

but it is more than difficult when the compliments are paid to a

better than I- my wife.

  And while I am not here to testify against myself- I can't be

expected to do so, a prisoner in your own country is not admitted to

do so- as to which member of the family wrote my books, I could say in

general that really I wrote the books myself. My wife puts the facts

in, and they make it respectable. My modesty won't suffer while

compliments are being paid to literature, and through literature to my

family. I can't get enough of them.

  I am curiously situated to-night. It so rarely happens that I am

introduced by a humorist; I am generally introduced by a person of

grave walk and carriage. That makes the proper background of gravity

for brightness. I am going to alter to suit, and haply I may say

some humorous things.

  When you start with a blaze of sunshine and upburst of humor, when

you begin with that, the proper office of humor is to reflect, to

put you into that pensive mood of deep thought, to make you think of

your sins, if you wish half an hour to fly. Humor makes me reflect now

to-night, it sets the thinking machinery in motion. Always, when I

am thinking, there come suggestions of what I am, and what we all are,

and what we are coming to. A sermon comes from my lips always when I

listen to a humorous speech.

  I seize the opportunity to throw away frivolities, to say

something to plant the seed, and make all better than when I came.

In Mr. Grossmith's remarks there was a subtle something suggesting

my favorite theory of the difference between theoretical morals and

practical morals. I try to instil practical morals in the place of

theatrical- I mean theoretical; but as an addendum- an annex-

something added to theoretical morals.

  When your chairman said it was the first time he had ever taken

the chair, he did not mean that he had not taken lots of other things;

he attended my first lecture and took notes. This indicated the

man's disposition. There was nothing else flying round, so he took

notes; he would have taken anything he could get.

  I can bring a moral to bear here which shows the difference

between theoretical morals and practical morals. Theoretical morals

are the sort you get on your mother's knee, in good books, and from

the pulpit. You gather them in your head, and not in your heart;

they are theory without practice. Without the assistance of practice

to perfect them, it is difficult to teach a child to "be honest, don't

steal."

  I will teach you how it should be done, lead you into temptation,

teach you how to steal, so that you may recognize when you have stolen

and feel the proper pangs. It is no good going round and bragging

you have never taken the chair.

  As by the fires of experience, so by commission of crime, you

learn real morals. Commit all the crimes, familiarize yourself with

all sins, take them in rotation (there are only two or three

thousand of them), stick to it, commit two or three every day, and

by-and-by you will be proof against them. When you are through you

will be proof against all sins and morally perfect. You will be

vaccinated against every possible commission of them. This is the only

way.

  I will read you a written statement upon the subject that I wrote

three years ago to read to the Sabbath-schools. [Here the lecturer

turned his pockets out, but without success.] No! I have left it at

home. Still, it was a mere statement of fact, illustrating the value

of practical morals produced by the commission of crime.

  It was in my boyhood- just a statement of fact, reading is only more

formal, merely facts, merely pathetic facts, which I can state so as

to be understood. It relates to the first time I ever stole a

watermelon; that is, I think it was the first time; anyway, it was

right along there somewhere.

  I stole it out of a farmer's wagon while he was waiting on another

customer. "Stole" is a harsh term. I withdrew- I retired that

watermelon. I carried it to a secluded corner of a lumber-yard. I

broke it open. It was green- the greenest watermelon raised in the

valley that year.

  The minute I saw it was green I was sorry, and began to reflect-

reflection is the beginning of reform. If you don't reflect when you

commit a crime then that crime is of no use; it might just as well

have been committed by some one else. You must reflect or the value is

lost; you are not vaccinated against committing it again.

  I began to reflect. I said to myself: "What ought a boy to do who

has stolen a green watermelon? What would George Washington do, the

father of his country, the only American who could not tell a lie?

What would he do? There is only one right, high, noble thing for any

boy to do who has stolen a watermelon of that class: he must make

restitution; he must restore that stolen property to its rightful

owner." I said I would do it when I made that good resolution. I

felt it to be a noble, uplifting obligation. I rose up spiritually

stronger and refreshed. I carried that watermelon back- what was

left of it- and restored it to the farmer, and made him give me a ripe

one in its place.

  Now you see that this constant impact of crime upon crime protects

you against further commission of crime. It builds you up. A man can't

become morally perfect by stealing one or a thousand green

watermelons, but every little helps.

  I was at a great school yesterday (St. Paul's), where for four

hundred years they have been busy with brains, and building up England

by producing Pepys, Miltons, and Marlboroughs. Six hundred boys left

to nothing in the world but theoretical morality. I wanted to become

the professor of practical morality, but the high master was away,

so I suppose I shall have to go on making my living- the same old way-

by adding practical to theoretical morality.

  What are the glory that was Greece, the grandeur that was Rome,

compared to the glory and grandeur and majesty of a perfected morality

such as you see before you?

  The New Vagabonds are old vagabonds (undergoing the old sort of

reform). You drank my health; I hope I have not been unuseful. Take

this system of morality to your hearts. Take it home to your neighbors

and your graves, and I hope that it will be a long time before you

arrive there.






                     LAYMAN'S SERMON.



  The Young Men's Christian Association asked Mr. Clemens to deliver a

lay sermon at the Majestic Theatre, New York, March 4, 1906. More than

five thousand young men tried to get into the theatre, and in a

short time traffic was practically stopped in the adjacent streets.

The police reserves had to be called out to thin the crowd. Doctor

Fagnani had said something before about the police episode, and Mr.

Clemens took it up.



  I HAVE been listening to what was said here, and there is in it a

lesson of citizenship. You created the police, and you are responsible

for them. One must pause, therefore, before criticising them too

harshly. They are citizens, just as we are. A little of citizenship

ought to be taught at the mother's knee and in the nursery.

Citizenship is what makes a republic; monarchies can get along without

it. What keeps a republic on its legs is good citizenship.

  Organization is necessary in all things. It is even necessary in

reform. I was an organization myself once- for twelve hours. I was

in Chicago a few years ago about to depart for New York. There were

with me Mr. Osgood, a publisher, and a stenographer. I picked out a

state-room on a train, the principal feature of which was that it

contained the privilege of smoking. The train had started but a

short time when the conductor came in and said that there had been a

mistake made, and asked that we vacate the apartment. I refused, but

when I went out on the platform Osgood and the stenographer agreed

to accept a section. They were too modest.

  Now, I am not modest. I was born modest, but it didn't last. I

asserted myself, insisted upon my rights, and finally the Pullman

conductor and the train conductor capitulated, and I was left in

possession.

  I went into the dining-car the next morning for breakfast.

Ordinarily I only care for coffee and rolls, but this particular

morning I espied an important-looking man on the other side of the car

eating broiled chicken. I asked for broiled chicken, and I was told by

the waiter and later by the dining-car conductor that there was no

broiled chicken. There must have been an argument, for the Pullman

conductor came in and remarked: "If he wants broiled chicken, give

it to him. If you haven't got it on the train, stop somewhere. It will

be better for all concerned!" I got the chicken.

  It is from experiences such as these that you get your education

of life, and you string them into jewels or into tinware, as you may

choose. I have received recently several letters asking my counsel

or advice. The principal request is for some incident that may prove

helpful to the young. There were a lot of incidents in my career to

help me along- sometimes they helped me along faster than I wanted

to go.

  Here is such a request. It is a telegram from Joplin, Missouri,

and it reads: "In what one of your works can we find the definition of

a gentleman?"

  I have not answered that telegram, either; I couldn't. It seems to

me that if any man has just merciful and kindly instincts he would

be a gentleman, for he would need nothing else in the world.

  I received the other day a letter from my old friend, William Dean

Howells- Howells, the head of American literature. No one is able to

stand with him. He is an old, old friend of mine, and he writes me,

"To-morrow I shall be sixty-nine years old." Why, I am surprised at

Howells writing that! I have known him longer than that. I'm sorry

to see a man trying to appear so young. Let's see. Howells says now,

"I see you have been burying Patrick. I suppose he was old, too."

  No, he was never old- Patrick. He came to us thirty-six years ago.

He was my coachman on the morning that I drove my young bride to our

new home. He was a young Irishman, slender, tall, lithe, honest,

truthful, and he never changed in all his life. He really was with

us but twenty-five years, for he did not go with us to Europe, but

he never regarded that as separation. As the children grew up he was

their guide. He was all honor, honesty, and affection. He was with

us in New Hampshire, with us last summer, and his hair was just as

black, his eyes were just as blue, his form just as straight, and

his heart just as good as on the day we first met. In all the long

years Patrick never made a mistake. He never needed an order, he never

received a command. He knew. I have been asked for my idea of an ideal

gentleman, and I give it to you- Patrick McAleer.






               UNIVERSITY SETTLEMENT SOCIETY.



  After the serious addresses were made, Seth Low introduced Mr.

Clemens at the Settlement House, February 2, 1901.



  THE older we grow the greater becomes our wonder at how much

ignorance one can contain without bursting one's clothes. Ten days ago

I did not know anything about the University Settlement except what

I'd read in the pamphlets sent me. Now, after being here and hearing

Mrs. Hewitt and Mrs. Thomas, it seems to me I know of nothing like

it at all. It's a charity that carries no humiliation with it.

Marvellous it is, to think of schools where you don't have to drive

the children in but drive them out. It was not so in my day.

  Down-stairs just now I saw a dancing lesson going on. You must pay a

cent for a lesson. You can't get it for nothing. That's the reason I

never learned to dance.

  But it was the pawnbroker's shop you have here that interested me

mightily. I've known something about pawnbrokers' shops in my time,

but here you have a wonderful plan. The ordinary pawnbroker charges,

thirty-six per cent; a year for a loan, and I've paid more myself, but

here a man or woman in distress can obtain a loan. for one per cent. a

month! It's wonderful!

  I've been interested in all I've heard to-day, especially in the

romances recounted by Mrs. Thomas, which reminds me that I have a

romance of my own in my autobiography, which I am building for the

instruction of the world.

  In San Francisco, many years ago, when I was a newspaper reporter

(perhaps I should say I had been and was willing to be), a

pawnbroker was taking care of what property I had. There was a

friend of mine, a poet, out of a job, and he was having a hard time of

it, too. There was passage in it, but I guess I've got to keep that

for the autobiography.

  Well, my friend the poet thought his life was a failure, and I

told him I thought it was, and then he said he thought he ought to

commit suicide, and I said "all right," which was disinterested advice

to a friend in trouble; but, like all such advice, there was just a

little bit of self-interest back of it, for if I could get a "scoop"

on the other newspapers I could get a job.

  The poet could be spared, and so, largely for his own good and

partly for mine, I kept the thing in his mind, which was necessary, as

would-be suicides are very changeable and hard to hold to their

purpose. He had a preference for a pistol, which was an

extravagance, for we hadn't enough between us to hire a pistol. A fork

would have been easier.

  And so he concluded to drown himself, and I said it was an excellent

idea- the only trouble being that he was so good a swimmer. So we went

down to the beach. I went along to see that the thing was done

right. Then something most romantic happened. There came in on the sea

something that had been on its way for three years. It rolled in

across the broad Pacific with a message that was full of meaning to

that poor poet and cast itself at his feet. It was a life-preserver!

This was a complication. And then I had an idea- he never had any,

especially when he was going to write poetry; I suggested that we pawn

the life-preserver and get a revolver.

  The pawnbroker gave us an old derringer with a bullet as big as a

hickory nut. When he heard that it was only a poet that was going to

kill himself he did not quibble. Well, we succeeded in sending a

bullet right through his head. It was a terrible moment when he placed

that pistol against his forehead and stood for an instant. I said,

"Oh, pull the trigger!" and he did, and cleaned out all the gray

matter in his brains. It carried the poetic faculty away, and now he's

a useful member of society.

  Now, therefore, I realize that there's no more beneficent

institution than this penny fund of yours, and I want all the poets to

know this. I did think about writing you a check, but now I think I'll

send you a few copies of what one of your little members called

Strawberry Finn.






               PUBLIC EDUCATION ASSOCIATION.



         ADDRESS AT A MEETING OF THE BERKELEY LYCEUM,

                NEW YORK, NOVEMBER 23, 1900.



  I DON'T suppose that I am called here as an expert on education, for

that would show a lack of foresight on your part and a deliberate

intention to remind me of my shortcomings.

  As I sat here looking around for an idea it struck me that I was

called for two reasons. One was to do good to me, a poor unfortunate

traveller on the world's wide ocean, by giving me a knowledge of the

nature and scope of your society and letting me know that others

beside myself have been of some use in the world. The other reason

that I can see is that you have called me to show by way of contrast

what education can accomplish if administered in the right sort of

doses.

  Your worthy president said that the school pictures, which have

received the admiration of the world at the Paris Exposition, have

been sent to Russia, and this was a compliment from that Government-

which is very surprising to me. Why, it is only an hour since I read a

cablegram in the newspapers beginning "Russia Proposes to Retrench." I

was not expecting such a thunderbolt, and I thought what a happy thing

it will be for Russians when the retrenchment will bring home the

thirty thousand Russian troops now in Manchuria, to live in peaceful

pursuits. I thought this was what Germany should do also without

delay, and that France and all the other nations in China should

follow suit.

  Why should not China be free from the foreigners, who are only

making trouble on her soil? If they would only all go home, what a

pleasant place China would be for the Chinese! We do not allow

Chinamen to come here, and I say in all seriousness that it would be a

graceful thing to let China decide who shall go there.

  China never wanted foreigners any more than foreigners wanted

Chinamen, and on this question I am with the Boxers every time. The

Boxer is a patriot. He loved his country better than he does the

countries of other people. I wish him success. The Boxer believes in

driving us out of his country. I am a Boxer too, for I believe in

driving him out of our country.

  When I read the Russian despatch further my dream of world peace

vanished. It said that the vast expense of maintaining the army had

made it necessary to retrench, and so the Government had decided

that to support the army it would be necessary to withdraw the

appropriation from the public schools. This is a monstrous idea to us.

We believe that out of the public school grows the greatness of a

nation.

  It is curious to reflect how history repeats itself the world

over. Why, I remember the same thing was done when I was a boy on

the Mississippi River. There was a proposition in a township there

to discontinue public schools because they were too expensive. An

old farmer spoke up and said if they stopped the schools they would

not save anything, because every time a school was closed a jail had

to be built.

  It's like feeding a dog on his own tail. He'll never get fat. I

believe it is better to support schools than jails.

  The work of your association is better and shows more wisdom than

the Czar of Russia and all his people. This is not much of a

compliment, but it's the best I've got in stock.

