



                             MARK TWAIN'S SPEECHES

                                 by Mark Twain

PREFACE




         FROM THE PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION OF

                 "MARK TWAIN'S SKETCHES."



  If I were to sell the reader a barrel of molasses, and he, instead

of sweetening his substantial dinner with the same at judicious

intervals, should eat the entire barrel at one sitting, and then abuse

me for making him sick, I would say that he deserved to be made sick

for not knowing any better how to utilize the blessings this world

affords. And if I sell to the reader this volume of nonsense, and

he, instead of seasoning his graver reading with a chapter of it now

and then, when his mind demands such relaxation, unwisely overdoses

himself with several chapters of it at a single sitting, he will

deserve to be nauseated, and he will have nobody to blame but

himself if he is. There is no more sin in publishing an entire

volume of nonsense than there is in keeping a candy-store with no

hardware in it. It lies wholly with the customer whether he will

injure himself by means of either, or will derive from them the

benefits which they will afford him if he uses their possibilities

judiciously.

                                         Respectfully submitted,

                                               THE AUTHOR.









                  THE STORY OF A SPEECH.



  An address delivered in 1877, and a review of it twenty-nine years

later. The original speech was delivered at a dinner given by the

publishers of The Atlantic Monthly in honor of the seventieth

anniversary of the birth of John Greenleaf Whittier, at the Hotel

Brunswick, Boston, December 17, 1877.



  THIS is an occasion peculiarly meet for the digging up of pleasant

reminiscences concerning literary folk; therefore I will drop

lightly into history myself. Standing here on the shore of the

Atlantic and contemplating certain of its largest literary billows,

I am reminded of a thing which happened to me thirteen years ago, when

I had just succeeded in stirring up a little Nevadian literary

puddle myself, whose spume-flakes were beginning to blow thinly

Californiaward. I started an inspection tramp through the southern

mines of California. I was callow and conceited, and I resolved to try

the virtue of my nom de guerre.

  I very soon had an opportunity. I knocked at a miner's lonely log

cabin in the foot-hills of the Sierras just at nightfall. It was

snowing at the time. A jaded, melancholy man of fifty, barefooted,

opened the door to me. When he heard my nom de guerre he looked more

dejected than before. He let me in- pretty reluctantly, I thought- and

after the customary bacon and beans, black coffee and hot whiskey, I

took a pipe. This sorrowful man had not said three words up to this

time. Now he spoke up and said, in the voice of one who is secretly

suffering, "You're the fourth- I'm going to move." "The fourth

what?" said I. "The fourth littery man that has been here in

twenty-four hours- I'm going to move." "You don't tell me!" said I;

"who were the others?" "Mr. Longfellow, Mr. Emerson, and Mr. Oliver

Wendell Holmes- consound the lot!"

  You can easily believe I was interested. I supplicated- three hot

whiskeys did the rest- and finally the melancholy miner began. Said

he:

  "They came here just at dark yesterday evening, and I let them in of

course. Said they were going to the Yosemite. They were a rough lot,

but that's nothing; everybody looks rough that travels afoot. Mr.

Emerson was a seedy little bit of a chap, red-headed. Mr. Holmes was

as fat as a balloon; he weighed as much as three hundred, and had

double chins all the way down to his stomach. Mr. Longfellow was built

like a prize-fighter. His head was cropped and bristly, like as if

he had a wig made of hair-brushes. His nose lay straight down his

face, like a finger with the end joint tilted up. They had been

drinking, I could see that. And what queer talk they used! Mr.

Holmes inspected this cabin, then he took me by the buttonhole, and

says he:



         "'Through the deep caves of thought

           I hear a voice that sings,

           Build thee more stately mansions,

           O my soul!'



  "Says I, 'I can't afford it, Mr. Holmes, and moreover I don't want

to.' Blamed if I liked it pretty well, either, coming from a stranger,

that way. However, I started to get out my bacon and beans, when Mr.

Emerson came and looked on awhile, and then he takes me aside by the

buttonhole and says:



         "'Give me agates for my meat;

           Give me cantharids to eat;

           From air and ocean bring me foods,

           From all zones and altitudes.'



  "Says I, 'Mr. Emerson, if you'll excuse me, this ain't no hotel.'

You see it sort of riled me- I warn't used to the ways of littery

swells. But I went on a-sweating over my work, and next comes Mr.

Longfellow and buttonholes me, and interrupts me. Says he:



         "'Honor be to Mudjekeewis!

           You shall hear how Pau-Puk-Keewis-'



  "But I broke in, and says I, 'Beg your pardon, Mr. Longfellow, if

you'll be so kind as to hold your yawp for about five minutes and

let me get this grub ready, you'll do me proud.' Well, sir, after

they'd filled up I set out the jug. Mr. Holmes looks at it, and then

he fires up all of a sudden and yells:



         "'Flash out a stream of blood-red wine!

           For I would drink to other days.'



  "By George, I was getting kind of worked up. I don't deny it, I

was getting kind of worked up. I turns to Mr. Holmes, and says I,

'Looky here, my fat friend, I'm a-running this shanty, and if the

court knows herself, you'll take whiskey straight or you'll go dry.'

Them's the very words I said to him. Now I don't want to sass such

famous littery people, but you see they kind of forced me. There ain't

nothing unreasonable 'bout me; I don't mind a passel of guests

a-treadin' on my tail three or four times, but when it comes to

standing on it it's different, 'and if the court knows herself,' I

says, 'you'll take whiskey straight or you'll go dry.' Well, between

drinks they'd swell around the cabin and strike attitudes and spout;

and pretty soon they got out a greasy old deck and went to playing

euchre at ten cents a corner- on trust. I began to notice some

pretty suspicious things. Mr. Emerson dealt, looked at his hand, shook

his head, says:



         "'I am the doubter and the doubt-'



and ca'mly bunched the hands and went to shuffling for a new layout.

Says he:



         "'They reckon ill who leave me out;

           They know not well the subtle ways I keep.

           I pass and deal again!'



  "Hang'd if he didn't go ahead and do it, too! Oh, he was a cool one!

Well, in about a minute things were running pretty tight, but all of a

sudden I see by Mr. Emerson's eye he judged he had 'em. He had already

corralled two tricks, and each of the others one. So now he kind of

lifts a little in his chair and says:



         "'I tire of globes and aces!-

           Too long the game is played!'



- and down he fetched a right bower. Mr. Longfellow smiles as sweet as

pie and says:



         "'Thanks, thanks to thee, my worthy friend,

           For the lesson thou hast taught,'



  - and blamed if he didn't down with another right bower! Emerson

claps his hand on his bowie, Longfellow claps his on his revolver, and

I went under a bunk. There was going to be trouble; but that monstrous

Holmes rose up, wobbling his double chins, and says he, 'Order,

gentlemen; the first man that draws, I'll lay down on him and

smother him!' All quiet on the Potomac, you bet!

  "They were pretty how-come-you-so by now, and they begun to blow.

Emerson says, 'The nobbiest thing I ever wrote was "Barbara

Frietchie."' Says Longfellow, 'It don't begin with my "Biglow

Papers."' Says Holmes, 'My "Thanatopis" lays over 'em both.' They

mighty near ended in a fight. Then they wished they had some more

company- and Mr. Emerson pointed to me and says:



         "'Is yonder squalid peasant all

           That this proud nursery could breed?'



  "He was a-whetting his bowie on his boot- so I let it pass. Well,

sir, next they took it into their heads that they would like some

music; so they made me stand up and sing "When Johnny Comes Marching

Home" till I dropped- at thirteen minutes past four this morning.

That's what I've been through, my friend. When I woke at seven, they

were leaving, thank goodness, and Mr. Longfellow had my only boots on,

and his'n under his arm. Says I, 'Hold on, there, Evangeline, what are

you going to do with them?' He says, 'Going to make tracks with 'em;

because:



         "'Lives of great men all remind us

             We can make our lives sublime;

           And, departing, leave behind us

             Footprints on the sands of time.'



As I said, Mr. Twain, you are the fourth in twenty-four hours- and I'm

going to move; I ain't suited to a littery atmosphere."

  I said to the miner, "Why, my dear sir, these were not the

gracious singers to whom we and the world pay loving reverence and

homage; these were impostors."

  The miner investigated me with a calm eye for a while; then said he,

"Ah! impostors, were they? Are you?"

  I did not pursue the subject, and since then I have not travelled on

my nom de guerre enough to hurt. Such was the reminiscence I was moved

to contribute, Mr. Chairman. In my enthusiasm I may have exaggerated

the details a little, but you will easily forgive me that fault, since

I believe it is the first time I have ever deflected from

perpendicular fact on an occasion like this.



             From Mark Twain's Autobiography.



                                                 January 11, 1906.



  Answer to a letter received this morning:



  DEAR MRS. H.,- I am forever your debtor for reminding me of that

curious passage in my life. During the first year or two after it

happened, I could not bear to think of it. My pain and shame were so

intense, and my sense of having been an imbecile so settled,

established and confirmed, that I drove the episode entirely from my

mind- and so all these twenty-eight or twenty-nine years I have

lived in the conviction that my performance of that time was coarse,

vulgar, and destitute of humor. But your suggestion that you and

your family found humor in it twenty-eight years ago moved me to

look into the matter. So I commissioned a Boston typewriter to delve

among the Boston papers of that bygone time and send me a copy of it.

  It came this morning, and if there is any vulgarity about it I am

not able to discover it. If it isn't innocently and ridiculously

funny, I am no judge. I will see to it that you get a copy.



  What I have said to Mrs. H. is true. I did suffer during a year or

two from the deep humiliations of that episode. But at last, in

1888, in Venice, my wife and I came across Mr. and Mrs. A. P. C., of

Concord, Massachusetts, and a friendship began then of the sort

which nothing but death terminates. The C.'s were very bright people

and in every way charming and companionable. We were together a

month or two in Venice and several months in Rome, afterward, and

one day that lamented break of mine was mentioned. And when I was on

the point of lathering those people for bringing it to my mind when

I had gotten the memory of it almost squelched, I perceived with joy

that the C.'s were indignant about the way that my performance had

been received in Boston. They poured out their opinions most freely

and frankly about the frosty attitude of the people who were present

at that performance, and about the Boston newspapers for the

position they had taken in regard to the matter. That position was

that I had been irreverent beyond belief, beyond imagination. Very

well; I had accepted that as a fact for a year or two, and had been

thoroughly miserable about it whenever I thought of it- which was

not frequently, if I could help it. Whenever I thought of it I

wondered how I ever could have been inspired to do so unholy a

thing. Well, the C.'s comforted me, but they did not persuade me to

continue to think about the unhappy episode. I resisted that. I

tried to get it out of my mind, and let it die, and I succeeded. Until

Mrs. H.'s letter came, it had been a good twenty-five years since I

had thought of that matter; and when she said that the thing was funny

I wondered if possibly she might be right. At any rate, my curiosity

was aroused, and I wrote to Boston and got the whole thing copied,

as above set forth.

  I vaguely remember some of the details of that gathering- dimly I

can see a hundred people no, perhaps fifty- shadowy figures sitting at

tables feeding, ghosts now to me, and nameless forevermore. I don't

know who they were, but I can very distinctly see, seated at the grand

table and facing the rest of us, Mr. Emerson, supernaturally grave,

unsmiling? Mr. Whittier, grave, lovely, his beautiful spirit shining

out of his face; Mr. Longfellow, with his silken white hair and his

benignant face; Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes, flashing smiles and

affection and all good-fellowship everywhere like a rose-diamond whose

facets are being turned toward the light first one way and then

another- a charming man, and always fascinating, whether he was

talking or whether he was sitting still (what he would call still, but

what would be more or less motion to other people). I can see those

figures with entire distinctness across this abyss of time.

  One other feature is clear- Willie Winter (for these past thousand

years dramatic editor of the New York Tribune, and still occupying

that high post in his old age) was there. He was much younger then

than he is now, and he showed it. It was always a pleasure to me to

see Willie Winter at a banquet. During a matter of twenty years I

was seldom at a banquet where Willie Winter was not also present,

and where he did not read a charming poem written for the occasion. He

did it this time, and it was up to standard: dainty, happy, choicely

phrased, and as good to listen to as music, and sounding exactly as if

it was pouring unprepared out of heart and brain.

  Now at that point ends all that was pleasurable about that notable

celebration of Mr. Whittier's seventieth birthday- because I got up at

that point and followed Winter, with what I have no doubt I supposed

would be the gem of the evening- the gay oration above quoted from the

Boston paper. I had written it all out the day before and had

perfectly memorized it, and I stood up there at my genial and happy

and self-satisfied ease, and begin to deliver it. Those majestic

guests, that row of venerable and still active volcanoes, listened, as

did everybody else in the house, with attentive interest. Well, I

delivered myself of- we'll say the first two hundred words of my

speech. I was expecting no returns from that part of the speech, but

this was not the case as regarded the rest of it. I arrived now at the

dialogue: "The old miner said, 'You are the fourth, I'm going to

move.' 'The fourth what?' said I. He answered, 'The fourth littery man

that has been here in twenty-four hours. I am going to move.' 'Why,

you don't tell me,' said I. 'Who were the others?' 'Mr. Longfellow,

Mr. Emerson, Mr. Oliver Wendell Holmes, consound the lot-'"

  Now, then, the house's attention continued, but the expression of

interest in the faces turned to a sort of black frost. I wondered what

the trouble was. I didn't know. I went on, but with difficulty- I

struggled along, and entered upon that miner's fearful description

of the bogus Emerson, the bogus Holmes, the bogus Longfellow, always

hoping- but with a gradually perishing hope- that somebody would

laugh, or that somebody would at least smile, but nobody did. I didn't

know enough to give it up and sit down, I was too new to public

speaking, and so I went on with this awful performance, and carried it

clear through to the end, in front of a body of people who seemed

turned to stone with horror. It was the sort of expression their faces

would have worn if I had been making these remarks about the Deity and

the rest of the Trinity; there is no milder way in which to describe

the petrified condition and the ghastly expression of those people.

  When I sat down it was with a heart which had long ceased to beat. I

shall never be as dead again as I was then. I shall never be as

miserable again as I was then. I speak now as one who doesn't know

what the condition of things may be in the next world, but in this one

I shall never be as wretched again as I was then. Howells, who was

near me, tried to say a comforting word, but couldn't get beyond a

gasp. There was no use- he understood the whole size of the

disaster. He had good intentions, but the words froze before they

could get out. It was an atmosphere that would freeze anything. If

Benvenuto Cellini's salamander had been in that place he would not

have survived to be put into Cellini's autobiography. There was a

frightful pause. There was an awful silence, a desolating silence.

Then the next man on the list had to get up- there was no help for it.

That was Bishop- Bishop had just burst handsomely upon the world

with a most acceptable novel, which had appeared in The Atlantic

Monthly, a place which would make any novel respectable and any author

noteworthy. In this case the novel itself was recognized as being,

without extraneous help, respectable. Bishop was away up in the public

favor, and he was an object of high interest, consequently there was a

sort of national expectancy in the air; we may say our American

millions were standing, from Maine to Texas and from Alaska to

Florida, holding their breath, their lips parted, their hands ready to

applaud, when Bishop should get up on that occasion, and for the first

time in his life speak in public. It was under these damaging

conditions that he got up to "make good," as the vulgar say. I had

spoken several times before, and that is the reason why I was able

to go on without dying in my tracks, as I ought to have done- but

Bishop had had no experience. He was up facing those awful deities-

facing those other people, those strangers- facing human beings for

the first time in his life, with a speech to utter. No doubt it was

well packed away in his memory, no doubt it was fresh and usable,

until I had been heard from. I suppose that after that, and under

the smothering pall of that dreary silence, it began to waste away and

disappear out of his head like the rags breaking from the edge of a

fog, and presently there wasn't any fog left. He didn't go on- he

didn't last long. It was not many sentences after his first before

he began to hesitate, and break, and lose his grip, and totter, and

wobble, and at last he slumped down in a limp and mushy pile.

  Well, the programme for the occasion was probably not more than

one-third finished, but it ended there. Nobody rose. The next man

hadn't strength enough to get up, and everybody looked so dazed, so

stupefied, paralyzed, it was impossible for anybody to do anything, or

even try. Nothing could go on in that strange atmosphere. Howells

mournfully, and without words, hitched himself to Bishop and me and

supported us out of the room. It was very kind- he was most

generous. He towed us tottering away into some room in that

building, and we sat down there. I don't know what my remark was

now, but I know the nature of it. It was the kind of remark you make

when you know that nothing in the world can help your case. But

Howells was honest- he had to say the heart-breaking things he did

say: that there was no help for this calamity, this shipwreck, this

cataclysm; that this was the most disastrous thing that had ever

happened in anybody's history- and then he added, "That is, for you-

and consider what you have done for Bishop. It is bad enough in your

case, you deserve to suffer. You have committed this crime, and you

deserve to have all you are going to get. But here is an innocent man.

Bishop had never done you any harm, and see what you have done to him.

He can never hold his head up again. The world can never look upon

Bishop as being a live person. He is a corpse."

  That is the history of that episode of twenty-eight years ago, which

pretty nearly killed me with shame during that first year or two

whenever it forced its way into my mind.



  Now then, I take that speech up and examine it. As I said, it

arrived this morning, from Boston. I have read it twice, and unless

I am an idiot, it hasn't a single defect in it from the first word

to the last. It is just as good as good can be. It is smart; it is

saturated with humor. There isn't a suggestion of coarseness or

vulgarity in it anywhere. What could have been the matter with that

house? It is amazing, it is incredible, that they didn't shout with

laughter, and those deities the loudest of them all. Could the fault

have been with me? Did I lose courage when I saw those great men up

there whom I was going to describe in such a strange fashion? If

that happened, if I showed doubt, that can account for it, for you

can't be successfully funny if you show that you are afraid of it.

Well, I can't account for it, but if I had those beloved and revered

old literary immortals back here now on the platform at Carnegie

Hall I would take that same old speech, deliver it, word for word, and

melt them till they'd run all over that stage. Oh, the fault must have

been with me, it is not in the speech at all.











             PLYMOUTH ROCK AND THE PILGRIMS.



      ADDRESS AT THE FIRST ANNUAL DINNER, N. E. SOCIETY,

             PHILADELPHIA, DECEMBER 22, 1881.



  On calling upon Mr. Clemens to make response, President Rollins

said:

  "This sentiment has been assigned to one who was never exactly

born in New England, nor, perhaps, were any of his ancestors. He is

not technically, therefore, of New England descent. Under the

painful circumstances in which he has found himself, however, he has

done the best he could- he has had all his children born there, and

has made of himself a New England ancestor. He is a self-made man.

More than this, and better even, in cheerful, hopeful, helpful

literature he is of New England ascent. To ascend there in anything

that's reasonable is difficult, for- confidentially, with the door

shut- we all know that they are the brightest, ablest sons of that

goodly land who never leave it, and it is among and above them that

Mr. Twain has made his brilliant and permanent ascent- become a man of

mark."



  I RISE to protest. I have kept still for years, but really I think

there is no sufficient justification for this sort of thing. What do

you want to celebrate those people for?- those ancestors of yours of

1620- the Mayflower tribe, I mean. What do you want to celebrate

them for? Your pardon: the gentleman at my left assures me that you

are not celebrating the Pilgrims themselves, but the landing of the

Pilgrims at Plymouth Rock on the 22d of December. So you are

celebrating their landing. Why, the other pretext was thin enough, but

this is thinner than ever; the other was tissue, tinfoil,

fish-bladder, but this is gold-leaf. Celebrating their landing! What

was there remarkable about it, I would like to know? What can you be

thinking of? Why, those Pilgrims had been at sea three or four months.

It was the very middle of winter: it was as cold as death off Cape Cod

there. Why shouldn't they come ashore? If they hadn't landed there

would be some reason for celebrating the fact. It would have been a

case of monumental leatherheadedness which the world would not

willingly let die. If it had been you, gentlemen, you probably

wouldn't have landed, but you have no shadow of right to be

celebrating, in your ancestors, gifts which they did not exercise, but

only transmitted. Why, to be celebrating the mere landing of the

Pilgrims- to be trying to make out that this most natural and simple

and customary procedure was an extraordinary circumstance- a

circumstance to be amazed at, and admired, aggrandized and

glorified, at orgies like this for two hundred and sixty years- hang

it, a horse would have known enough to land; a horse- Pardon again;

the gentleman on my right assures me that it was not merely the

landing of the Pilgrims that we are celebrating, but the Pilgrims

themselves. So we have struck an inconsistency here- one says it was

the landing, the other says it was the Pilgrims. It is an

inconsistency characteristic of your intractable and disputatious

tribe, for you never agree about anything but Boston. Well, then, what

do you want to celebrate those Pilgrims for? They were a mighty hard

lot- you know it. I grant you, without the slightest unwillingness,

that they were a deal more gentle and merciful and just than were

the people of Europe of that day; I grant you that they are better

than their predecessors. But what of that?- that is nothing. People

always progress. You are better than your fathers and grandfathers

were (this is the first time I have ever aimed a measureless slander

at the departed, for I consider such things improper). Yes, those

among you who have not been in the penitentiary, if such there be, are

better than your fathers and grandfathers were; but is that any

sufficient reason for getting up annual dinners and celebrating you?

No, by no means- by no means. Well, I repeat, those Pilgrims were a

hard lot. They took good care of themselves, but they abolished

everybody else's ancestors. I am a border-ruffian from the State of

Missouri. I am a Connecticut Yankee by adoption. In me, you have

Missouri morals, Connecticut culture; this, gentlemen, is the

combination which makes the perfect man. But where are my ancestors?

Whom shall I celebrate? Where shall I find the raw material?

  My first American ancestor, gentlemen, was an Indian- an early

Indian. Your ancestors skinned him alive, and I am an orphan. Not

one drop of my blood flows in that Indian's veins today. I stand here,

lone and forlorn, without an ancestor. They skinned him! I do not

object to that, if they needed his fur; but alive, gentlemen- alive!

They skinned him alive- and before company! That is what rankles.

Think how he must have felt; for he was a sensitive person and

easily embarrassed. If he had been a bird, it would have been all

right, and no violence done to his feelings, because he would have

been considered "dressed." But he was not a bird, gentlemen, he was

a man, and probably one of the most undressed men that ever was. I ask

you to put yourselves in his place. I ask it as a favor; I ask it as a

tardy act of justice; I ask it in the interest of fidelity to the

traditions of your ancestors; I ask it that the world may contemplate,

with vision unobstructed by disguising swallow-tails and white

cravats, the spectacle which the true New England Society ought to

present. Cease to come to these annual orgies in this hollow modern

mockery- the surplusage of raiment. Come in character; come in the

summer grace, come in the unadorned simplicity, come in the free and

joyous costume which your sainted ancestors provided for mine.

  Later ancestors of mine were the Quakers William Robinson, Marmaduke

Stevenson, et al. Your tribe chased them out of the country for

their religion's sake; promised them death if they came back; for your

ancestors had forsaken the homes they loved, and braved the perils

of the sea, the implacable climate, and the savage wilderness, to

acquire that highest and most precious of boons, freedom for every man

on this broad continent to worship according to the dictates of his

own conscience- and they were not going to allow a lot of

pestiferous Quakers to interfere with it. Your ancestors broke forever

the chains of political slavery, and gave the vote to every man in

this wide land, excluding none!- none except those who did not

belong to the orthodox church. Your ancestors- yes, they were a hard

lot; but, nevertheless, they gave us religious liberty to worship as

they required us to worship, and political liberty to vote as the

church required; and so I the bereft one, I the forlorn one, am here

to do my best to help you celebrate them right.

  The Quaker woman Elizabeth Hooton was an ancestress of mine. Your

people were pretty severe with her- you will confess that. But, poor

thing! I believe they changed her opinions before she died, and took

her into their fold; and so we have every reason to presume that

when she died she went to the same place which your ancestors went to.

It is a great pity, for she was a good woman. Roger Williams was an

ancestor of mine. I don't really remember what your people did with

him. But they banished him to Rhode Island, anyway. And then, I

believe, recognizing that this was really carrying harshness to an

unjustifiable extreme, they took pity on him and burned him. They were

a hard lot! All those Salem witches were ancestors of mine! Your

people made it tropical for them. Yes, they did; by pressure and the

gallows they made such a clean deal with them that there hasn't been a

witch and hardly a halter in our family from that day to this, and

that is one hundred and eighty-nine years. The first slave brought

into New England out of Africa by your progenitors was an ancestor

of mine- for I am of a mixed breed, an infinitely shaded and exquisite

Mongrel. I'm not one of your sham meerschaums that you can color in

a week. No, my complexion is the patient art of eight generations.

Well, in my own time, I had acquired a lot of my kin- by purchase, and

swapping around, and one way and another- and was getting along very

well. Then, with the inborn perversity of your lineage, you got up a

war, and took them all away from me. And so, again am I bereft,

again am I forlorn; no drop of my blood flows in the veins of any

living being who is marketable.

  O my friends, hear me and reform! I seek your good, not mine. You

have heard the speeches. Disband these New England societies-

nurseries of a system of steadily augmenting laudation and hosannaing,

which, if persisted in uncurbed, may some day in the remote future

beguile you into prevaricating and bragging. Oh, stop, stop, while you

are still temperate in your appreciation of your ancestors! Hear me, I

beseech you; get up an auction and sell Plymouth Rock! The Pilgrims

were a simple and ignorant race. They never had seen any good rocks

before, or at least any that were not watched, and so they were

excusable for hopping ashore in frantic delight and clapping an iron

fence around this one. But you, gentlemen, are educated; you are

enlightened; you know that in the rich land of your nativity,

opulent New England, overflowing with rocks, this one isn't worth,

at the outside, more than thirty-five cents. Therefore, sell it,

before it is injured by exposure, or at least throw it open to the

patent-medicine advertisements, and let it earn its taxes.

  Yes, hear your true friend- your only true friend- list to his

voice. Disband these societies, hotbeds of vice, of moral decay-

perpetuators of ancestral superstition. Here on this board I see

water, I see milk, I see the wild and deadly lemonade. These are but

steps upon the downward path. Next we shall see tea, then chocolate,

then coffee- hotel coffee. A few more years- all too few, I fear- mark

my words, we shall have cider! Gentlemen, pause ere it be too late.

You are on the broad road which leads to dissipation, physical ruin,

moral decay, gory crime and the gallows! I beseech you, I implore you,

in the name of your anxious friends, in the name of your suffering

families, in the name of your impending widows and orphans, stop ere

it be too late. Disband these New England societies, renounce these

soul-blistering saturnalia, cease from varnishing the rusty

reputations of your long-vanished ancestors- the super-high-moral

old iron-clads of Cape Cod, the pious buccaneers of Plymouth Rock-

go home, and try to learn to behave!

  However, chaff and nonsense aside, I think I honor and appreciate

your Pilgrim stock as much as you do yourselves, perhaps; and I

endorse and adopt a sentiment uttered by a grandfather of mine once- a

man of sturdy opinions, of sincere make of mind, and not given to

flattery. He said: "People may talk as they like about that Pilgrim

stock, but, after all's said and done, it would be pretty hard to

improve on those people; and, as for me, I don't mind coming out

flat-footed and saying there ain't any way to improve on them-

except having them born in Missouri!"










                 COMPLIMENTS AND DEGREES.



       DELIVERED AT THE LOTOS CLUB, JANUARY 11, 1908.



  In introducing Mr. Clemens, Frank R. Lawrence, the President of

the Lotos Club, recalled the fact that the first club dinner in the

present club-house, some fourteen years ago, was in honor of Mark

Twain.



  I WISH to begin this time at the beginning, lest I forget it

altogether; that is to say, I wish to thank you for this welcome

that you are giving, and the welcome which you gave me seven years

ago, and which I forgot to thank you for at that time. I also wish

to thank you for the welcome you gave me fourteen years ago, which I

also forgot to thank you for at the time.

  I hope you will continue this custom to give me a dinner every seven

years before I join the hosts in the other world- I do not know

which world.

  Mr. Lawrence and Mr. Porter have paid me many compliments. It is

very difficult to take compliments. I do not care whether you

deserve the compliments or not, it is just as difficult to take

them. The other night I was at the Engineers' Club, and enjoyed the

sufferings of Mr. Carnegie. They were complimenting him there; there

it was all compliments, and none of them deserved. They say that you

cannot live by bread alone, but I can live on compliments.

  I do not make any pretence that I dislike compliments. The

stronger the better, and I can manage to digest them. I think I have

lost so much by not making a collection of compliments, to put them

away and take them out again once in a while. When in England I said

that I would start to collect compliments, and I began there and I

have brought some of them along.

  The first one of these lies- I wrote them down and preserved them- I

think they are mighty good and extremely just. It is one of Hamilton

Mabie's compliments. He said that La Salle was the first one to make a

voyage of the Mississippi, but Mark Twain was the first to chart,

light, and navigate it for the whole world.

  If that had been published at the time that I issued that book [Life

on the Mississippi], it would have been money in my pocket. I tell

you, it is a talent by itself to pay compliments gracefully and have

them ring true. It's an art by itself.

  Here is another compliment by Albert Bigelow Paine, my biographer.

He is writing four octavo volumes about me, and he has been at my

elbow two and one-half years.

  I just suppose that he does not know me, but says he knows me. He

says "Mark Twain is not merely a great writer, a great philosopher,

a great man; he is the supreme expression of the human being, with his

strength and his weakness." What a talent for compression! It takes

a genius in compression to compact as many facts as that.

  W. D. Howells spoke of me as first of Hartford, and ultimately of

the solar system, not to say of the universe.

  You know how modest Howells is. If it can be proved that my fame

reaches to Neptune and Saturn, that will satisfy even me. You know how

modest and retiring Howells seems to be, but deep down he is as vain

as I am.

  Mr. Howells had been granted a degree at Oxford, whose gown was red.

He had been invited to an exercise at Columbia, and upon inquiry had

been told that it was usual to wear the black gown. Later he had found

that three other men wore bright gowns, and he had lamented that he

had been one of the black mass, and not a red torch.

  Edison wrote: "The average American loves his family. If he has

any love left over for some other person, he generally selects Mark

Twain."

  Now here's the compliment of a little Montana girl which came to

me indirectly. She was in a room in which there was a large photograph

of me. After gazing at it steadily for a time, she said:

  "We've got a John the Baptist like that." She also said: "Only

ours has more trimmings."

  I suppose she meant the halo. Now here is a gold-miner's compliment.

It is forty-two years old. It was my introduction to an audience to

which I lectured in a log school-house. There were no ladies there.

I wasn't famous then. They didn't know me. Only the miners were there,

with their breeches tucked into their boot-tops and with clay all over

them. They wanted some one to introduce me, and they selected a miner,

who protested, saying:

  "I don't know anything about this man. Anyhow, I only know two

things about him. One is, he has never been in jail, and the other is,

I don't know why."

  There's one thing I want to say about that English trip. I knew

his Majesty the King of England long years ago, and I didn't meet

him for the first time then. One thing that I regret was that some

newspapers said I talked with the Queen of England with my hat on. I

don't do that with any woman. I did not put it on until she asked me

to. Then she told me to put it on, and it's a command there. I thought

I had carried my American democracy far enough. So I put it on. I have

no use for a hat, and never did have.

  Who was it who said that the police of London knew me? Why, the

police know me everywhere. There never was a day over there when a

policeman did not salute me, and then put up his hand and stop the

traffic of the world. They treated me as though I were a duchess.

  The happiest experience I had in England was at a dinner given in

the building of the Punch publication, a humorous paper which is

appreciated by all Englishmen. It was the greatest privilege ever

allowed a foreigner. I entered the dining-room of the building,

where those men get together who have been running the paper for

over fifty years. We were about to begin dinner when the toastmaster

said: "Just a minute; there ought to be a little ceremony." Then there

was that meditating silence for a while, and out of a closet there

came a beautiful little girl dressed in pink, holding in her hand a

copy of the previous week's paper, which had in it my cartoon. It

broke me all up. I could not even say "Thank you." That was the

prettiest incident of the dinner, the delight of all that wonderful

table. When she was about to go, I said, "My child, you are not

going to leave me; I have hardly got acquainted with you." She

replied, "You know I've got to go; they never let me come in here

before, and they never will again." That is one of the beautiful

incidents that I cherish.



  [At the conclusion of his speech, and while the diners were still

cheering him, Colonel Porter brought forward the red-and-gray gown

of the Oxford "doctor," and Mr. Clemens was made to don it. The diners

rose to their feet in their enthusiasm. With the mortar-board on his

head, and looking down admiringly at himself, Mr. Twain said:]

  I like that gown. I always did like red. The redder it is the better

I like it. I was born for a savage. Now, whoever saw any red like

this? There is no red outside the arteries of an archangel that

could compare with this. I know you all envy me. I am going to have

luncheon shortly with ladies- just ladies. I will be the only lady

of my sex present, and I shall put on this gown and make those

ladies look dim.











                 BOOKS, AUTHORS, AND HATS.



        ADDRESS AT THE PILGRIMS' CLUB LUNCHEON, GIVEN

           IN HONOR OF MR. CLEMENS AT THE SAVOY

               HOTEL, LONDON, JUNE 25, 1907.



  Mr. Birrell, M.P., Chief-Secretary for Ireland, in introducing Mr.

Clemens said: "We all love Mark Twain, and we are here to tell him so.

One more point- all the world knows it, and that is why it is

dangerous to omit it- our guest is a distinguished citizen of the

Great Republic beyond the seas. In America his Huckleberry Finn and

his Tom Sawyer are what Robinson Crusoe and Tom Brown's School Days

have been to us. They are racy of the soil. They are books to which it

is impossible to place any period of termination. I will not speak

of the classics- reminiscences of much evil in our early lives. We

do not meet here to-day as critics with our appreciations and

depreciations, our two-penny little prefaces or our forewords. I am

not going to say what the world a thousand years hence will think of

Mark Twain. Posterity will take care of itself, will read what it

wants to read, will forget what it chooses to forget, and will pay

no attention whatsoever to our critical mumblings and jumblings. Let

us therefore be content to say to our friend and guest that we are

here speaking for ourselves and for our children, to say what he has

been to us. I remember in Liverpool, in 1867, first buying the copy,

which I still preserve, of the celebrated Jumping Frog. It had a few

words of preface which reminded me then that our guest in those days

was called 'the wild humorist of the Pacific slope,' and a few lines

later down, 'the moralist of the Main.' That was some forty years ago.

Here he is, still the humorist, still the moralist. His humor enlivens

and enlightens his morality, and his morality is all the better for

his humor. That is one of the reasons why we love him. I am not here

to mention any book of his- that is a subject of dispute in my

family circle, which is the best and which is the next best- but I

must put in a word, lest I should not be true to myself- a terrible

thing- for his Joan of Arc, a book of chivalry, of nobility, and of

manly sincerity for which I take this opportunity of thanking him. But

you can all drink this toast, each one of you with his own

intention. You can get into it what meaning you like. Mark Twain is

a man whom English and Americans do well to honor. He is the true

consolidator of nations. His delightful humor is of the kind which

dissipates and destroys national prejudices. His truth and his

honor, his love of truth, and his love of honor, overflow all

boundaries. He has made the world better by his presence. We rejoice

to see him here. Long may he live to reap the plentiful harvest of

hearty, honest human affection!"



  PILGRIMS, I desire first to thank those undergraduates of Oxford.

When a man has grown so old as I am, when he has reached the verge

of seventy-two years, there is nothing that carries him back to the

dreamland of his life, to his boyhood, like recognition of those young

hearts up yonder. And so I thank them out of my heart. I desire to

thank the Pilgrims of New York also for their kind notice and

message which they have cabled over here. Mr. Birrell says he does not

know how he got here. But he will be able to get away all right- he

has not drunk anything since he came here. I am glad to know about

those friends of his, Otway and Chatterton- fresh, new names to me.

I am glad of the disposition he has shown to rescue them from the

evils of poverty, and if they are still in London, I hope to have a

talk with them. For a while I thought he was going to tell us the

effect which my book had upon his growing manhood. I thought he was

going to tell us how much that effect amounted to, and whether it

really made him what he now is, but with the discretion born of

Parliamentary experience he dodged that, and we do not know now

whether he read the book or not. He did that very neatly. I could

not do it any better myself.

  My books have had effects, and very good ones, too, here and

there, and some others not so good. There is no doubt about that.

But I remember one monumental instance of it years and years ago.

Professor Norton, of Harvard, was over here, and when he came back

to Boston I went out with Howells to call on him. Norton was allied in

some way by marriage with Darwin. Mr. Norton was very gentle in what

he had to say, and almost delicate, and he said: "Mr. Clemens, I

have been spending some time with Mr. Darwin in England, and I

should like to tell you something connected with that visit. You

were the object of it, and I myself would have been very proud of

it, but you may not be proud of it. At any rate, I am going to tell

you what it was, and to leave to you to regard it as you please. Mr.

Darwin took me up to his bedroom and pointed out certain things there-

pitcher-plants, and so on, that he was measuring and watching from day

to day- and he said: 'The chambermaid is permitted to do what she

pleases in this room, but she must never touch those plants and

never touch those books on that table by that candle. With those books

I read myself to sleep every night.' Those were your own books." I

said: "There is no question to my mind as to whether I should regard

that as a compliment or not. I do regard it as a very great compliment

and a very high honor that that great mind, laboring for the whole

human race, should rest itself on my books. I am proud that he

should read himself to sleep with them."

  Now, I could not keep that to myself- I was so proud of it. As

soon as I got home to Hartford I called up my oldest friend- and

dearest enemy on occasion- the Rev. Joseph Twichell, my pastor, and

I told him about that, and, of course, he was full of interest and

venom. Those people who get no compliments like that feel like that.

He went off. He did not issue any applause of any kind, and I did

not hear of that subject for some time. But when Mr. Darwin passed

away from this life, and some time after Darwin's Life and Letters

came out, the Rev. Mr. Twichell procured an early copy of that work

and found something in it which he considered applied to me. He came

over to my house- it was snowing, raining, sleeting, but that did

not make any difference to Twichell. He produced the book, and

turned over and over, until he came to a certain place, when he

said: "Here, look at this letter from Mr. Darwin to Sir Joseph

Hooker." What Mr. Darwin said- I give you the idea and not the very

words- was this: I do not know whether I ought to have devoted my

whole life to these drudgeries in natural history and the other

sciences or not, for while I may have gained in one way I have lost in

another. Once I had a fine perception and appreciation of high

literature, but in me that quality is atrophied. "That was the

reason," said Mr. Twichell, "he was reading your books."

  Mr. Birrell has touched lightly- very lightly, but in not an

uncomplimentary way- on my position in this world as a moralist. I

am glad to have that recognition, too, because I have suffered since I

have been in this town; in the first place, right away, when I came

here, from a newsman going around with a great red, highly displayed

placard in the place of an apron. He was selling newspapers, and there

were two sentences on that placard which would have been all right

if they had been punctuated; but they ran those two sentences together

without a comma or anything, and that would naturally create a wrong

impression, because it said, "Mark Twain arrives Ascot Cup stolen." No

doubt many a person was misled by those sentences joined together in

that unkind way. I have no doubt my character has suffered from it.

I suppose I ought to defend my character, but how can I defend it? I

can say here and now- and anybody can see by my face that I am

sincere, that I speak the truth- that I have never seen that Cup. I

have not got the Cup- I did not have a chance to get it. I have always

had a good character in that way. I have hardly ever stolen

anything, and if I did steal anything I had discretion enough to

know about the value of it first. I do not steal things that are

likely to get myself into trouble. I do not think any of us do that. I

know we all take things- that is to be expected- but really, I have

never taken anything, certainly in England, that amounts to any

great thing. I do confess that when I was here seven years ago I stole

a hat, but that did not amount to anything. It was not a good hat, and

was only a clergyman's hat, anyway.

  I was at a luncheon party, and Archdeacon Wilberforce was there

also. I dare say he is Archdeacon now- he was a canon then- and he was

serving in the Westminster battery, if that is the proper term- I do

not know, as you mix military and ecclesiastical things together so

much. He left the luncheon table before I did. He began this. I did

steal his hat, but he began by taking mine. I make that interjection

because I would not accuse Archdeacon Wilberforce of stealing my

hat- I should not think of it. I confine that phrase to myself. He

merely took my hat. And with good judgment, too- it was a better hat

than his. He came out before the luncheon was over, and sorted the

hats in the hall, and selected one which suited. It happened to be

mine. He went off with it. When I came out by-and-by there was no

hat there which would go on my head except his, which was left behind.

My head was not the customary size just at that time. I had been

receiving a good many very nice and complimentary attentions, and my

head was a couple of sizes larger than usual, and his hat just

suited me. The bumps and corners were all right intellectually.

There were results pleasing to me- possibly so to him. He found out

whose hat it was, and wrote me saying it was pleasant that all the way

home, whenever he met anybody his gravities, his solemnities, his deep

thoughts, his eloquent remarks were all snatched up by the people he

met, and mistaken for brilliant humorisms.

  I had another experience. It was not unpleasing. I was received with

a deference which was entirely foreign to my experience by everybody

whom I met, so that before I got home I had a much higher opinion of

myself than I have ever had before or since. And there is in that very

connection an incident which I remember at that old date which is

rather melancholy to me, because it shows how a person can deteriorate

in a mere seven years. It is seven years ago. I have not that hat now.

I was going down Pall-Mall, or some other of your big streets, and I

recognized that that hat needed ironing. I went into a big shop and

passed in my hat, and asked that it might be ironed. They were

courteous, very courteous, even courtly. They brought that hat back to

me presently very sleek and nice, and I asked how much there was to

pay. They replied that they did not charge the clergy anything. I have

cherished the delight of that moment from that day to this. It was the

first thing I did the other day to go and hunt up that shop and hand

in my hat to have it ironed. I said when it came back, "How much to

pay?" They said, "Ninepence." In seven years I have acquired all

that worldliness, and I am sorry to be back where I was seven years

ago.

  But now I am chaffing and chaffing and chaffing here, and I hope you

will forgive me for that; but when a man stands on the verge of

seventy-two you know perfectly well that he never reached that place

without knowing what this life is- heartbreaking bereavement. And so

our reverence is for our dead. We do not forget them; but our duty

is toward the living; and if we can be cheerful, cheerful in spirit,

cheerful in speech and in hope, that is a benefit to those who are

around us.

  My own history includes an incident which will always connect me

with England in a pathetic way, for when I arrived here seven years

ago with my wife and my daughter- we had gone around the globe

lecturing to raise money to clear off a debt- my wife and one of my

daughters started across the ocean to bring to England our eldest

daughter. She was twenty-four years of age and in the bloom of young

womanhood, and we were unsuspecting. When my wife and daughter- and my

wife has passed from this life since- when they had reached

mid-atlantic, a cablegram- one of those heartbreaking cablegrams which

we all in our days have to experience- was put into my hand. It stated

that that daughter of ours had gone to her long sleep. And so, as I

say, I cannot always be cheerful, and I cannot always be chaffing; I

must sometimes lay the cap and bells aside, and recognize that I am of

the human race like the rest, and must have my cares and griefs. And

therefore I noticed what Mr. Birrell said- I was so glad to hear him

say it- something that was in the nature of these verses here at the

top of this:



          "He lit our life with shafts of sun

             And vanquished pain.

           Thus two great nations stand as one

             In honoring Twain."



  I am very glad to have those verses. I am very glad and very

grateful for what Mr. Birrell said in that connection. I have received

since I have been here, in this one week, hundreds of letters from all

conditions of people in England- men, women, and children- and there

is in them compliment, praise, and, above all and better than all,

there is in them a note of affection. Praise is well, compliment is

well, but affection- that is the last and final and most precious

reward that any man can win, whether by character or achievement,

and I am very grateful to have that reward. All these letters make

me feel that here in England- as in America- when I stand under the

English flag, I am not a stranger. I am not an alien, but at home.









                   DEDICATION SPEECH.



        AT THE DEDICATION OF THE COLLEGE OF THE

            CITY OF NEW YORK, MAY 14, 1908.



  Mr. Clemens wore his gown as Doctor of Laws, Oxford University.

Ambassador Bryce and Mr. Choate had made the formal addresses.



  HOW difficult indeed, is the higher education. Mr. Choate needs a

little of it. He is not only short as a statistician of New York,

but he is off, far off, in his mathematics. The four thousand citizens

of Greater New York, indeed!

  But I don't think it was wise or judicious on the part of Mr. Choate

to show this higher education he has obtained. He sat in the lap of

that great education (I was there at the time), and see the result-

the lamentable result. Maybe if he had had a sandwich here to

sustain him the result would not have been so serious.

  For seventy-two years I have been striving to acquire that higher

education which stands for modesty and diffidence, and it doesn't

work.

  And then look at Ambassador Bryce, who referred to his alma mater,

Oxford. He might just as well have included me. Well, I am a later

production.

  If I am the latest graduate, I really and sincerely hope I am not

the final flower of its seven centuries; I hope it may go on for seven

ages longer.

             DIE SCHRECKEN DER DEUTSCHEN SPRACHE



      ADDRESS TO THE VIENNA PRESS CLUB, NOVEMBER 21, 1897,

                  AS DELIVERED IN GERMAN



  ES hat mich tief geruhrt, meine Herren, hier so gastfreundlich

empfangen zu werden, von Kollegen aus meinem eigenen Berufe, in diesem

von meiner eigenen Heimath so weit entferntem Lande. Mein Herz ist

voller Dankbarkeit, aber meine Armuth an deutschen Worten zwingt

mich zu groszer Sparzamkeit des Ausdruckes. Entschuldigen Sie, meine

Herren, dasz ich verlese, was ich Ihnen sagen will. (Er las aber

nicht, Anm. d. Ref.) Die deutsche Sprache spreche ich nicht gut,

doch haben mehrere Sachverstandige mich versichert, dasz ich sie

schreibe wie ein Engel. Mag sein- ich weisz nicht. Habe bis jetzt

keine Bekanntschaften mit Engeln gehabt. Das kommt spater- wenn's

dem lieben Gott gefallt- es hat keine Eile.

  Seit lange, meine Herren, habe ich die leidenschaftliche Sehnsucht

gehegt, eine Rede auf Deutsch zu halten, aber man hat mir's nie

erlauben wollen. Leute, die kein Gefuhl fur die Kunst hatten, legten

mir immer Hindernisse in den Weg und vereitelten meinen Wunsch-

zuweilen durch Vorwande, haufig durch Gewalt. Immer sagten diese Leute

zu mir: "Schweigen Sie, Ew. Hochwohlgeboren! Ruhe, um Gotteswillen!

Suche eine andere Art und Weise, Dich lastig zu machen."

  Im jetzigen Fall, wie gewohnlich, ist es mir schwierig geworden, mir

die Erlaubnisz zu verschaffen. Das Comite bedauerte sehr, aber es

konnte mir die Erlaubnisz nicht bewilligen wegen eines Gesetzes, das

von der Concordia verlangt, sie soll die deutsche Sprache schnutzen.

Du liebe Zeit! Wieso hatte man mir das sagen konnen- mogen- durfen-

sollen? Ich bin ja der treueste Freund der deutschen Sprache- und

nicht nur jetzt, sondern von lange her- ja vor zwanzig Jahren schon.

Und nie habe ich das Verlangen gehabt, der edlen Sprache zu schaden,

im Gegentheil, nur gewunscht, sie zu verbessern; ich wollte sie blos

reformiren. Es ist der Traum meines Lebens gewesen. Ich habe schon

Besuche bei den verschiedenen deutschen Regierungen abgestattet und um

Kontrakte gebeten. Ich bin jetzt nach Oesterreich in demselben Auftrag

gekommen. Ich wurde nur einige Aenderungen anstreben. Ich wurde blos

die Sprachmethode- die uppige, weitschweifige Konstruktion-

zusammenrucken; die ewige Parenthese unterdrucken, abschaffen,

vernichten; die Einfuhrung von mehr als dreizehn Subjekten in einen

Satz verbieten; das Zeitwort so weit nach vorne rucken, bis man es

ohne Fernrohr entdecken kann. Mit einem Wort, meine Herren, ich mochte

Ihre geliebte Sprache vereinfachen, auf dasz, meine Herren, wenn Sie

sie zum Gebet brauchen, man sie dort oben versteht.

  Ich flehe Sie an, von mir sich berathen zu lassen, fuhren Sie

diese erwahnten Reformen aus. Dann werden Sie eine prachtvolle Sprache

besitzen und nachher, wenn Sie Etwas sagen wollen, werden Sie

wenigstens selber verstehen, was Sie gesagt haben. Aber ofters

heutzutage, wenn Sie einen meilen-langen Satz von sich gegeben und Sie

sich etwas angelehnt haben, um auszuruhen, dann mussen Sie eine

ruhrende Neugierde empfinden, selbst herauszubringen, was Sie

eigentlich gesprochen haben. Vor mehreren Tagen hat der

Korrespondent einer hiesigen Zeitung einen Satz zustande gebracht

welcher hundertundzwolf Worte enthielt und darin waren sieben

Parenthese eingeschachtelt und es wurde Das Subjekt siebenmal

gewechselt. Denken Sie nur, meine Herren, im Laufe der Reise eines

einzigen Satzes musz das arme, verfolgte, ermudete Subjekt siebenmal

umsteigen.

  Nun, wenn wir die erwahnten Reformen ausfuhren, wird's nicht mehre

so arg sein. Doch noch eins. Ich mochte gern das trennbare Zeitwort

auch ein Bischen reformiren. Ich mochte Niemand thun lassen, was

Schiller gethan: Der hat die ganze Geschichte des dreizigjahrigen

Krieges zwischen die zwei Glieder eines trennbaren Zeitwortes

eingezwangt. Das hat sogar Deutschland selbst emport; und man hat

Schiller die Erlaubnisz verweigert, die Geschichte des hundert

Jahrigen Krieges zu verfassen- Gott sei's gedankt. Nachdem alle

diese Reformen festgestellt sein werden, wird die deutsche Sprache die

edelste und die schonste auf der Welt sein.

  Da Ihnen jetzt, meine Herren, der Charackter meiner Mission

bekannt ist, bitte ich Sie, so freundlich zu sein und mir Ihre

werthvolle Hilfe zu schenken. Herr Potzl hat das Publikum glauben

machen wollen, dasz ich nach Wien gekommen bin, um die Brucken zu

verstopfen und den Verkehr zu hindern, wahrend ich Beobachtungen

sammle und aufzeichne. Lassen Sie sich aber nicht von ihm anfuhren.

Meine haufige Anwesenheit auf den Brucken hat einen ganz

unschuldigen Grund. Dort giebt's den nothigen Raum. Dort kann man

einen edlen, langen, deutschen Satz ausdehnen, die Bruckengelander

entlang, und seinen ganzen Inhalt mit einem Blick ubersehen. Auf das

eine Ende des Gelanders klebe ich das erste Glied eines trennbaren

Zeitwortes und das Schluszglied klebe ich an's andere Ende- dann

breite ich den Leib des Satzes dazwischen aus. Gewohnlich sind fur

meinen Zweck die Brucken der Stadt lang genug: wenn ich aber Potzl's

Schriften studiren will, fahre ich hinaus und benutze die herrliche

unendliche Reichsbrucke. Aber das ist eine Verleumdung. Potzl schreibt

das schonste Deutsch. Vielleicht nicht so biegsam wie das meinige,

aber in manchen Kleinigkeiten viel besser. Entschuldigen Sie diese

Schmeicheleien. Die sind wohl verdient. Nun bringe ich meine Rede

um- nein- ich wollte sagen, ich bringe sie zum Schlusz. Ich bin ein

Fremder- aber hier, unter Ihnen, habe ich es ganz vergessen. Und so,

wieder, und noch wieder- biete ich Ihnen meinen herzlichsten Dank!










              HORRORS OF THE GERMAN LANGUAGE.



      ADDRESS TO THE VIENNA PRESS CLUB, NOVEMBER 21, 1897



                 [A LITERAL TRANSLATION].



  IT has me deeply touched, my gentlemen, here so hospitably

received to be. From colleagues out of my own profession, in this from

my own home so far distant land. My heart is full of gratitude, but my

poverty of German words forces me to greater economy of expression.

Excuse you, my gentlemen, that I read off, what I you say will. [But

he didn't read].



  The German language speak I not good, but have numerous connoisseurs

me assured that I her write like an angel. Maybe- maybe- I know not.

Have till now no acquaintance with the angels had. That comes later-

when it the dear God please- it has no hurry.



  Since long, my gentlemen, have I the passionate longing nursed a

speech on German to hold, but one has me not permitted. Men, who no

feeling for the art had, laid me ever hindrance in the way and made

naught my desire- sometimes by excuses, often by force. Always said

these men to me: "Keep you still, your Highness! Silence! For God's

sake seek another way and means yourself obnoxious to make."



  In the present case, as usual it is me difficult become, for me

the permission to obtain. The committee sorrowed deeply, but could

me the permission not grant on account of a law which from the

Concordia demands she shall the German language protect. Du liebe

Zeit! How so had one to me this say could- might- dared- should? I

am indeed the truest friend of the German language- and not only

now, but from long since- yes, before twenty years already. And

never have I the desire had the noble language to hurt; to the

contrary, only wished she to improve- I would her only reform. It is

the dream of my life been. I have already visits by the various German

governments paid and for contracts prayed. I am now to Austria in

the same task come. I would only some changes effect. I would only the

language method- the luxurious, elaborate construction compress, the

eternal parenthesis suppress, do away with, annihilate; the

introduction of more than thirteen subjects in one sentence forbid;

the verb so far to the front pull that one it without a telescope

discover can. With one word, my gentlemen, I would your beloved

language simplify so that, my gentlemen, when you her for prayer need,

One her yonder-up understands.



  I beseech you, from me yourself counsel to let, execute these

mentioned reforms. Then will you an elegant language possess, and

afterward, when you some thing say will, will you at least yourself

understand what you said had. But often nowadays, when you a mile-long

sentence from you given and you yourself somewhat have rested, then

must you have a touching inquisitiveness have yourself to determine

what you actually spoken have. Before several days has the

correspondent of a local paper a sentence constructed which hundred

and twelve words contain, and therein were seven parentheses

smuggled in, and the subject seven times changed. Think you only, my

gentlemen, in the course of the voyage of a single sentence must the

poor, persecuted, fatigued subject seven times change position!



  Now, when we the mentioned reforms execute, will it no longer so bad

be. Doch noch eins. I might gladly the separable verb also a little

bit reform. I might none do let what Schiller did: he has the whole

history of the Thirty Years' War between the two members of a

separable verb in-pushed. That has even Germany itself aroused, and

one has Schiller the permission refused the History of the Hundred

Years' War to compose- God be it thanked! After all these reforms

established be will, will the German language the noblest and the

prettiest on the world be.



  Since to you now, my gentlemen, the character of my mission known

is, beseech I you so friendly to be and to me your valuable help

grant. Mr. Potzl has the public believed make would that I to Vienna

come am in order the bridges to clog up and the traffic to hinder,

while I observations gather and note. Allow you yourselves but not

from him deceived. My frequent presence on the bridges has an entirely

innocent ground. Yonder gives it the necessary space, yonder can one a

noble long German sentence elaborate, the bridge-railing along, and

his whole contents with one glance overlook. On the one end of the

railing pasted I the first member of a separable verb and the final

member cleave I to the other end- then spread the body of the sentence

between it out! Usually are for my purposes the bridges of the city

long enough; when I but Potzl's writings study will I ride out and use

the glorious endless imperial bridge. But this is a calumny; Potzl

writes the prettiest German. Perhaps not so pliable as the mine, but

in many details much better. Excuse you these flatteries. These are

well deserved.



  Now I my speech execute- no, I would say I bring her to the close. I

am a foreigner- but here, under you, have I it entirely forgotten. And

so again and yet again proffer I you my heartiest thanks.

