





                   THE ASCOT GOLD CUP.



  The news of Mr. Clemens's arrival in England in June, 1907, was

announced in the papers with big headlines. Immediately following

the announcement was the news- also with big headlines- that the Ascot

Gold Cup had been stolen the same day. The combination, MARK TWAIN

ARRIVES- ASCOT CUP STOLEN, amused the public. The Lord Mayor of London

gave a banquet at the Mansion House in honor of Mr. Clemens.



  I DO assure you that I am not so dishonest as I look. I have been so

busy trying to rehabilitate my honor about that Ascot Cup that I

have had no time to prepare a speech.

  I was not so honest in former days as I am now, but I have always

been reasonably honest. Well, you know how a man is influenced by

his surroundings. Once upon a time I went to a public meeting where

the oratory of a charitable worker so worked on my feelings that, in

common with others, I would have dropped something substantial in

the hat- if it had come round at that moment.

  The speaker had the power of putting those vivid pictures before

one. We were all affected. That was the moment for the hat. I would

have put two hundred dollars in. Before he had finished I could have

put in four hundred dollars. I felt I could have filled up a blank

check- with somebody else's name- and dropped it in.

  Well, now, another speaker got up, and in fifteen minutes damped

my spirit; and during the speech of the third speaker all my

enthusiasm went away. When at last the hat came round I dropped in ten

cents- and took out twenty-five.

  I came over here to get the honorary degree from Oxford, and I would

have encompassed the seven seas for an honor like that- the greatest

honor that has ever fallen to my share. I am grateful to Oxford for

conferring that honor upon me, and I am sure my country appreciates

it, because first and foremost it is an honor to my country.

  And now I am going home again across the sea. I am in spirit young

but in the flesh old, so that it is unlikely that when I go away I

shall ever see England again. But I shall go with the recollection

of the generous and kindly welcome I have had.

  I suppose I must say "Good-bye." I say it not with my lips only, but

from the heart.







                 THE SAVAGE CLUB DINNER.



  A portrait of Mr. Clemens, signed by all the members of the club

attending the dinner, was presented to him, July 6, 1907, and in

submitting the toast "The Health of Mark Twain" Mr. J. Scott Stokes

recalled the fact that he had read parts of Doctor Clemens's works

to Harold Frederic during Frederic's last illness.



  MR. CHAIRMAN AND FELLOW-SAVAGES,- I am very glad indeed to have that

portrait. I think it is the best one that I have ever had, and there

have been opportunities before to get a good photograph. I have sat to

photographers twenty-two times to-day. Those sittings added to those

that have preceded them since I have been in Europe- if we average

at that rate- must have numbered one hundred to two hundred

sittings. Out of all those there ought to be some good photographs.

This is the best I have had, and I am glad to have your honored

names on it. I did not know Harold Frederic personally, but I have

heard a great deal about him, and nothing that was not pleasant and

nothing except such things as lead a man to honor another man and to

love him. I consider that it is a misfortune of mine that I have never

had the luck to meet him, and if any book of mine read to him in his

last hours made those hours easier for him and more comfortable, I

am very glad and proud of that. I call to mind such a case many

years ago of an English authoress, well known in her day, who wrote

such beautiful child tales, touching and lovely in every possible way.

In a little biographical sketch of her I found that her last hours

were spent partly in reading a book of mine, until she was no longer

able to read. That has always remained in my mind, and I have always

cherished it as one of the good things of my life. I had read what she

had written, and had loved her for what she had done.

  Stanley apparently carried a book of mine feloniously away to

Africa, and I have not a doubt that it had a noble and uplifting

influence there in the wilds of Africa- because on his previous

journeys he never carried anything to read except Shakespeare and

the Bible. I did not know of that circumstance. I did not know that he

had carried a book of mine. I only noticed that when he came back he

was a reformed man. I knew Stanley very well in those old days.

Stanley was the first man who ever reported a lecture of mine, and

that was in St. Louis. When I was down there the next time to give the

same lecture I was told to give them something fresh, as they had read

that in the papers. I met Stanley here when he came back from that

first expedition of his which closed with the finding of

Livingstone. You remember how he would break out at the meetings of

the British Association, and find fault with what people said, because

Stanley had notions of his own, and could not contain them. They had

to come out or break him up- and so he would go round and address

geographical societies. He was always on the war-path in those days,

and people always had to have Stanley contradicting their geography

for them and improving it. But he always came back and sat drinking

beer with me in the hotel up to two in the morning, and he was then

one of the most civilized human beings that ever was.

  I saw in a newspaper this evening a reference to an interview

which appeared in one of the papers the other day, in which the

interviewer said that I characterized Mr. Birrell's speech the other

day at the Pilgrims' Club as "bully." Now, if you will excuse me, I

never use slang to an interviewer or anybody else. That distresses me.

Whatever I said about Mr. Birrell's speech was said in English, as

good English as anybody uses. If I could not describe Mr. Birrell's

delightful speech without using slang I would not describe it at

all. I would close my mouth and keep it closed, much as it would

discomfort me.

  Now that comes of interviewing a man in the first person, which is

an altogether wrong way to interview him. It is entirely wrong because

none of you, I, or anybody else, could interview a man- could listen

to a man talking any length of time and then go off and reproduce that

talk in the first person. It can't be done. What results is merely

that the interviewer gives the substance of what is said and puts it

in his own language and puts it in your mouth. It will always be

either better language than you use or worse, and in my case it is

always worse. I have a great respect for the English language. I am

one of its supporters, its promoters, its elevators. I don't degrade

it. A slip of the tongue would be the most that you would get from me.

I have always tried hard and faithfully to improve my English and

never to degrade it. I always try to use the best English to

describe what I think and what I feel, or what I don't feel and what I

don't think.

  I am not one of those who in expressing opinions confine

themselves to facts. I don't know anything that mars good literature

so completely as too much truth. Facts contain a deal of poetry, but

you can't use too many of them without damaging your literature. I

love all literature, and as long as I am a doctor of literature- I

have suggested to you for twenty years I have been diligently trying

to improve my own literature, and now, by virtue of the University

of Oxford, I mean to doctor everybody else's.

  Now I think I ought to apologize for my clothes. At home I venture

things that I am not permitted by my family to venture in foreign

parts. I was instructed before I left home and ordered to refrain from

white clothes in England. I meant to keep that command fair and clean,

and I would have done it if I had been in the habit of obeying

instructions, but I can't invent a new process in life right away. I

have not had white clothes on since I crossed the ocean until now.

  In these three or four weeks I have grown so tired of gray and black

that you have earned my gratitude in permitting me to come as I

have. I wear white clothes in the depth of winter in my home, but I

don't go out in the streets in them. I don't go out to attract too

much attention. I like to attract some, and always I would like to

be dressed so that I may, be more conspicuous than anybody else.

  If I had been an ancient Briton, I would not have contented myself

with blue paint, but I would have bankrupted the rainbow. I so enjoy

gay clothes in which women clothe themselves that it always grieves me

when I go to the opera to see that, while women look like a

flower-bed, the men are a few gray stumps among them in their black

evening dress. These are two or three reasons why I wish to wear white

clothes. When I find myself in assemblies like this, with everybody in

black clothes, I know I possess something that is superior to

everybody else's. Clothes are never clean. You don't know whether they

are clean or not, because you can't see.

  Here or anywhere you must scour your head every two or three days or

it is full of grit. Your clothes must collect just as much dirt as

your hair. If you wear white clothes you are clean, and your

cleaning bill gets so heavy that you have to take care. I am proud

to say that I can wear a white suit of clothes without a blemish for

three days. If you need any further instruction in the matter of

clothes I shall be glad to give it to you. I hope I have convinced

some of you that it is just as well to wear white clothes as any other

kind. I do not want to boast. I only want to make you understand

that you are not clean.

  As to age, the fact that I am nearly seventy-two years old does

not clearly indicate how old I am, because part of every day- it is

with me as with you- you try to describe your age, and you cannot do

it. Sometimes you are only fifteen; sometimes you are twenty-five.

It is very seldom in a day that I am seventy-two years old. I am older

now sometimes than I was when I used to rob orchards; a thing which

I would not do today- if the orchards were watched. I am so glad to be

here to-night. I am so glad to renew with the Savages that now ancient

time when I first sat with a company of this club in London in 1872.

That is a long time ago. But I did stay with the Savages a night in

London long ago, and as I had come into a very strange land, and was

with friends, as I could see, that has always remained in my mind as a

peculiarly blessed evening, since it brought me into contact with

men of my own kind and my own feelings.

  I am glad to be here, and to see you all again, because it is very

likely that I shall not see you again. It is easier than I thought

to come across the Atlantic. I have been received, as you know, in the

most delightfully generous way in England ever since I came here. It

keeps me choked up all the time. Everybody is so generous, and they do

seem to give you such a hearty welcome. Nobody in the world, can

appreciate it higher than I do. It did not wait till I got to

London, but when I came ashore at Tilbury the stevedores on the dock

raised the first welcome- a good and hearty welcome from the men who

do the heavy labor in the world, and save you and me having to do

it. They are the men who with their hands build empires and make

them prosper. It is because of them that the others are wealthy and

can live in luxury. They received me with a "Hurrah!" that went to

my heart. They are the men that build civilization, and without them

no civilization can be built. So I came first to the authors and

creators of civilization, and I blessedly end this happy meeting

with the Savages who destroy it.







                 GENERAL MILES AND THE DOG.



  Mr. Clemens was the guest of honor at a dinner given by the Pleiades

Club at the Hotel Brevoort, December 22, 1907- The toastmaster

introduced the guest of the evening with a high tribute to his place

in American literature, saying that he was dear to the hearts of all

Americans.



  IT is hard work to make a speech when you have listened to

compliments from the powers in authority. A compliment is a hard

text to preach to. When the chairman introduces me as a person of

merit, and when he says pleasant things about me, I always feel like

answering simply that what he says is true; that it is all right;

that, as far as I am concerned, the things he said can stand as they

are. But you always have to say something, and that is what

frightens me.

  I remember out in Sydney once having to respond to some

complimentary toast, and my one desire was to turn in my tracks like

any other worm- and run for it. I was remembering that occasion at a

later date when I had to introduce a speaker. Hoping, then, to spur

his speech by putting him, in joke, on the defensive, I accused him in

my introduction of everything I thought it impossible for him to

have committed. When I finished there was an awful calm. I had been

telling his life history by mistake.

  One must keep up one's character. Earn a character first if you can,

and if you can't, then assume one. From the code of morals I have been

following and revising and revising for seventy-two years I remember

one detail. All my life I have been honest- comparatively honest. I

could never use money I had not made honestly- I could only lend it.

  Last spring I met General Miles again, and he commented on the

fact that we had known each other thirty years. He said it was strange

that we had not met years before, when we had both been in Washington.

At that point I changed the subject, and I changed it with art. But

the facts are these:

  I was then under contract for my Innocents Abroad, but did not

have a cent to live on while I wrote it. So I went to Washington to do

a little journalism. There I met an equally poor friend, William

Davidson, who had not a single vice, unless you call it a vice in a

Scot to love Scotch. Together we devised the first and original

newspaper syndicate, selling two letters a week to twelve newspapers

and getting $1 a letter. That $24 a week would have been enough for

us- if we had not had to support the jug.

  But there was a day when we felt that we must have $3 right away- $3

at once. That was how I met the General. It doesn't matter now what we

wanted so much money at one time for, but that Scot and I did

occasionally want it. The Scot sent me out one day to get it. He had a

great belief in Providence, that Scottish friend of mine. He said:

"The Lord will provide."

  I had given up trying to find the money lying about, and was in a

hotel lobby in despair, when I saw a beautiful unfriended dog. The dog

saw me, too, and at once we became acquainted. Then General Miles came

in, admired the dog, and asked me to price it. I priced it at $3. He

offered me an opportunity to reconsider the value of the beautiful

animal, but I refused to take more than Providence knew I needed.

The General carried the dog to his room.

  Then came in a sweet little middle-aged man, who at once began

looking around the lobby.

  "Did you lose a dog?" I asked. He said he had.

  "I think I could find it," I volunteered, "for a small sum."

  "'How much?'" he asked. And I told him $3. He urged me to accept

more, but I did not wish to outdo Providence. Then I went to the

General's room and asked for the dog back. He was very angry, and

wanted to know why I had sold him a dog that did not belong to me.

  "That's a singular question to ask me, sir," I replied. "Didn't

you ask me to sell him? You started it." And he let me have him. I

gave him back his $3 and returned the dog, collect, to its owner. That

second $3 I carried home to the Scot, and we enjoyed it, but the first

$3, the money I got from the General, I would have had to lend.

  The General seemed not to remember my part in that adventure, and

I never had the heart to tell him about it.







               WHEN IN DOUBT, TELL THE TRUTH.



  Mark Twain's speech at the dinner of the "Freundschaft Society,"

March 9, 1906, had as a basis the words of introduction used by

Toastmaster Frank, who, referring to Pudd'nhead Wilson, used the

phrase, "When in doubt, tell the truth."



  MR. CHAIRMAN, MR. PUTZEL, AND GENTLEMEN OF THE FREUNDSCHAFT,- That

maxim I did invent, but never expected it to be applied to me. I did

say, "When you are in doubt," but when I am in doubt myself I use more

sagacity.

  Mr. Grout suggested that if I have anything to say against Mr.

Putzel, or any criticism of his career or his character, I am the last

person to come out on account of that maxim and tell the truth. That

is altogether a mistake.

  I do think it is right for other people to be virtuous so that

they can be happy hereafter, but if I knew every impropriety that even

Mr. Putzel has committed in his life, I would not mention one of them.

My judgment has been maturing for seventy years, and I have got to

that point where I know better than that.

  Mr. Putzel stands related to me in a very tender way (through the

tax office), and it does not behoove me to say anything which could by

any possibility militate against that condition of things.

  Now, that word- taxes, taxes, taxes! I have heard it to-night. I

have heard it all night. I wish somebody would change that subject;

that is a very sore subject to me.

  I was so relieved when Judge Leventritt did find something that

was not taxable- when he said that the commissioner could not tax your

patience. And that comforted me. We've got so much taxation. I don't

know of a single foreign product that enters this country untaxed

except the answer to prayer.

  On an occasion like this the proprieties require that you merely pay

compliments to the guest of the occasion, and I am merely here to

pay compliments to the guest of the occasion, not to criticise him

in any way, and I can say only complimentary things to him.

  When I went down to the tax office some time ago, for the first time

in New York, I saw Mr. Putzel sitting in the "Seat of Perjury." I

recognized him right away. I warmed to him on the spot. I didn't

know that I had ever seen him before, but just as soon as I saw him

I recognized him. I had met him twenty-five years before, and at

that time had achieved a knowledge of his abilities and something more

than that.

  I thought: "Now, this is the man whom I saw twenty-five years

ago." On that occasion I not only went free at his hands, but

carried off something more than that. I hoped it would happen again.

  It was twenty-five years ago when I saw a young clerk in Putnam's

book-store. I went in there and asked for George Haven Putnam, and

handed him my card, and then the young man said Mr. Putnam was busy

and I couldn't see him. Well, I had merely called in a social way, and

so it didn't matter.

  I was going out when I saw a great big, fat, interesting-looking

book lying there, and I took it up. It was an account of the

invasion of England in the fourteenth century by the Preaching

Friar, and it interested me.

  I asked him the price of it, and he said four dollars.

  "Well," I said, "what discount do you allow to publishers?"

  He said: "Forty per cent. off."

  I said: "All right, I am a publisher."

  He put down the figure, forty per cent. off, on a card.

  Then I said: "What discount do you allow to authors?"

  He said: "Forty per cent. off."

  "Well," I said, "set me down as an author."

  "Now," said I, "what discount do you allow to the clergy?"

  He said: "Forty per cent. off."

  I said to him that I was only on the road, and that I was studying

for the ministry. I asked him wouldn't he knock off twenty per cent.

for that. He set down the figure, and he never smiled once.

  I was working off these humorous brilliancies on him and getting

no return- not a scintillation in his eye, not a spark of

recognition of what I was doing there. I was almost in despair.

  I thought I might try him once more, so I said: "Now, I am also a

member of the human race. Will you let me have the ten per cent. off

for that?" He set it down, and never smiled.

  Well, I gave it up. I said: "There is my card with my address on it,

but I have not any money with me. Will you please send the bill to

Hartford?" I took up the book and was going away.

  He said: "Wait a minute. There is forty cents coming to you."

  When I met him in the tax office I thought maybe I could make

something again, but I could not. But I had not any idea I could

when I came, and as it turned out I did get off entirely free.

  I put up my hand and made a statement. It gave me a good deal of

pain to do that. I was not used to it. I was born and reared in the

higher circles of Missouri, and there we don't do such things-

didn't in my time, but we have got that little matter settled- got a

sort of tax levied on me.

  Then he touched me. Yes, he touched me this time, because he

cried- cried! He was moved to tears to see that I, a virtuous person

only a year before, after immersion for one year- during one year in

the New York morals- had no more conscience than a millionaire.







                   THE DAY WE CELEBRATE.



        ADDRESS AT THE FOURTH-OF-JULY DINNER OF THE

              AMERICAN SOCIETY, LONDON, 1899.



  I NOTICED in Ambassador Choate's speech that he said: "You may be

Americans or Englishmen, but you cannot be both at the same time." You

responded by applause.

  Consider the effect of a short residence here. I find the Ambassador

rises first to speak to a toast, followed by a Senator, and I come

third. What a subtle tribute that to monarchial influence of the

country when you place rank above respectability!

  I was born modest, and if I had not been things like this would

force it upon me. I understand it quite well. I am here to see that

between them they do justice to the day we celebrate, and in case they

do not I must do it myself. But I notice they have considered this day

merely from one side- its sentimental, patriotic, poetic side. But

it has another side. It has a commercial, a business side that needs

reforming. It has a historical side.

  I do not say "an" historical side, because I am speaking the

American language. I do not see why our cousins should continue to say

"an" hospital, "an" historical fact, "an" horse. It seems to me the

Congress of Women, now in session, should look to it. I think "an"

is having a little too much to do with it. It comes of habit, which

accounts for many things.

  Yesterday, for example, I was at a luncheon party. At the end of the

party a great dignitary of the English Established Church went away

half an hour before anybody else and carried off my hat. Now, that was

an innocent act on his part. He went out first, and of course had

the choice of hats. As a rule I try to get out first myself. But I

hold that it was an innocent, unconscious act, due, perhaps, to

heredity. He was thinking about ecclesiastical matters, and when a man

is in that condition of mind he will take anybody's hat. The result

was that the whole afternoon I was under the influence of his clerical

hat and could not tell a lie. Of course, he was hard at it.

  It is a compliment to both of us. His hat fitted me exactly; my hat

fitted him exactly. So I judge I was born to rise to high dignity in

the Church some how or other, but I do not know what he was born for.

That is an illustration of the influence of habit, and it is

perceptible here when they say "an" hospital, "an" European, "an"

historical.

  The business aspects of the Fourth of July is not perfect as it

stands. See what it costs us every year with loss of life, the

crippling of thousands with its fireworks, and the burning down of

property. It is not only sacred to patriotism and universal freedom,

but to the surgeon, the undertaker, the insurance offices- and they

are working it for all it is worth.

  I am pleased to see that we have a cessation of war for the time.

This coming from me, a soldier, you will appreciate. I was a soldier

in the Southern war for two weeks, and when gentlemen get up to

speak of the great deeds our army and navy have recently done, why, it

goes all through me and fires up the old war spirit. I had in my first

engagement three horses shot under me. The next ones went over my

head, the next hit me in the back. Then I retired to meet an

engagement.

  I thank you, gentlemen, for making even a slight reference to the

war profession, in which I distinguished myself, short as my career

was.







                     INDEPENDENCE DAY.



  The American Society in London gave a banquet, July 4, 1907, at

the Hotel Cecil. Ambassador Choate called on Mr. Clemens to respond to

the toast "The Day We Celebrate."



  MR. CHAIRMAN, MY LORD, AND GENTLEMEN,- Once more it happens, as it

has happened so often since I arrived in England a week or two ago,

that instead of celebrating the Fourth of July properly as has been

indicated, I have to first take care of my personal character.

  Sir Mortimer Durand still remains unconvinced. Well, I tried to

convince these people from the beginning that I did not take the Ascot

Cup; and as I have failed to convince anybody that I did not take

the cup, I might as well confess I did take it and be done with it.

I don't see why this uncharitable feeling should follow me everywhere,

and why I should have that crime thrown up to me on all occasions. The

tears that I have wept over it ought to have created a different

feeling than this- and, besides, I don't think it is very right or

fair that, considering England has been trying to take a cup of ours

for forty years- I don't see why they should take so much trouble when

I tried to go into the business myself.

  Sir Mortimer Durand, too, has had trouble from going to a dinner

here, and he has told you what he suffered in consequence. But what

did he suffer? He only missed his train and one night of discomfort,

and he remembers it to this day. Oh! if you could only think what I

have suffered from a similar circumstance. Two or three years ago,

in New York, with that Society there which is made up of people from

all British Colonies, and from Great Britain, generally, who were

educated in British colleges and British schools, I was there to

respond to a toast of some kind or other, and I did then what I have

been in the habit of doing, from a selfish motive, for a long time,

and that is, I got myself placed No. 3 in the list of speakers- then

you get home early.

  I had to go five miles up-river, and had to catch a particular train

or not get there. But see the magnanimity which is born in me, which I

have cultivated all my life. A very famous and very great British

clergyman came to me presently, and he said: "I am away down in the

list; I have got to catch a certain train this Saturday night; if I

don't catch that train I shall be carried beyond midnight and break

the Sabbath. Won't you change places with me? I said: "Certainly I

will." I did it at once. Now, see what happened. Talk about Sir

Mortimer Durand's sufferings for a single night! I have suffered

ever since. because I saved that gentleman from breaking the

Sabbath- yes, saved him. I took his place, but I lost my train, and it

was I who broke the Sabbath. Up to that time I never had broken the

Sabbath in my life and from that day to this I never have kept it.

  Oh! I am learning much here to-night. I find I didn't know

anything about the American Society- that is, I didn't know its

chief virtue. I didn't know its chief virtue until his Excellency

our Ambassador revealed it- I may say, exposed it. I was intending

to go home on the 13th of this month, but I look upon that in a

different light now. I am going to stay here until the American

Society pays my passage.

  Our Ambassador has spoken of our Fourth of July and the noise it

makes. We have got a double Fourth of July- a daylight Fourth and a

midnight Fourth. During the day in America, as our Ambassador has

indicated, we keep the Fourth of July properly in a reverent spirit.

We devote it to teaching our children patriotic things- reverence

for the Declaration of Independence. We honor the day all through

the daylight hour's, and when night comes we dishonor it. Presently-

before long- they are getting nearly ready to begin now- on the

Atlantic coast, when night shuts down, that pandemonium will begin,

and there will be noise, and noise, and noise- all night long- and

there will be more than noise- there will be people crippled, there

will be people killed, there will be people who will lose their

eyes, and all through that permission which we give to irresponsible

boys to play with firearms and fire-crackers, and all sorts of

dangerous things. We turn that Fourth of July, alas! over to rowdies

to drink and get drunk and make the night hideous, and we cripple

and kill more people than you would imagine.

  We probably began to celebrate our Fourth-of-July night in that

way one hundred and twenty-five years ago, and on every Fourth-of-July

night since these horrors have grown and grown, until now, in our five

thousand towns of America, somebody gets killed or crippled on every

Fourth-of-July night, besides those cases of sick persons whom we

never hear of, who die as the result of the noise or the shock. They

cripple and kill more people on the Fourth of July in America than

they kill and cripple in our wars nowadays, and there are no

pensions for these folk. And, too, we burn houses. Really we destroy

more property on every Fourth-of-July night than the whole of the

United States was worth one hundred and twenty-five years ago.

Really our Fourth of July is our day of mourning, our day of sorrow.

Fifty thousand people who have lost friends, or who have had friends

crippled, receive that Fourth of July, when it comes, as a day of

mourning for the losses they have sustained in their families.

  I have suffered in that way myself. I have had relatives killed in

that way. One was in Chicago years ago- an uncle of mine, just as good

an uncle as I have ever had, and I had lots of them- yes, uncles to

burn, uncles to spare. This poor uncle, full of patriotism, opened his

mouth to hurrah, and a rocket went down his throat. Before that man

could ask for a drink of water to quench that thing, it blew up and

scattered him all over the forty-five States, and- really, now, this

is true- I know about it myself- twenty-four hours after that it was

raining buttons, recognizable as his, on the Atlantic seaboard. A

person cannot have a disaster like that and be entirely cheerful the

rest of his life. I had another uncle, on an entirely different Fourth

of July, who was blown up that way, and really it trimmed him as it

would a tree. He had hardly a limb left on him anywhere. All we have

left now is an expurgated edition of that uncle. But never mind

about these things; they are merely passing matters. Don't let me make

you sad.

  Sir Mortimer Durand said that you, the English people, gave up

your colonies over there- got tired of them- and did it with

reluctance. Now I wish you just to consider that he was right about

that, and that he had his reasons for saying that England did not look

upon our Revolution as a foreign war, but as a civil war fought by

Englishmen.

  Our Fourth of July which we honor so much, and which we love so

much, and which we take so much pride in, is an English institution,

not an American one, and it comes of a great ancestry. The first

Fourth of July in that noble genealogy dates back seven centuries

lacking eight years. That is the day of the Great Charter- the Magna

Charta- which was born at Runnymede in the next to the last year of

King John, and portions of the liberties secured thus by those hardy

Barons from that reluctant King John are a part of our Declaration

of Independence, of our Fourth of July, of our American liberties. And

the second of those Fourths of July was not born until four

centuries later, in Charles the First's time in the Bill of Rights,

and that is ours, that is part of our liberties. The next one was

still English, in New England, where they established that principle

which remains with us to this day, and in will continue to remain with

us- no taxation without-representation. That is always going to stand,

and that the English Colonies in New England gave us.

  The Fourth of July, and the one which you are celebrating now,

born in Philadelphia on the 4th of July, 1776- that is English, too.

It is not American. Those were English colonists, subjects of King

George III., Englishmen at heart, who protested against the

oppressions of the Home Government. Though they proposed to cure those

oppressions and remove them, still remaining under the Crown, they

were not intending a revolution. The revolution was brought about by

circumstances which they could not control. The Declaration of

Independence was written by a British subject, every name signed to it

was the name of a British subject. There was not the name of a

single American attached to the Declaration of Independence- in

fact, there was not an American in the country in that day except

the Indians out on the plains. They were Englishmen, all Englishmen-

Americans did not begin until seven years later, when that Fourth of

July had become seven years old, and then the American Republic was

established. Since then there have been Americans. So you see what

we owe to England in the matter of liberties.

  We have, however, one Fourth of July which is absolutely our own,

and that is that great proclamation issued forty years ago by that

great American to whom Sir Mortimer Durand paid that just and

beautiful tribute- Abraham Lincoln. Lincoln's proclamation, which

not only set the black slaves free, but set the white man free also.

The owner was set free from the burden and offence, that sad condition

of things where he was in so many instances a master and owner of

slaves when he did not want to be. That proclamation set them all

free. But even in this matter England suggested it, for England had

set her slaves free thirty years before, and we followed her

example. We always followed her example, whether it was good or bad.

  And it was an English judge that issued that other great

proclamation, and established that great principle that, when a slave,

let him belong to whom he may, and let him come whence he may, sets

his foot upon English soil, his fetters by that act fall away and he

is a free man before the world. We followed the example of 1833, and

we freed our slaves as I have said.

  It is true, then, that all our Fourths of July, and we have five

of them, England gave to us, except that one that I have mentioned-

the Emancipation Proclamation, and, lest we forget, let us all

remember that we owe these things to England. Let us be able to say to

Old England, this great-hearted, venerable old mother of the race, you

gave us our Fourths of July that we love and that we honor and revere,

you gave us the Declaration of Independence, which is the Charter of

our rights, you, the venerable Mother of Liberties, the Protector of

Anglo-Saxon Freedom- you gave us these things, and we do most honestly

thank you for them.







                   AMERICANS AND THE ENGLISH.



              ADDRESS AT A GATHERING OF AMERICANS IN

                      LONDON, JULY 4, 1872.



  MR. CHAIRMAN AND LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,- I thank you for the

compliment which has just been tendered me, and to show my

appreciation of it I will not afflict you with many words. It is

pleasant to celebrate in this peaceful way, upon this old mother soil,

the anniversary of an experiment which was born of war with this

same land so long ago, and wrought out to a successful issue by the

devotion of our ancestors. It has taken nearly a hundred years to

bring the English and Americans into kindly and mutually

appreciative relations, but I believe it has been accomplished at

last. It was a great step when the two last misunderstandings were

settled by arbitration instead of cannon. It is another great step

when England adopts our sewing-machines without claiming the

invention- as usual. It was another when they imported one of our

sleeping-cars the other day. And it warmed my heart more than I can

tell, yesterday, when I witnessed the spectacle of an Englishman

ordering an American sherry cobbler of his own free will and accord-

and not only that but with a great brain and a level head reminding

the barkeeper not to forget the strawberries. With a common origin,

a common language, a common literature, a common religion, and- common

drinks, what is longer needful to the cementing of the two nations

together in a permanent bond of brotherhood?

  This is an age of progress, and ours is a progressive land. A

great and glorious land, too- a land which has developed a Washington,

a Franklin, a Wm. M. Tweed, a Longfellow, a Motley, a Jay Gould, a

Samuel C. Pomeroy, a recent Congress which has never had its equal (in

some respects), and a United States Army which conquered sixty Indians

in eight months by tiring them out- which is much better than

uncivilized slaughter, God knows. We have a criminal jury system which

is superior to any in the world and its efficiency is only marred by

the difficulty of finding twelve men every day who don't know anything

and can't read. And I may observe that we have an insanity plea that

would have saved Cain. I think I can say, and say with pride, that

we have some legislatures that bring higher prices than any in the

world.

  I refer with effusion to our railway system, which contents to let

us live, though it might do the opposite, being our owners. It only

destroyed three thousand and seventy lives last year by collisions,

and twenty-seven thousand two hundred and sixty by running over

heedless and unnecessary people at crossings. The companies

seriously regretted the killing of these thirty thousand people, and

went so far as to pay for some of them- voluntarily, of course, for

the meanest of us would not claim that we possess a court

treacherous enough to enforce a law against a railway company. But,

thank Heaven, the railway companies are generally disposed to do the

right and kindly thing without compulsion. I know of an instance which

greatly touched me at the time. After an accident the company sent

home the remains of a dear distant old relative of mine in a basket,

with the remark, "Please state what figure you hold him at- and return

the basket." Now there couldn't be anything friendlier than that.

  But I must not stand here and brag all night. However, you won't

mind a body bragging a little about his country on the Fourth of July.

It is a fair and legitimate time to fly the eagle. I will say only one

more word of brag- and a hopeful one. It is this. We have a form of

government which gives each man a fair chance and no favor. With us no

individual is born with a right to look down upon his neighbor and

hold him in contempt. Let such of us as are not dukes find our

consolation in that. And we may find hope for the future in the fact

that as unhappy as is the condition of our political morality

to-day, England has risen up out of a far fouler since the days when

Charles I. ennobled courtesans and all political place was a matter of

bargain and sale. There is hope for us yet.*



  * At least the above is the speech which I was going to make, but

our minister, General Schenck, presided, and after the blessing, got

up and made a great, long, inconceivably dull harangue, and wound up

by saying that inasmuch as speech-making did not seem to exhilarate

the guests much, all further oratory would be dispensed with during

the evening, and we could just sit and talk privately to our

elbow-neighbors and have a good, sociable time. It is known that in

consequence of that remark forty-four perfected speeches died in the

womb. The depression, the gloom, the solemnity that reigned over the

banquet from that time forth will be a lasting memory with many that

were there. By that one thoughtless remark General Schenck lost

forty-four of the best friends he had in England. More than one said

that night: "And this is the sort of person that is sent to

represent us in a great sister empire!"







                       ABOUT LONDON.



       ADDRESS AT A DINNER GIVEN BY THE SAVAGE CLUB,

              LONDON, SEPTEMBER 28, 1872.



  Reported by Moncure D. Conway in the Cincinnati Commercial.



  IT affords me sincere pleasure to meet this distinguished club, a

club which has extended its hospitalities and its cordial welcome to

so many of my countrymen. I hope [and here the speaker's voice

became low and fluttering] you will excuse these clothes. I am going

to the theatre; that will explain these clothes. I have other

clothes than these. Judging human nature by what I have seen of it,

I suppose that the customary thing for a stranger to do when he stands

here is to make a pun on the name of this club, under the

impression, of course, that he is the first man that that idea has

occurred to. It is a credit to our human nature, not a blemish upon

it; for it shows that underlying all our depravity (and God knows

and you know we are depraved enough) and all our sophistication, and

untarnished by them, there is a sweet germ of innocence and simplicity

still. When a stranger says to me, with a glow of inspiration in his

eye, some gentle, innocuous little thing about "Twain and one

flesh," and all that sort of thing, I don't try to crush that man into

the earth- no. I feel like saying: "Let me take you by the hand,

sir; let me embrace you; I have not heard that pun for weeks." We will

deal in palpable puns. We will call parties named King "Your Majesty,"

and we will say to the Smiths that we think we have heard that name

before somewhere. Such is human nature. We cannot alter this. It is

God that made us so for some good and wise Purpose. Let us not repine.

But though I may seem strange, may seem eccentric, I mean to refrain

from punning upon the name of this club, though I could make a very

good one if I had time to think about it- a week.

  I cannot express to you what entire enjoyment I find in this first

visit to this prodigious metropolis of yours. Its wonders seem to me

to be limitless. I go about as in a dream- as in a realm of

enchantment- where many things are rare and beautiful, and all

things are strange and marvellous. Hour after hour I stand- I stand

spellbound, as it were- and gaze upon the statuary in Leicester

Square. [Leicester Square being a horrible chaos, with the relic of an

equestrian statue in the centre, the king being headless and limbless,

and the horse in little better condition.] I visit the mortuary

effigies of noble old Henry VIII., and Judge Jeffreys, and the

preserved gorilla, and try to make up my mind which of my ancestors

I admire the most. I go to that matchless Hyde Park and drive all

around it, and then I start to enter it at the Marble Arch- and- am

induced to "change my mind." [Cabs are not permitted in Hyde Park-

nothing less aristocratic than a private carriage.] It is a great

benefaction- is Hyde Park. There, in his hansom cab, the invalid can

go- the poor, sad child of misfortune- and insert his nose between the

railings, and breathe the pure, health-giving air of the country and

of heaven. And if he is a swell invalid, who isn't obliged to depend

upon parks for his country air, he can drive inside- if he owns his

vehicle. I drive round and round Hyde Park, and the more I see of

the edges of it the more grateful I am that the margin is extensive.

  And I have been to the Zoological Gardens. What a wonderful place

that is! I never have seen such a curious and interesting variety of

wild animals in any garden before- except "Mabille." I never

believed before there were so many different kinds of animals in the

world as you can find there- and I don't believe it yet. I have been

to the British Museum. I would advise you to drop in there some time

when you have nothing to do for- five minutes- if you have never

been there. It seems to me the noblest monument that this nation has

yet erected to her greatness. I say to her, our greatness- as a

nation. True, she has built other monuments, and stately ones, as

well; but these she has uplifted in honor of two or three colossal

demigods who have stalked across the world's stage, destroying tyrants

and delivering nations, and whose prodigies will still live in the

memories of men ages after their monuments shall have crumbled to

dust- I refer to the Wellington and Nelson monuments, and- the

Albert memorial. [Sarcasm. The Albert memorial is the finest

monument in the world, and celebrates the existence of as

commonplace a person as good luck ever lifted out of obscurity.]

  The library at the British Museum I find particularly astounding.

I have read there hours together, and hardly made an impression on it.

I revere that library. It is the author's friend. I don't care how

mean a book is, it always takes one copy. [A copy of every book

printed in Great Britain must by law be sent to the British Museum,

a law much complained of by publishers.] And then every day that

author goes there to gaze at that book, and is encouraged to go on

in the good work. And what a touching sight it is of a Saturday

afternoon to see the poor, care-worn clergymen gathered together in

that vast reading-room cabbaging sermons for Sunday. You will pardon

my referring to these things. Everything in this monster city

interests me, and I cannot keep from talking, even at the risk of

being instructive. People here seem always to express distances by

parables. To a stranger it is just a little confusing to be so

parabolic- so to speak. I collar a citizen, and I think I am going

to get some valuable information out of him. I ask him how far it is

to Birmingham, and he says it is twenty-one shillings and sixpence.

Now we know that doesn't help a man who is trying to learn. I find

myself down-town somewhere, and I want to get some sort of idea

where I am- being usually lost when alone- and I stop a citizen and

say: "How far is it to Charing Cross?" "Shilling fare in a cab," and

off he goes. I suppose if I were to ask a Londoner how far it is

from the sublime to the ridiculous, he would try to express it in

coin. But I am trespassing upon your time with these geological

statistics and historical reflections. I will not longer keep you from

your orgies. 'Tis a real pleasure for me to be here, and I thank you

for it. The name of the Savage Club is associated in my mind with

the kindly interest and the friendly offices which you lavished upon

an old friend of mine who came among you a stranger, and you opened

your English hearts to him and gave him welcome and a home- Artemus

Ward. Asking that you will join me, I give you his memory.







PRINCETON

                        PRINCETON.



  Mr. Clemens spent several days in May, 1901, in Princeton, New

Jersey, as the guest of Lawrence Hutton. He gave a reading one evening

before a large audience composed of university students and

professors. Before the reading Mr. Clemens said:



  I FEEL exceedingly surreptitious in coming down here without an

announcement of any kind. I do not want to see any advertisements

around, for the reason that I'm not a lecturer any longer. I

reformed long ago, and I break over and commit this sin only just

one time this year- and that is moderate, I think, for a person of

my disposition. It is not my purpose to lecture any more as long as

I live. I never intend to stand up on a platform any more- unless by

the request of a sheriff or something like that.







                 THE ST. LOUIS HARBOR-BOAT

                       "MARK TWAIN".



  The Countess de Rochambeau christened the St. Louis harbor-boat Mark

Twain in honor of Mr. Clemens June 6, 19O2. Just before the luncheon

he acted as pilot.

  "Lower away lead!" boomed out the voice of the pilot.

  "Mark twain, quarter five and one-half- six feet!" replied the

leadsman below.

  "You are all dead safe as long as I have the wheel- but this is my

last time at the wheel."



  At the luncheon Mr. Clemens made a short address.



  FIRST of all, no- second of all- I wish to offer my thanks for the

honor done me by naming this last rose of summer of the Mississippi

Valley for me, this boat which represents a perished interest, which I

fortified long ago, but did not save its life. And, in the first

place, I wish to thank the Countess de Rochambeau for the honor she

has done me in presiding at this christening.

  I believe that it is peculiarly appropriate that I should be allowed

the privilege of joining my voice with the general voice of St.

Louis and Missouri in welcoming to the Mississippi Valley and this

part of the continent these illustrious visitors from France.

  When La Salle came down this river a century and a quarter ago there

was nothing on its banks but savages. He opened up this great river,

and by his simple act was gathered in this great Louisiana

territory. I would have done it myself for half the money.







                   SEVENTIETH BIRTHDAY.



      ADDRESS AT A DINNER GIVEN BY COLONEL GEORGE HARVEY

        AT DELMONICO'S, DECEMBER 5, 1905, TO CELEBRATE

              THE SEVENTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF

                   MR. CLEMENS' BIRTH.



  Mr. Howells introduced Mr. Clemens:



  "Now, ladies and gentlemen, and Colonel Harvey, I will try not to be

greedy on your behalf in wishing the health of our honored and, in

view of his great age, our revered guest. I will not say, 'Oh King,

live forever!' but 'Oh King, live as long as you like!'" [Amid great

applause and waving of napkins all rise and drink to Mark Twain.]



  WELL, if I made that joke, it is the best one I ever made, and it is

in the prettiest language, too. I never can get quite to that

height. But I appreciate that joke, and I shall remember it- and I

shall use it when occasion requires.

  I have had a great many birthdays in my time. I remember the first

one very well, and I always think of it with indignation; everything

was so crude, unaesthetic, primeval. Nothing like this at all. No

proper appreciative preparation made; nothing really ready. Now, for a

person born with high and delicate instincts- why, even the cradle

wasn't whitewashed- nothing ready at all. I hadn't any hair, I

hadn't any teeth, I hadn't any clothes, I had to go to my first

banquet just like that. Well, everybody came swarming in. It was the

merest little bit of a village- hardly that, just a little hamlet,

in the backwoods of Missouri, where nothing ever happened, and the

people were all interested, and they all came; they looked me over

to see if there was anything fresh in my line. Why, nothing ever

happened in that village- I- why, I was the only thing that had really

happened there for months and months and months; And although I say it

myself that shouldn't, I came the nearest to being a real event that

had happened in that village in more than two years. Well, those

people came, they came with that curiosity which is so provincial,

with that frankness which also is so provincial, and they examined

me all around and gave their opinion. Nobody asked them, and I

shouldn't have minded if anybody had paid me a compliment, but

nobody did. Their opinions were all just green with prejudice, and I

feel those opinions to this day. Well, I stood that as long as-

well, you know I was born courteous and I stood it to the limit. I

stood it an hour, and then the worm turned. I was the worm; it was

my turn to turn, and I turned. I knew very well the strength of my

position; I knew that I was the only spotlessly pure and innocent

person in that whole town, and I came out and said so. And they

could not say a word. It was so true, They blushed; they were

embarrassed. Well that was the first after-dinner speech I ever

made. I think it was after dinner.

  It's a long stretch between that first birthday speech and this one.

That was my cradle-song, and this is my swan-song, I suppose. I am

used to swan-songs; I have sung them several times.

  This is my seventieth birthday, and I wonder if you all rise to

the size of that proposition, realizing all the significance of that

phrase, seventieth birthday.

  The seventieth birthday! It is the time of life when you arrive at a

new and awful dignity; when you may throw aside the decent reserves

which have oppressed you for a generation and stand unafraid and

unabashed upon your seven-terraced summit and look down and teach-

unrebuked. You can tell the world how you got there. It is what they

all do. You shall never get tired of telling by what delicate arts and

deep moralities you climbed up to that great place. You will explain

the process and dwell on the particulars with senile rapture. I have

been anxious to explain my own system this long time, and now at

last I have the right.

  I have achieved my seventy years in the usual way: by sticking

strictly to a scheme of life which would kill anybody else. It

sounds like an exaggeration, but that is really the common rule for

attaining to old age. When we examine the programme of any of these

garrulous old people we always find that the habits which have

preserved them would have decayed us; that the way of life which

enabled them to live upon the property of their heirs so long, as

Mr. Choate says, would have put us out of commission ahead of time.

I will offer here, as a sound maxim, this: That we can't reach old age

by another man's road.

  I will now teach, offering my way of life to whomsoever desires to

commit suicide by the scheme which has enabled me to beat the doctor

and the hangman for seventy years. Some of the details may sound

untrue, but they are not. I am not here to deceive; I am here to

teach.

  We have no permanent habits until we are forty. Then they begin to

harden, presently they petrify, then business begins. Since forty I

have been regular about going to bed and getting up- and that is one

of the main things. I have made it a rule to go to bed when there

wasn't anybody left to sit up with; and I have made it a rule to get

up when I had to. This has resulted in an unswerving regularity of

irregularity. It has saved me sound, but it would injure another

person.

  In the matter of diet- which is another main thing- I have been

persistently strict in sticking to the things which didn't agree

with me until one or the other of us got the best of it. Until

lately I got the best of it myself. But last spring I stopped

frolicking with mince-pie after midnight; up to then I had always

believed it wasn't loaded. For thirty years I have taken coffee and

bread at eight in the morning, and no bite nor sup until

seven-thirty in the evening. Eleven hours. That is all right for me,

and is wholesome, because I have never had a headache in my life,

but headachy people would not reach seventy comfortably by that

road, and they would be foolish to try it. And I wish to urge upon you

this- which I think is wisdom- that if you find you can't make seventy

by any but an uncomfortable road, don't you go. When they take off the

Pullman and retire you to the rancid smoker, put on your things, count

your checks, and get out at the first way station where there's a

cemetery.

  I have made it a rule never to smoke more than one cigar at a

time. I have no other restriction as regards smoking. I do not know

just when I began to smoke, I only know that it was in my father's

lifetime, and that I was discreet. He passed from this life early in

1847, when I was a shade past eleven; ever since then I have smoked

publicly. As an example to others, and not that I care for

moderation myself, it has always been my rule never to smoke when

asleep, and never to refrain when awake. It is a good rule. I mean,

for me; but some of you know quite well that it wouldn't answer for

everybody that's trying to get to be seventy.

  I smoke in bed until I have to go to sleep; I wake up in the

night, sometimes once, sometimes twice, sometimes three times, and I

never waste any of these opportunities to smoke. This habit is so

old and dear and precious to me that I would feel as you, sir, would

feel if you should lose the only moral you've got- meaning the

chairman- if you've got one: I am making no charges. I will grant,

here, that I have stopped smoking now and then, for a few months at

a time, but it was not on principle, it was only to show off; it was

to pulverize those critics who said I was a slave to my habits and

couldn't break my bonds.

  To-day it is all of sixty years since I began to smoke the limit.

I have never bought cigars with life-belts around them. I early

found that those were too expensive for me. I have always bought cheap

cigars- reasonably cheap, at any rate. Sixty years ago they cost me

four dollars a barrel, but my taste has improved, latterly, and I

pay seven now. Six or seven. Seven, I think. Yes, it's seven. But that

includes the barrel. I often have smoking-parties at my house; but the

people that come have always just taken the pledge. I wonder why

that is?

  As for drinking, I have no rule about that. When the others drink

I like to help; otherwise I remain dry, by habit and preference.

This dryness does not hurt me, but it could easily hurt you, because

you are different. You let it alone.

  Since I was seven years old I have seldom taken a dose of

medicine, and have still seldomer needed one. But up to seven I

lived exclusively on allopathic medicines. Not that I needed them, for

I don't think I did; it was for economy; my father took a drug-store

for a debt, and it made cod-liver oil cheaper than the other breakfast

foods. We had nine barrels of it, and it lasted me seven years.

Then. I was weaned. The rest of the family had to get along with

rhubarb and ipecac and such things, because I was the pet. I was the

first Standard Oil Trust. I had it all. By the time the drug store was

exhausted my health was established, and there has never been much the

matter with, me since. But you know very well it would be foolish

for the average child to start for seventy on that basis. It

happened to be just the thing for me, but that was merely an accident;

it couldn't happen again in a century.

  I have never taken any exercise, except sleeping and resting, and

I never intend to take any. Exercise is loathsome. And it cannot be

any benefit when you are tired; and I was always tired. But let

another person try my way, and see where he will come out.

  I desire now to repeat and emphasize that maxim: We can't reach

old age by another man's road. My habits protect my life, but they

would assassinate you.

  I have lived a severely moral life. But it would be a mistake for

other people to try that, or for me to recommend it. Very few would

succeed: you have to have a perfectly colossal stock of morals; and

you can't get them on a margin; you have to have the whole thing,

and put them in your box. Morals are an acquirement- like music,

like a foreign language, like piety, poker, paralysis- no man is born.

with them. I wasn't myself, I started poor. I hadn't a single moral.

There is hardly a man in this house that is poorer than I was then.

Yes, I started like that- the world before me, not a moral in the

slot. Not even an insurance moral. I can remember the first one I ever

got. I can remember the landscape, the weather, the- I can remember

how everything looked. It was an old moral, an old second-hand

moral, all out of repair, and didn't fit, anyway. But if you are

careful with a thing like that, and keep it in a dry place, and save

it for processions, and Chautauquas, and World's Fairs, and so on, and

disinfect it now and then, and give it a fresh coat of whitewash

once in a while, you will be surprised to see how well she will last

and how long she will keep sweet, or at least inoffensive. When I

got that mouldy old moral, she had stopped growing, because she hadn't

any exercise; but I worked her hard, I worked her Sundays and all.

Under this cultivation she waxed in might and stature beyond belief,

and served me well and was my pride and joy for sixty-three years;

then she got to associating with insurance presidents, and lost

flesh and character, and was a sorrow to look at and no longer

competent for business. She was a great loss to me. Yet not all

loss. I sold her- ah, pathetic skeleton, as she was- I sold her to

Leopold, the pirate King of Belgium; he sold her to our Metropolitan

Museum, and it was very glad to get her, for without a rag on, she

stands 57 feet long and 16 feet high, and they think she's a

brontosaur. Well, she looks it. They believe it will take nineteen

geological periods to breed her match.

  Morals are of inestimable value, for every man is born crammed

with sin microbes, and the only thing that can extirpate these sin

microbes is morals. Now you take a sterilized Christian- I mean, you

take the sterilized Christian, for there's only one. Dear sir, I

wish you wouldn't look at me like that.

  Threescore years and ten!

  It is the Scriptural statute of limitations. After that, you owe

no active duties; for you the strenuous life is over. You are a

time-expired man, to use Kipling's military phrase: You have served

your term, well or less well, and you are mustered out. You are become

an honorary member of the republic, you are emancipated, compulsions

are not for you, not any bugle-call but "lights out." You pay the

time-worn duty bills if you choose, or decline if you prefer- and

without prejudice- for they are not legally collectable.

  The previous-engagement plea, which in forty years has cost you so

many twinges, you can lay aside forever; on this side of the grave you

will never need it again. If you shrink at the thought of night and

winter, and the late home-coming from the banquet and the lights and

the laughter through the deserted streets- a desolation which would

not remind you now, as for a generation it did, that your friends

are sleeping, and you must creep in a-tiptoe and not disturb them, but

would only remind you that you need not tiptoe, you can never

disturb them more- if you shrink at thought of these things, you

need only reply, "Your invitation honors me, and pleases me because

you still keep me in your remembrance, but I am seventy; seventy,

and would nestle in the chimney-corner, and smoke my pipe, and read my

book, and take my rest, wishing you well in all affection, and that

when you in your return shall arrive at pier No. 70 you may step

aboard your waiting ship with a reconciled spirit, and lay your course

toward the sinking sun with a contented heart.





                        THE END

