



                 GERMAN FOR THE HUNGARIANS.



          ADDRESS AT THE JUBILEE CELEBRATION OF THE

             EMANCIPATION OF THE HUNGARIAN PRESS,

                     MARCH 26, 1899.



  The Ministry and members of Parliament were present. The subject was

the "Ausgleich"- i. e., the arrangement for the apportionment of the

taxes between Hungary and Austria. Paragraph 14 of the ausgleich fixes

the proportion each country must pay to the support of the army. It is

the paragraph which caused the trouble and prevented its renewal.



  NOW that we are all here together, I think it will be a good idea to

arrange the ausgleich. If you will act for Hungary I shall be quite

willing to act for Austria, and this is the very time for it. There

couldn't be a better, for we are all feeling friendly, fair-minded,

and hospitable now, and full of admiration for each other, full of

confidence in each other, full of the spirit of welcome, full of the

grace of forgiveness, and the disposition to let bygones be bygones.

  Let us not waste this golden, this beneficent, this providential

opportunity. I am willing to make any concession you want, just so

we get it settled. I am not only willing to let grain come in free,

I am willing to pay the freight on it, and you may send delegates to

the Reichsrath if you like. All I require is that they shall be quiet,

peaceable people like your own deputies, and not disturb our

proceedings.

  If you want the

Gegenseitigengeldbeitragendenverhaltnismassigkeiten rearranged and

readjusted I am ready for that. I will let you off at twenty-eight per

cent.- twenty-seven- even twenty-five if you insist, for there is

nothing illiberal about me when I am out on a diplomatic debauch.

  Now, in return for these concessions, I am willing to take

anything in reason, and I think we may consider the business settled

and the ausgleich ausgegloschen at last for ten solid years, and we

will sign the papers in blank, and do it here and now.

  Well, I am unspeakably glad to have that ausgleich off my hands.

It has kept me awake nights for anderthalbjahr.

  But I never could settle it before, because always when I called

at the Foreign Office in Vienna to talk about it, there wasn't anybody

at home, and that is not a place where you can go in and see for

yourself whether it is a mistake or not, because the person who

takes care of the front door there is of a size that discourages

liberty of action and the free spirit of investigation. To think the

ausgleich is abgemacht at last! It is a grand and beautiful

consummation, and I am glad I came.

  The way I feel now I do honestly believe I would rather be just my

own humble self at this moment than paragraph 14.

                   A NEW GERMAN WORD.



  To aid a local charity Mr. Clemens appeared before a fashionable

audience in Vienna, March 10, 1899, reading his sketch "The Lucerne

Girl," and describing how he had been interviewed and ridiculed. He

said in part:



  I HAVE not sufficiently mastered German to allow my using it with

impunity. My collection of fourteen-syllable German words is still

incomplete. But I have just added to that collection a jewel- a

veritable jewel. I found it in a telegram from Linz, and it contains

ninety-five letters:



  Personaleinkommensteuerschatzungskommissionsmitgliedsreisekosten-

rechnungserganzungsrevisionsfund



  If I could get a similar word engraved upon my tombstone I should

sleep beneath it in peace.









                 UNCONSCIOUS PLAGIARISM.



      DELIVERED AT THE DINNER GIVEN BY THE PUBLISHERS OF

       "THE ATLANTIC MONTHLY" TO OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES

            IN HONOR OF HIS SEVENTIETH BIRTHDAY,

                    AUGUST 29, 1879.



  I WOULD have travelled a much greater distance than I have come to

witness the paying of honors to Doctor Holmes; for my feeling toward

him has always been one of peculiar warmth. When one receives a letter

from a great man for the first time in his life, it is a large event

to him, as all of you know by your own experience. You never can

receive letters enough from famous men afterward to obliterate that

one, or dim the memory of the pleasant surprise it was, and the

gratification it gave you. Lapse of time cannot make it commonplace or

cheap.

  Well, the first great man who ever wrote me a letter was our

guest- Oliver Wendell Holmes. He was also the first great literary man

I ever stole anything from- and that is how I came to write to him and

he to me. When my first book was new, a friend of mine said to me,

"The dedication is very neat." Yes, I said, I thought it was. My

friend said, "I always admired it, even before I saw it in The

Innocents Abroad." I naturally said: "What do you mean? Where did

you ever see it before?" "Well, I saw it first some years ago as

Doctor Holmes's dedication to his Songs in Many Keys." Of course, my

first impulse was to prepare this man's remains for burial, but upon

reflection I said I would reprieve him for a moment or two and give

him a chance to prove his assertion if he could. We stepped into a

book-store, and he did prove it. I had really stolen that

dedication, almost word for word. I could not imagine how this curious

thing had happened; for I knew one thing- that a certain amount of

pride always goes along with a teaspoonful of brains, and that this

pride protects a man from deliberately stealing other people's

ideas. That is what a teaspoonful of brains will do for a man- and

admirers had often told me I had nearly a basketful- though they

were rather reserved as to the size of the basket.

  However, I thought the thing out, and solved the mystery. Two

years before, I had been laid up a couple of weeks in the Sandwich

Islands, and had read and re-read Doctor Holmes's poems till my mental

reservoir was filled up with them to the brim. The dedication lay on

the top, and handy, so, by-and-by, I unconsciously stole it. Perhaps I

unconsciously stole the rest of the volume, too, for many people

have told me that my book was pretty poetical, in one way or

another. Well, of course, I wrote Doctor Holmes and told him I

hadn't meant to steal, and he wrote back and said in the kindest way

that it was all right and no harm done; and added that he believed

we all unconsciously worked over ideas gathered in reading and

hearing, imagining they were original with ourselves. He stated a

truth, and did it in such a pleasant way, and salved over my sore spot

so gently and so healingly, that I was rather glad I had committed the

crime, for the sake of the letter. I afterward called on him and

told him to make perfectly free with any ideas of mine that struck him

as being good protoplasm for poetry. He could see by that that there

wasn't anything mean about me; so we got along right from the start. I

have not met Doctor Holmes many times since; and lately he said-

However, I am wandering wildly away from the one thing which I got

on my feet to do; that is, to make my compliments to you, my

fellow-teachers of the great public, and likewise to say that I am

right glad to see that Doctor Holmes is still in his prime and full of

generous life; and as age is not determined by years, but by trouble

and infirmities of mind and body, I hope it may be a very long time

yet before any one can truthfully say, "He is growing old."










                     THE WEATHER.



     ADDRESS AT THE NEW ENGLAND SOCIETY'S SEVENTY-FIRST

              ANNUAL DINNER, NEW YORK CITY.



  The next toast was: "The Oldest Inhabitant- The Weather of New

England."

           Who can lose it and forget it?

           Who can have it and regret it?



           "Be interposer 'twixt us Twain."

                                       -Merchant of Venice.



  I REVERENTLY believe that the Maker who made us all makes everything

in New England but the weather. I don't know who makes that, but I

think it must be raw apprentices in the weather-clerk's factory who

experiment and learn how, in New England, for board and clothes, and

then are promoted to make weather for countries that require a good

article, and will take their custom elsewhere if they don't get it.

There is a sumptuous variety about the New England weather that

compels the stranger's admiration- and regret. The weather is always

doing something there; always attending strictly to business; always

getting up new designs and trying them on the people to see how they

will go. But it gets through more business in spring than in any other

season. In the spring I have counted one hundred and thirty-six

different kinds of weather inside of four-and-twenty hours. It was I

that made the fame and fortune of that man that had that marvellous

collection of weather on exhibition at the Centennial, that so

astounded the foreigners. He was going to travel all over the world

and get specimens from all the climes. I said, "Don't you do it; you

come to New England on a favorable spring day." I told him what we

could do in the way of style, variety, and quantity. Well, he came and

he made his collection in four days. As to variety, why, he

confessed that he got hundreds of kinds of weather that he had never

heard of before. And as to quantity- well, after he had picked out and

discarded all that was blemished in any way, he not only had weather

enough, but weather to spare; weather to hire out; weather to sell; to

deposit; weather to invest; weather to give to the poor. The people of

New England are by nature patient and forbearing, but there are some

things which they will not stand. Every year they kill a lot of

poets for writing about "Beautiful Spring." These are generally casual

visitors, who bring their notions of spring from somewhere else, and

cannot, of course, know how the natives feel about spring. And so

the first thing they know the opportunity to inquire how they feel has

permanently gone by. Old Probabilities has a mighty reputation for

accurate prophecy, and thoroughly well deserves it. You take up the

paper and observe how crisply and confidently he checks off what

to-day's weather is going to be on the Pacific, down South, in the

Middle States, in the Wisconsin region. See him sail along in the

joy and pride of his power till he gets to New England, and then see

his tail drop. He doesn't know what the weather is going to be in

New England. Well, he mulls over it, and by-and-by he gets out

something about like this: Probably northeast to southwest winds,

varying to the southward and westward and eastward, and points

between, high and low barometer swapping around from place to place;

probable areas of rain, snow, hail, and drought, succeeded or preceded

by earthquakes, with thunder and lightning. Then he jots down his

postscript from his wandering mind, to cover accidents. "But it is

possible that the programme may be wholly changed in the mean time."

Yes, one of the brightest gems in the New England weather is the

dazzling uncertainty of it. There is only one thing certain about

it: you are certain there is going to be plenty of it- a perfect grand

review; but you never can tell which end of the procession is going to

move first. You fix up for the drought; you leave your umbrella in the

house and sally out, and two to one you get drowned. You make up

your mind that the earthquake is due; you stand from under, and take

hold of something to steady yourself, and the first thing you know you

get struck by lightning. These are great disappointments; but they

can't be helped. The lightning there is peculiar; it is so convincing,

that when it strikes a thing it doesn't leave enough of that thing

behind for you to tell whether- Well, you'd think it was something

valuable, and a Congressman had been there. And the thunder. When

the thunder begins to merely tune up and scrape and saw, and key up

the instruments for the performance, strangers say, "Why, what awful

thunder you have here!" But when the baton is raised and the real

concert begins, you'll find that stranger down in the cellar with

his head in the ash-barrel. Now as to the size of the weather in New

England- lengthways, I mean. It is utterly disproportioned to the size

of that little country. Half the time, when it is packed as full as it

can stick, you will see that New England weather sticking out beyond

the edges and projecting around hundreds and hundreds of miles over

the neighboring States. She can't hold a tenth part of her weather.

You can see cracks all about where she has strained herself trying

to do it. I could speak volumes about the inhuman perversity of the

New England weather, but I will give but a single specimen. I like

to hear rain on a tin roof. So I covered part of my roof with tin,

with an eye to that luxury. Well, sir, do you think it ever rains on

that tin? No, sir; skips it every time. Mind, in this speech I have

been trying merely to do honor to the New England weather- no language

could do it justice. But, after all, there is at least one or two

things about that weather (or, if you please, effects produced by

it) which we residents would not like to part with. If we hadn't our

bewitching autumn foliage, we should still have to credit the

weather with one feature which compensates for all its bullying

vagaries- the ice-storm: when a leafless tree is clothed with ice from

the bottom to the top- ice that is as bright and clear as crystal;

when every bough and twig is strung with ice-beads, frozen

dew-drops, and the whole tree sparkles cold and white, like the Shah

of Persia's diamond plume. Then the wind waves the branches and the

sun comes out and turns all those myriads of beads and drops to prisms

that glow and burn and flash with all manner of colored fires, which

change and change again with inconceivable rapidity from blue to

red, from red to green, and green to gold- the tree becomes a spraying

fountain, a very explosion of dazzling jewels; and it stands there the

acme, the climax, the supremest possibility in art or nature, of

bewildering, intoxicating, intolerable magnificence. One cannot make

the words too strong.










                     THE BABIES.



       DELIVERED AT THE BANQUET, IN CHICAGO, GIVEN

         BY THE ARMY OF THE TENNESSEE TO THEIR

           FIRST COMMANDER GENERAL U. S.

               GRANT, NOVEMBER, 1879.



  The fifteenth regular toast was "The Babies.- As they comfort us

in our sorrows, let us not forget them in our festivities."



  I LIKE that. We have not all had the good fortune to be ladies. We

have not all been generals, or poets, or statesmen; but when the toast

works down to the babies, we stand on common ground. It is a shame

that for a thousand years the world's banquets have utterly ignored

the baby, as if he didn't amount to anything. If you will stop and

think a minute- if you will go back fifty or one hundred years to your

early married life and recontemplate your first baby- you will

remember that he amounted to a good deal, and even something over. You

soldiers all know that when that little fellow arrived at family

headquarters you had to hand in your resignation. He took entire

command. You became his lackey, his mere body-servant, and you had

to stand around too. He was not a commander who made allowances for

time, distance, weather, or anything else. You had to execute his

order whether it was possible or not. And there was only one form of

marching in his manual of tactics, and that was the double-quick. He

treated you with every sort of insolence and disrespect, and the

bravest of you didn't dare to say a word. You could face the

death-storm at Donelson and Vicksburg, and give back blow for blow;

but when he clawed your whiskers, and pulled your hair, and twisted

your nose, you had to take it. When the thunders of war were

sounding in your ears you set your faces toward the batteries, and

advanced with steady tread; but when he turned on the terrors of his

war-whoop you advanced in the other direction, and mighty glad of

the chance, too. When he called for soothing-syrup, did you venture to

throw out any side-remarks about certain services being unbecoming

an officer and a gentleman? No. You got up and got it. When he ordered

his pap bottle and it was not warm, did you talk back? Not you. You

went to work and warmed it. You even descended so far in your menial

office as to take a suck at that warm, insipid stuff yourself, to

see if it was right- three parts water to one of milk, a touch of

sugar to modify the colic, and a drop of peppermint to kill those

immortal hiccoughs. I can taste that stuff yet. And how many things

you learned as you went along! Sentimental young folks still take

stock in that beautiful old saying that when the baby smiles in his

sleep, it is because the angels are whispering to him. Very pretty,

but too thin- simply wind on the stomach, my friends. If the baby

proposed to take a walk at his usual hour, two o'clock in the morning,

didn't you rise up promptly and remark, with a mental addition which

would not improve a Sunday-school book much, that that was the very

thing you were about to propose yourself? Oh! you were under good

discipline, and as you went fluttering up and down the room in your

undress uniform, you not only prattled undignified baby-talk, but even

tuned up your martial voices and tried to sing!- Rock-a-by Baby in the

Tree-top, for instance. What a spectacle for an Army of the Tennessee!

And what an affliction for the neighbors, too; for it is not everybody

within a mile around that likes military music at three in the

morning. And when you had been keeping this sort of thing up two or

three hours, and your little velvet-head intimated that nothing suited

him like exercise and noise, what did you do? You simply went on until

you dropped in the last ditch. The idea that a baby doesn't amount

to anything! Why, one baby is just a house and a front yard full by

itself. One baby can furnish more business than you and your whole

Interior Department can attend to. He is enterprising, irrepressible,.

brimful of lawless activities. Do what you please, you can't make

him stay on the reservation. Sufficient unto the day is one baby. As

long as you are in your right mind don't you ever pray for twins.

Twins amount to a permanent riot. And there ain't any real

difference between triplets and an insurrection.

  Yes, it was high time for a toast-master to recognize the importance

of the babies. Think what is in store for the present crop! Fifty

years from now we shall all be dead, I trust, and then this flag, if

it still survive (and let us hope it may), will be floating over a

Republic numbering 200,000,000 souls, according to the settled laws of

our increase. Our present schooner of State will have grown into a

political leviathan- a Great Eastern. The cradled babies of to-day

will be on deck. Let them be well trained, for we are going to leave a

big contract on their hands. Among the three or four million cradles

now rocking in the land are some which this nation would preserve

for ages as sacred things, if we could know which ones they are. In

one of these cradles the unconscious Farragut of the future is at this

moment teething- think of it!- and putting in a world of dead earnest,

unarticulated, but perfectly justifiable profanity over it, too. In

another the future renowned astronomer is blinking at the shining

Milky Way with but a languid interest- poor little chap!- and

wondering what has become of that other one they call the wet-nurse.

In another the future great historian is lying- and doubtless will

continue to lie until his earthly mission is ended. In another the

future President is busying himself with no profounder problem of

state than what the mischief has become of his hair so early; and in a

mighty array of other cradles there are now some 60,000 future

office-seekers, getting ready to furnish him occasion to grapple

with that same old problem a second time. And in still one more

cradle, somewhere under the flag, the future illustrious

commander-in-chief of the American armies is so little burdened with

his approaching grandeurs and responsibilities as to be giving his

whole strategic mind at this moment to trying to find out some way

to get his big toe into his mouth- an achievement which, meaning no

disrespect, the illustrious guest of this evening turned his entire

attention to some fifty-six years ago; and if the child is but a

prophecy of the man, there are mighty few who will doubt that he

succeeded.









           OUR CHILDREN AND GREAT DISCOVERIES.



        DELIVERED AT THE AUTHORS' CLUB, NEW YORK.



  OUR children- yours-and-mine. They seem like little things to talk

about- our children, but little things often make up the sum of

human life- that's a good sentence. I repeat it, little things often

produce great things. Now, to illustrate, take Sir Isaac Newton- I

presume some of you have heard of Mr. Newton. Well, once when Sir

Isaac Newton- a mere lad- got over into the man's apple orchard- I

don't know what he was doing there- I didn't come all the way from

Hartford to q-u-e-s-t-i-o-n Mr. Newton's honesty- but when he was

there- in the main orchard- he saw an apple fall and he was

a-t-t-racted toward it, and that led to the discovery- not of Mr.

Newton- but of the great law of attraction and gravitation.

  And there was once another great discoverer- I've forgotten his

name, and I don't remember what he discovered, but I know it was

something very important, and I hope you will all tell your children

about it when you get home. Well, when the great discoverer was once

loafin' around down in Virginia, and a-puttin' in his time flirting

with Pocahontas- oh! Captain John Smith, that was the man's name-

and while he and Poca were sitting in Mr. Powhatan's garden, he

accidentally put his arm around her and picked something- a simple

weed, which proved to be tobacco- and now we find it in every

Christian family, shedding its civilizing influence broadcast

throughout the whole religious community.

  Now there was another great man, I can't think of his name either,

who used to loaf around and watch the great chandelier in the

cathedral at Pisa, which set him to thinking about the great law of

gunpowder, and eventually led to the discovery of the cotton-gin.

  Now, I don't say this as an inducement for our young men to loaf

around like Mr. Newton and Mr. Galileo and Captain Smith, but they

were once little babies two days old, and they show what little things

have sometimes accomplished.

                 EDUCATING THEATRE-GOERS.



  The children of the Educational Alliance gave a performance of

"The Prince and the Pauper" on the afternoon of April 14, 1907, in the

theatre of the Alliance Building in East Broadway. The audience was

composed of nearly one thousand children of the neighborhood. Mr.

Clemens, Mr. Howells, and Mr. Daniel Frohman were among the invited

guests.



  I HAVE not enjoyed a play so much, so heartily, and so thoroughly

since I played Miles Hendon twenty-two years ago. I used to play in

this piece ("The Prince and the Pauper") with my children, who,

twenty-two years ago, were little youngsters. One of my daughters

was the Prince, and a neighbor's daughter was the Pauper, and the

children of other neighbors played other parts. But we never gave such

a performance as we have seen here to-day. It would have been beyond

us.

  My late wife was the dramatist and stage-manager. Our coachman was

the stage-manager, second in command. We used to play it in this

simple way, and the one who used to bring in the crown on a cushion-

he was a little fellow then- is now a clergyman way up high- six or

seven feet high- and growing higher all the time. We played it well,

but not as well as you see it here, for you see it done by practically

trained professionals.

  I was especially interested in the scene which we have just had, for

Miles Hendon was my part. I did it as well as a person could who never

remembered his part. The children all knew their parts. They did not

mind if I did not know mine. I could thread a needle nearly as well as

the player did whom you saw to-day. The words of my part I could

supply on the spot. The words of the song that Miles Hendon sang

here I did not catch. But I was great in that song.

  [Then Mr. Clemens hummed a bit of doggerel that the reporter made

out as this:



          "There was a woman in her town,

           She loved her husband well,

           But another man just twice as well."



  "How is that?" demanded Mr. Clemens. Then resuming:]

  It was so fresh and enjoyable to make up a new set of words each

time that I played the part.

  If I had a thousand citizens in front of me, I would like to give

them information, but you children already know all that I have

found out about the Educational Alliance. It's like a man living

within thirty miles of Vesuvius and never knowing about a volcano.

It's like living for a lifetime in Buffalo, eighteen miles from

Niagara, and never going to see the Falls. So I had lived in New

York and knew nothing about the Educational Alliance.

  This theatre is a part of the work, and furnishes pure and clean

plays. This theatre is an influence. Everything in the world is

accomplished by influences which train and educate. When you get to be

seventy-one and a half, as I am, you may think that your education

is over, but it isn't.

  If we had forty theatres of this kind in this city of four millions,

how they would educate and elevate! We should have a body of

educated theatre-goers.

  It would make better citizens, honest citizens. One of the best

gifts a millionaire could make would be a theatre here and a theatre

there. It would make of you a real Republic, and bring about an

educational level.









                 THE EDUCATIONAL THEATRE.



  On November 19, 1907, Mr. Clemens entertained a party of six or

seven hundred of his friends, inviting them to witness the

representation of "The Prince and the Pauper," played by boys and

girls of the East Side at the Children's Educational Theatre, New

York.



  JUST a word or two to let you know how deeply I appreciate the honor

which the children who are the actors and frequenters of this cozy

playhouse have conferred upon me. They have asked me to be their

ambassador to invite the hearts and brains of New York to come down

here and see the work they are doing. I consider it a grand

distinction to be chosen as their intermediary. Between the children

and myself there is an indissoluble bond of friendship.

  I am proud of this theatre and this performance- proud, because I am

naturally vain- vain of myself and proud of the children.

  I wish we could reach more children at one time. I am glad to see

that the children of the East Side have turned their backs on the

Bowery theatres to come to see the pure entertainments presented here.

  This Children's Theatre is a great educational institution. I hope

the time will come when it will be part of every public school in

the land. I may be pardoned in being vain. I was born vain, I guess.

[At this point the stage-manager's whistle interrupted Mr. Clemens.]

That settles it; there's my cue to stop. I was to talk until the

whistle blew, but it blew before I got started. It takes me longer

to get started than most people. I guess I was born at slow speed.

My time is up, and if you'll keep quiet for two minutes I'll tell

you something about Miss Herts, the woman who conceived this

splendid idea. She is the originator and the creator of this

theatre. Educationally, this institution coins the gold of young

hearts into external good.



  [On April 23, 1908, he spoke again at the same place]



  I will be strictly honest with you; I am only fit to be honorary

president. It is not to be expected that I should be useful as a

real president. But when it comes to things ornamental I, of course,

have no objection. There is, of course, no competition. I take it as a

very real compliment because there are thousands of children who

have had a part in this request. It is promotion in truth.

  It is a thing worth doing that is done here. You have seen the

children play. You saw how little Sally reformed her burglar. She

could reform any burglar. She could reform me. This is the only school

in which can be taught the highest and most difficult lessons- morals.

In other schools the way of teaching morals is revolting. Here the

children who come in thousands live through each part.

  They are terribly anxious for the villain to get his bullet, and

that I take to be a humane and proper sentiment. They spend freely the

ten cents that is not saved without a struggle. It comes out of the

candy money, and the money that goes for chewing-gum and other

necessaries of life. They make the sacrifice freely. This is the

only school which they are sorry to leave.

