        _Poor Richard Improved_
        1755

        COURTEOUS READER,
        It is a common Saying, that _One Half of the World does not
know how the other Half lives._ To add somewhat to your Knowledge in
that Particular, I gave you in a former Almanack, an Account of the
Manner of living at _Hudson's-Bay_, and the Effects produced by the
excessive Cold of that Climate, which seem'd so strange to some of
you, that it was taken for a Romance, tho' really authentick. -- In
this, I shall give you some Idea of a Country under the Torrid Zone,
which for the Variety of its Weather (where one would naturally
expect the greatest Uniformity) is extreamly remarkable.  The Account
is extracted from the Journal of Monsieur _Bouguer_, one of the
_French_ Academicians, sent by their King to measure a Degree of
Latitude under the Equinoctial, in order to settle a Dispute between
the _English_ and _French_ Philosophers concerning the Shape of the
Earth, others being at the same Time sent for the same Purpose to
_Lapland_, under the Polar Circle. -- The Mountains in that Country
are so lofty, that the highest we have, being compared to them, are
mere Mole-hills.  This Extract relates chiefly to the Country among
those Mountains.

        The Method of this Almanack is the same I have observed for
some Years past; only in the third Column the Names of some of the
principal fixed Stars are put down against those Days on which they
come to the Meridian at nine a Clock in the Evening, whereby those
unacquainted, may learn to know them.  I am,
                                         _Your obliged Friend and Servant,_
                                                 R. SAUNDERS.

        A Man without a Wife, is but half a Man.

        Speak little, do much.

        He that would travel much, should eat little.

        When the Wine enters, out goes the Truth.

        If you would be loved, love and be loveable.

        Ask and have, is sometimes dear buying.

        The hasty Bitch brings forth blind Puppies.

        Where there is Hunger, Law is not regarded; and where Law is
not regarded, there will be Hunger.

        Two dry Sticks will burn a green One.

        The honest Man takes Pains, and then enjoys Pleasures; the
Knave takes Pleasure, and then suffers Pains.

        Think of three Things, whence you came, where you are going,
and to whom you must account.

        _Necessity_ has no Law; Why?  Because 'tis not to be had
without Money.

        There was never a good Knife made of bad Steel.

        The Wolf sheds his Coat once a Year, his Disposition never.

        _Who is wise?_ He that learns from every One.
        _Who is powerful?_ He that governs his Passions.
        _Who is rich?_ He that is content.
        _Who is that?_ Nobody.

        A full Belly brings forth every Evil.

        The Day is short, the Work great, the Workmen lazy, the Wages
high, the Master urgeth; Up, then, and be doing.

        The Doors of Wisdom are never shut.

        Much Virtue in Herbs, little in Men.

        The Master's Eye will do more Work than both his Hands.

        When you taste Honey, remember Gall.

        Being ignorant is not so much a Shame, as being unwilling to
learn.

        God gives all Things to Industry.

        An hundred Thieves cannot strip one naked Man, especially if
his Skin's off.

        Diligence overcomes Difficulties, Sloth makes them.

        Neglect mending a small Fault, and 'twill soon be a great One.

        Bad Gains are truly Losses.

        A long Life may not be good enough, but a good Life is long
enough.

        Be at War with your Vices, at Peace with your Neighbours, and
let every New-Year find you a better Man.


.
