





CHAPTER XI



Keeping Christmas Our Way



            "I remember, I remember

                How my childhood fleeted by,--

             The mirth of its December,

                And the warmth of its July."



When dusk closed in it would be Christmas eve.  All day I had

three points--a chair beside the kitchen table, a lookout melted

through the frost on the front window, and the big sitting-room

fireplace.



All the perfumes of Araby floated from our kitchen that day. 

There was that delicious smell of baking flour from big snowy

loaves of bread, light biscuit, golden coffee cake, and cinnamon

rolls dripping a waxy mixture of sugar, butter, and spice, much

better than the finest butterscotch ever brought from the city. 

There was the tempting odour of boiling ham and baking pies.  The

air was filled with the smell of more herbs and spices than I

knew the names of, that went into mincemeat, fruit cake, plum

pudding, and pies.  There was a teasing fragrance in the spiced

vinegar heating for pickles, a reminder of winesap and rambo in

the boiling cider, while the newly opened bottles of grape juice

filled the house with the tang of Concord and muscadine.  It

seemed to me I never got nicely fixed where I could take a sly

dip in the cake dough or snipe a fat raisin from the mincemeat

but Candace would say:  "Don't you suppose the backlog is halfway

down the lane?"



Then I hurried to the front window, where I could see through my

melted outlook on the frosted pane, across the west eighty to the

woods, where father and Laddie were getting out the Christmas

backlog.  It was too bitterly cold to keep me there while they

worked, but Laddie said that if I would watch, and come to meet

them, he would take me up, and I might ride home among the

Christmas greens on the log.



So I flattened my nose against the pane and danced and fidgeted

until those odours teased me back to the kitchen; and no more did

I get nicely located beside a jar of pudding sauce than Candace

would object to the place I had hung her stocking.  It was my

task, my delightful all-day task, to hang the stockings.  Father

had made me a peg for each one, and I had ten feet of mantel

front along which to arrange them.  But it was no small job to do

this to every one's satisfaction.  No matter what happened to any

one else, Candace had to be pleased: for did not she so manage

that most fowls served on mother's table went gizzardless to the

carving?  She knew and acknowledged the great importance of

trying cookies, pies, and cake while they were hot.  She was

forever overworked and tired, yet she always found time to make

gingerbread women with currant buttons on their frocks, and pudgy

doughnut men with clove eyes and cigars of cinnamon.  If my own

stocking lay on the hearth, Candace's had to go in a place that

satisfied her--that was one sure thing.  Besides, I had to make

up to her for what Leon did, because she was crying into the

corner of her apron about that.



He slipped in and stole her stocking, hung it over the

broomstick, and marched around the breakfast table singing to the

tune of--



            "Ha, ha, ha, who wouldn't go--

                 Up on the housetop click, click, click?

             Down through the chimney,

                 With good Saint Nick----"



words he made up himself.  He walked just fast enough that she

couldn't catch him, and sang as he went:



            "Ha, ha, ha, good Saint Nick,

                 Come and look at this stocking, quick!



             If you undertake its length to fill,

                 You'll have to bust a ten-dollar bill.

             Who does it belong to?  Candace Swartz.

                 Bring extra candy,--seven quarts----"





She got so angry she just roared, so father made Leon stop it,

but I couldn't help laughing myself.  Then we had to pet her all

day, so she'd cheer up, and not salt the Christmas dinner with

her tears.  I never saw such a monkey as Leon!  I trotted out to

comfort her, and snipped bites, until I wore a triangle on the

carpet between the kitchen and the mantel, the mantel and the

window, and the window and the kitchen, while every hour things

grew more exciting.



There never had been such a flurry at our house since I could

remember; for to-morrow would be Christmas and bring home all the

children, and a house full of guests.  My big brother, Jerry, who

was a lawyer in the city, was coming with his family, and so were

Frank, Elizabeth, and Lucy with theirs, and of course Sally and

Peter--I wondered if she would still be fixing his tie--and

Shelley came yesterday, blushing like a rose, and she laughed if

you pointed your finger at her.



Something had happened to her in Chicago.  I wasn't so sure as I

had been about a city being such a dreadful place of noise, bad

air, and wicked people.  Nothing had hurt Shelley.  She had grown

so much that you could see she was larger.  Her hair and face--

all of Shelley just shone.  Her eyes danced, she talked and

laughed all the time, and she hugged every one who passed her. 

She never loved us so before.  Leon said she must have been

homesick and coming back had given her a spell.  I did hope it

would be a bad one, and last forever.  I would have liked for all

our family to have had a spell if it would have made them act and

look like Shelley.  The Princess was not a speck lovelier, and

she didn't act any nicer.



If I could have painted, I'd have made a picture of Shelley with

a circle of light above her head like the one of the boy Jesus

where He talked with the wise men in the temple.  I asked father

if he noticed how much prettier and nicer she was, and he said he

did.  Then I asked him if he thought now, that a city was such a

bad place to live in, and he said where she was had nothing to do

with it, the same thing would happen here, or anywhere, when

life's greatest experience came to a girl.  That was all he would

say, but figuring it out was easy.  The greatest experience that

happened to our girls was when they married, like Sally, so it

meant that Shelley had gone and fallen in love with that lawyer

man, and she liked sitting on the sofa with him, and no doubt she

fixed his ties.  But if any one thought I would tell anything I

saw when he came they were badly mistaken.



All of us rushed around like we were crazy.  If father and mother

hadn't held steady and kept us down, we might have raised the

roof.  We were all so glad about getting Leon and the money back;

mother hadn't been sick since the fish cured her; the new blue

goose was so like the one that had burst, even father never

noticed any difference; all the children were either home or

coming, and after we had our gifts and the biggest dinner we ever

had, Christmas night all of us would go to the schoolhouse to see

our school try to spell down three others to whom they had sent

saucy invitations to come and be beaten.



Mother sat in the dining-room beside the kitchen door, so that

she could watch the baking, brewing, pickling, and spicing.  It

took four men to handle the backlog, which I noticed father

pronounced every year "just a little the finest we ever had," and

Laddie strung the house with bittersweet, evergreens, and the

most beautiful sprays of myrtle that he raked from under the

snow.  Father drove to town in the sleigh, and the list of things

to be purchased mother gave him as a reminder was almost a yard

long.



The minute they finished the outdoor work Laddie and Leon began

bringing in baskets of apples, golden bellflowers, green pippins,

white winter pearmains, Rhode Island greenings, and striped

rambos all covered with hoarfrost, yet not frozen, and so full of

juice you had to bite into them carefully or they dripped and

offended mother.  These they washed and carried to the cellar

ready for use.



Then they cracked big dishes of nuts; and popped corn that popped

with the most resounding pops in all my experience--popped a

tubful, and Laddie melted maple sugar and poured over it and made

big balls of fluff and sweetness.  He took a pan and filled it

with grains, selected one at a time, the very largest and

whitest, and made an especial ball, in the middle of which he put

a lovely pink candy heart on which was printed in red letters: 

"How can this heart be mine, yet yours, unless our hearts are

one?"  He wouldn't let any of them see it except me, and he only

let me because he knew I'd be delighted.



It was almost dusk when father came through the kitchen loaded

with bundles and found Candace and the girls still cooking.



We were so excited we could scarcely be gathered around the

supper table, and mother said we chattered until she couldn't

hear herself think.  After a while Laddie laid down his fork and

looked at our father.



"Have you any objection to my using the sleigh to-morrow night?"

he asked.



Father looked at mother.



"Had you planned to use it, mother?"



Mother said:  "No.  If I go, I'll ride in the big sled with all

of us.  It is such a little way, and the roads are like glass."



So father said politely, as he always spoke to us:  "Then it will

give me great pleasure for you to take it, my son."



That made Leon bang his fork loudly as he dared and squirm in his

chair, for well he knew that if he had asked, the answer would

have been different.  If Laddie took the sleigh he would harness

carefully, drive fast, but reasonably, blanket his horse, come

home at the right time, and put everything exactly where he found

it.  But Leon would pitch the harness on some way, race every

step, never think of his steaming horse, come home when there was

no one so wild as he left to play pranks with, and scatter the

harness everywhere.  He knew our father would love to trust him

the same as he did Laddie.  He wouldn't always prove himself

trustworthy, but he envied Laddie.



"You think you'll take the Princess to the spelling bee, don't

you?" he sneered.



"I mean to ask her," replied Laddie.



"Maybe you think she'll ride in our old homemade, hickory

cheesebox, when she can sail all over the country like a bird in

a velvet-lined cutter with a real buffalo robe."



There was a quick catch in mother's breath and I felt her hand on

my chair tremble.  Father's lips tightened and a frown settled on

his face, while Laddie fairly jumped.  He went white to the lips,

and one hand dropped on the table, palm up, the fingers closing

and unclosing, while his eyes turned first to mother, and then to

father, in dumb appeal.  We all knew that he was suffering.  No

one spoke, and Leon having shot his arrow straight home, saw as

people so often do in this world that the damage of unkind words

could not easily be repaired; so he grew red in the face and

squirmed uncomfortably.



At last Laddie drew a deep, quivering breath.  "I never thought

of that," he said.  "She has seemed happy to go with me several

times when I asked her, but of course she might not care to ride

in ours, when she has such a fine sleigh of her own."



Father's voice fairly boomed down the length of the table.



"Your mother always has found our sleigh suitable," he said.



The fact was, father was rarely proud of it.  He had selected the

hickory in our woods, cut it and hauled it to the mill, cured the

lumber, and used all his spare time for two winters making it. 

With the exception of having the runners turned at a factory and

iron-bound at a smithy, he had completed it alone with great

care, even to staining it a beautiful cherry colour, and fitting

white sheepskins into the bed.  We had all watched him and been

so proud of it, and now Leon was sneering at it.  He might just

as well have undertaken to laugh at father's wedding suit or to

make fun of "Clark's Commentaries."



Laddie appealed to mother:  "Do you think I'd better not ask

her?"



He spoke with an effort.



"Laddie, that is the first time I ever heard you propose to do

any one an injustice," she said.



"I don't see how," said Laddie.



"It isn't giving the Princess any chance at all," replied mother

"You've just said that she has seemed pleased to accompany you

before, now you are proposing to cut her out of what promises to

be the most delightful evening of the winter, without even giving

her the chance to say whether she'd go with you or not.  Has she

ever made you feel that anything you offered her or wanted to do

for her was not good enough?"



"Never!" exclaimed Laddie fervently.



"Until she does, then, do you think it would be quite manly and

honourable to make decisions for her?  You say you never thought

of anything except a pleasant time with her; possibly she feels

the same.  Unless she changes, I would scarcely let a boy's

foolish tongue disturb her pleasure.  Moreover, as to the matter

of wealth, your father may be as rich as hers; but they have one,

we have many.  If what we spend on all our brood could be

confined to one child, we could easily duplicate all her

luxuries, and I think she has the good sense to realize the fact

as quickly as any one.  I've no doubt she would gladly exchange

half she has for the companionship of a sister or a brother in

her lonely life."



Laddie turned to father, and father's smile was happy again. 

Mother was little but she was mighty.  With only a few words she

had made Leon feel how unkind and foolish he had been, quieted

Laddie's alarm, and soothed the hurt father's pride had felt in

that he had not been able to furnish her with so fine a turnout

as Pryors had.



Next morning when the excitement of gifts and greetings was over,

and Laddie's morning work was all finished, he took a beautiful

volume of poems and his popcorn ball and started across the

fields due west; all of us knew that he was going to call on and

offer them to the Princess, and ask to take her to the spelling

bee.  I suppose Laddie thought he was taking that trip alone, but

really he was surrounded.  I watched him from the window, and my

heart went with him.  Presently father went and sat beside

mother's chair, and stroking her hand, whispered softly:  "Please

don't worry, little mother.  It will be all right.  Your boy will

come home happy."



"I hope so," she answered, "but I can't help feeling dreadfully

nervous.  If things go wrong with Laddie, it will spoil the day."



"I have much faith in the Princess' good common sense," replied

father, "and considering what it means to Laddie, it would hurt

me sore to lose it."



Mother sat still, but her lips moved so that I knew she was

making soft little whispered prayers for her best loved son.  But

Laddie, plowing through the drift, never dreamed that all of us

were with him.  He was always better looking than any other man I

ever had seen, but when, two hours later, he stamped into the

kitchen he was so much handsomer than usual, that I knew from the

flush on his cheek and the light in his eye, that the Princess

had been kind, and by the package in his hand, that she had made

him a present.  He really had two, a beautiful book and a

necktie.  I wondered to my soul if she gave him that, so she

could fix it!  I didn't believe she had begun on his ties at that

time; but of course when he loved her as he did, he wished she

would.



It was the very jolliest Christmas we ever had, but the day

seemed long.  When night came we were in a precious bustle.  The

wagon bed on bobs, filled with hay and covers, drawn by Ned and

Jo, was brought up for the family, and the sleigh made spick-and-

span and drawn by Laddie's thoroughbred, stood beside it.  Laddie

had filled the kitchen oven with bricks and hung up a comfort at

four o'clock to keep the Princess warm.



Because he had to drive out of the way to bring her, Laddie

wanted to start early; and when he came down dressed in his

college clothes, and looking the manliest of men, some of the

folks thought it funny to see him carefully rake his hot bricks

from the oven, and pin them in an old red breakfast shawl.  I

thought it was fine, and I whispered to mother:  "Do you suppose

that if Laddie ever marries the Princess he will be good to her

as he is to you?"



Mother nodded with tear-dimmed eyes, but Shelley said:  "I'll

wager a strong young girl like the Princess will laugh at you for

babying over her."



"Why?" inquired Laddie.  "It is a long drive and a bitter night,

and if you fancy the Princess will laugh at anything I do, when I

am doing the best I know for her comfort, you are mistaken.  At

least, that is the impression she gave me this morning."



I saw the swift glance mother shot at father, and father laid

down his paper and said, while he pretended his glasses needed

polishing:  "Now there is the right sort of a girl for you.  No

foolishness about her, when she has every chance.  Hurrah for the

Princess!"



It was easy to see that she wasn't going to have nearly so hard a

time changing father's opinion as she would mother's.  It was not

nearly a year yet, and here he was changed already.  Laddie said

good-bye to mother--he never forgot--gathered up his comfort and

bricks, and started for Pryors' downright happy.  We went to the

schoolhouse a little later, all of us scoured, curled, starched,

and wearing our very best clothes.  My! but it was fine.  There

were many lights in the room and it was hung with greens.  There

was a crowd even though it was early.  On Miss Amelia's table was

a volume of history that was the prize, and every one was looking

and acting the very best he knew how, although there were cases

where they didn't know so very much.



Our Shelley was the handsomest girl there, until the Princess

came, and then they both were.  Shelley wore one of her city

frocks and a quilted red silk hood that was one of her Christmas

gifts, and she looked just like a handsome doll.  She made every

male creature in that room feel that she was pining for him

alone.  May had a gay plaid frock and curls nearly a yard long,

and so had I, but both our frocks and curls were homemade; mother

would have them once in a while; father and I couldn't stop her.



But there was not a soul there who didn't have some sort of gift

to rejoice over, and laughter and shouts of "Merry Christmas!"

filled the room.  It was growing late and there was some talk of

choosers, when the door opened and in a rush of frosty air the

Princess and Laddie entered.  Every one stopped short and stared.



There was good reason.  The Princess looked as if she had

accidentally stepped from a frame.  She was always lovely and

beautifully dressed, but to-night she was prettier and finer than

ever before.  You could fairly hear their teeth click as some of

the most envious of those girls caught sight of her, for she was

wearing a new hat!--a black velvet store hat, fitting closely

over her crown, with a rim of twisted velvet, a scarlet bird's

wing, and a big silver buckle.  Her dress was of scarlet cloth

cut in forms, and it fitted as if she had been melted and poured

into it.  It was edged around the throat, wrists, and skirt with

narrow bands of fur, and she wore a loose, long, silk-lined coat

of the same material, and worst of all, furs--furs such as we had

heard wealthy and stylish city ladies were wearing.  A golden

brown cape that reached to her elbows, with ends falling to the

knees, finished in the tails of some animal, and for her hands a

muff as big as a nail keg.



Now, there was not a girl in that room, except the Princess, an

she had those clothes, who wouldn't have flirted like a peacock,

almost bursting with pride; but because the Princess had them,

and they didn't, they sat stolid and sullen, and cast glances at

each other as if they were saying:  "The stuck-up thing!" 

"Thinks she's smart, don't she?"



Many of them should have gone to meet her and made her welcome,

for she was not of our district and really their guest.  Shelley

did go, but I noticed she didn't hurry.



The choosers began at once, and Laddie was the first person

called for our side, and the Princess for the visitors'.  Every

one in the room was chosen on one side or the other; even my name

was called, but I only sat still and shook my head, for I very

well knew that no one except father would remember to pronounce

easy ones for me, and besides I was so bitterly disappointed I

could scarcely have stood up.  They had put me in a seat near the

fire; the spellers lined either wall, and a goodly number that

refused to spell occupied the middle seats.  I couldn't get a

glimpse of Laddie or the home folks, or worst of all, of my

idolized Princess.



I never could bear to find a fault with Laddie, but I sadly

reflected that he might as well have left me at home, if I were

to be buried where I could neither hear nor see a thing.  I was

just wishing it was summer so I could steal out to the cemetery,

and have a good visit with the butterflies that always swarmed

around Georgiana Jane Titcomb's grave at the corner of the

church.  I never knew Georgiana Jane, but her people must have

been very fond of her, for her grave was scarlet with geraniums,

and pink with roses from earliest spring until frost, and the

bright colours attracted swarms of butterflies.  I had learned

that if I stuck a few blossoms in my hair, rubbed some sweet

smelling ones over my hands, and knelt and kept so quiet that I

fitted into the landscape, the butterflies would think me a

flower too, and alight on my hair, dress, and my hands, even. 

God never made anything more beautiful than those butterflies,

with their wings of brightly painted velvet down, their bright

eyes, their curious antennae, and their queer, tickly feet. 

Laddie had promised me a book telling all about every kind there

was, the first time he went to a city, so I was wishing I had it,

and was among my pet beauties with it, when I discovered him

bending over me.



He took my arm, and marching back to his place, helped me to the

deep window seat beside him, where with my head on a level, and

within a foot of his, I could see everything in the whole room. 

I don't know why I ever spent any time pining for the beauties of

Georgiana Jane Titcomb's grave, even with its handsome headstone

on which was carved a lamb standing on three feet and holding a

banner over its shoulder with the fourth, and the geraniums,

roses, and the weeping willow that grew over it, thrown in.  I

might have trusted Laddie.  He never had forgotten me; until he

did, I should have kept unwavering faith.



Now, I had the best place of any one in the room, and I smoothed

my new plaid frock and shook my handmade curls just as near like

Shelley as ever I could.  But it seems that most of the ointment

in this world has a fly in it, like in the Bible, for fine as my

location was, I soon knew that I should ask Laddie to put me

down, because the window behind me didn't fit its frame, and the

night was bitter.  Before half an hour I was stiff with cold; but

I doubt if I would have given up that location if I had known I

would freeze, because this was the most fun I had ever seen.



Miss Amelia began with McGuffey's spelling book, and whenever

some poor unfortunate made a bad break the crowd roared with

laughter.  Peter Justice stood up to spell and before three

rounds he was nodding on his feet, so she pronounced "sleepy" to

him.  Some one nudged Pete and he waked up and spelled it, s-l-e,

sle, p-e, pe, and because he really was so sleepy it made every

one laugh.  James Whittaker spelled compromise with a k, and

Isaac Thomas spelled soap, s-o-a-p-e, and it was all the funnier

that he couldn't spell it, for from his looks you could tell that

he had no acquaintance with it in any shape.  Then Miss Amelia

gave out "marriage" to the spooniest young man in the district,

and "stepfather" to a man who was courting a widow with nine

children; and "coquette" to our Shelley, who had been making

sheep's eyes at Johnny Myers, so it took her by surprise and she

joined the majority, which by that time occupied seats.



There was much laughing and clapping of hands for a time, but

when Miss Amelia had let them have their fun and thinned the

lines to half a dozen on each side who could really spell, she

began business, and pronounced the hardest words she could find

in the book, and the spellers caught them up and rattled them off

like machines.



"Incompatibility," she gave out, and before the sound of her

voice died away the Princess was spelling:  "I-n, in, c-o-m, com,

in com, p-a-t, pat, incompat, i, incompati, b-i-l, bil,

incompatibil, i, incompatibili, t-y, ty, incompatibility."



Then Laddie spelled "incomprehensibility," and they finished up

the "bilities" and the "alities" with a rush and changed

McGuffey's for Webster, with five on Laddie's side and three on

the Princess', and when they quit with it, the Princess was

alone, and Laddie and our little May facing her.



From that on you could call it real spelling.  They spelled from

the grammars, hyperbole, synecdoche, and epizeuxis.  They spelled

from the physiology, chlorophyll, coccyx, arytenoid, and the

names of the bones and nerves, and all the hard words inside you.



They tried the diseases and spelled jaundice, neurasthenia, and

tongue-tied.  They tried all the occupations and professions, and

went through the stores and spelled all sorts of hardware, china

and dry goods.  Each side kept cheering its own and urging them

to do their best, and every few minutes some man in the back of

the house said something that was too funny.  When Miss Amelia

pronounced "bombazine" to Laddie our side cried, "Careful,

Laddie, careful! you're out of your element!"



And when she gave "swivel-tree" to the Princess, her side

whispered, "Go easy!  Do you know what it is?  Make her define

it."



They branched over the country.  May met her Jonah on the

mountains.  Katahdin was too much for her, and Laddie and the

Princess were left to fight it out alone.  I didn't think Laddie

liked it.  I'm sure he never expected it to turn out that way. 

He must have been certain he could beat her, for after he

finished English there were two or three other languages he knew,

and every one in the district felt that he could win, and

expected him to do it.  It was an awful place to put him in, I

could see that.  He stood a little more erect than usual, with

his eyes toward the Princess, and when his side kept crying,

"Keep the prize, Laddie!  Hold up the glory of the district!" he

ground out the words as if he had a spite at them for not being

so hard that he would have an excuse for going down.



The Princess was poised lightly on her feet, her thick curls,

just touching her shoulders, shining in the light; her eyes like

stars, her perfect, dark oval face flushed a rich red, and her

deep bosom rising and falling with excitement.  Many times in

later years I have tried to remember when the Princess was

loveliest of all, and that night always stands first.



I was thinking fast.  Laddie was a big man.  Men were strong on

purpose so they could bear things.  He loved the Princess so, and

he didn't know whether she loved him or not; and every

marriageable man in three counties was just aching for the chance

to court her, and I didn't feel that he dared risk hurting her

feelings.



Laddie said, to be the man who conquered the Princess and to whom

she lifted her lips for a first kiss was worth life itself.  I

made up my mind that night that he knew just exactly what he was

talking about.  I thought so too.  And I seemed to understand why

Laddie--Laddie in his youth, strength, and manly beauty, Laddie,

who boasted that there was not a nerve in his body--trembled

before the Princess.



It looked as if she had set herself against him and was working

for the honours, and if she wanted them, I didn't feel that he

should chance beating her, and then, too, it was beginning to be

plain that it was none too sure he could.  Laddie didn't seem to

be the only one who had been well drilled in spelling.



I held my jaws set a minute, so that I could speak without Laddie

knowing how I was shivering, and then I whispered:  "Except her

eyes are softer, she looks just like a cardinal."



Laddie nodded emphatically and moving a step nearer laid his

elbow across my knees.  Heavens, how they spelled!  They finished

all the words I ever heard and spelled like lightning through a

lot of others the meaning of which I couldn't imagine.  Father

never gave them out at home.  They spelled epiphany, gaberdine,

ichthyology, gewgaw, kaleidoscope, and troubadour.  Then Laddie

spelled one word two different ways; and the Princess went him

one better, for she spelled another three.



They spelled from the Bible, Nebuchadnezzar, Potiphar, Peleg,

Belshazzar, Abimelech, and a host of others I never heard the

minister preach about.  Then they did the most dreadful thing of

all.  "Broom," pronounced the teacher, and I began mentally, b-r-

o-o-m, but Laddie spelled "b-r-o-u-g-h-a-m," and I stared at him

in a daze.  A second later Miss Amelia gave out "Beecham" to the

Princess, and again I tried it, b-e-e-c-h, but the Princess was

spelling "B-e-a-u-c-h-a-m-p," and I almost fell from the window.



They kept that up until I was nearly crazy with nervousness; I

forgot I was half frozen.  I pulled Laddie's sleeve and whispered

in his ear:  "Do you think she'll cry if you beat her?"



I was half crying myself, the strain had been awful.  I was torn

between these dearest loves of mine.



"Seen me have any chance to beat her?" retorted Laddie.



Miss Amelia seemed to have used most of her books, and at last

picked up an old geography and began giving out points around the

coast, while Laddie and the Princess took turns snatching the

words from her mouth and spelling them.  Father often did that,

so Laddie was safe there.  They were just going it when Miss

Amelia pronounced, "Terra del Fuego," to the Princess.  "T-e-r-r-

a, Terra, d-e-l, del, F-i-e-u-g-o," spelled the Princess, and sat

down suddenly in the midst of a mighty groan from her side,

swelled by a wail from one little home district deserter.



"Next!" called Miss Amelia.



"T-e-r-r-a, Terra, d-e-l, del, F-e-u-g-o," spelled Laddie.



"Wrong!" wailed Miss Amelia, and our side breathed one big groan

in concert, and I lifted up my voice in that also.  Then every

one laughed and pretended they didn't care, and the Princess came

over and shook hands with Laddie, and Laddie said to Miss Amelia:



"Just let me take that book a minute until I see how the thing

really does go."  It was well done and satisfied the crowd, which

clapped and cheered; but as I had heard him spell it many, many

times for father, he didn't fool me.



Laddie and the Princess drew slips for the book and it fell to

her.  He was so pleased he kissed me as he lifted me down and

never noticed I was so stiff I could scarcely stand--and I did

fall twice going to the sleigh.  My bed was warm and my room was

warm, but I chilled the night through and until the next

afternoon, when I grew so faint and sleepy I crept to Miss

Amelia's desk, half dead with fright--it was my first trip to ask

an excuse--and begged:  "Oh teacher, I'm so sick.  Please let me

go home."



I think one glance must have satisfied her that it was true, for

she said very kindly that I might, and she would send Leon along

to take care of me.  But my troubles were only half over when I

had her consent.  It was very probable I would be called a baby

and sent back when I reached home, so I refused company and

started alone.  It seemed a mile past the cemetery.  I was so

tired I stopped, and leaning against the fence, peeped through at

the white stones and the whiter mounds they covered, and wondered

how my mother would feel if she were compelled to lay me beside

the two little whooping cough and fever sisters already sleeping

there.  I decided that it would be so very dreadful, that the

tears began to roll down my cheeks and freeze before they fell.



Down the Big Hill slowly I went.  How bare it looked then!  Only

leafless trees and dried seed pods rattling on the bushes, the

sand frozen, and not a rush to be seen for the thick blanket of

snow.  A few rods above the bridge was a footpath, smooth and

well worn, that led down to the creek, beaten by the feet of

children who raced it every day and took a running slide across

the ice.  I struck into the path as always; but I was too stiff

to run, for I tried.  I walked on the ice, and being almost worn

out, sat on the bridge and fell to watching the water bubbling

under the glassy crust.  I was so dull a horse's feet struck the

bridge before I heard the bells--for I had bells in my ears that

day--and when I looked up it was the Princess--the Princess in

her red dress and furs, with a silk hood instead of her hat, her

sleigh like a picture, with a buffalo robe, that it was whispered

about the country, cost over a hundred dollars, and her

thoroughbred mare Maud dancing and prancing.  "Bless me!  Is it

you, Little Sister?" she asked.  "Shall I give you a ride home?"



Before I could scarcely realize she was there, I was beside her

and she was tucking the fine warm robe over me.  I lifted a pair

of dull eyes to her face.



"Oh Princess, I am so glad you came," I said.  "I don't think I

could have gone another step if I had frozen on the bridge."



The Princess bent to look in my face.  "Why, you poor child!" She

exclaimed, "you're white as death!  Where are you ill?"



I leaned on her shoulder, though ordinarily I would not have

offered to touch her first, and murmured:  "I am not ill,

outdoors, only dull, sleepy, and freezing with the cold."



"It was that window!" she exclaimed.  "I thought of it, but I

trusted Laddie."



That roused me a little.



"Oh Princess," I cried, "you mustn't blame Laddie!  I knew it was

too cold, but I wouldn't tell him, because if he put me down I

couldn't see you, and we thought, but for your eyes being softer,

you looked just like a cardinal."



The Princess hugged me close and laughed merrily.  "You darling!"

she cried.



Then she shook me up sharply:  "Don't you dare go to sleep!" she

said.  "I must take you home first."



Once there she quieted my mother's alarm, put me to bed, drove

three miles for Dr. Fenner and had me started nicely on the road

to a month of lung fever, before she left.  In my delirium I

spelled volumes; and the miracle of it was I never missed a word

until I came to "Terra del Fuego," and there I covered my lips

and stoutly insisted that it was the Princess' secret.



To keep me from that danger sleep on the road, she shook me up

and asked about the spelling bee.  I thought it was the grandest

thing I had ever seen in my life, and I told her so.  She

gathered me close and whispered:  "Tell me something, Little

Sister, please."



The minx!  She knew I thought that a far finer title than hers.



"Would Laddie care?" I questioned.



"Not in the least!"



"Well then, I will."



"Can Laddie spell `Terra del Fuego?'" she whispered.



I nodded.



"Are you sure?"



"I have heard him do it over and over for father."



The Princess forgot I was so sick, forgot her horse, forgot

everything.  She threw her head back and her hands up, until her

horse stopped in answer to the loosened line, and she laughed and

laughed.  She laughed until peal on peal re-echoed from our Big

Woods clear across the west eighty.  She laughed until her

ringing notes set my slow pulses on fire, and started my numbed

brain in one last effort.  I stood up and took her lovely face

between my palms, turning it until I could see whether the

thought that had come to me showed in her eyes, and it did.



"Oh you darling, splendid Princess!" I cried.  "You missed it on

purpose to let Laddie beat!  You can spell it too!"


