





CHAPTER IX



"Even So"



            "All things whatsoever ye would

             That men should do to you,

             Do ye even so to them."





Our big girls and boys always made a dreadful fuss and said we

would catch every disease you could mention, but mother and

father were set about it, just like the big rocks in the hills. 

They said they, themselves, once had been at the mercy of the

people, and they knew how it felt.  Mother said when they were

coming here in a wagon, and she had ridden until she had to walk

to rest her feet, and held a big baby until her arms became so

tired she drove while father took it, and when at last they saw a

house and stopped, she said if the woman hadn't invited her in,

and let her cook on the stove, given her milk and eggs, and

furnished her a bed to sleep in once in a while, she couldn't

have reached here at all; and she never had been refused once. 

Then she always quoted:  "All things whatsoever ye would that men

should do to you, do ye EVEN SO to them."



Father said there were men who made a business of splitting

hairs, and of finding different meanings in almost everything in

the Bible.  I would like to have seen any one split hairs about

that, or it made to mean something else.  Of all the things in

the Bible that you had to do because it said to, whether you

liked it or not, that was the one you struck oftenest in life and

it took the hardest pull to obey.  It was just the hatefulest

text of any, and made you squirm most.  There was no possible way

to get around it.  It meant, that if you liked a splinter new

slate, and a sharp pencil all covered with gold paper, to make

pictures and write your lessons, when Clarissa Polk sat next you

and sang so low the teacher couldn't hear until she put herself

to sleep on it, "I WISHT I had a slate!  I wisht I HAD a slate! 

I wisht I had a SLATE!  Oh I WISHT I HAD A SLATE!"--it meant that

you just had to wash up yours and stop making pictures yourself,

and pass it over; you even had to smile when you offered it, if

you did it right.  I seldom got through it as the Lord would, for

any one who loaned Clarissa a slate knew that it would come back

with greasy, sweaty finger marks on it you almost had to dig a

hole to wash off, and your pencil would be wet.  And if there

were the least flaw of crystal in the pencil, she found it, and

bore down so hard that what she wrote never would come off.



The Lord always seemed bigger and more majestic to me, than at

any other time, when I remembered that He could have known all

that, and yet smiled as He loaned Clarissa His slate.  And that

old Bible thing meant, too, that if you would like it if you were

travelling a long way, say to California to hunt gold, or even

just to Indiana, to find a farm fit to live on--it meant that if

you were tired, hungry, and sore, and would want to be taken in

and fed and rested, you had to let in other people when they

reached your house.  Father and mother had been through it

themselves, and they must have been tired as could be, before

they reached Sarah Hood's and she took them in, and rested and

fed them, even when they were only a short way from the top of

the Little Hill, where next morning they looked down and stopped

the wagon, until they chose the place to build their house. 

Sarah Hood came along, and helped mother all day, so by night she

was settled in the old cabin that was on the land, and ready to

go to work making money to build a new one, and then a big house,

and fix the farm all beautiful like it was then.  They knew so

well how it felt, that they kept one bed in the boys' room, and

any man who came at dusk got his supper, to sleep there, and his

breakfast, and there never was anything to pay.  The girls always

scolded dreadfully about the extra washing, but mother said she

slept on sheets when she came out, and some one washed them.



One time Sally said:  "Mother, have you ever figured out how many

hundred sheets you've washed since, to pay for that?"



Mother said:  "No, but I just hope it will make a stack high

enough for me to climb from into Heaven."



Sally said:  "The talk at the church always led me to think that

you flew to Heaven."



Mother answered:  "So I get there, I don't mind if I creep."



Then Sally knew it was time to stop.  We always knew.  And we

stopped, too!



We had heard that "All things" quotation, until the first two

words were as much as mother ever needed repeat of it any more,

and we had cooked, washed for, and waited on people travelling,

until Leon got so when he saw any one coming--of course we knew

all the neighbours, and their horses and wagons and carriages--he

always said:  "Here comes another `Even So!'"  He said we had

done "even so" to people until it was about our share, but mother

said our share was going to last until the Lord said, "Well done,

good and faithful servant," and took us home.  She had much more

about the stranger at the gate and entertaining angels unawares;

why, she knew every single thing in the Bible that meant it was

her duty to feed and give a bed to any one, no matter how dirty

or miserable looking he was!  So when Leon came in one evening at

dusk and said, "There's another `Even So' coming down the Little

Hill!" all of us knew that we'd have company for the night, and

we had.



I didn't like that man, but some of the others seemed to find him

amusing.  Maybe it was because I had nothing to do but sit and

watch him, and so I saw more of him than the ones who came and

went all the time.  As long as there was any one in the room, he

complained dreadfully about his sore foot, and then cheered up

and talked, and he could tell interesting things.  He was young,

but he must have been most everywhere and seen everything.  He

was very brave and could stand off three men who were going to

take from him the money he was carrying to buy a piece of land in

Illinois.  The minute the grown folks left the room to milk, do

the night feeding, and begin supper, he twisted in his chair and

looked at every door, and went and stood at the back dining-room

window, where he could see the barn and what was out there, and

coming back he took a peep into father's and mother's room, and

although he limped dreadfully when he came, he walked like any

one when he went over and picked up father's gun and looked to

see if it were loaded, and seemed mighty glad when he found it

wasn't.  Father said he could load in a flash when it was

necessary, but he was dubious about a loaded gun in a house full

of children.  Not one of us ever touched it, until the boys were

big enough to have permission, like Laddie and Leon had.  He said

a gun was such a great "moral persuader," that the sight of one

was mostly all that was needed, and nobody could tell by looking

at it whether it was loaded or not.  This man could, for he

examined the lock and smiled in a pleased way over it, and he

never limped a step going back to his chair.  He kept on

complaining, until father told him before bedtime that he had

better rest a day or two, and mother said that would be a good

idea.



He talked so much we couldn't do our lessons or spell very well,

but it was Friday and we'd have another chance Saturday, so it

didn't make so much difference.  Father said the traveller must

be tired and sleepy and Leon should take a light and show him to

bed.  He stayed so long father went to the foot of the stairway,

and asked him why he didn't come down and he said he was in bed

too.  The next morning he was sleepy at breakfast and Laddie said

it was no wonder, because Leon and the traveller were talking

when he went upstairs.  The man turned to father and said: 

"That's a mighty smart boy, Mr. Stanton."  Father frowned and

said:  "Praise to the face is open disgrace.  I hope he will be

smart enough not to disgrace us, anyway."



The traveller said he was sure he would be, and we could see that

he had taken a liking to Leon, for he went with him to the barn

to help do the morning feeding.  They stayed so long mother sent

me to call them, and when I got there, the man was telling Leon

how foolish it was for boys to live on a farm; how they never

would amount to anything unless they went to cities, and about

all the fun there was there, and how nice it was to travel,

even along the roads, because every one fed you, and gave you a

good bed.  He forgot that walking had made his foot lame, and I

couldn't see, to save me, why he was going to spend his money to

buy a farm, if he thought a town the only place where it was fit

to live.



He stayed all Saturday, and father said Sunday was no suitable

time to start on a journey again, and the man's foot was bad when

father was around, so it would be better to wait until Monday. 

The traveller tagged Leon and told him what a fine fellow he was,

how smart he was, and to prove it, Leon boasted about everything

he knew, and showed the man all over the farm.



I even saw them pass the Station in the orchard, and heard Leon

brag how father had been an agent for the Governor; but of course

he didn't really show him the place, and probably it would have

made no difference if he had, for all the money must have been

spent on Sally's wedding.  Of course father might have put some

there he had got since, or that money might never have been his

at all, but it seemed as if it would be, because it was on his

land.



Sunday evening all of us attended church, but the traveller was

too tired, so when Leon said he'd stay with him, father thought

it was all right.  I could see no one wanted to leave the man

alone in the house.  He said they'd go to bed early, and we came

in quite late.  The lamp was turned low, the door unlocked, and

everything in place.  Laddie went to bed without a candle, and

said he'd undress and slip in easy so as not to waken them.



In the morning when he got up the traveller's bed hadn't been

slept in, and neither had Leon's.  The gun was gone, and father

stared at mother, and mother stared at Laddie, and he turned and

ran straight toward the Station, and in a minute he was back,

whiter than a plate.  He just said:  "All gone!"  Father and

mother both sat down suddenly and hard.  Then Laddie ran to the

barn and came back and said none of the horses had been taken. 

Soon they went into the parlour and shut the door, and when they

came out father staggered and mother looked exactly like

Sabethany.  Laddie ran to the barn, saddled Flos and rode away. 

Father wanted to ring an alarm on the dinner bell, like he had a

call arranged to get all the neighbours there quickly if we had

sickness or trouble, and mother said:  "Paul, you shall not! 

He's so young!  We've got to keep this as long as we can, and

maybe the Lord will help us find him, and we can give him another

chance."



Father started to say something, and mother held up her hand and

just said, "Paul!" and he sank back in the chair and kept still. 

Mother always had spoken of him as "the Head of the Family," and

here he wasn't at all!  He minded her quickly as I would.



When Miss Amelia came downstairs they let her start to school and

never told her a word, but mother said May and I were not to go. 

So I slipped out and ran through the orchard to look at the

Station, and sure enough! the stone was rolled back, the door

open and the can lying on the floor.  I slid down and picked it

up, and there was one sheet of paper money left in it stuck to

the sides.  It was all plain as a pikestaff.  Leon must have

thought the money had been spent, and showed the traveller the

Station, just to brag, and he guessed there might be something

there, and had gone while we were at church and taken it.  He had

all night the start of us, and he might have a horse waiting

somewhere, and be almost to Illinois by this time, and if the

money belonged to father, there would be no Christmas; and if it

happened to be the money the county gave him to pay the men who

worked the roads every fall, and Miss Amelia, or collections from

the church, he'd have to pay it back, even if it put him in debt;

and if he died, they might take the land, like he said; and where

on earth was Leon?  Knew what he'd done and hiding, I bet!  He

needed the thrashing he would get that time, and I started out to

hunt him and have it over with, so mother wouldn't be uneasy

about him yet; and then I remembered Laddie had said Leon hadn't

been in bed all night.  He was gone too!



Maybe he wanted to try life in a city, where the traveller had

said everything was so grand; but he must have known that he'd

kill his mother if he went, and while he didn't kiss her so

often, and talk so much as some of us, I never could see that he

didn't run quite as fast to get her a chair or save her a step. 

He was so slim and light he could race for the doctor faster than

Laddie or father, either one.  Of course he loved his mother,

just as all of us did; he never, never could go away and not let

her know about it.  If he had gone, that watchful-eyed man, who

was lame only part of the time, had taken the gun and made him

go.  I thought I might as well save the money he'd overlooked, so

I gripped it tight in my hand, and put it in my apron pocket, the

same as I had Laddie's note to the Princess, and started to the

barn, on the chance that Leon might be hiding.  I knew precious

well I would, if I were in his place.  So I hunted the granaries,

the haymow, the stalls, then I stood on the threshing floor and

cried:  "Leon!  If you're hiding come quick!  Mother will be sick

with worrying and father will be so glad to see you, he won't do

anything much.  Do please hurry!"



Then I listened, and all I could hear was a rat gnawing at a

corner of the granary under the hay.  Might as well have saved

its teeth, it would strike a strip of tin when it got through,

but of course it couldn't know that.  Then I went to every hole

around the haystack, where the cattle had eaten; none were deep

yet, like they would be later in the season, and all the way I

begged of Leon to come out.  Once a rooster screamed, flew in my

face and scared me good, but no Leon; so I tried the corn crib,

the implement shed, and the wood house, climbing the ladder with

the money still gripped in one hand.  Then I slipped in the front

door, up the stairs, and searched the garret, even away back

where I didn't like to very well.  At last I went to the dining-

room, and I don't think either father or mother had moved, while

Sabethany turned to stone looked good compared with them.  Seemed

as if it would have been better if they'd cried, or scolded, or

anything but just sit there as they did, when you could see by

their moving once in a while that they were alive.  In the

kitchen Candace and May finished the morning work, and both of

them cried steadily.  I slipped to May, "Whose money was it?" I

whispered.  "Father's, or the county's, or the church's?"



"All three," said May.



"The traveller took it."



"How would he find it?  None of us knew there was such a place

before."



"Laddie seemed to know!"



"Oh Laddie!  Father trusts him about everything."



"They don't think HE told?"



"Of course not, silly.  It's Leon who is gone!"



"Leon may have told about the Station!" I cried.  "He didn't

touch the money.  He never touched it!"



Then I went straight to father.  Keeping a secret was one thing;

seeing the only father you had look like that, was another.  I

held out the money.



"There's one piece old Even So didn't get, anyway," I said. 

"Found it on the floor of the Station, where it was stuck to the

can.  And I thought Leon must be hiding for fear he'd be whipped

for telling, but I've hunted where we usually hide, and promised

him everything under the sun if he'd come out; but he didn't, so

I guess that traveller man must have used the gun to make him go

along."



Father sat and stared at me.  He never offered to touch the

money, not even when I held it against his hand.  So I saw that

money wasn't the trouble, else he'd have looked quick enough to

see how much I had.  They were thinking about Leon being gone, at

least father was.  Mother called me to her and asked:  "You knew

about the Station?"



I nodded.



"When?"



"On the way back from taking Amanda Deam her ducks this summer."



"Leon was with you?"



"He found it."



"What were you doing?"



"Sitting on the fence eating apples.  We were wondering why that

ravine place wasn't cleaned up, when everywhere else was, and

then Leon said there might be a reason.  He told about having

seen a black man, and that he was hidden some place, and we

hunted there and found it.  We rolled back the stone, and opened

the door, and Leon went in, and both of us saw a can full of

money."



"Go on."



"We didn't touch it, mother!  Truly we didn't!  Leon said we'd

found something not intended for children, and we'd be whipped

sick if we ever went near or told, and we never did, not even

once, unless Leon wanted to boast to the traveller man, but if he

showed him the place, he thought sure the money had all been

spent on the wedding and sending Shelley away."



Father's arms shot out, and his head pitched on the table. 

Mother got up and began to walk the floor, and never went near or

even touched him.  I couldn't bear it.  I went and pulled his arm

and put the bill under his hand.



"Leon didn't take your money!  He didn't!  He didn't!  I just

know he didn't!  He does tricks because they are so funny, or he

thinks they'll be, but he doesn't steal!  He doesn't touch a

single thing that is not his, only melons, or chicken out of the

skillet, or bread from the cellar; but not money and things.  I

take gizzards and bread myself, but I don't steal, and Leon or

none of us do!  Oh father, we don't!  Not one of us do!  Don't

you remember about `Thou shalt not,' and the Crusaders?  Leon's

the best fighter of any of us.  I'm not sure that he couldn't

even whip Laddie, if he got mad enough!  Maybe he can't whip the

traveller if he has the gun, but, father, Leon simply couldn't

take the money.  Laddie will stay home and work, and all of us. 

We can help get it back.  We can sell a lot of things.  Laddie

will sell Flos before he'll see you suffer so; and all of us will

give up Christmas, and we'll work!  We'll work as hard as ever we

can, and maybe you could spare the little piece Joe Risdell wants

to build his cabin on.  We can manage about the money, father,

indeed we can.  But you don't dare think Leon took it!  He never

did!  Why, he's yours!  Yours and mother's!"



Father lifted his head and reached out his arms.



"You blessing!" he said.  "You blessing from the Lord!"



Then he gave me a cold, stiff kiss on the forehead, went to

mother, took her arm, and said:  "Come, mommy, let's go and tell

the Lord about it, and then we'll try to make some plan.  Perhaps

Laddie will be back with word soon."



But he almost had to carry her.  Then we could hear him praying,

and he was so anxious, and he made it so earnest it sounded

exactly like the Lord was in our room and father was talking

right to His face.  I tried to think, and this is what I thought:

as father left the room, he looked exactly as I had seen Mr.

Pryor more than once, and my mother had both hands gripped over

her heart, and she said we must not let any one know.  Now if

something could happen to us to make my father look like the

Princess' and my mother hold her heart with both hands, and if no

one were to know about it like they had said, how were we any

different from Pryors?  We might be of the Lord's anointed, but

we could get into the same kind of trouble the infidels could,

and have secrets ourselves, or at least it seemed as if it might

be very nearly the same, when it made father and mother look and

act the way they did.  I wondered if we'd have to leave our

lovely, lovely home, cross a sea and be strangers in a strange

land, as Laddie said; and if people would talk about us, and make

us feel that being a stranger was the loneliest, hardest thing in

all the world.  Well, if mysteries are like this, and we have to

live with one days and years, the Lord have mercy on us!  Then I

saw the money lying on the table, so I took it and put it in the

Bible.  Then I went out and climbed the catalpa tree to watch for

Laddie.



Soon I saw a funny thing, such as I never before had seen. 

Coming across the fields, straight toward our house, sailing over

the fences like a bird, came the Princess on one of her horses. 

Its legs stretched out so far its body almost touched the ground,

and it lifted up and swept over the rails.  She took our meadow

fence lengthwiselike, and at the hitching rack she threw the

bridle over the post, dismounted, and then I saw she had been

riding astride, like a man.  I ran before her and opened the

sitting-room door, but no one was there, so I went on to the

dining-room.  Father had come in, and mother was sitting in her

chair.  Both of them looked at the Princess and never said a

word.



She stopped inside the dining-room door and spoke breathlessly,

as if she as well as the horse had raced.



"I hope I'm not intruding," she said, "but a man north of us told

our Thomas in the village that robbers had taken quite a large

sum of hidden money you held for the county, and church, and of

your own, and your gun, and got away while you were at church

last night.  Is it true?"



"Practically," said my father.



Then my mother motioned toward a chair.



"You are kind to come," she said.  "Won't you be seated?"



The Princess stepped to the chair, but she gripped the back in

both hands and stood straight, breathing fast, her eyes shining

with excitement, her lips and cheeks red, so lovely you just had

to look, and look.



"No," she said.  "I'll tell you why I came, and then if there is

nothing I can do here, and no errand I can ride for you, I'll go.



Mother has heart trouble, the worst in all the world, the kind no

doctor can ever hope to cure, and sometimes, mostly at night, she

is driven to have outside air.  Last night she was unusually ill,

and I heard her leave the house, after I'd gone to my room.  I

watched from my window and saw her take a seat on a bench under

the nearest tree.  I was moving around and often I looked to see

if she were still there.  Then the dogs began to rave, and I

hurried down.  They used to run free, but lately, on account of

her going out, father has been forced to tie them at night.  They

were straining at their chains, and barking dreadfully.  I met

her at the door, but she would only say some one passed and gave

her a fright.  When Thomas came in and told what he had heard,

she said instantly that she had seen the man.



"She said he was about the size of Thomas, that he came from your

direction, that he ran when our dogs barked, but he kept beside

the fences, and climbed over where there were trees.  He crossed

our barnyard and went toward the northwest.  Mother saw him

distinctly as he reached the road, and she said he was not a

large man, he stooped when he ran, and she thought he moved like

a slinking, city thief.  She is sure he's the man who took your

money; she says he acted exactly as if he were trying to escape

pursuit; but I was to be SURE to tell you that he didn't carry a

gun.  If your gun is gone, there must have been two, and the

other man took that and went a different way.  Did two men stop

here?"



"No," said father.  "Only one."



The Princess looked at him thoughtfully.



"Do you think, Mr. Stanton," she said, "that the man who took the

money would burden himself with a gun?  Isn't a rifle heavy for

one in flight to carry?"



"It is," said father.  "Your mother saw nothing of two men?"



"Only one, and she knows he didn't carry a gun.  Except the man

you took in, no stranger has been noticed around here lately?"



"No one.  We are quite careful.  Even the gun was not loaded as

it stood; whoever took it carried the ammunition also, but he

couldn't fire until he loaded."



Father turned to the corner where the gun always stood and then

he stooped and picked up two little white squares from the floor.



They were bits of unbleached muslin in which he wrapped the

bullets he made.



"The rifle was loaded before starting, and in a hurry," he said,

as he held up the squares of muslin.  Then he scratched a match,

bent, and ran it back and forth over the floor, and at one place

there was a flash, and the flame went around in funny little

fizzes as it caught a grain of powder here and there.  "You see

the measure was overrun."



"Wouldn't the man naturally think the gun was loaded, and take it

as it stood?"



"That would be a reasonable conclusion," said father.



"But he looked!" I cried.  "That first night when you and the

boys went to the barn, and the girls were getting supper, he

looked at the gun, and he LIKED it when he saw it wasn't loaded. 

He smiled.  And he didn't limp a mite when I was the only one in

the room.  He and Leon knew it wasn't loaded, and I guess he

didn't load it, for he liked having it empty so well."



"Ummmm!" said father.  "What it would save in this world if a

child only knew when to talk and when to keep still.  Little

Sister, the next time you see a stranger examine my gun when I'm

not in the room, suppose you take father out alone and whisper to

him about it."



"Yes, sir," I said.



The way I wished I had told that at the right time made me dizzy,

but then there were several good switchings I'd had for telling

things, besides what Sally did to me about her and Peter.  I

would have enjoyed knowing how one could be sure.  Hereafter, it

will be all right about the gun, anyway.



"Could I take my horse and carry a message anywhere for you?  Are

both your sons riding to tell the neighbours?"



Father hesitated, but it seemed as if he stopped to think, so I

just told her:  "Laddie is riding.  Leon didn't take a horse."



Father said there was nothing she could do, so she took my hand

and we started for the gate.



"I do hope they will find him, and get back the money, and give

him what he deserves!" she cried.



"Yes, father and mother are praying that they'll find him," I

said.  "It doesn't seem to make the least difference to them

about the money.  Father didn't even look at a big paper piece I

found where it was hidden.  But they are anxious about the man. 

Mother says he is so young, we just must find him, and keep this

a secret, and give him another chance.  You won't tell, will

you?"



The Princess stood still on our walk, and then of all things!  if

she didn't begin to go Sabethany-like.  The colour left her

cheeks and lips and she shivered and shook and never said one

word.  I caught her arm.  "Say, what ails you?" I cried.  "You

haven't gone and got heart trouble too, have you?"



She stood there trembling, and then, wheeling suddenly, ran back

into the house, and went to my mother.  On her knees, the

Princess buried her face in mother's breast and said:  "Oh Mrs.

Stanton!  Oh, if I only could help you!"



She began to cry as if something inside her had broken, and she'd

shake to pieces.



Mother stared above her head at father, with her eyebrows raised

high, and he waved his hand toward me.  Mother turned to me, but

already she had put her arms around the Princess, and was trying

to hold her together.



"What did you tell her that made her come back?" she asked

sternlike.



"You forgot to explain that the man was so young, and you wanted

to keep it a secret and give him another chance," I said.  "I

just asked her not to tell."



Mother looked at father and all the colour went from her face,

and she began to shake.  He stared at her, then he opened her

door and lifted the Princess with one arm, and mother with the

other, and helped them into mother's room, stepped back and

closed the door.  After a while it opened and they came out

together, with both mother's arms around the Princess, and she

had cried until she staggered.  Mother lifted her face and kissed

her, when they reached the door and said:  "Tell your mother I

understand enough to sympathize.  Carry her my love.  I do wish

she would give herself the comfort of asking God to help her."



"She does!  Oh, I'm sure she does!" said the Princess.  "It's

father who has lost all judgment and reason."



Father went with her to the gate, and this time she needed help

to mount her horse, and she left it to choose its way and go

where it pleased on the road.  When father came in he looked at

mother, and she said:  "I haven't the details, but she

understands too well.  The Pryor mystery isn't much of a mystery

any more.  God help their poor souls, and save us from suffering

like that!"



She said so little and meant so much, I couldn't figure out

exactly what she did mean, but father seemed to understand.



"I've often wondered," he said, but he didn't say what he

wondered, and he hurried to the barn and saddled our best horse

and came in and began getting ready to ride, and we knew he would

go northwest.  I went back to the catalpa tree and wondered

myself; but it was too much for me to straighten out: just why my

mother wanting to give the traveller man another chance would

make the Princess feel like that.  If she had known my mother as

I did, she'd have known that she ALWAYS wanted to give every man

a second chance, no matter whether he was young or old.



Then I saw Laddie coming down the Big Hill beside the church, but

he was riding so fast I thought he wouldn't want to bother with

me, so I slid from the tree, and ran to tell mother.  She went to

the door and watched as he rode up, but you could see by his face

he had not heard of them.



"Nothing, but I have some men out.  I am going east now," he

said.  "I wish, father, you would rub Flos down, blanket her, and

if you can, walk her slowly an hour while she cools off.  I am

afraid I've ruined her.  How much had you there?"



"I haven't stopped to figure," said father.  "I think I'd better

take the horse I have ready and go on one of the northwest roads.



The Pryor girl was here a few moments ago, and her mother saw a

man cross their place about the right time last evening.  He ran

and acted suspiciously when the dogs barked.  But he was alone

and he didn't have a gun."



"Was she sure?"



"Positive."



"Then it couldn't have been our man, but I'll ride in that

direction and start a search.  They would keep to the woods, I

think!  You'd better stay with mother.  I'll ask Jacob Hood to

take your place."



So Laddie rode away again without even going into the house, and

mother said to father:  "What can he be saying to people, that

the neighbours don't come?"



Father answered:  "I don't know, but if any one can save the

situation, Laddie will."



Mother went to bed, while father sat beside her reading aloud

little scraps from the Bible, and they took turns praying.  From

the way they talked to the Lord, you could plainly see that they

were reminding Him of all the promises He had made to take care

of people, comfort those in trouble, and heal the broken-hearted.



One thing was so curious, I asked May if she noticed, and she

had.  When they had made such a fuss about money only a short

while before, and worked so hard to get our share together, and

when they would have to pay back all that belonged to the county

and church, neither of them ever even mentioned money then. 

Every minute I expected father to ask where I'd put the piece I

found, and when he opened right at it, in the Bible, he turned on

past, exactly as if it were an obituary, or a piece of Sally's

wedding dress, or baby hair from some of our heads.  He went on

hunting places where the Lord said sure and strong that He'd help

people who loved Him.  When either of them prayed, they asked the

Lord to help those near them who were in trouble, as often and

earnestly as they begged Him to help them.  There were no people

near us who were in trouble that we knew of, excepting Pryors. 

Hard as father and mother worked, you'd have thought the Lord

wouldn't have minded if they asked only once to get the money

back, or if they forgot the neighbours, but they did neither one.



May said because they were big like that was why all of us loved

them so.



I would almost freeze in the catalpa, but as I could see far in

all directions there, I went back, and watched the roads, and

when I remembered what Laddie had said, I kept an eye on the

fields too.  At almost dusk, and frozen so stiff I could scarcely

hang to the limb, I heard the bulldogs at Pryors' begin to rave. 

They kept on steadily, and I thought Gypsies must be passing. 

Then from the woods came a queer party that started across the

cornfield toward the Big Meadow in front of the house, and I

thought they were hunters.  I stood in the tree and watched until

they climbed the meadow fence, and by that time I could see

plainly.



The traveller man got over first, then Leon and the dogs, and

then Mr. Pryor handed Leon the gun, leaped over, and took it.  I

looked again, and then fell from the tree and almost bursted.  As

soon as I could get up, and breathe, I ran to the front door,

screaming:  "Father!  Father!  Come open the Big Gate.  Leon's

got him, but he's so tired Mr. Pryor is carrying the gun, and

helping him walk!"



Just like one, all of us ran; father crossed the road, and opened

the gate.  The traveller man wouldn't look up, he just slouched

along.  But Leon's chin was up and his head high.  He was

scratched, torn, and dirty.  He was wheezing every breath most

from his knees, and Mr. Pryor half carried him and the gun.  When

they met us, Leon reached in his trousers pocket and drew out a

big roll of money that he held toward father.  "My fault!" he

gasped.  "But I got it back for you."



Then he fell over and father caught him in his arms and carried

him into the house, and laid him on the couch in the dining-room.



Mr. Pryor got down and gathered up the money from the road.  He

followed into the house and set the gun in the corner.



"Don't be frightened," he said to mother.  "The boy has walked

all night, and all day, with no sleep or food, and the gun was a

heavy load for him.  I gathered from what he said, when the dogs

let us know they were coming, that this hound took your money. 

Your dog barked and awakened the boy and he loaded the gun and

followed.  The fellow had a good start and he didn't get him

until near daybreak.  It's been a stiff pull for the youngster

and he seems to feel it was his fault that this cowardly cur you

sheltered learned where you kept your money.  If that is true, I

hope you won't be hard on him!"



Father was unfastening Leon's neckband, mother was rubbing his

hands, Candace was taking off his shoes, and May was spilling

water father had called for, all over the carpet, she shook so. 

When Leon drew a deep breath and his head rolled on the pillow,

father looked at Mr. Pryor.  I don't think he heard all of it,

but he caught the last words.



"`Hard on him!  Hard on him!'" he said, the tears rolling down

his cheeks.  "`This my son, who was lost, is found!'"



"Oh!" shouted Mr. Pryor, slamming the money on the table.  "Poor

drivel to fit the circumstances.  If I stood in your boots, sir,

I would rise up in the mighty strength of my pride and pull out

foundation stones until I shook the nation!  I never envied

mortal man as I envy you to-day!"



Candace cried out:  "Oh look, his poor feet!  They are blistered

and bleeding!"



Mother moved down a little, gathered them in her arms, and began

kissing them.  Father wet Leon's lips and arose.  He held out his

hand, and Mr. Pryor took it.



"I will pray God," he said, "that it may happen `even so' to

you."



Leon opened his eyes and caught only the last words.



"You had better look out for the `Even So's,' father," he said.



And father had to laugh, but Mr. Pryor went out, and slammed the

door, until I looked to see if it had cracked from top to bottom;

but we didn't care if it had, we were so happy over having Leon

back.



I went and picked up the money and carried it to father to put

away, and that time he took it.  But even then he didn't stop to

see if he had all of it.



"You see!" I said, "I told you----"



"You did indeed!" said father.  "And you almost saved our reason.

There are times when things we have come to feel we can't live

without, so press us, that money seems of the greatest

importance.  This is our lesson.  Hereafter, I and all my family,

who have been through this, will know that money is not even

worth thinking about when the life and honour of one you love

hangs in the balance.  When he can understand, your brother shall

know of the wondrous faith his Little Sister had in him."



"Maybe he won't like what you and mother thought.  Maybe we

better not tell him.  I can keep secrets real well.  I have

several big ones I've never told, and I didn't say a word about

the Station when Leon said I shouldn't."



"After this there will be no money kept on the place," said

father.  "It's saving time at too great cost.  All we have goes

into the bank, and some of us will cheerfully ride for what we

want, when we need it.  As for not telling Leon, that is as your

mother decides.  For myself, I believe I'd feel better to make a

clean breast of it."



Mother heard, for she sobbed as she bathed Leon's feet, and when

his eyes came open so they'd stay a little while, he kept looking

at her so funny, between sips of hot milk.



"Don't CRY, mammy!" he said.  "I'M all right.  Sorry such a

rumpus!  Let him fool me.  Be smart as the next fellow, after

this!  Know how glad you are to get the money!"



Mother sat back on her heels and roared as I do when I step in a

bumblebee's nest, and they get me.  Leon was growing better every

minute, and he stared at her, and then his dealish, funny old

grin began to twist his lips and he cried:  "Oh golly!  You

thought _I_ helped take it and went with him, didn't you?"



"Oh my son, my son!" wailed mother until she made me think of

Absalom under the oak.



"Well, I be ding-busted!" said Leon, sort of slow and wondering-

like, and father never opened his head to tell him that was no

way to talk.



Mother cried more than ever, and between sobs she tried to

explain that I heard what the traveller man had said about how

bad it was to live in the country; and how Leon was now at an age

where she'd known boys to get wrong ideas, and how things looked,

and in the middle of it he raised on his elbow and took her in

his arms and said:  "Well of all the geese!  And I 'spose father

was in it too!  But since it's the first time, and since it is

you----!  Go to bed now, and let me sleep----But see that you

don't ever let this happen again."



Then he kissed her over and over and clung to her tight and at

last dropped back and groaned:



            "My reputation, O my reputation!

             I've lost my reputation!"





She had to laugh while the tears were still running, and father

and Laddie looked at each other and shouted.  I guess they

thought Leon was about right after that.  Laddie went and bent

over him and took his hand.



"Don't be in quite such a hurry, old man," he said.  "Before you

wink out I have got to tell you how proud I am of having a

brother who is a real Crusader.  The Lord knows this took nerve! 

You're great, boy, simply great!"



Leon grabbed Laddie's hand with both of his and held tight and

laughed.  You could see the big tears squeeze out, although he

fought to wink them back.  He held to Laddie and said low-like,

only for him to hear:  "It's all right if you stay by a while,

old man."



He began to talk slowly.



"It was a long time before I caught up, and then I had to hide,

and follow until day, and he wasn't so very easy to handle.  Once

I thought he had me sure!  It was an awful load, but if it hadn't

been for the good old gun, I'd never have got him.  When we mixed

up, I had fine luck getting that chin punch on him; good thing I

worked it out so slick on Absalom Saunders, and while old Even So

was groggy I got the money away from him, took the gun, and stood

back some distance, before he came out of it.  Once we had it

settled who walked ahead, and who carried the money and gun, we

got along better, but I had to keep an eye on him every minute. 

To come through the woods was the shortest, but I'm tired out,

and so is he.  Getting close I most felt sorry for him, he was so

forlorn, and so scared about what would be done to him.  He

stopped and pulled out another roll, and offered me all of it, if

I'd let him go.  I didn't know whether it was really his, or part

of father's, so I told him he could just drop it until I found

out.  Made him sweat blood, but I had the gun, and he had to

mind.  I was master then.  So there may be more in the roll I

gave father than Even So took.  Father can figure up and keep

what belongs to him.  Even So had gone away past Flannigans'

before I tackled him, and I was sleepy, cold, and hungry; you'd

have thought there'd have been a man out hunting, or passing on

the road, but not a soul did we see 'til Pryors'!  Say, the old

man was bully!  He helped me so, I almost thought I belonged to

him!  My! he's fine, when you know him!  After he came on the

job, you bet old Even So walked up.  Say, where is he?  Have you

fed him?"



Laddie looked at father, who was listening, and we all rushed to

the door, but it must have been an hour, and Even So hadn't

waited.  Father said it was a great pity, because a man like that

shouldn't be left to prey on the community; but mother said she

didn't want to be mixed up with a trial, or to be responsible for

taking the liberty of a fellow creature, and father said that was

exactly like a woman.  Leon went to sleep, but none of us thought

of going to bed; we just stood around and looked at him, and

smiled over him, and cried about him, until you would have

thought he had been shipped to us in a glass case, and cost,

maybe, a hundred dollars.



Father got out his books and figured up his own and the road

money, and Miss Amelia's, and the church's.  Laddie didn't want

her around, so he stopped at the schoolhouse and told her to stay

at Justices' that night, we'd need all our rooms; but she didn't

like being sent away when there was such excitement, but every

one minded Laddie when he said so for sure.



When father had everything counted there was more than his, quite

a lot of it, stolen from other people who sheltered the traveller

no doubt, father said.  We thought he wouldn't be likely to come

back for it, and father said he was at loss what to do with it,

but Laddie said he wasn't--it was Leon's--he had earned it; so

father said he would try to find out if anything else had been

stolen, and he'd keep it a year, and then if no one claimed it,

he would put it on interest until Leon decided what he wanted to

do with it.



When you watched Leon sleep you could tell a lot more about what

had happened to him than he could.  He moaned, and muttered

constantly, and panted, and felt around for the gun, and breathed

like he was running again, and fought until Laddie had to hold

him on the couch, and finally awakened him.  But it did no good;

he went right off to sleep again, and it happened all over.  Then

father began getting his Crusader blood up, although he always

said he was a man of peace.  But it was a lucky thing Even So got

away; for after father had watched Leon a while, he said if that

man had been on the premises, his fingers itched so to get at

him, he was positive he'd have vented a little righteous

indignation on him that would have cost him within an inch of his

life.  And he'd have done it too!  He was like that.  It took a

lot, and it was slow coming, but when he became angry enough, and

felt justified in it, why you'd be much safer to be some one else

than the man who provoked him.



After ten o'clock the dog barked, some one tapped, and father

went; he always would open the door; you couldn't make him

pretend he was asleep, or not at home when he was, and there

stood Mr. Pryor.  He said they could see the lights and they were

afraid the boy was ill, and could any of them help.  Father said

there was nothing they could do; Leon was asleep.  Then Mr. Pryor

said:  "If he is off sound, so it won't disturb him, I would like

to see him again."



Father told him Leon was restless, but so exhausted a railroad

train wouldn't waken him, so Mr. Pryor came in and went to the

couch.  He took off his hat, like you do beside a grave, while

his face slowly grew whiter than his hair, and that would be

snow-white; then he turned at last and stumbled toward the door. 

Laddie held it for him, but he didn't seem to remember he was

there.  He muttered over and over:  "Why?  Why?  In the name of

God, why?"  Laddie followed to the gate to help him on his horse,

because he thought he was almost out of his head, but he had

walked across the fields, so Laddie kept far behind and watched

until he saw him go safely inside his own door.



I think father and Laddie sat beside Leon all night.  The others

went to sleep.  A little after daybreak, just as Laddie was

starting to feed, there was an awful clamour, and here came a lot

of neighbours with Even So.  Mr. Freshett had found him asleep in

a cattle hole in the straw stack, and searched him, and he had

more money, and that made Mr. Freshett sure; and as he was very

strong, and had been for years a soldier, and really loved to

fight, he marched poor Even So back to our house.  Every few rods

they met more men out searching who came with them, until there

were so many, our front yard and the road were crowded.  Of all

the sights you ever saw, Even So looked the worst.  You could see

that he'd drop over at much more.  Those men kept crying they

were going to hang him; but mother went out and talked to them,

and said they mustn't kill a man for taking only money.  She told

them how little it was worth compared with other things; she had

Candace bring Even So a cup of hot coffee, lots of bread, and

sausage from the skillet, and she said it was our money, and our

lad, and we wanted nothing done about it.  The men didn't like

it, but the traveller did.  He grabbed and gobbled like a beast

at the hot food and cried, and mother said she forgave him, and

to let him go.



Then Mr. Freshett looked awful disappointed, and he came up to

father, with his back toward mother, and asked:  "That's your say

too, Mr. Stanton?"  Father grinned sort of rueful-like, but he

said to give Even So his money and let him go.  He told all about

getting ours back, and having had him at the house once before. 

He brought the money Leon took from him, but the men said no

doubt he had stolen that, and Leon had earned it bringing him

back, so the traveller shouldn't have it.  They took him away on

a horse and said they'd let him go, but that they'd escort him

from the county.  Father told Mr. Freshett that he was a little

suspicious of them, and he would hold him responsible for the

man's life.  Mr. Freshett said that he'd give his word that the

man would be safe; they only wanted to make sure he wouldn't come

back, and that he'd be careful in the future how he abused

hospitality, so they went, and all of us were glad of it.



I don't know what Mr. Freshett calls safe, for they took Even So

to Groveville and locked him up until night.  Then they led him

to the railroad, and made him crawl back and forth through an old

engine beside the track, until he was blacker than any negro ever

born; and then they had him swallow a big dose of croton oil for

his health.  That was the only KIND thing they did, for afterward

they started him down the track and told him to run, and all of

them shot at his feet as he went.  Hannah Freshett told me at

school the next day.  Her father said Even So just howled, and

flew up in the air, and ducked, and dodged and ran like he'd

never walked a step, or was a bit tired.  We made a game of it,

and after that one of the boys was Even So, and the others were

the mob, and the one who could howl nicest, jump highest, and go

fastest, could be "It" oftenest.



Leon grew all right faster than you would think.  He went to

school day after next, and the boys were sick with envy.  They

asked and asked, but Leon wouldn't tell much.  He didn't seem to

like to talk about it, and he wouldn't play the game or even

watch us.  He talked a blue streak about the money.  Father was

going to write to every sheriff of the counties along the way the

man said he had come, and if he could find no one before spring

who had been robbed, he said Leon might do what he liked with the

money.  I used to pretend it was coming to me, and each day I

thought of a new way to spend it.  Leon was so sure he'd get it

he marched right over and asked Mr. Pryor about a nice young

thoroughbred horse, from his stables, and when he came back he

could get a coltlike one so very cheap that father and Laddie

looked at each other and gasped, and never said a word.  They

figured up, and if Leon got the money, he could have the horse,

and save some for college, and from the start he never changed a

mite about those two things he wanted to do with it.  He had the

horse picked out and went to the field to feed and pet it and

make it gentle, so he could ride bareback, and mother said he

would be almost sick if the owner of the money turned up.



Pulling his boots one night, father said so too, and that the

thoughts of it worried him.  He said Mr. Pryor had shaded his

price so that if the money had to go, he would be tempted to see

if we couldn't manage it ourselves.  I don't know how shading the

price of a horse would make her feel better, but it did, and

maybe Leon is going to get it.

