




CHAPTER IV



The Last Day in Eden



            "'Tis the sunset of life gives me mystical lore,

              And coming events cast their shadows before."



Of course the baby was asleep and couldn't be touched; but there

was some excitement, anyway.  Father had come from town with a

letter from the new school teacher, that said she would expect

him to meet her at the station next Saturday.  Mother thought she

might as well get the room ready and let her stay at our house,

because we were most convenient, and it would be the best place

for her.  She said that every time, and the teacher always stayed

with us.  Really it was because father and mother wanted the

teacher where they could know as much as possible about what was

going on.  Sally didn't like having her at all; she said with the

wedding coming, the teacher would be a nuisance.  Shelley had

finished our school, and the Groveville high school, and instead

of attending college she was going to Chicago to study music. 

She was so anxious over her dresses and getting started, she

didn't seem to think much about what was going to happen to us at

home; so she didn't care if Miss Amelia stayed at our house.  May

said it would be best to have the teacher with us, because she

could help us with our lessons at home, and we could get ahead of

the others.  May already had decided that she would be at the

head of her class when she finished school, and every time you

wanted her and couldn't find her, if you would look across the

foot of mother's bed, May would be there with a spelling book. 

Once she had spelled down our school, when Laddie was not there.





Father had met Peter Dover in town, and he had said that he was

coming to see Sally, because he had something of especial

importance to tell her.



"Did he say what it was?" asked Sally.



"Only what I have told you," replied father.



Sally wanted to take the broom and sweep the parlour.



"It's clean as a ribbon," said mother.



"If you go in there, you'll wake the baby," said Lucy.



"Will it kill it if I do?" asked Sally.



"No, but it will make it cross as fire, so it will cry all the

time Peter is here," said Lucy.



"I'll be surprised if it doesn't scream every minute anyway,"

said Sally.



"I hope it will," said Lucy.  "That will make Peter think a while

before he comes so often."



That made Sally so angry she couldn't speak, so she went out and

began killing chickens.  I helped her catch them.  They were so

used to me they would come right to my feet when I shelled corn.



"I'm going to kill three," said Sally.  "I'm going to be sure we

have enough, but don't you tell until their heads are off."



While she was working on them mother came out and asked how many

she had, so Sally said three.  Mother counted us and said that

wasn't enough; there would have to be four at least.



After she was gone Sally looked at me and said:  "Well, for

land's sake!"



It was so funny she had to laugh, and by the time I caught the

fourth one, and began helping pick them, she was over being

provoked and we had lots of fun.



The minute I saw Peter Dover he made me think of something.  I

rode his horse to the barn with Leon leading it.  There we saw

Laddie.



"Guess what!" I cried.



"Never could!" laughed Laddie, giving Peter Dover's horse a slap

as it passed him on the way to a stall.



"Four chickens, ham, biscuit, and cake!" I announced.



"Is it a barbecue?" asked Laddie.



"No, the extra one is for the baby," said Leon.  "Squally little

runt, I call it."



"It's a nice baby!" said Laddie.



"What do you know about it?" demanded Leon.



"Well, considering that I started with you, and have brought up

two others since, I am schooled in all there is to know," said

Laddie.



"Guess what else!" I cried.



"More?" said Laddie.  "Out with it!  Don't kill me with

suspense."



"Father is going to town Saturday to meet the new teacher and she

will stay at our house as usual."



Leon yelled and fell back in a manger, while Laddie held harness

oil to his nose.



"More!" cried Leon, grabbing the bottle.



"Are you sure?" asked Laddie of me earnestly.



"It's decided.  Mother said so," I told him.



"Name of a black cat, why?" demanded Laddie.



"Mother said we were most convenient for the teacher."



"Aren't there enough of us?" asked Leon, straightening up

sniffing harness oil as if his life depended on it.



"Any unprejudiced person would probably say so to look in," said

Laddie.



"I'll bet she'll be sixty and a cat," said Leon.  "Won't I have

fun with her?"



"Maybe so, maybe not!" said Laddie.  "You can't always tell, for

sure.  Remember your Alamo!  You were going to have fun with the

teacher last year, but she had it with you."



Leon threw the oil bottle at him.  Laddie caught it and set it on

the shelf.



"I don't understand," said Leon.



"I do," said Laddie dryly.  "THIS is one reason."  He hit Peter

Dover's horse another slap.



"Maybe yes," said Leon.



"Shelley to music school, two."



"Yes," said Leon.  "Peter Dovers are the greatest expense, and

Peter won't happen but once.  Shelley will have at least two

years in school before it is her turn, and you come next,

anyway."



"Shut up!" cried Laddie.



"Thanky!  Your orders shall be obeyed gladly."



He laid down the pitchfork, went outside, closed the door, and

latched it.  Laddie called to him, but he ran to the house.  When

Laddie and I finished our work, and his, and wanted to go, we had

to climb the stairs and leave through the front door on the

embankment.



"The monkey!" said Laddie, but he didn't get mad; he just

laughed.



The minute I stepped into the house and saw the parlour door

closed, I thought of that "something" again.  I walked past it,

but couldn't hear anything.  Of course mother wanted to know; and

she would be very thankful to me if I could tell her.  I went out

the front door, and thought deeply on the situation.  The windows

were wide open, but I was far below them and I could only hear a

sort of murmur.  Why can't people speak up loud and plain,

anyway?  Of course they would sit on the big haircloth sofa. 

Didn't Leon call it the "sparking bench"?  The hemlock tree would

be best.  I climbed quieter than a cat, for they break bark and

make an awful scratching with their claws sometimes; my bare feet

were soundless.  Up and up I went, slowly, for it was dreadfully

rough.  They were not on the sofa.  I could see plainly through

the needles.  Then I saw the spruce would have been better, for

they were standing in front of the parlour door and Peter had one

hand on the knob.  His other arm was around my sister Sally. 

Breathlessly I leaned as far as I could, and watched.



"Father said he'd give me the money to buy a half interest, and

furnish a house nicely, if you said `yes,' Sally," said Peter.



Sally leaned back all pinksome and blushful, and while she

laughed at him she



            "Carelessly tossed off a curl

             That played on her delicate brow."



exactly like Mary Dow in McGuffey's Third.



"Well, what did I SAY?" she asked.



"Come to think of it, you didn't say anything."



Sally's face was all afire with dancing lights, and she laughed

the gayest little laugh.



"Are you so very sure of that, Peter?" she said.



"I'm not sure of anything," said Peter, "except that I am so

happy I could fly."



"Try it, fool!" I said to myself, deep in my throat.



Sally laughed again, and Peter took his other hand from the door

and put that arm around Sally too, and he drew her to him and

kissed her, the longest, hardest kiss I ever saw.  I let go and

rolled, tumbled, slid, and scratched down the hemlock tree,

dropped from the last branch to the ground, and scampered around

the house.  I reached the dining-room door when every one was

gathering for supper.



"Mother!" I cried.  "Mother!  Yes!  They're engaged!  He's

kissing her, mother!  Yes, Lucy, they're engaged!"



I rushed in to tell all of them what they would be glad to know,

and if there didn't stand Peter and Sally!  How they ever got

through that door, and across the sitting-room before me, I don't

understand.  Sally made a dive at me, and I was so astonished I

forgot to run, so she caught me.  She started for the wood house

with me, and mother followed.  Sally turned at the door and she

was the whitest of anything you ever saw.



"This is my affair," she said.  "I'll attend to this young lady."



"Very well," said mother, and as I live she turned and left me to

my sad fate, as it says in a story book we have.  I wish when

people are going to punish me, they'd take a switch and strike

respectably, like mother does.  This thing of having some one get

all over me, and not having an idea where I'm going to be hit, is

the worst punishment that I ever had.  I'd been down the hill and

up the hemlock that day, anyway.  I'd always been told Sally

didn't want me.  She PROVED it right then.  Finally she quit,

because she was too tired to strike again, so I crept among the

shavings on the work bench and went to sleep.  I THOUGHT they

would like to know, and that I was going to please them.



Anyway, they found out, for by the time Sally got back Peter had

told them about the store, and the furnished house, and asked

father for Sally right before all of them, which father said was

pretty brave; but Peter knew it was all right or he couldn't have

come like he'd been doing.



After that, you couldn't hear anything at our house but wedding. 

Sally's share of linen and bedding was all finished long ago. 

Father took her to Fort Wayne on the cars to buy her wedding,

travelling, and working dresses, and her hat, cloak, and linen,

like you have when you marry.



It was strange that Sally didn't want mother to go, but she said

the trip would tire her too much.  Mother said it was because

Sally could coax more dresses from father.  Anyway, mother told

him to set a limit and stick to it.  She said she knew he hadn't

done it as she got the first glimpse of Sally's face when they

came back, but the child looked so beautiful and happy she hadn't

the heart to spoil her pleasure.



The next day a sewing woman came; and all of them were shut up in

the sitting-room, while the sewing machine just whizzed on the

working dresses.  Sally said the wedding dress had to be made by

hand.  She kept the room locked, and every new thing that they

made was laid away on the bed in the parlour bedroom, and none of

us had a peep until everything was finished.  It was awfully

exciting, but I wouldn't pretend I cared, because I was huffy at

her.  I told her I wouldn't kiss her goodbye, and I'd be GLAD

when she was gone.



Sally said the school-ma'am simply had to go to Winters', or some

place else, but mother said possibly a stranger would have some

ideas, and know some new styles, so Sally then thought maybe they

had better try it a few days, and she could have her place and be

company when she and Shelley left.  Shelley was rather silent and

blue, and before long I found her crying, because mother had told

her she couldn't start for Chicago until after the wedding, and

that would make her miss six weeks at the start.



Next day word was sent around that school was to begin the coming

Monday; so Saturday afternoon the people who had children large

enough to go sent the biggest of them to clean the schoolhouse. 

May, Leon, and I went to do our share.  Just when there were

about a bushel of nut shells, and withered apple cores, and inky

paper on the floor, the blackboard half cleaned, and ashes

trailed deep between the stove and the window Billy Wilson was

throwing them from, some one shouted:  "There comes Mr. Stanton

with Her."



All of us dropped everything and ran to the south windows.  I

tell you I was proud of our big white team as it came prancing

down the hill, and the gleaming patent leather trimmings, and the

brass side lamps shining in the sun.  Father sat very straight,

driving rather fast, as if he would as lief get it over with, and

instead of riding on the back seat, where mother always sat, the

teacher was in front beside him, and she seemed to be talking

constantly.  We looked at each other and groaned when father

stopped at the hitching post and got out.  If we had tried to see

what a dreadful muss we could make, things could have looked no

worse.  I think father told her to wait in the carriage, but we

heard her cry:  "Oh Mr. Stanton, let me see the dear children I'm

to teach, and where I'm to work."



Hopped is the word.  She hopped from the carriage and came

hopping after father.  She was as tall as a clothes prop and

scarcely as fat.  There were gray hairs coming on her temples. 

Her face was sallow and wrinkled, and she had faded, pale-blue

eyes.  Her dress was like my mother had worn several years

before, in style, and of stiff gray stuff.  She made me feel that

no one wanted her at home, and probably that was the reason she

had come so far away.



Every one stood dumb.  Mother always went to meet people and May

was old enough to know it.  She went, but she looked exactly as

she does when the wafer bursts and the quinine gets in her mouth,

and she doesn't dare spit it out, because it costs five dollars a

bottle, and it's going to do her good.  Father introduced May and

some of the older children, and May helped him with the others,

and then he told us to "dig in and work like troopers," and he

would take Miss Pollard on home.



"Oh do let me remain and help the dear children!" she cried.



"We can finish!" we answered in full chorus.



"How lovely of you!" she chirped.



Chirp makes you think of a bird; and in speech and manner Miss

Amelia Pollard was the most birdlike of any human being I ever

have seen.  She hopped from the step to the walk, turned to us,

her head on one side, playfulness in the air around her, and

shook her finger at us.



"Be extremely particular that you leave things immaculate at the

consummation of your labour," she said.  "`Remember that

cleanliness is next to Godliness!'"



"Two terms of that!" gasped Leon, sinking on the stove hearth. 

"Behold Job mourning as close the ashes as he can."



Billy Wilson had the top lid off, so he reached down and got a

big handful of ashes and sifted them over Leon.  But it's no fun

to do anything like that to him; he only sank in a more dejected

heap, and moaned:  "Send for Bildad and Zophar to comfort me, and

more ashes, please."



"Why does the little feathered dear touch earth at all?  Why

doesn't she fly?" demanded Silas Shaw.



"I'm going to get a hundred wads ready for Monday," said Jimmy

Hood.  "We can shoot them when we please."



"Bet ten cents you can't hit her," said Billy Wilson.  "There

ain't enough of her for a decent mark."



"Let's quit and go home," proposed Leon.  "This will look worse

than it does now by Monday night."



Then every one began talking at once.  Suddenly May seized the

poker and began pounding on the top of the stove for order.



"We must clean this up," she said.  "We might as well finish. 

Maybe you'll shoot wads and do what you please, and maybe you

won't.  Her eyes went around like a cat that smells mice.  If she

can spell the language she uses, she is the best we've ever had."



That made us blink, and I never forgot it.  Many times afterward

while listening to people talk, I wondered if they could spell

the words they used.



"Well, come on, then!" said Leon.  He seized the broom and handed

it to Billy Wilson, quoting as he did so, "Work, work, my boy, be

not afraid"; and he told Silas Shaw as he gave him the mop, to

"Look labour boldly in the face!" but he never did a thing

himself, except to keep every one laughing.



So we cleaned up as well as we could, and Leon strutted like

Bobby, because he locked the door and carried the key.  When we

reached home I was sorry I hadn't gone with father, so I could

have seen mother, Sally, Candace, and Laddie when first they met

the new teacher.  The shock showed yet!  Miss Amelia had taken

off her smothery woollen dress and put on a black calico, but it

wasn't any more cheerful.  She didn't know what to do, and you

could see plainly that no one knew what to do with her, so they

united in sending me to show her the place.  I asked her what she

would like most to see, and she said everything was so charming

she couldn't decide.  I thought if she had no more choice than

that, one place would do as well as another, so I started for the

orchard.  Quick as we got there, I knew what to do.  I led her

straight to our best cling peach tree, told her to climb on the

fence so she could reach easily, and eat all she chose.  We

didn't dare shake the tree, because the pigs ran on the other

side of the fence, and they chanked up every peach that fell

there.  Those peaches were too good to feed even father's finest

Berkshires.



By the time Miss Amelia had eaten nine or ten, she was so happy

to think she was there, she quit tilting her head and using big

words.  Of course she couldn't know how I loved to hear them, and

maybe she thought I wouldn't know what they meant, and that they

would be wasted on me.  If she had understood how much spelling

and defining I'd heard in my life, I guess she might have talked

up as big as she could, and still I'd have got most of it.  When

she reached the place where she ate more slowly, she began to

talk.  She must have asked me most a hundred questions.  What all

our names were, how old we were, if our girls had lots of beaus,

and if there were many men in the neighbourhood, and dozens of

things my mother never asked any one.  She always inquired if

people were well, if their crops were growing, how much fruit

they had, and how near their quilts were finished.



I told her all about Sally and the wedding, because no one cared

who knew it, after I had been pounded to mince-meat for telling. 

She asked if Shelley had any beaus, and I said there wasn't any

one who came like Peter, but every man in the neighbourhood

wanted to be her beau.  Then she asked about Laddie, and I was

taking no risks, so I said:  "I only see him at home.  I don't

know where he goes when he's away.  You'll have to ask him."



"Oh, I never would dare," she said.  "But he must.  He is so

handsome!  The girls would just compel him to go to see them."



"Not if he didn't want to go," I said.



"You must never, never tell him I said so, but I do think he is

the handsomest man I ever saw."



"So do I," I said, "and it wouldn't make any difference if I told

him."



"Then do you mean you're going to tell him my foolish remark?"

she giggled.



"No use," I said.  "He knows it now.  Every time he parts his

hair he sees how good looking he is.  He doesn't care.  He says

the only thing that counts with a man is to be big, strong,

manly, and well educated."



"Is he well educated?"



"Yes, I think so, as far as he's gone," I answered.  "Of course

he will go on being educated every day of his life, same as

father.  He says it is all rot about `finishing' your education. 

You never do.  You learn more important things each day, and by

the time you are old enough to die, you have almost enough sense

to know how to live comfortably.  Pity, isn't it?"



"Yes," said Miss Amelia, "it's an awful pity, but it's the truth.



Is your mother being educated too?"



"Whole family," I said.  "We learn all the time, mother most of

any, because father always looks out for her.  You see, it takes

so much of her time to manage the house, and sew, and knit, and

darn, that she can't study so much as the others; so father reads

all the books to her, and tells her about everything he finds

out, and so do all of us.  Just ask her if you think she doesn't

know things."



"I wouldn't know what to ask," said Miss Amelia.



"Ask how long it took to make this world, who invented printing,

where English was first spoken, why Greeley changed his politics,

how to make bluebell perfumery, cut out a dress, or cure a baby

of worms.  Just ask her!"



Miss Amelia threw a peach stone through a fence crack and hit a

pig.  It was a pretty neat shot.



"I don't need ask any of that," she said scornfully.  "I know all

of it now."



"All right!  What is best for worms?" I asked.



"Jayne's vermifuge," said Miss Amelia.



"Wrong!" I cried.  "That's a patent medicine.  Tea made from male

fern root is best, because there's no morphine in it!"



The supper bell rang and I was glad of it.  Peaches are not very

filling after all, for I couldn't see but that Miss Amelia ate as

much as any of us.  For a few minutes every one was slow in

speaking, then mother asked about cleaning the schoolhouse,

Laddie had something to explain to father about corn mould, Sally

and the dressmaker talked about pipings--not a bird--a new way to

fold goods to make trimmings, and soon everything was going on

the same as if the new teacher were not there.  I noticed that

she kept her head straight, and was not nearly so glib-tongued

and birdlike before mother and Sally as she had been at the

schoolhouse.  Maybe that was why father told mother that night

that the new teacher would bear acquaintance.



Sunday was like every other Sabbath, except that I felt so sad

all day I could have cried, but I was not going to do it.  Seemed

as if I never could put on shoes, and so many clothes Monday

morning, quite like church, and be shut in a room for hours, to

try to learn what was in books, when the world was running over

with things to find out where you could have your feet in water,

leaves in your hair, and little living creatures in your hands. 

In the afternoon Miss Amelia asked Laddie to take her for a walk

to see the creek, and the barn, and he couldn't escape.



I suppose our barn was exactly like hundreds of others.  It was

built against an embankment so that on one side you could drive

right on the threshing floor with big loads of grain.  On the

sunny side in the lower part were the sheep pens, cattle stalls,

and horse mangers.  It was always half bursting with overflowing

grain bins and haylofts in the fall; the swallows twittered under

the roof until time to go south for winter, as they sailed from

the ventilators to their nests plastered against the rafters or

eaves.  The big swinging doors front and back could be opened to

let the wind blow through in a strong draft.  From the east doors

you could see for miles across the country.



I said our barn was like others, but it was not.  There was not

another like it in the whole world.  Father, the boys, and the

hired men always kept it cleaned and in proper shape every day. 

The upper floor was as neat as some women's houses.  It was

swept, the sun shone in, the winds drifted through, the odours of

drying hay and grain were heavy, and from the top of the natural

little hill against which it stood you could see for miles in all

directions.



The barn was our great playhouse on Sundays.  It was clean there,

we were where we could be called when wanted, and we liked to

climb the ladders to the top of the haymows, walk the beams to

the granaries, and jump to the hay.  One day May came down on a

snake that had been brought in with a load.  I can hear her yell

now, and it made her so frantic she's been killing them ever

since.  It was only a harmless little garter snake, but she was

so surprised.



Miss Amelia held her head very much on one side all the time she

walked with Laddie, and she was so birdlike Leon slipped him a

brick and told him to have her hold it to keep her down.  Seemed

as if she might fly any minute.  She thought our barn was the

nicest she ever had seen and the cleanest.  When Laddie opened

the doors on the east side, and she could see the big, red,

yellow, and green apples thick as leaves on the trees in the

orchard, the lane, the woods pasture, and the meadow with

scattering trees, two running springs, and the meeting of the

creeks, she said it was the loveliest sight she ever saw--I mean

beheld.  Laddie liked that, so he told her about the beautiful

town, and the lake, and the Wabash River, that our creek emptied

into, and how people came from other states and big cities and

stayed all summer to fish, row, swim, and have good times.



She asked him to take her to the meadow, but he excused himself,

because he had an engagement.  So she stood in the door, and

watched him saddle Flos and start to the house to dress in his

riding clothes.  After that she didn't care a thing about the

meadow, so we went back.



Our house looked as if we had a party. We were all dressed in our

best, and every one was out in the yard, garden, or orchard. 

Peter and Sally were under the big pearmain apple tree at the

foot of the orchard, Shelley and a half dozen beaus were

everywhere.  May had her spelling book in one hand and was in my

big catalpa talking to Billy Stevens, who was going to be her

beau as soon as mother said she was old enough.  Father was

reading a wonderful new book to mother and some of the

neighbours.  Leon was perfectly happy because no one wanted him,

so he could tease all of them by saying things they didn't like

to hear.  When Laddie came out and mounted, Leon asked him where

he was going, and Laddie said he hadn't fully decided: he might

ride to Elizabeth's, and not come back until Monday morning.



"You think you're pretty slick," said Leon.  "But if we could see

north to the cross road we could watch you turn west, and go past

Pryors to show yourself off, or try to find the Princess on the

road walking or riding.  I know something I'm saving to tell next

time you get smart, Mr. Laddie."



Laddie seemed annoyed and no one was quicker to see it than Leon.



Instantly he jumped on the horse block, pulled down his face long

as he could, stretched his hands toward Laddie, and making his

voice all wavery and tremulous, he began reciting from "Lochiel's

Warning," in tones of agonizing pleading:



            "Laddie, Laddie, beware of the day!

             For, dark and despairing, my sight, I may seal,

             But man cannot cover what God would reveal;

             'Tis the sunset of life gives me mystical lore,

             And coming events cast their shadows before."





That scared me.  I begged Leon to tell, but he wouldn't say a

word more.  He went and talked to Miss Amelia as friendly as you

please, and asked her to take a walk in the orchard and get some

peaches, and she went flying.  He got her all she could carry and

guided her to Peter and Sally, introduced her to Peter, and then

slipped away and left her.  Then he and Sally couldn't talk about

their wedding, and Peter couldn't squeeze her hand, and she 

couldn't fix his tie, and it was awful.  Shelley and her boys

almost laughed themselves sick over it, and then she cried, "To

the rescue!" and started, so they followed.  They captured Miss

Amelia and brought her back, and left her with father and the

wonderful book, but I'm sure she liked the orchard better.



I took Grace Greenwood under my arm, Hezekiah on my shoulder, and

with Bobby at my heels went away.  I didn't want my hair pulled,

or to be teased that day.  There was such a hardness around my

heart, and such a lump in my throat, that I didn't care what

happened to me one minute, and the next I knew I'd slap any one

who teased me, if I were sent to bed for it.  As I went down the

lane Peter called to me to come and see him, but I knew exactly

how he looked, and didn't propose to make up.  There was not any

sense in Sally clawing me all over, when I only tried to help

mother and Lucy find out what they wanted to know so badly.  I

went down the hill, crossed the creek on the stepping-stones, and

followed the cowpath into the woods pasture.  It ran beside the

creek bank through the spice thicket and blackberry patches,

under pawpaw groves, and beneath giant oaks and elms.  Just where

the creek turned at the open pasture, below the church and

cemetery, right at the deep bend, stood the biggest white oak

father owned.  It was about a tree exactly like this that an

Englishman wrote a beautiful poem in McGuffey's Sixth, that

begins:



            "A song to the oak, the brave old oak,

             Who hath ruled in the greenwood long;

             Here's health and renown to his broad green crown,

             And his fifty arms so strong."





I knew it was the same, because I counted the arms time and

again, and there were exactly fifty.  There was a pawpaw and

spice hedge around three sides of this one, and water on the

other.  Wild grapes climbed from the bushes to the lower branches

and trailed back to earth again.  Here, I had two secrets I

didn't propose to tell.  One was that in the crotch of some

tiptop branches the biggest chicken hawks you ever saw had their

nest, and if they took too many chickens father said they'd have

to be frightened a little with a gun.  I can't begin to tell how

I loved those hawks.  They did the one thing I wanted to most,

and never could.  When I saw them serenely soar above the lowest

of the soft fleecy September clouds, I was wild with envy.  I

would have gone without chicken myself rather than have seen one

of those splendid big brown birds dropped from the skies.  I was

so careful to shield them, that I selected this for my especial

retreat when I wanted most to be alone, and I carefully gathered

up any offal from the nest that might point out their location,

and threw it into the water where it ran the swiftest.



I parted the vines and crept where the roots of the big oak

stretched like bony fingers over the water, that was slowly

eating under it and baring its roots.  I sat on them above the

water and thought.  I had decided the day before about my going

to school, and the day before that, and many, many times before

that, and here I was having to settle it all over again.  Doubled

on the sak roots, a troubled little soul, I settled it once more.



No books or teachers were needed to tell me about flowing water

and fish, how hawks raised their broods and kept house, about the

softly cooing doves of the spice thickets, the cuckoos slipping

snakelike in and out of the wild crab-apple bushes, or the brown

thrush's weird call from the thorn bush.  I knew what they said

and did, but their names, where they came from, where they went

when the wind blew and the snow fell--how was I going to find out

that?  Worse yet were the flowers, butterflies, and moths; they

were mysteries past learning alone, and while the names I made up

for them were pretty and suitable, I knew in all reason they

wouldn't be the same in the books.  I had to go, but no one will

ever know what it cost.  When the supper bell rang, I sat still. 

I'd have to wait until at least two tables had been served,

anyway, so I sat there and nursed my misery, looked and listened,

and by and by I felt better.  I couldn't see or hear a thing that

was standing still.  Father said even the rocks grew larger year

by year.  The trees were getting bigger, the birds were busy, and

the creek was in a dreadful hurry to reach the river.  It was

like that poetry piece that says:



            "When a playful brook, you gambolled,"



(Mostly that gambolled word is said about lambs)



                "And the sunshine o'er you smiled,

            On your banks did children loiter,

                 Looking for the spring flowers wild?"





The creek was more in earnest and working harder at pushing

steadily ahead without ever stopping than anything else; and like

the poetry piece again, it really did "seem to smile upon us as

it quickly passed us by."  I had to quit playing, and go to work

some time; it made me sorry to think how behind I was, because I

had not started two years before, when I should.  But that

couldn't be helped now.  All there was left was to go this time,

for sure.  I got up heavily and slowly as an old person, and then

slipped out and ran down the path to the meadow, because I could

hear Leon whistle as he came to bring the cows.



By fast running I could start them home for him:  Rose, Brindle,

Bess, and Pidy, Sukey and Muley; they had eaten all day, but they

still snatched bites as they went toward the gate.  I wanted to

surprise Leon and I did.



"Getting good, ain't you?" he asked.  "What do you want?"



"Nothing!" I said.  "I just heard you coming and I thought I'd

help you."



"Where were you?"



"Playing."



"You don't look as if you'd been having much fun."



"I don't expect ever to have any, after I begin school."



"Oh!" said Leon.  "It is kind of tough the first day or two, but

you'll soon get over it.  You should have behaved yourself, and

gone when they started you two years ago."



"Think I don't know it?"



Leon stopped and looked at me sharply.



"I'll help you nights, if you want me to," he offered.



"Can I ever learn?" I asked, almost ready to cry.



"Of course you can," said Leon.  "You're smart as the others, I

suppose.  The sevens and nines of the multiplication table are

the stickers, but you ought to do them if other girls can.  You

needn't feel bad because you are behind a little to start on; you

are just that much better prepared to work, and you can soon

overtake them.  You know a lot none of the rest of us do, and

some day it will come your turn to show off.  Cheer up, you'll be

all right."



Men are such a comfort.  I pressed closer for more.



"Do you suppose I will?" I asked.



"Of course," said Leon.  "Any minute the woods, or birds, or

flowers are mentioned your time will come; and all of us will

hear you read and help nights.  I'd just as soon as not."



That was the most surprising thing.  He never offered to help me

before.  He never acted as if he cared what became of me.  Maybe

it was because Laddie always had taken such good care of me, Leon

had no chance.  He seemed willing enough now.  I looked at him

closely.



"You'll find out I'll learn things if I try," I boasted.  "And

you will find out I don't tell secrets either."



"I've been waiting for you to pipe up about----"



"Well, I haven't piped, have I?"



"Not yet."



"I am not going to either."



"I almost believe you.  A girl you could trust would be a funny

thing to see."



"Tell me what you know about Laddie, and see if I'm funny."



"You'd telltale sure as life!"



"Well, if you know it, he knows it anyway."



"He doesn't know WHAT I know."



"Well, be careful and don't worry mother.  You know how she is

since the fever, and father says all of us must think of her.  If

it's anything that would bother her, don't tell before her."



"Say, looky here," said Leon, turning on me sharply, "is all this

sudden consideration for mother or are you legging for Laddie?"



"For both," I answered stoutly.



"Mostly for Laddie, just the same.  You can't fool me, missy.  I

won't tell you one word."



"You needn't!" I answered, "I don't care!"



"Yes you do," he said.  "You'd give anything to find out what I

know, and then run to Laddie with it, but you can't fool me.  I'm

too smart for you."



"All right," I said.  "You go and tell anything on Laddie, and

I'll watch you, and first trick I catch you at, I'll do some

telling myself, Smarty."



"That's a game more than one can play at," said Leon.  "Go

ahead!"


