




CHAPTER XVIII



The Pryor Mystery



            "And now old Dodson, turning pale,

             Yields to his fate--so ends my tale."



It didn't take me long to see why Shelley liked Robert Paget.  He

was one of the very most likeable persons I ever had seen.  We

were sitting under the apple tree, growing better friends every

minute, when we heard a smash, so we looked up, and it was the

sound made by Ranger as Mr. Pryor landed from taking our meadow

fence.  He had ridden through the pasture, and was coming down

the creek bank.  He was a spectacle to behold.  A mile away you

could see that Thomas had told him he had seen Robert, and where

he was.  Father had been mistaken in thinking Mr. Pryor would go

to the house.  He had lost his hat, his white hair was flying,

his horse was in a lather, and he seemed to be talking to

himself.  Robert took one good look.  "Ye Gods!" he cried. 

"There he comes now, a chattering madman!"



"The Station," I panted.  "Up that ravine!  Roll back the stone

and pull the door shut after you.  Quick!"



He never could have been inside, before Mr. Pryor's horse was

raving along the embankment beside the fence.



"Where is he?" he cried.  "Thomas saw him here!"



I didn't think his horse could take the fence at the top of the

hill, but it looked as if he intended trying to make it, and I

had to stop him if I could.



"Saw who?" I asked with clicking teeth.



"A tall, slender man, with a handsome face, and the heart of a

devil."



"Yes, there was a man here like that in the face.  I didn't see

his heart," I said.



"Which way?" raved Mr. Pryor.  "Which way?  Is he at your house?"



Then I saw that he had the reins in his left hand, and a big

revolver in his right.  So there was no mistake about whether

he'd really shoot.  But that gun provoked me.  People have no

business to be careless with those things.  They're dangerous!



"He didn't do what you think he did," I cried, "and he can prove

he didn't, if you'll stop cavorting, and listen to reason."



Mr. Pryor leaned over the fence, dark purple like a beet now.



"You tell me where he is, or I'll choke it out of you," he said.



I guess he meant it.  I took one long look at his lean, clawlike

fingers, and put both hands around my neck.



"He knew Thomas saw him.  He went that way," I said, waving off

toward the north.



"Hah! striking for petticoats, as usual!" he cried, and away he

went in the direction of his house.  Then I flew for the Station.



"Come from there, quick!" I cried.  "I've sent him back to his

house, but when he finds you're not there, he will come here

again.  Hurry, and I'll put you in the woodshed loft.  He'd never

think of looking there."



He came out and we started toward the house, going pretty fast. 

Almost to the back gate we met Shelley.



"Does mother know?" I asked.



"I just told her," she said.



"Father," I cried, going in the back dining-room door.  "Mr.

Pryor was down in the meadow on Ranger.  Thomas did see Robert,

and his father is hunting him with a gun.  We saw him coming, so

I hid Robert in the Station and sent Mr. Pryor back home--I guess

I told him a lie, father, or at least part of one, I said he went

`that way,' and he did, but not so far as I made his father

think; so he started back home, but when he gets there and

doesn't find Robert he'll come here again, madder than ever.  Oh

father, he'll come again, and he's crazy, father!  Clear, raving

crazy!  I know he'll come again!"



"Yes," said father calmly.  "I think it very probable that he

will come again."



Then he started around shutting and latching windows, closing and

locking the doors, and he carefully loaded his gun, and leaned it

against the front casing.  Then he put on his glasses, and began

examining the papers they had brought out again.  Robert stood

beside him, and explained and showed him.



"You see with me out of the way, the English law would give

everything to my cousin," he said, and he explained it all over

again.



"And to think how he always posed for a perfect saint!" cried the

Princess.  "Oh I hope the devil knows how to make him pay for

what all of us have suffered!"



"Child!  Child!" cried mother.



"I can't help it!" said the Princess.  "Let me tell you, Mr.

Stanton."



Then SHE told everything all over again, but it was even more

interesting than the way Robert explained it, because what she

said was about how it had been with her and her mother.



"It made father what he is," she said.  "He would have killed

Robert, if our friends hadn't helped him away.  He will now, if

he isn't stopped.  I tell you he will!  He sold everything he

could legally control, for what any one chose to give him, and

fled here stricken in pride, heartbroken, insane with anger, the

creature you know.  In a minute he'll be back again.  Oh what are

we going to do?"



Father was laying out the papers that he wanted to use very

carefully.



"These constitute all the proof any court would require," he said

to Robert.  "If he returns, all of you keep from sight.  This is

my house; I'll manage who comes here, in my own way."



"But you must be allowed to take no risk!" cried Robert.  "I

cawn't consent to youah facing danger for me."



"There will be no risk," said father.  "There is no reason why he

should want to injure me.  As the master of this house, I am

accustomed to being obeyed.  If he comes, step into the parlour

there, until I call you."



He was busy with the papers when he saw Mr. Pryor coming.  I

wondered if he would jump the yard fence and ride down mother's

flowers, but he left his horse at the hitching rack, and pounded

on the front door.



"Did any of you notice whether he was displaying a revolver?"

asked father.



"Yes father!  Yes!" I cried.  "And he's shaking so I'm afraid

he'll make it go, when he doesn't intend to."



Father picked up and levelled his rifle on the front door.



"Leon," he said, "you're pretty agile.  Open this door, keep

yourself behind it, and step around in the parlour.  The rest of

you get out, and stay out of range."



Those nearest hurried into the parlour.  Candace, May, and I

crouched in the front stairway, but things were so exciting we

just had to keep the door open a tiny crack so we could see plain

as anything.  There had been nothing for Mrs. Freshett to do all

afternoon, so she had gone over to visit an hour with Amanda

Deam.  Now Mr. Pryor probably thought father would meet him with

the Bible in his hand, and read a passage about loving your

neighbour as yourself.  I'll bet anything you can mention that he

never expected to find himself looking straight down the barrel

of a shining big rifle when that door swung open.  It surprised

him so, he staggered, and his arm wavered.  If he had shot and

hit anything then, it would have been an accident.



"Got you over the heart," said father, in precisely the same

voice he always said, "This is a fine day we are having."  "Now

why are you coming here in such a shape?"  This was a little

cross.  "I'm not the man to cringe before you!"  This was quite

boastful.  "You'll get bullet for bullet, if you attempt to

invade my house with a gun."  This pinged as if father shot words

instead of bullets.



"I want my daughter to come home," said Mr. Pryor.  "And if

you're sheltering the thief she is trying to hide, yield him up,

if you would save yourself."



"Well, I'm not anxious about dying, with the family I have on my

hands, neighbour," said father, his rifle holding without a

waver, "but unless you put away that weapon, and listen to

reason, you cannot enter my house.  Calm yourself, man, and hear

what there is to be said!  Examine the proof, that is here

waiting to be offered to you."



"Once and but once, send them out, or I'll enter over you!" cried

Mr. Pryor.



"Sorry," said father, "but if only a muscle of your trigger

finger moves, you fall before I do.  I've the best range, and the

most suitable implement for the work."



"Implement for the work!"  Well, what do you think of father? 

Any one who could not see, to have heard him, would have thought

he was talking about a hoe.  We saw a shadow before we knew what

made it; then, a little at a time, wonderingly, her jolly face a

bewildered daze, her mouth slowly opening, Mrs. Freshett, half-

bent and peering, stooped under Mr. Pryor's arm and looked in our

door.  She had come back to help get supper, and because the

kitchen was locked, she had gone around the house to see if she

could get in at the front.  What she saw closed her mouth, and

straightened her back.



"WHY, YOU TWO OLD FOOLS!" she cried.  "IF YE AIN'T DRAWED A BEAD

ON EACH OTHER!"



None of us saw her do it.  We only knew after it was over what

must have happened.  She had said she'd risk her life for mother.



She never stopped an instant when her chance came.  She must have

turned, and thrown her big body against Mr. Pryor.  He was tired,

old, and shaking with anger.  They went down together, she

gripping his right wrist with both hands, and she was strong as

most men.  Father set the gun beside the door, and bent over

them.  A minute more and he handed the revolver to Leon, and

helped Mrs. Freshett to her feet.  Mr. Pryor lay all twisted on

the walk, his face was working, and what he said was a stiff

jabber no one could understand.  He had broken into the pieces we

often feared he would.



Robert and Laddie came running to help father carry him in, and

lay him on the couch.



"I hope, Miss Stanton," said Mrs. Freshett, "that I wa'n't too

rough with him.  He was so shaky-like, I was 'feered that thing

would go off without his really makin' it, and of course I

couldn't see none of yourn threatened with a deadly weepon,

'thout buttin' in and doin' the best I could."



Mother put her arms around her as far as they would reach.  She

would have had to take her a side at a time to really hug all of

her, and she said:  "Mrs. Freshett, you are an instrument in the

hands of the Lord this day.  Undoubtedly you have kept us from a

fearful tragedy; possibly you have saved my husband for me.  None

of us ever can thank you enough."



"Loosen his collar and give him air," said Mrs. Freshett pushing

mother away.  "I think likely he has bust a blood vessel."



Father sent Leon flying to bring Dr. Fenner.  Laddie took the

carriage and he and Robert went after Mrs. Pryor, while father,

mother, Mrs. Freshett, the Princess, May, and I, every last one,

worked over Mr. Pryor.  We poured hot stuff down his throat, put

warm things around him, and rubbed him until the sweat ran on us,

trying to get his knotted muscles straightened out.  When Dr.

Fenner came he said we were doing all he could; MAYBE Mr. Pryor

would come to and be all right, and maybe his left side would be

helpless forever; it was a stroke.  Seemed to me having Mrs.

Freshett come against you like that, could be called a good deal

more than a stroke, but I couldn't think of the right word then. 

And after all, perhaps stroke was enough.  He couldn't have been

much worse off if the barn had fallen on him.  I didn't think

there was quite so much of Mrs. Freshett; but then she was

scared, and angry; and he was about ready to burst, all by

himself, if no one had touched him.  He had much better have

stayed at home and listened to what was to be said, reasonably,

like father would; and then if he really had to shoot, he would

have been in some kind of condition to take aim.



After a long hard fight we got him limber, straightened out, and

warm, it didn't rip so when he breathed, then they put him in the

parlour on the big davenport.  Leon said if the sparkin' bench

didn't bring him to, nothing would.  Laddie sat beside him and

mother kept peeping.  She wouldn't let Dr. Fenner go, because she

said Mr. Pryor just must come out of it right, and have a few

years of peace and happiness.



Mrs. Pryor came back with Laddie and Robert.  He carried her in,

put her in the big rocking chair again, and he sat beside her,

stroking and kissing her, while she held him with both hands. 

You could see NOW why his mother couldn't sleep, walked the road,

and held her hands over her heart.  She was a brave woman, and

she had done well to keep alive and going in any shape at all. 

You see we knew.  There had been only the few hours when it

seemed possible that one of our boys had taken father's money and

was gone.  I well remembered what happened to our mother then. 

And if she had been disgraced before every one, dragged from her

home away across a big sea to live among strangers, and not known

where her boy was for years, I'm not a bit sure that she'd have

done better than Mrs. Pryor.  Yes, she would too; come to think

it out--she'd have kept on believing the Lord had something to do

with it, and that He'd fix it some way; and I know she and father

would have held hands no matter what happened or where they went.



I guess the biggest thing the matter with Pryors was that they

didn't know how to go about loving each other right; maybe it was

because they didn't love God, so they couldn't know exactly what

PROPER LOVE was; because God is love, like father said.



Mrs. Pryor didn't want to see Mr. Pryor--I can't get used to

calling them Paget--and she didn't ask anything about him.  I

guess she was pretty mad at him.  She never had liked the Emmet

cousin, and she'd had nothing but trouble with him all the time

he had been in her family, and then that awful disgrace, that she

always THOUGHT was all him, but she couldn't prove it, and she

had no money.



That's a very bad thing.  A woman should always have some money. 

She works as hard as any one, and usually she has more that

worries her, so it's only fair for her to have part of what the

work and worry bring.  Mother always has money.  Why, she has so

much, she can help father out when he is pushed with bills, as

she did last fall, to start Shelley to music school.  It's no way

to be forced to live with a man, just to get a home, food, and

clothing.  I don't believe mother ever would do it in all this

world.  But then mother has worked all her life, and so if father

doesn't do as she wants him to, she'd know exactly how to go

about taking care of herself.



After all Mrs. Pryor didn't need to sit back on her dignity and

look so abused.  He couldn't knock her down, and drag her clear

here.  Why didn't she say right out, in the beginning, that her

son COULDN'T be a thief, that she knew it, and she'd stay at home

and wait for him to come back?  She could have put a piece in the

paper saying she knew her boy was all right, and for him to come

back, so they could go to work and PROVE it.  I bet if she'd had

one tenth of the ginger mother has, she'd have stopped the whole

fuss in the start.  I looked at her almost steadily, trying to

figure out just what mother would have done in her place.  Maybe

I'm mistaken about exactly how she would have set to work, but

this I KNOW: she'd have stuck to the Lord; she'd have loved

father, so dearly, he just COULDN'T have wanted her to do things

that hurt her until it gave her heart trouble; and she never,

never would have given up one of us, and sat holding her heart

for months, refusing to see or to speak to any one, while she

waited for some one else to do something.  Mother never waits. 

She always thinks a minute, if she's in doubt she asks father; if

he can't decide, both of them ask God; and then you ought to see

things begin to fly.



The more I watched Mrs. Pryor, the more I began to think she was

a lady; and just about when I was sure that was what ailed her, I

heard father say:  "Perhaps the lady would like a cup of tea."  I

had a big notion to tell her to come on, and I would show her

where the cannister was, but I thought I better not.  I wanted

to, though.  She'd have felt much better if she had got up and

worked like the rest of us.  With all the excitement, and

everything happening at once, you'd have thought mother would be

flat on her back, but flat nothing!  Everything was picked up and

slid back, fast as it was torn down; she found time to flannel

her nose and brush her hair, her collar was straight, and the

goldstone pin shone in the light, while her starched white apron

fluttered as she went through the doors.  She said a few words to

Candace and Mrs. Freshett, May took out a linen cloth and began

to set places for all the grown people, so I knew there'd be

strawberry preserves and fried ham, but in all that, would you

ever have thought that she'd find a second to make biscuit, and

tea cakes herself?  Plain as preaching I heard her say to Mrs.

Freshett:  "I do hope and pray that Mr. Pryor will come out of it

right, so we can take him home, and teach him to behave himself;

but if he's gone this minute, I intend to have another decent

meal for Shelley to offer her young man; and I don't care if I

show Mrs. Pryor that we're not hungry over here, if we do lack

servants to carry in food on silver platters."



"That I jest would!" said Mrs. Freshett.  "Even if he turns up

his toes, 'tain't YOUR funeral, thank the Lord! an' looky here,

I'd jest as soon set things in a bake pan an' pass 'em for you,

myself.  I'll do it, if you say the word."



Mother bit her lip, and fought her face to keep it straight, as

she said confidential-like:  "No, I'm not going to toady to her. 

I only want her to see that a meal really consists of food after

all; I don't mind putting my best foot foremost, but I won't ape

her."



"Huccome they to fuss like this, peaceable as Mr. Stanton be, an'

what's Shelley's beau to them?"



"I should think you could tell by looking at Pryors," said

mother.  "He's their mystery, and also their son.  Shelley met

him in Chicago, he came here to see her, and ran right into them.

I'll tell you about it before you go.  Now, I must keep these

applications hot, for I've set my head on pulling Mr. Pryor out

so that he can speak, and have a few decent years of life yet."



"But why did the old devil--EX-cuse me, I mean the old GENTLEMAN,

want to shoot your man?"



"He didn't!  I'll tell you all about it after they're gone."



"I bet you don't get shet of them the night," said Mrs. Freshett.



"All right!" said mother.  "Whatever Dr. Fenner thinks.  I won't

have Mr. Pryor moved until it can't hurt him, if he stays a week.

I blame her quite as much as I do him; from what I know.  If a

woman is going to live with a man, there are times when she's got

to put her foot down--flat--most unmercifully flat!"



"Ain't she though!" said Mrs. Freshett; then she and mother just

laughed.



There!  What did I tell you?  I feel as good as if father had

patted me on the head and bragged on me a lot.  I THOUGHT mother

wouldn't think that Mr. Pryor was ALL to blame, and she didn't. 

I figured that out by myself, too.



Every minute Mr. Pryor grew better.  He breathed easier, and

mother tilted on her toes and waved her hands, when he moved his

feet, threw back his head, lifted his hand to it, and acted like

he was almost over it, and still in shape to manage himself.  She

hurried to tell Mrs. Pryor, and I know mother didn't like it when

she never even said she was glad, or went to see for herself.



Laddie and the Princess watched him, while every one else went to

supper.  Laddie picked up Mrs. Pryor's chair, carried her to the

dining-room, and set her in my place beside father.  He placed

Dr. Fenner next her, and left Robert to sit with Shelley.  I

don't think Mrs. Pryor quite liked that, but no one asked her.



I watched and listened until everything seemed to be going right

there, and then I slipped into the parlour, where Laddie and the

Princess were caring for Mr. Pryor.  With one hand Laddie held

hers, the other grasped Mr. Pryor's wrist.  Laddie never took his

eyes from that white, drawn face, except to smile at her, and

squeeze her hand every little while.  At last Mr. Pryor turned

over and sighed, pretty soon he opened his eyes, and looked at

Laddie, then at the Princess, and it was nothing new to see them,

so he smiled and dozed again.  After a while he opened them

wider, then he saw the piano--that was an eye-opener for any

one--and the strange room, so he asked, most as plain as he ever

talked, why he was at our house again, and then he began to

remember.  He struggled to sit up and the colour came into his

face.  So Laddie let go the Princess, and held him down while he

said:  "Mr. Pryor, answer me this.  Do you want to spend the

remainder of your life in an invalid's chair, or would you like

to walk abroad and sit a horse again?"



He glared at Laddie, but he heard how things were plainly enough.



Laddie held him, while he explained what a fight we had to unlock

his muscles, and start him going again, and how, if we hadn't

loved him, and wanted him so, and had left him untouched until

the Doctor came, very likely he'd have been paralyzed all the

rest of his life, if he hadn't died; and he said he wished he

HAD, and he didn't THANK any one for saving him.



"Oh yes you do!" said Laddie, the same as he'd have talked to

Leon.  "You can't stuff me on that, and you needn't try.  Being

dead is a cold, clammy proposition, that all of us put off as

long as we can.  You know you want to see Pamela in her own home.



You know you are interested in how I come out with those horses. 

You know you want the little people you spoke of, around you. 

You know the pain and suspense you have borne have almost driven

you insane, and it was because you cared so deeply.  Now lie

still, and keep quiet!  All of us are tired and there's no sense

in making us go through this again, besides the risk of crippling

yourself that you run.  Right here in this house are the papers

to prove that your nephew took your money, and hid it in your

son's clothing, as he already had done a hundred lesser things,

before, purposely to estrange you.  Hold steady!  You must hear

this!  The sooner you know it, the better you'll feel.  You

remember, don't you, that before your nephew entered your home,

you idolized your son.  You thought the things he did were

amusing.  A boy is a boy, and if he's alive, he's very apt to be

lively.  Mother could tell you a few pranks that Leon has put us

through; but they're only a boy's foolishness, they are not

unusual or unforgivable.  I've gone over the evidence your son

brings, with extreme care, so has father.  Both of us are quite

familiar with common law.  He has every proof you can possibly

desire.  You can't get around it, even if your heart wasn't worn

out with rebellion, and you were not crazy to have the loving

sympathy of your family again."



"I don't believe a word of it!"



"You have got to!  I tell you it is PROOF, man!  The documents

are in this house now."



"He forged them, or stole them, as he took the money!"



Laddie just laughed.



"How you do long, and fight, to be convinced!" he said.  "I don't

blame you!  When anything means this much, of course you must be

sure.  But you'll know your nephew's signature; also your

lawyer's.  You'll know letters from old friends who are above

question.  Sandy McSheel has written you that he was with Robert

through all of it, and he gives you his word that everything is

all right.  You will believe him, won't you?"



Big tears began to squeeze from under Mr. Pryor's lids, until

Laddie and the Princess each tried to see how much of him they

could hold to keep him together-like.



"Tell me!" he said at last, so they took turns explaining

everything plain as day, and soon he listened without being held.



When they had told him everything they could think of, he asked: 

"Did Robert kill Emmet?"



"I am very happy to be able to tell you that he did not.  It

would have been painful, and not helped a bad matter a particle. 

Your nephew had dissipated until he was only a skeleton just

breathing his last.  It's probable that his fear of death helped

your son out, so that he got the evidence he wanted easier than

he hoped to in the beginning.  I don't mean that he is dead now;

but he is passing slowly, and loathsomely.  Robert thinks word

that he has gone will come any hour.  Think how pleasant it will

be to have your son!  Think how happy your home will be now! 

Think how you will love to see Sandy, and all your old friends! 

Think how glad you'll be to go home, and take charge of your

estate!"



"Think!" cried Mr. Pryor, pushing Laddie away and sitting up: 

"Think how I shall enjoy wringing the last drop of blood from

that craven's body with these old hands!"



What a sight he did look to be sure!  Sick, half-crazy, on the

very verge of the grave himself, and wanting to kill a poor man

already dying.  Aren't some people too curious?



Laddie carefully laid him down, straightened him out and held him

again.  Mother always said he was "patient as Job," and that day

it proved to be a good thing.



"You're determined to keep yourself well supplied with trouble,"

laughed Laddie.  I don't believe any one else would have dared. 

"Now to an unbiased observer, it would seem that you'd be ready

to let well enough alone.  You have your son back, you have him

fully exonerated, you have much of your property, you are now

ready for freedom, life, and love, with the best of us; you have

also two weddings on your hands in the near future.  Why in the

name of sense are you anxious for more?"



"I should have thought that Sandy McSheel, if he's a real friend

of mine----"



"Sandy tells you all about it in the letter he has sent.  He went

with Robert fully intending to do that very thing for you, but

the poor creature was too loathsome.  The sight of him made Sandy

sick.  He writes you that when he saw the horrible spectacle, all

he could think of was to secure the evidence needed and get

away."



Suddenly the Princess arose and knelt beside the davenport.  She

put her arms around her father's neck and drew his wrinkled,

white old face up against her lovely one.



"Daddy!  Dear old Daddy!" she cried.  "I've had such a hard spot

in my heart against you for so long.  Oh do let's forget

everything, and begin all over again; begin away back where we

were before Emmet ever came.  Oh Daddy, do let's forget, and

begin all over new, like other people!"



He held her tight a minute, then his lips began whispering

against her ear.  Finally he said:  "Take yourselves off, and

send Robert here.  I want my son.  Oh I want my boy!"



It was a long time before Robert came from the parlour; when he

did, it was only to get his mother and take her back with him;

then it was a still longer time before the door opened; but when

it did, it was perfectly sure that they were all friends again. 

Then Leon went to tell Thomas, and he came with the big carriage.



White and shaking, Mr. Pryor was lifted into it and they went

home together, taking Shelley with them to stay that night; so no

doubt she was proposed to and got her kiss before she slept.



That fall there were two weddings at our church at the same time.



Sally's had been fine; but it wasn't worth mentioning beside

Laddie and the Princess, and Robert and Shelley.  You should have

seen my mother!  She rocked like a kingbird on the top twig of

the winesap, which was the tallest tree in our orchard, and for

once there wasn't a single fly in her ointment, not one, she said

so herself, and so did father.  As we watched the big ve-hi-

ackle, as Leon called it, creep slowly down the Little Hill, it

made me think of that pathetic poem, "The Three Warnings," in

McGuffey's Sixth.  I guess I gave Mr. Pryor the first, that time

he got so angry he hit his horse until it almost ran away. 

Mother delivered the second when she curry-combed him about the

taxes, and Mrs. Freshett finished the job.  The last two lines

read as if they had been especially written about him:



            "And now old Dodson, turning pale,

             Yields to his fate--so ends my tale."





The End 






