





CHAPTER XVII





In Faith Believing



            "Nor could the bright green world around

                 A joy to her impart,

             For still she missed the eyes that made

                 The summer of her heart."



Soon as she had the piano, Shelley needed only the Paget man to

make her happy as a girl could be; and having faith in that

prayer, I decided to try it right away.  So I got Laddie to

promise surely that he'd wake me when he got up the next morning.



I laid my clothes out all ready; he merely touched my foot, and I

came to, slipped out with him, and he helped me dress.  We went

to the barn when the morning was all gray.



"What the dickens have you got in your head now, Chicken?" he

asked.  "Is it business with the Fairies?"



"No, this is with the Most High," I said solemnly, like father. 

"Go away and leave me alone."



"Well of all the queer chickens!" he said, but he kissed me and

went.



I climbed the stairs to the threshing floor, then the ladder to

the mow, walked a beam to the wall, there followed one to the

east end, and another to the little, high-up ventilator window. 

There I stood looking at the top of the world.  A gray mist was

rising like steam from the earth, there was a curious colour in

the east, stripes of orange and flames of red, where the sun was

coming.  I folded my hands on the sill, faced the sky, and stood

staring.  Just stood, and stood, never moving a muscle.  By and

by I began to think how much we loved Shelley, how happy she had

been at Christmas the way she was now, and how much all of us

would give in money, or time, or love, to make her sparkling,

bubbling, happy again; so I thought and thought, gazing at the

sky, which every second became a grander sight.  Little cold

chills began going up my back, and soon I was talking to the Lord

exactly as if He stood before me on the reddest ray that topped

our apple trees.



I don't know all I said.  That's funny, for I usually remember to

the last word; but this time it was so important, I wanted it so

badly, and I was so in earnest that words poured in a stream.  I

began by reminding Him that He knew everything, and so He'd

understand if what I asked was for the best.  Then I told Him how

it looked to us, who knew only a part; and then I went at Him and

implored and beseeched, if it would be best for Shelley, and

would make her happy, to send her the Paget man, and to be quick

about it.  When I had said the last word that came to me, and

begged all I thought becoming--I don't think with His face, that

Jesus wants us to grovel to Him, at least He looks too dignified

to do it Himself--I just stood there, still staring.



I didn't expect to see a burning bush, or a pillar of fire, or a

cloud of flame, or even to hear a small, still voice; but I

watched, so I wouldn't miss it if there should be anything

different in that sunrise from any other I ever had seen, and

there was not.  Not one thing!  It was so beautiful, and I was so

in earnest my heart hurt; but that was like any other sunrise on

a fine July morning.  There wasn't the least sign that Jesus had

heard me, and would send the man; yet before I knew it, I was

amazed to find the feeling creeping over me that he was coming. 

If I had held the letter in my hand saying he would arrive on the

noon train, I couldn't have grown surer.  Why, I even looked down

the first time I moved, to see if I had it; but I was certain

anyway.  So I looked steadily toward the east once more and said,

"Thank you, with all my heart, Lord Jesus," then I slowly made my

way down and back to the house.



Shelley was at the orchard gate, waiting; so I knew they had

missed me, and Laddie had told them where I was and not to call. 

She had the strangest look on her face, as she asked:  "Where

have you been?"



I looked straight and hard at her and said, "It's all right,

Shelley.  He's going to come soon"; but I didn't think it was a

thing to mouth over, so I twisted away from her, and ran to the

kitchen to see if breakfast had all been eaten.  I left Shelley

standing there with her eyes wide, also her mouth.  She looked

about as intelligent as Mehitabel Heasty, and it wouldn't have

surprised me if she had begun to jump up and down and say there

were snakes in HER shoes.  No doubt you have heard of people

having been knocked silly; I knew she was, and so she had a

perfect right to look that way, until she could remember what she

was doing, and come back to herself.  Maybe it took her longer,

because mother wasn't there, to remind her about her mouth, and I

didn't propose to mention it.



At breakfast, mother said father was going to drive Frank home in

the carriage, and if I would like, I might go along.  I would

have to sit on the back seat alone, going; but coming home I

could ride beside and visit with father.  I loved that, for you

could see more from the front seat, and father would stop to

explain every single thing.  He always gave me the money and let

me pay the toll.  He would get me a drink at the spring, let me

wade a few minutes at Enyard's riffles, where their creek, with

the loveliest gravel bed, ran beside the road; and he always

raced like wildfire at the narrows, where for a mile the railroad

ran along the turnpike.



We took Frank to his office, stopped a little while to visit

Lucy, and give her the butter and cream mother sent, went to the

store to see Peter, and then to the post-office.  From there we

could see that the veranda of the hotel across the street was

filled with gayly dressed people, and father said that the summer

boarders from big cities around must be pouring in fast.  When he

came out with the mail he said he better ask if the landlord did

not want some of mother's corn and milk fed spring chickens,

because last year he had paid her more than the grocer.  So he

drove across the street, stopped at the curb, and left me to hold

the team.



Maybe you think I wasn't proud!  I've told you about Ned and Jo,

with their sharp ears, dappled sides, and silky tails, and the

carriage almost new, with leather seats, patent leather

trimmings, and side lamps, so shiny you could see yourself in the

brass.  We never drove into the barn with one speck of mud or

dust on it.  That was how particular mother was.



I watched the team carefully; I had to if I didn't want my neck

broken; but I also kept an eye on that veranda.  You could see at

a glance that those were stylish women.  Now my mother liked to

be in fashion as well as any one could; so I knew she'd be

mightily pleased if I could tell her a new place to set her comb,

a different way to fasten her collar, or about an unusual pattern

for a frock.



I got my drink at the spring, father offered to stop at the

riffle, but I was enjoying the ride so much, and I could always

wade at home, although our creek was not so beautiful as

Enyard's, but for common wading it would do; we went through the

narrows, like two shakes of a sheep's tail, then we settled down

to a slow trot, and were having the loveliest visit possible,

when in the bundle on my lap, I saw the end of something that

interested me.  Mr. Agnew always made our mail into a roll with

the Advocate and the Agriculturist on the outside, and because

every one was so anxious about their letters, and some of them

meant so much, I felt grown and important while holding the

package.



I was gripping it tight when I noticed the end of one letter much

wider and fatter than any I ever had seen, so when father was not

looking I began pushing it a little at one end, and pulling it at

the other, to work it up, until I could read the address.  I got

it out so far I thought every minute he'd notice, and tell me not

to do that, but I could only see Stanton.  All of us were

Stanton, so it might be for me, for that matter.  Jerry might be

sending me pictures, or a book, he did sometimes, but there was

an exciting thing about it.  Besides being fatter than it looked

right at the end, it was plastered with stamps--lots of them,

enough to have brought it clear around the world.  I pushed that

end back, pulled out the other, and took one good look.  I almost

fell from the carriage.  I grabbed father's arm and cried: 

"Stop!  Stop this team quick.  Stop them and see if I can read."



"Are you crazy, child?" asked father, but he checked the horses.



"No, but you are going to be in a minute," I said.  "Look at

that!"



I yanked the letter from the bundle, and held it over.  I THOUGHT

I could read, but I was too scared to be sure.  I thought it said

in big, strong, upstanding letters, Miss Shelley Stanton,

Groveville, Indiana.  And in the upper corner, Blackburn, Yeats

and PAGET, Counsellors of Law, 37 to 39 State St., Chicago.  I

put my finger on the Paget, and looked into father's face.  I was

no fool after all.  He was not a bit surer that HE could read

than I was, from the dazed way he stared.



"You see!" I said.



"It says Paget!" he said, like he would come nearer believing; it

if he heard himself pronounce the word.



"I THOUGHT it said `Paget,'" I gasped, "but I wanted to know if

you thought so too."



"Yes, it's Paget plain enough," said father, but he acted like

there was every possibility that it might change to Jones any

minute.  "It says `Paget,' plain as print."



"Father!" I cried, clutching his arm, "father, see how fat it is!



There must be pages and pages!  Father, it wouldn't take all that

to tell her he didn't like her, and he never wanted to see her

again.  Would it, father?"



"It doesn't seem probable," said father.



"Father don't you think it means there's been some big mistake,

and it takes so much to tell how it can be fixed?"



"It seems reasonable."



I gripped him tighter, and maybe shook him a little.



"Father!" I cried.  "Father, doesn't it just look HURRY, all

over?  Can't you speed up a little?  They have all day to cool

off.  Oh father, won't you speed a little?"



"That I will!" said father.  "Get a tight hold, and pray God it

is good word we carry."



"But I prayed the one big prayer to get this," I said.  "It

wouldn't be sent if it wasn't good.  The thing to do now is to

thank the Lord for `all his loving kindnesses,' like mother said.



Drive father!  Make them go!"



At first he only touched them up; I couldn't see that we were

getting home so fast; but in a minute a cornfield passed like a

streak, a piece of woods flew by a dark blur, a bridge never had

time to rattle, and we began to rock from side to side a little. 

Then I gripped the top supports with one hand, the mail with the

other, and hung on for dear life.  I took one good look at

father.



His feet were on the brace, his face was clear, even white, his

eyes steely, and he never moved a muscle.  When Jo thought it was

funny, that he was loose in the pasture, and kicked up a little

behind, father gave him a sharp cut with the whip and said: 

"Steady boy!  Get along there!"



Sometimes he said, "Aye, aye!  Easy!" but he never stopped a

mite.  We whizzed past the church and cemetery, and scarcely

touched the Big Hill.  People ran to their doors, even to the

yards, and I was sure they thought we were having a runaway, but

we were not.  Father began to stop at the lane gate, he pulled

all the way past the garden, and it was as much as he could do to

get them slowed down so that I could jump out by the time we

reached the hitching rack.  He tied them, and followed me into

the house instead of going to the barn.  I ran ahead calling: 

"Shelley!  Where is Shelley?"



"What in this world has happened, child?" asked mother, catching

my arm.



"Her letter has come!  Her Paget letter!  The one you looked for

until you gave up.  It's come at last!  Oh, where is she?"



"Be calmer, child, you'll frighten her," said mother.



May snatched the letter from my fingers and began to read all

that was on it aloud.  I burst out crying.



"Make her give that back!" I sobbed to father.  "It's mine!  I

found it.  Father, make her let me take it!"



"Give it to her!" said father.  "I rather feel that it is her

right to deliver it."



May passed it back, but she looked so disappointed, that by how

she felt I knew how much I wanted to take it myself; so I reached

my hand to her and said:  "You can come along!  We'll both take

it!  Oh where is she?"



"She went down in the orchard," said mother.  "I think probably

she's gone back where she was the other day."



Gee, but we ran!  And there she was!  As we came up, she heard us

and turned.



"Shelley!" I cried.  "Here's your letter!  Everything is all

right!  He's coming, Shelley!  Look quick, and see when!  Mother

will want to begin baking right away!"



Shelley looked at me, and said coolly:  "Paddy Ryan!  What's the

matter?"



"Your letter!" I cried, shoving it right against her hands. 

"Your letter from Robert!  From the Paget man, you know!  I told

you he was coming!  Hurry, and see when!"



She took it, and sat there staring at it, so much like father,

that it made me think of him, so I saw that she was going to have

to come around to it as we did, and that one couldn't hurry her. 

She just had to take her time to sense it.



"Shall I open it for you?" I asked, merely to make her see that

it was time she was doing it herself.



Blest if she didn't reach it toward me!--sort of woodenlike.  I

stuck my finger under the flap, gave it a rip across and emptied

what was inside into her lap.  Bet there were six or seven

letters in queer yellow envelopes I never before had seen any

like, and on them was the name, Robert Paget, while in one corner

it said, "Returned Dead Letter"; also there was a loose folded

white sheet.  She sat staring at the heap, touching one, another,

and repeating "Robert Paget?" as she picked each up in turn.



"What do you suppose it means?" she asked May.  May examined

them.



"You must read the loose sheet," she advised.  "No doubt that

will explain."



But Shelley never touched it.  She handled those letters and

stared at them.  Father and mother came through the orchard and

stood together behind us, so father knelt down at last, reached

across Shelley's shoulder, picked one up and looked at it.



"Have you good word, dear?" asked mother of Shelley.



"Why, I don't understand at all," said Shelley.  "Just look at

all these queer letters, addressed to Mr. Paget.  Why should they

be sent to me?  I mustn't open them.  They're not mine.  There

must be some mistake."



"These are DEAD LETTERS," said father.  "They've been written to

you, couldn't be delivered, and so were sent to the Dead Letter

Office at Washington, which returned them to the writer, and

unopened he has forwarded them once more to you.  You've heard of

dead letters, haven't you?"



"I suppose so," said Shelley.  "I don't remember just now; but

there couldn't be a better name.  They've come mighty near

killing me."



"If you'd only read that note!" urged May, putting it right into

her fingers.



Shelley still sat there.



"I'm afraid of it," she said exactly like I'd have spoken if

there had been a big rattlesnake coming right at me, when I'd

nothing at hand to bruise it.



Laddie and Leon came from the barn.  They had heard me calling,

seen May and me run, and then father and mother coming down, so

they walked over.



"What's up?" asked Leon.  "Has Uncle Levi's will been discovered,

and does mother get his Mexican mines?"



"What have you got, Shelley?" asked Laddie, kneeling beside her,

and picking up one of the yellow letters.



"I hardly know," said Shelley.



"I brought her a big letter with all those little ones and a note

in it, and they are from the Paget man," I explained to him. 

"But she won't even read the note, and see what he writes.  She

says she's afraid."



"Poor child!  No wonder!" said Laddie, sitting beside her and

putting his arm around her.  "Suppose I read it for you.  May I?"



"Yes," said Shelley.  "You read it.  Read it out loud.  I don't

care."



She leaned against him, while he unfolded the white sheet.



"Umph!" he said.  "This DOES look bad for you.  It begins:  `My

own darling Girl.'"



"Let me see!" cried Shelley, suddenly straightening, and reaching

her hand.



Laddie held the page toward her, but she only looked, she didn't

offer to touch it.



"`My own darling Girl:'" repeated Laddie tenderly, making it mean

just all he possibly could, because he felt so dreadfully sorry

for her--"  `On my return to Chicago, from the trip to England I

have so often told you I intended to make some time soon----'"



"Did he?" asked mother.



"Yes," answered Shelley.  "He couldn't talk about much else.  It

was his first case.  It was for a friend of his who had been

robbed of everything in the world; honour, relatives, home, and

money.  If Robert won it, he got all that back for his friend and

enough for himself--that he could--a home of his own, you know! 

Read on, Laddie!"



"`I was horrified to find on my desk every letter I had written

you during my absence returned to me from the Dead Letter Office,

as you see.'"



"Good gracious!" cried mother, picking up one and clutching it

tight as if she meant to see that it didn't get away again.



"Go on!" cried Shelley.



"`I am enclosing some of them as they came back to me, in proof

of my statement.  I drove at once to your boarding place and

found you had not been there for weeks, and your landlady was

distinctly crabbed.  Then I went to the college, only to find

that you had fallen ill and gone to your home.  That threw me

into torments, and all that keeps me from taking the first train

is the thought that perhaps you refused to accept these letters,

for some reason.  Shelley, you did not, did you?  There is some

mistake somewhere, is there not----'"



"One would be led to think so," said father sternly.  "Seems as

if he might have managed some way----"



"Don't you blame him!" cried Shelley.  "Can't you see it's all my

fault?  He'd been coming regularly, and the other girls envied

me; then he just disappeared, and there was no word or anything,

and they laughed and whispered until I couldn't endure it; so I

moved in with Peter's cousin, as I wrote you; but that left Mrs.

Fleet with an empty room in the middle of the term, and it made

her hopping mad.  I bet anything she wouldn't give the postman my

new address, to pay me back.  I left it, of course.  But if I'd

been half a woman, and had the confidence I should have had in

myself and in him----  Oh how I've suffered, and punished all of

you----!"



"Never you mind about that," said mother, stroking Shelley's

hair.  "Likely there isn't much in Chicago to give a girl who

never had been away from her family before, `confidence' in

herself or any one else.  As for him--just disappearing like

that, without a word or even a line----  Go on Laddie!"



"`Surely, you knew that I was only waiting the outcome of this

trip to tell you how dearly I love you.  Surely, you encouraged

me in thinking you cared for me a little, Shelley.  Only a little

will do to begin with----'"



"You see, I DID have something to go on!" cried Shelley, wiping

her eyes and straightening up.



"`No doubt you misunderstood and resented my going without coming

to explain, and bid you good-bye in person, but Shelley, _I_

SIMPLY DARED NOT.  You see, it was this way:  I got a cable about

the case I was always talking of, and the only man who could give

the testimony I MUST HAVE was dying!'"



"For land's sake!  The poor boy!" cried mother, patting Shelley's

shoulder.



"`An hour's delay might mean the loss of everything in the world

to me, even you.  For if I lost any time, and the man escaped me,

there was no hope of winning my case, and everything, even you,

as I said before, depended on him----'"



"Good Lord!  I mean land!" cried Leon.



"`If I could catch the train in an hour, I could take a boat at

New York, and go straight through with no loss of time.  So I

wrote you a note that probably said more than I would have

ventured in person, and paid a boy to deliver it.'"



"Kept the money and tore up the note, I bet!" said May.



"`I wrote on the train, but found after sailing that I had rushed

so I had failed to post it in New York.  I kept on writing every

day on the boat, and mailed you six at Liverpool.  All the time I

have written frequently; there are many more here that this

envelope will not hold, that I shall save until I hear from

you.'"



"Well, well!" said father.



"`Shelley, I beat death, reached my man, got the testimony I had

to have, and won my case.'"



"Glory!" cried mother.  "Praise the Lord!"



"`Then I scoured England, and part of the continent, hunting some

interested parties; and when I was so long finding them, and

still no word came from you, I decided to come back and get you,

if you would come with me, and go on with the work together.'"



"Listen to that!  More weddings!" cried Leon.  He dropped on his

knees before Shelley.  "Will you marry me, my pretty maid?" he

begged.



"Young man, if you cut any capers right now, I'll cuff your

ears!" cried father.  "This is no proper time for your

foolishness!"



"`Shelley, I beg that you will believe me, and if you care for me

in the very least, telegraph if I may come.  Quick!  I'm half

insane to see you.  I have many things to tell you, first of all

how dear you are to me.  Please telegraph.  Robert.'"



"Saddle a horse, Leon!" father cried as he unstrapped his wallet.



"Laddie, take down her message."



"Can you put it into ten words?" asked Laddie.



"Mother, what would you say?" questioned Shelley.



Leon held up his fingers and curled down one with each word. 

"Say, `Dear Robert.  Well and happy.  Come when you get ready.'"



"But then I won't know when he's coming," objected Shelley.  "You

don't need to," said Leon.  "You can take it for granted from

that epistolary effusion that he won't let the grass grow under

his feet while coming here.  That's a bully message!  It sounds

as if you weren't crazy over him, and it's a big compliment to

mother.  Looks as if she didn't have to know when people are

coming--like she's ready all the time."



"Write it out and let me see," said Shelley.



So Laddie wrote it, and she looked at it a long time, it seemed

to me, at last she said:  "I don't like that `get.'  It doesn't

sound right.  Wouldn't `are' be better?"



"Come when you are ready," repeated Laddie.  "Yes, that's better.



`Get' sounds rather saucy."



"Why not put it, `Come when you choose?'" suggested mother. 

"That will leave a word to spare, so it won't look as if you had

counted them and used exactly ten on purpose, and it doesn't

sound as if you expected him to make long preparations, like the

other.  That will leave it with him to start whenever he likes."



"Yes! yes!" cried Shelley.  "That's much better!  Say, `Come when

you choose!'"



"Right!" said Laddie as he wrote it.  "Now I'll take this!"



"Oh no you won't!" cried Leon.  "Father told me to saddle my

horse.  She's got enough speed in her to beat yours a mile.  I

take that!  Didn't you say for me to saddle, father?"



"Such important business, I think I better," said Laddie, and

Leon began to cry.



"I think you should both go," said Shelley.  "It is so important,

and if one goes to make a mistake, maybe the other will notice

it."



"Yes, that's the best way," said mother.



"Yes, both go," said father.



It was like one streak when they went up the Big Hill.  Father

shook his head.  "Poor judgment--that," he said.  "Never run a

horse up hill!"



"But they're in such a hurry," Shelley reminded him.



"So they are," said father.  "In this case I might have broken

the rule myself.  Now come all of you, and let the child get at

her mail."



"But I want you to stay," said Shelley.  "I'm so addle-pated this

morning.  I need my family to help me."



"Of course you do, child," said mother.  "Families were made to

cling together, and stand by each other in every circumstance of

life--joy or sorrow.  Of course you need your family."



May began sorting the letters by dates so Shelley could start on

the one that had been written first.  Father ran his knife across

the top of each, and cut all the envelopes, and Shelley took out

the first and read it; that was the train one.  In it he told her

about sending the boy with the note again, and explained more

about how it was so very important for him to hurry, because the

only man who could help him was so sick.  We talked it over, and

all of us thought the boy had kept the money and torn up the

note.  Father said the way would have been to send the note and

pay the boy when he came back; but Shelley said Mr. Paget would

have been gone before the boy got back, so father saw that

wouldn't have been the way, in such a case.



Next she read one written on the boat.  He told more about

sending the boy; how he loved her, what it would mean to both of

them if he got the evidence he wanted and won his first case; and

how much it would bring his friend.  The next one told it all

over again, and more.  In that he wrote a little about the ocean,

the people on board the ship, and he gave Shelley the name of the

place where he was going and begged her to write to him.  He told

her if the ship he was on passed another, they were going to stop

and send back the mail.  He begged her to write often, and to say

she forgave him for starting away without seeing her, as he had

been forced to.



The next one was the same thing over, only a little more yet.  In

the last he had reached England, the important man was still

living, but he was almost gone, and Mr. Paget took two good

witnesses, all the evidence he had, and went to see him; and the

man saw it was no use, so he made a statement, and Robert had it

all written out, signed and witnessed.  For the real straight

sense there was in that letter, I could have done as well myself.



It was a wild jumble, because Robert was so crazy over having the

evidence that would win his case; and he told Shelley that now he

was perfectly free to love her all she would allow him.  He said

he had to stay a while longer to find his friend's people so they

would get back their share of the money, but it was not going to

be easy to locate them.  You wouldn't think the world so big, but

maybe it seemed smaller to me because as far as I could see from

the top of our house, was all I knew about it.  After Shelley had

read the letters, and the note again, father heaved a big sigh

that seemed to come clear from his boot soles and he said:  "Well

Shelley, it looks to me as if you had found a MAN.  Seems to me

that's a mighty important case for a young lawyer to be trusted

with, in a first effort."



"Yes, but it was for Robert's best friend, and only think, he has

won!"



"I don't see how he could have done better if he'd been old as

Methuselah, and wise as Solomon," boasted mother.



"But he hasn't found the people who must have back their money,"

said May.  "He will have to go to England again.  And he wants to

take you, Shelley.  My!  You'll get to sail on a big steamer,

cross the Atlantic Ocean, and see London.  Maybe you'll even get

a peep at the Queen!"



Shelley was busy making a little heap of her letters; when the

top one slid off I reached over and put it back for her.  She

looked straight at me, and smiled the most wonderful and the most

beautiful smile I ever saw on any one's face, so I said to her: 

"You see! I TOLD you he was coming!"



"I can't understand it!" said Shelley.



"YOU KNOW I told you."



"Of course I do!  But what made you think so?"



"That was the answer.  Just that he was coming."



"What are you two talking about?" asked mother.



Shelley looked at me, and waited for me to tell mother as much as

I wanted to, of what had happened.  But I didn't think things

like that were to be talked about before every one, so I just

said:



"Oh nothing!  Only, I told Shelley this very morning that the

Paget man was coming soon, and that everything was going to be

all right."



"You did?  Well of all the world!  I can't see why."



"Oh something told me! I just FELT that way."



"More of that Fairy nonsense?" asked father sharply.



"No.  I didn't get that from the Fairies."



"Well, never mind!" said Shelley, rising, because she saw that I

had told all I wanted to.  "Little Sister DID tell me this

morning that he was coming, that everything would be made right,

and it's the queerest thing, but instantly I believed her. 

Didn't I sing all morning, mother?  The first note since Robert

didn't come when I expected him in Chicago, weeks ago."



"Yes," said mother.  "That's a wonderfully strange thing.  I

can't see what made you think so."



"Anyway, I did!" I said.  "Now let's go have dinner.  I'm

starving."



I caught May's hand, and ran to get away from them.  Father and

mother walked one on each side of Shelley, while with both hands

she held her letters before her.  When we reached the house we

just talked about them all the time.  Pretty soon the boys were

back, and then they told about sending the telegram.  Leon vowed

he gave the operator a dime extra to start that message with a

shove, so it would go faster.



"It will go all right," said Laddie, "and how it will go won't be

a circumstance to the way he'll come.  If there's anything we

ought to do, before he gets here, we should hustle.  Chicago

isn't a thousand miles away.  That message can reach him by two

o'clock, it's probable he has got ready while he was waiting, so

he will start on the first train our way.  He could reach

Groveville on the ten, to-morrow.  We better meet it."



"Yes, we'll meet it," said mother.  "Is the carriage perfectly

clean?"



Father said:  "It must be gone over.  Our general manager here

ordered me to speed up, and we drove a little coming from town."



Mother went to planning what else should be done.



"Don't do anything!" cried Shelley.  "The house is all right. 

There's no need to work and worry into a sweat.  He won't notice

or care how things look."



"I miss my guess if he doesn't notice and care very much indeed,"

said mother emphatically.  "Men are not blind.  No one need think

they don't see when things are not as they should be, just

because they're not cattish enough to let you know it, like a

woman always does.  Shelley, wouldn't you like to ride over and

spend the afternoon with the Princess?"



"Nope!" said Shelley.  "It's her turn to come to see me. 

Besides, you don't get me out of the way like that.  I know what

you'll do here, and I intend to help."



"Do you need one of the boys at the house?" asked father, and if

you'll believe it, both of them wanted to stay.



Father said he must have one to help wash the carriage and do a

little fixing around the barn; so he took Leon, but he didn't

like to go.  He said:  "I don't see what all this fuss is about,

anyway.  Probably he'll be another Peter."



Shelley looked at him:  "Oh Mr. Paget isn't nearly so large as

Peter," she said, "and his hair is whiter than yours, while his

eyes are not so blue."



"Saints preserve us!" cried Leon.  "Come on, father, let's only

dust the carriage!  He's not worth washing it for."



"Is he like that?" asked mother anxiously.



"Wait and see!" said Shelley.  "Looks don't make a man.  He has

proved what he can do."



Then all of us went to work.  Before night we were hunting over

the yard, and beside the road, to see if we could find anything

to pick up.  Six chickens were in the cellar, father was to bring

meat and a long list of groceries from town in the morning.  He

was to start early, get them before train time, put them under

the back seat, and take them out after he drove into the lane,

when he came back.  That made a little more trouble for father,

but there was not the slightest necessity for making Mr. Paget

feel that he had ridden in a delivery wagon.



Next morning I wakened laughing softly, because some one was

fussing with my hair, patting my face, and kissing me, so I put

up my arms and pulled that loving person down on my pillow, and

gave back little half-asleep kisses, and slept on; but it was

Shelley, and she gently shook me and began repeating that fool

old thing I have been waked up with half the mornings of my life:



        "Get up, Little Sister, the morning is bright,

         The birds are all singing to welcome the light,

         Get up; for when all things are merry and glad,

         Good children should never be lazy and sad;

         For God gives us daylight, dear sister, that we

         May rejoice like the lark and work like the bee."





Usually I'd have gone on sleeping, but Shelley was so sweet and

lovely, and she kissed me so hard, that I remembered it was going

to be a most exciting day, so I came to quick as snap and jumped

right up, for I didn't want to miss a single thing that might

happen.



The carriage was shining when it came to the gate, so was father.



I thought there was going to be a vacant seat beside him, and I

asked if I might go along.  He said:  "Yes, if mother says so." 

He always would stick that in.  So I ran to ask her, and she

didn't care, if Shelley made no objections.  I was just starting

to find her, when here she came, all shining too, but Laddie was

with her.  I hadn't known that he was going, and I was so

disappointed I couldn't help crying.



"What's the matter?" asked Shelley.



"Father and mother both said I might go, if you didn't care."



"Why, I'm dreadfully sorry," said Shelley, "but I have several

things I want Laddie to do for me."



Laddie stooped down to kiss me good-bye and he said:  "Don't cry,

Little Sister.  The way to be happy is to be good."



Then they drove to Groveville, and we had to wait.  But there was

so much to do, it made us fly to get all of it finished.  So

mother sent Leon after Mrs. Freshett to help in the kitchen,

while Candace wore her white dress, and waited on the table. 

Mother cut flowers for the dining table, and all through the

house.  She left the blinds down to keep the rooms cool, chilled

buttermilk to drink, and if she didn't think of every single,

least little thing, I couldn't see what it was.  Then all of us

put on our best dresses.  Mother looked as glad and sweet as any

girl, when she sat to rest a little while.  I didn't dare climb

the catalpa in my white dress, so I watched from the horse block,

and when I saw the grays come over the top of the hill, I ran to

tell.  As mother went to the gate, she told May and me to walk

behind, to stay back until we were spoken to, and then to keep

our heads level, and remember our manners.  I don't know where

Leon went.  He said he lost all interest when he found there was

to be another weak-eyed towhead in the family, and I guess he was

in earnest about it, because he wasn't even curious enough to be

at the gate when Mr. Paget came.



Father stopped with a flourish, Laddie hurried around and helped

Shelley, and then Mr. Paget stepped down.  Goodness, gracious,

sakes alive!  Little?  Towhead?  He was taller than Laddie.  His

hair was most as black as ink, and wavy.  His eyes were big and

dark; he was broad and strong and there was the cleanest,

freshest look about him.  He put his arm spang around Shelley,

right there in the road, and mother said:  "Hold there!  Not so

fast, young man!  I haven't given my consent to that."



He laughed, and he said:  "Yes, but you'ah going to!"  And he put

his other arm around mother, so May and I crowded up, and we had

a family reunion right between the day lilies and the snowball

bush.  We went into the house, and he LIKED us, his room, and

everything went exactly right.  He was crazy about the cold

buttermilk, and while he was drinking it Leon walked into the

dining-room, because he thought of course Mr. Paget and Shelley

would be on the davenport in the parlour.  When he saw Robert he

said lowlike to Shelley:  "Didn't Mr. Paget come?  Who's that?"



Shelley looked so funny for a minute, then she remembered what

she had told him and she just laughed as she said:  "Mr. Paget,

this is my brother."



Robert went to shake hands, and Leon said right to his teeth: 

"Well a divil of a towhead you are!"



"Towhead?" said Robert, bewildered-like.



"Shelley said you were a little bit of a man, with watery blue

eyes, and whiter hair than mine."



"Oh I say!" cried Robert.  "She must have been stringin' you!"



Leon just whooped; because while Mr. Paget didn't talk like the

'orse, 'ouse people, he made you think of them in the way he said

things, and the sound of his voice.  Then we had dinner, and I

don't remember that we ever had quite such a feast before. 

Mother had put on every single flourish she knew.  She used her

very best dishes, and linen, and no cook anywhere could beat

Candace alone; now she had Mrs. Freshett to help her, and mother

also.  If she tried to show Mr. Paget, she did it!  No visitor

was there except him, but we must have been at the table two

hours talking, and eating from one dish after another.  Candace

LIKED to wear her white dress, and carry things around, and they

certainly were good.



And talk!  Father, Laddie, and Robert talked over all creation. 

Every once in a while when mother saw an opening, she put in her

paddle, and no one could be quicker, when she watched sharp and

was trying to make a good impression.  Shelley was very quiet;

she scarcely spoke or touched that delicious food.  Once the

Paget man turned to her, looking at her so fondlike, as he picked

up one of her sauce dishes and her spoon and wanted to feed her. 

And he said:  "Heah child, eat your dinnah!  You have nawthing to

be fussed ovah!  I mean to propose to you, and your parents

befowr night.  That is what I am heah for."



Every one laughed so, Shelley never got the bite; but after that

she perked up more and ate a little by herself.



At last father couldn't stand it any longer, so he began asking

Robert about his trip to England, and the case he had won.  When

the table was cleared for dessert, Mr. Paget asked mother to have

Candace to bring his satchel.  He opened it and spread papers all

over, so that father and Laddie could see the evidence, while he

told them how it was.



It seemed there was a law in England, all of us knew about it,

because father often had explained it.  This law said that a man

who had lots of money and land must leave almost all of it to his

eldest son; and the younger ones must go into law, the army, be

clergymen, or enter trade and earn a living, while the eldest

kept up the home place.  Then he left it to his eldest son, and

his other boys had to work for a living.  It kept the big estates

together; but my! it was hard on the younger sons, and no one

seemed even to think about the daughters.  I never heard them

mentioned.



Now there was a very rich man; he had only two sons, and each of

them married, and had one son.  The younger son died, and sent

his boy for his elder brother to take care of.  He pretended to

be good, but for sure, he was bad as ever he could be.  He knew

that if his cousin were out of the way, all that land and money

would be his when his uncle died.  So he went to work and he

tried for years, and a lawyer man who had no conscience at all,

helped him.  At last when they had done everything they could

think of, they took a lot of money and put it in the pocket of

the son they wanted to ruin; then when his father missed the

money, and the house was filled with policemen, detectives, and

neighbours, the bad man said he'd feel more comfortable to have

the family searched too, merely as a formality, so he stepped out

and was gone over, and when the son's turn came, there was the

money on him!  That made him a public disgrace to his family, and

a criminal who couldn't inherit the estate, and his father went

raving mad and tried to kill him, so he had to run away.  At

first he didn't care what he did, so he came over here.  Robert

said that man was his best friend, and as men went, he was a

decent fellow, so he cheered him up all he could, and went to

work with all his might to prove he was innocent, and to get back

his family, and his money for him.



When Robert had enough evidence that he was almost ready to start

to England, his man got a cable from an old friend of his

father's, who always had believed in him, and it said that the

bad man was dying--to come quick.  So Robert went all of a

sudden, like the Dead Letters told about.  Now, he described how

he reached there, took the old friend of the father of his friend

with him, and other witnesses, and all the evidence he had, and

went to see the sick man.  When Robert showed him what he could

prove, the bad man said it was no use, he had to die in a few

days, so he might as well go with a clean conscience, and he told

about everything he had done.  Robert had it all written out,

signed and sworn to.  He told about all of it, and then he said

to father:  "Have I made it clear to you?"



Leon was so excited he forgot all the manners he ever had, for he

popped up before father could open his head, and cried: "Clear as

mud!  I got that son business so plain in my mind, I'd know the

party of the first part, from the party of the second part, if I

met him promenading on the Stone Wall of China!"



Father and Laddie knew so much law they asked dozens of

questions; but that Robert man wasn't a smidgin behind, for every

clip he had the answer ready, and then he could go on and tell

much more than he had been asked.  He said as a Case, it was a

pretty thing to work on; but it was much more than a case to him,

because he always had known that his friend was not guilty; that

he was separated from his family, suffering terribly under the

disgrace, and they must be also.  He had worked for life for his

friend, because the whole thing meant so much to both of them. 

He said he must go back soon and finish up a little more that he

should have done while he was there, if it hadn't been that he

received no word from Shelley.



"When I didn't heah from heh for so long, and wrote so many

letters, and had no reply, I thought possibly some gay `young

Lochinvah had come out from the west,' and taken my sweet 'eart,"

he said, "and while I had my armour on, I made up my mind that

I'd give him a fight too.  I didn't propose to lose Shelley, if

it were in my powah to win heh.  I hadn't been able to say to heh

exactly what I desiahed, on account of getting a start alone in

this country; but if I won this case, I would have ample means. 

When I secuahed the requiahed evidence, I couldn't wait to

finish, so I came straight ovah, to make sure of heh."



He arose and handed the satchel to father.



"I notice you have a very good looking gun convenient," he said. 

"Would you put these papahs where you consider them safe until

I'm ready to return?  Our home, our living, and the honah of a

man are there, and we are mighty particular about that bag, are

we not, Shelley?"



"Well I should think we are!" cried Shelley.  "For goodness sake,

father, hang to it!  Is the man still living?  Could you get that

evidence over again?"



"He was alive when I left, but the doctors said ten days would be

his limit, so he may be gone befowr this."



Father picked up the satchel, set it on his knees, and stroked it

as if it were alive.



"Well!  Well!" he said.  "Now would any one think such a little

thing could contain so much?"



Shelley leaned toward Robert.



"Your friend!" she cried, "Your friend!  What DID he say to you? 

What did he DO?"



"Well, for a time he was wildly happy ovah having the stain

removed from his honah, and knowing that he would have his family

and faw'tn back; but there is an extremely sad feature to his

case that is not yet settled, so he must keep his head level

until we work that out.  Now about that hoss you wanted to show

me----" he turned to Leon.



Mother gave the signal, and we left the table.  Father carried

the satchel to his chest, made room for it, locked it in and put

the key in his pocket.  Then our men started to the barn to show

the Arab-Kentucky horse.  Mr. Paget went to Shelley and took her

in his arms exactly like Peter did Sally before the parlour door

that time when I got into trouble, and he looked at mother and

laughed as he said:  "I hope you will excuse me, but I"e been

having a very nawsty, anxious time, and I cawn't conform to the

rules for a few days, until I become accustomed to the fawct that

Shelley is not lost to me.  It was beastly when I reached

Chicago, had back all my letters, and found she had gone home

ill.  I've much suffering to recompense.  I'll atone for a small

portion immediately."



He lifted Shelley right off the floor--that's how big and strong

he was--he hugged her tight, and kissed her forehead, cheeks, and

eyes.



"When I've gone through the fahmality of asking your parents for

you, and they have said a gracious `yes,' I'll put the fust one

on your lips," he said, setting her down carefully.  "In the

meantime, you be fixing your mouth to say, `yes,' also, when I

propose to you, because it's coming befowr you sleep."



Shelley was like a peach blossom.  She reached up and touched his

cheek, while she looked at mother all smiling, and sparkling, as

she said:  "You see!"



Mother smiled back.



"I do, indeed!" she answered.



Leon pulled Mr. Paget's sleeve.



"Aw quit lally-gaggin' and come see a real horse," he said.



Robert put his other arm around Leon, drew him to his side and

hugged him as if he were a girl.  "I'm so glad Shelley has a

lawge family," he said.  "Big families are jolly.  I'm so proud

of all the brothers I'm going to have.  I was the only boy at

home."



"You haven't told us about your family," said mother.



"No," said Robert, "but I intend to.  I have a family!  One of

the finest on uth.  We'll talk about them after this hoss is

inspected."



He let Shelley go and walked away, his arm still around Leon. 

Shelley ran to mother and both of them sobbed out loud.



"NOW YOU SEE HOW IT WAS!" she said.



"You poor child!" cried mother.  "Indeed I DO see how it was. 

You've been a brave girl.  A good, brave girl!  Father and I are

mighty proud of you!"



"Oh mother!  I thought you were ashamed of me!" sobbed Shelley.



"Oh my child!" said mother quavery-like.  "Oh my child!  You

surely see that none of us could understand, as we do now."



She patted Shelley, and told her to run upstairs and lie down for

a while, because she was afraid she would be sick.



"We mustn't have a pale, tired girl right now," said mother.



Well!" said Shelley, but she just stood there holding mother.



"Well?" said mother gripping her.



"You see!" said Shelley.



"Child," said mother, "I DO see!  I see six feet of as handsome

manhood as I ever have seen anywhere.  His manner is perfect, and

I find his speech most attractive.  I am delighted with him.  I

do see indeed!  Your father is quite as proud and pleased as I

am.  Now go to bed."



Shelley held up her lips, and then went.  I ran to the barn,

where the men were standing in the shade, while Leon led his

horse up and down before them, told about its pedigree, its

record, how he came to have it.  The Paget man stood there

looking and listening gravely, as he studied the horse.  At last

he went over her, and gee! but he knew horse!  Then Laddie

brought out Flos and they talked all about her, and then went

into the barn.  Father opened the east doors to show how much

land he had, which were his lines; and while the world didn't

look quite so pretty as it had in May, still it was good enough. 

Then they went into the orchard, sat under the trees and began

talking about business conditions.  That was so dry I went back

to the house.  And maybe I didn't strike something interesting

there!



As I came up the orchard path to a back yard gate, I saw a

carriage at the hitching rack in front of the house, so I took a

peep and almost fell over.  It was the one the Princess had come

to Sally's wedding in; so I knew she was in the house visiting

Shelley.  I went to the parlour and there I had another shock;

for lo and behold! in our big rocking chair, and looking as well

as any one, so far as you could see--of course you can't see

heart trouble, though--sat Mrs. Pryor.  The Princess and mother

were there, all of them talking, laughing and having the best

time, while on the davenport enjoying himself as much as any one,

was Mr. Pryor.  They talked about everything, and it was easy to

see that the Pryor door was OPEN so far as we were concerned,

anyway.  Mrs. Pryor was just as nice and friendly as she could

be, and so was he.  Shelley sat beside him, and he pinched her

cheek and said:  "Something seems to make you especially

brilliant today, young woman!"



Shelley flushed redder, laughed, and glanced at mother, so she

said:  "Shelley is having a plain old-fashioned case of beau. 

She met a young man in Chicago last fall and he's here now to ask

our consent.  All of us are quite charmed with him.  That's why

she's so happy."



Then the Princess sprang up and kissed Shelley, so did Mrs.

Pryor, while such a chatter you never heard.  No one could repeat

what they said, for as many as three talked at the same time.



"Oh do let's have a double wedding!" cried the Princess when the

excitement was over a little.  "I think it would be great fun; do

let's!  When are you planning for?"



"Nothing is settled yet," said Shelley.  "We've had no time to

talk!"



"Mercy!" cried the Princess.  "Go make your arrangements quickly!



Hurry up, then come over, and we'll plan for the same time.  It

will be splendid!  Don't you think that would be fine, Mrs.

Stanton?"



"I can't see any objections to it," said mother.



"Where is your young man?  I'm crazy to see him," cried the

Princess.  "If you have gone and found a better looking one than

mine, I'll never speak to you again."



"She hasn't!" cried Mrs. Pryor calmly, like that settled it.  I

like her.  "They're not made!"



"I am not so sure of that," said Shelley proudly.  "Mother, isn't

my man quite as good looking, and as nice in every way, as

Laddie?"



"Fully as handsome, and so far as can be seen in such a short

time, quite as fine," said mother.



I was perfectly amazed at her; as if any man could be!



"I don't believe it, I won't stand it, and I shan't go home until

I have seen for myself!" cried the Princess, laughing, and yet it

sounded as if she were half-provoked, and I knew I was.  The

Paget man was all right, but I wasn't going to lose my head over

him.  Laddie was the finest, of course!



"Well, he's somewhere on the place with our men, this minute,"

said Shelley, "but you stay for supper, and meet him."



"When you haven't your arrangements made yet!  You surely are

unselfish!  Of course I won't do that, but I'd love to have one

little peep, then you bring him and come over to-morrow, so all

of us can become acquainted, and indeed, I'm really in earnest

about a double wedding."



"Go see where the men are," said Shelley to me.



I went to the back door, and their heads were bobbing far down in

the orchard.



"They're under the greening apple tree," I reported.



"If you will excuse us," said Shelley to Mr. and Mrs. Pryor,

"we'll walk down a few minutes and prove that I'm right."



"Don't stay," said Mrs. Pryor.  "This trip is so unusual for me

that I'm quite tired.  For a first venture, in such a long time,

I think I've done well.  But now I'm beginning to feel I should

go home."



"Go straight along," said the Princess.  "I'll walk across the

fields, or Thomas can come back after me."



So Mr. and Mrs. Pryor went away, while the Princess, Shelley,

May, and I walked through the orchard toward the men.  They were

standing on the top of the hill looking over the meadow, and

talking with such interest they didn't hear us or turn until

Shelley said:  "Mr. Paget, I want to present you to Laddie's

betrothed--Miss Pamela Pryor."



He swung around, finishing what he was saying as he turned, the

Princess took a swift step toward him, then, at the same time,

both of them changed to solid tombstone, and stood staring, and

so did all of us, while no one made a sound.  At last the Paget

man drew a deep, quivery breath and sort of shook himself as he

gazed at her.



"Why, Pam!" he cried.  "Darling Pam, cawn it possibly be you?"



If you ever heard the scream of a rabbit when the knives of a

reaper cut it to death, why that's exactly the way she cried out.



She covered her eyes with her hands.  He drew back and smiled,

the red rushed into his face, and he began to be alive again. 

Laddie went to the Princess and took her hands.



"What does this mean?" he begged.



She pulled away from him, and went to the Paget man slowly, her

big eyes wild and strained.



"Robert!" she cried.  "Robert! how did you get here?  Were you

hunting us?"



"All ovah England, yes," he said.  "Not heah!  I came heah to see

Shelley.  But you?  How do you happen to be in this country?"



"We've lived on adjoining land for two years!"



"You moved heah!  To escape the pity of our friends?"



"Father moved!  Mother and I had no means, and no refuge.  We

were forced.  We never believed it!  Oh Robert, we never--not for

a minute!  Oh Robert, say you never did it!"



"Try our chawming cousin Emmet your next guess!"



"That devil!  Oh that devil!"



She cried out that hurt way again, so he took her tight in his

arms; but sure as ever Laddie was my brother, he was hers, so

that was all right.  When they were together you wondered why in

this world you hadn't thought of it the instant you saw him

alone.  They were like as two peas.  They talked exactly the

same, only he sounded much more so, probably from having just

been in England for weeks, while in two years she had grown a

little as we were.  We gazed at them, open-mouthed, like as not,

and no one said a word.



At last Mr. Paget looked over the Princess' shoulder at father

and said:  "I can explain this, Mr. Stanton, in a very few wuds. 

I am my friend.  The case was my own.  The evidence I secuahed

was for myself.  This is my only sisteh.  Heh people are

mine----"



"The relationship is apparent," said father.  "There is a

striking likeness between you and your sister, and I can discern

traces of your parents in your face, speech and manner."



"If you know my father," said Robert, "then you undehstand what

happened to me when I was found with his money on my pehson, in

the presence of our best friends and the police.  He went raving

insane on the instant, and he would have killed me if he hadn't

been prevented; he tried to; has he changed any since, Pam?"



The Princess was clinging to him with both hands, staring at him,

wonder, joy, and fear all on her lovely face.



"Worse!" she cried.  "He's much worse!  The longer he broods, the

more mother grieves, the bitterer he becomes.  Mr. Stanton, he is

always armed.  He'll shoot on sight.  Oh what shall we do?"



"Miss Pamela," said Leon, "did your man Thomas know your brother

in England?"



"All his life."



"Well, then, we'd better be doing something quick.  He tied the

horses and was walking up and down the road while he waited, and

he saw us plainly when we crossed the wood yard a while ago.  He

followed us and stared so, I couldn't help noticing him."



"Jove!" cried Robert.  "I must have seen him in the village this

morning.  A man reminded me of him, then I remembered how like

people of his type are, and concluded I was mistaken.  Mr.

Stanton, you have agreed that the evidence I hold is sufficient. 

Pam cawn tell you that while I don't deny being full of tricks as

a boy, they weh not dirty, not low, and while father always

taking Emmet's paht against me drove me to recklessness

sometimes, I nevah did anything underhand or disgraceful.  She

knows what provocation I had, and exactly what happened.  Let heh

tell you!"



"I don't feel that I require any further information," said

father.  "You see, I happen to be fairly well acquainted with Mr.

Pryor."



"Pryor?"



"He made us use that name here," explained the Princess.



"WELL, HIS NAME IS PAGET!" said Robert angrily.



Laddie told me long ago he didn't believe it was Pryor.



"Then, if you are acquainted with my father, what would you

counsel?  Unless I'm prepahed to furnish the central figyah of

interest in a funeral, I dare not meet him, until he has seen

this evidence, had time to digest it, and calm himself."



Shelley caught him by the arm.  No wonder!  She hadn't been

proposed to, or even had a kiss on her lips.  She pulled him.



"You come straight to the house," she said.  "Thomas may tell

your father he thought he saw you."



That was about as serious as anything could be, but nothing ever

stopped Leon.  He sidled away from father, repeating in a low

voice:



        "`For sore dismayed, through storm and shade

             His child he did discover;

          One lovely hand she stretched for aid,

             And one was round her lover--'"





Shelley just looked daggers at him, but she was too anxious to

waste any time.



"Would Thomas tell your father?" she asked the Princess.



"The instant he saw him alone, yes.  He wouldn't before mother."



"Hold one minute!" cried father.  "We must think of our mother,

just a little.  Shelley, you and the girls run up and explain how

this is.  Better all of you go to the house, except Mr. Paget. 

He'll be safe here as anywhere.  Mr. Pryor will stop there, if he

comes.  So it would be best for you to keep out of sight, Robert,

until I have had a little talk with him."



"I'll stay here," I offered.  "We'll talk until you get Mr. Pryor

cooled off.  He can be awful ragesome when he's excited, and it

doesn't take much to start him."



"You're right about that!" agreed Robert.



So we sat under the greening and were having a fine visit while

the others went to break the news gently to mother that the Pryor

mystery had gone up higher than Gilderoy's kite.  My! but she'd

be glad!  It would save her many a powerful prayer.  I was

telling Robert all about the time his father visited us, and what

my mother said to him, and he said:  "She'd be the one to talk

with him now.  Possibly he'd listen to her, until he got it

through his head that his own son is not a common thief."



"Maybe he'll have to be held, like taking quinine, and made to

listen," I said.



"That would be easy, if he were not a walking ahsenal," said

Robert.  "You have small chance to reason with a half-crazy man

while he is handling a pistol."



He meant revolver.



"But he'll shoot!" I cried.  "The Princess said he'd shoot!"



"So he will!" said Robert.  "Shoot first, then find out how

things are, and kill himself and every one else with remorse,

afterward.  He is made that way."



"Then he doesn't dare see you until he finds out how mistaken he

has been," I said, for I was growing to like Robert better every

minute longer I knew him.  Besides, there was the Princess,

looking like him as possible, and loving him of course, like I

did Laddie, maybe.  And if anything could cure Mrs. Pryor's heart

trouble, having her son back would, because that was what made it

in the first place, and even before them, there was Shelley to be

thought of, and cared for.


