





CHAPTER XIII



The Garden of the Lord



            "With what content and merriment,

             Their days are spent, whose minds are bent

             To follow the useful plow."



That spring I decided if school didn't stop pretty soon, I'd run

away again, and I didn't in the least care what they did to me. 

A country road was all right and it was good enough, if it had

been heaped up, leveled and plenty of gravel put on; and of

course our road would be fine, because father was one of the

commissioners, and as long as he filled that office, every road

in the county would be just as fine as the law would allow him to

make it.  I have even heard him tell mother that he "stretched it

a leetle mite," when he was forced to by people who couldn't seem

to be made to understand what was required to upbuild a nation. 

He said our language was founded on the alphabet, and to master

it you had to begin with "a".  And he said the nation was like

that; it was based on townships, and when a township was clean,

had good roads, bridges, schoolhouses, and churches, a county was

in fine shape, and when each county was in order, the state was

right, and when the state was prosperous, the nation could

rejoice in its strength.



He said Atlas in the geography book, carrying the world on his

back, was only a symbol, but it was a good one.  He said when the

county elected him to fill an important office, it used his

shoulder as a prop for the nation, so it became his business to

stand firmly, and use every ounce of strength and brains he had,

first of all to make his own possessions a model, then his

township, his county, and his state, and if every one worked

together doing that, no nation on earth had our amount of

territory and such fine weather, so none of them could beat us.



Our road was like the barn floor, where you drove: on each side

was a wide grassy strip, and not a weed the length of our land. 

All the rails in the fences were laid straight, the gates were

solid, sound, and swung firmly on their beams, our fence corners

were full of alders, wild roses, sumac, blackberry vines, masses

of wild flowers beneath them, and a bird for every bush.  Some of

the neighbours thought that to drive two rails every so often,

lay up the fences straight, and grub out the shrubs was the way,

but father said they were vastly mistaken.  He said that was such

a shortsighted proceeding, he would be ashamed to indulge in it. 

You did get more land, but if you left no place for the birds,

the worms and insects devoured your crops, and you didn't raise

half so much as if you furnished the birds shelter and food.  So

he left mulberries in the fields and fence corners and wild

cherries, raspberries, grapes, and every little scrub apple tree

from seeds sown by Johnny Appleseed when he crossed our land.



Mother said those apples were so hard a crane couldn't dent them,

but she never watched the birds in winter when the snow was

beginning to come and other things were covered up.  They swarmed

over those trees until spring, for the tiny sour apples stuck

just like oak leaves waiting for next year's crop to push them

off.  She never noticed us, either.  After a few frosts, we could

almost get tipsy on those apples; there was not a tree in our

orchard that had the spicy, teasing tang of Johnny Appleseed's

apples.  Then too, the limbs could be sawed off and rambo and

maiden's-blush grafted on, if you wanted to; father did on some

of them, so there would be good apples lying beside the road for

passers-by, and they needn't steal to get them.  You could graft

red haws on them too, and grow great big, little haw-apples, that

were the prettiest things you ever saw, and the best to eat. 

Father said if it didn't spoil the looks of the road, he wouldn't

care how many of his neighbours straightened their fences.  If

they did, the birds would come to him, and the more he had, the

fewer bugs and worms he would be troubled with, so he would be

sure of big crops, and sound fruit.  He said he would much rather

have a few good apples picked by robins or jays, than untouched

trees, loaded with wormy falling ones he could neither use nor

sell.  He always patted my head and liked every line of it when I

recited, sort of tearful-like and pathetic:



            "Don't kill the birds! the happy birds,

             That bless the field and grove;

             So innocent to look upon,

             They claim our warmest love."





The roads crossing our land were all right, and most of the

others near us; and a road is wonderful, if it is taking you to

the woods or a creek or meadow; but when it is walking you

straight to a stuffy little schoolhouse where you must stand up

to see from a window, where a teacher is cross as fire, like Miss

Amelia, and where you eternally HEAR things you can't see, there

comes a time about the middle of April when you had quite as soon

die as to go to school any longer; and what you learn there

doesn't amount to a hill of beans compared with what you can find

out for yourself outdoors.



Schoolhouses are made wrong.  If they must be, they should be

built in a woods pasture beside a stream, where you could wade,

swim, and be comfortable in summer, and slide and skate in

winter.  The windows should be cut to the floor, and stand wide

open, so the birds and butterflies could pass through.  You ought

to learn your geography by climbing a hill, walking through a

valley, wading creeks, making islands in them, and promontories,

capes, and peninsulas along the bank.  You should do your

arithmetic sitting under trees adding hickory-nuts, subtracting

walnuts, multiplying butternuts, and dividing hazelnuts.  You


could use apples for fractions, and tin cups for liquid measure. 

You could spell everything in sight and this would teach you the

words that are really used in the world.  Every single one of us

could spell incompatibility, but I never heard father, or the

judge, or even the Bishop, put it in a speech.



If you simply can't have school THAT way, then you should be shut

in black cells, deep under the ground, where you couldn't see, or

hear a sound, and then if they'd give you a book and candle and

Miss Amelia, and her right-hand man, Mister Ruler, why you might

learn something.  This way, if you sat and watched the windows

you could see a bird cross our woods pasture to the redbird swamp

every few minutes; once in a while one of my big hawks took your

breath as he swept, soared, sailed, and circled, watching the

ground below for rabbits, snakes, or chickens.  The skinny old

blue herons crossing from the Wabash to hunt frogs in the cowslip

swale in our meadow, sailed so slow and so low, that you could

see their sharp bills stuck out in front, their uneven, ragged

looking feathers, and their long legs trailing out behind.  I bet

if Polly Martin wore a blue calico dress so short her spindle-

shanks showed, and flew across our farm, you couldn't tell her

from a heron.



There were so many songs you couldn't decide which was which to

save you; it was just a pouring jumble of robins, larks, doves,

blackbirds, sparrows, everything that came that early; the red

and the yellow birds had not come yet, or the catbirds or

thrushes.  You could hear the thumping wings of the roosters in

Sills' barnyard nearest the schoolhouse, and couldn't tell which

was whipping, so you had to sit there and wonder; and worst of

all you must stand Miss Amelia calmly telling you to pay

attention to your books or you would be kept in, and all the time

you were forced to bear torments, while you watched her walk from

window to window to see every speck of the fight.  One day they

had thumped and fought for half an hour; she had looked from

every window in the room, and at last there was an awful

whacking, and then silence.  It grew so exciting I raised my

hand, and almost before she nodded permission, "Which whipped?" I

asked.



Miss Amelia turned red as a beet.  Gee, but she was mad!



"I did!" she said.  "Or at least I will.  You may remain for it

after school is dismissed."



Now if you are going to be switched, they never do it until they

are just so angry anyway, and then they always make it as hard as

they dare not to stripe you, so it isn't much difference HOW

provoked they are, it will be the same old thrashing, and it's

sure to sting for an hour at least, so you might as well be

beaten for a little more as hardly anything at all.  At that

instant from the fence not far from my window came a triumphant

crow that fairly ripped across the room.



"Oh, it was the Dorking!" I said.  "No wonder you followed clear

around the room to see him thrash a Shanghai three times his

size!  I bet a dollar it was great!"



Usually, I wouldn't have put up more than five cents, but at that

time I had over six dollars from my Easter eggs, and no girl of

my age at our school ever had half that much.  Miss Amelia

started toward me, and I braced my feet so she'd get a good jolt

herself, when she went to shake me; she never struck us over the

head since Laddie talked to her that first day; but John Hood's

foot was in the aisle.  I thought maybe I'd have him for my beau

when we grew up, because I bet he knew she was coming, and stuck

out his foot on purpose; anyway, she pitched, and had to catch a

desk to keep off the floor, and that made her so mad at him, that

she forgot me, while he got his scolding; so when my turn came at

last, she had cooled down enough that she only marched past to

her desk, saying I was to remain after school.  I had to be

careful after that to be mighty good to May and Leon.



When school was out they sat on the steps before the door and

waited.  Miss Amelia fussed around and there they sat.  Then her

face grew more gobblerish than usual, and she went out and told

them to go home.  Plain as anything I heard May say It:  "She's

been awful sick, you know, and mother wouldn't allow it."  And

then Leon piped up:  "You DID watch the roosters, all the time

they fought, and of course all of us wanted to see just as badly

as you did."



She told them if they didn't go right home she'd bring them back

and whip them too; so they had to start, and leave me to my sad

fate.  I was afraid they had made it sadder, instead of helping

me; she was so provoked when she came in she was crying, and over

nothing but the plain truth too; if we had storied on her, she'd

have had some cause to beller.  She arranged her table, cleaned

the board, emptied the water bucket, and closed the windows. 

Then she told me I was a rude, untrained child.  I was rude, I

suppose, but goodness knows, I wasn't untrained; that was hard on

father and mother; I had a big notion to tell them; and then, she

never whipped me at all.  She said if I wanted her to love me, I

mustn't be a saucy, impudent girl, and I should go straight home

and think it over.



I went, but I was so dazed at her thinking I wanted her to love

me, that I hardly heard May and Leon calling; when I did I went

to the cemetery fence and there they lay in the long grass

waiting.



"If you cried, we were coming back and pitch into her," said

Leon.



There was a pointer.  Next time, first cut she gave me, I decided

to scream bloody murder.  But that would be no Crusader way. 

There was one thing though.  No Crusader ever sat and heard a

perfectly lovely fight going on, and never even wondered which

whipped.



May and Leon stepped one on each side, took a hand, and we ran

like Indians, and slid down the hill between the bushes, climbed

the fence, crossed the pasture back of the church, and went to

the creek.  There we sat on a log, I told them, and we just

laughed.  I didn't know what I could do to pay them, for they

saved me sure as fate that time.



I wished we lived in the woods the way it was when father and

mother were married and moved to Ohio.  The nearest neighbours

were nine miles, and there wasn't a dollar for school funds, so

of course the children didn't have to go, and what their fathers

and mothers taught them was all they knew.  That would not have

helped me much though, for we never had one single teacher who

knew anything to compare with what father and mother did, and we

never had one who was forever reading books, papers, and learning

more things that help, to teach other people.  I wished father

had time to take our school.  It would have been some fun to go

to him, because I just knew he would use the woods for the room,

and teach us things it would do some good to know about.



I began debating whether it was a big enough thing to bother the

Lord with: this being penned up in the schoolhouse droning over

spelling and numbers, when you could smell tree bloom, flower

bloom, dozens of birds were nesting, and everything was beginning

to hum with life.  I couldn't think for that piece about "Spring"

going over in my head:



            "I am coming, I am coming:

                 Hark! the little bee is humming:

             See! the lark is soaring high,

                 In the bright and sunny sky;

             All the birds are on the wing:

                 Little maiden, now is spring."





I made up my mind that it was of enough importance to call for

the biggest prayer I could think of and that I would go up in the

barn to the top window, stand on a beam, and turn my face to the

east, where Jesus used to be, and I'd wrestle with the Lord for

freedom, as Jacob wrestled with the Angel on the banks of the

Jabbok in the land of Ammon.  I was just getting up steam to pray

as hard as ever I could; for days I'd been thinking of it, and I

was nearly to the point where one more killdeer crying across the

sky would have sent me headlong from the schoolhouse anywhere

that my feet were on earth, and the air didn't smell of fried

potatoes, kraut, sweat, and dogs, like it did whenever you sat

beside Clarissa Polk.  When I went to supper one night; father

had been to Groveville, and he was busy over his papers.  After

he finished the blessing, he seemed worried, at last he said the

funds were all out, and the county would make no appropriation so

school would have to close next week.



Well that beats me!  I had faith in that prayer I was going to

make, and here the very thing I intended to ask for happened

before I prayed.  I decided I would save the prayer until the

next time I couldn't stand anything another minute, and then I

would try it with all my might, and see if it really did any

good.  After supper I went out the back door, spread my arms

wide, and ran down the orchard to the fence in great bounds, the

fastest I ever went in my life.  I climbed my pulpit in the

corner and tried to see how much air my lungs would hold without

bursting, while I waved my arms and shouted at the top of my

voice:  "Praise ye the Lord!  Praised be His holy name!"



"Ker-awk!" cried an old blue heron among the cowslips below me. 

I had almost scared it to death, and it arose on flapping wings

and paid me back by frightening me so I screamed as I dodged its

shadow.



"What is all this?" asked father behind me.



"Come up and take a seat, and I'll try to tell you," I said.



So he stepped on my pulpit and sat on the top rail, while I stood

between his knees, put my arms around his neck, took off his hat

and loosened his hair so the wind could wave it, and make his

head feel cool and good.  His hair curled a little and it was

black and fine.  His cheeks were pink and his eyes the brightest

blue, with long lashes, and heavier brows than any other man I

ever have seen.  He was the best looking--always so clean and

fresh, and you never had to be afraid of him, unless you had been

a bad, sinful child.  If you were all right, you would walk into

his arms, play with his hair, kiss him all you pleased, and there

wasn't a thing on earth you couldn't tell him, excepting a secret

you had promised to keep.



So I explained all this, and more too.  About how I wanted to

hunt for the flowers, to see which bloomed first, and watch in

what order the birds came, and now it was a splendid time to

locate nests, because there were no leaves, so I could see

easily, and how glad mother would be to know where the blue goose

nested, and her white turkey hen; because she wanted her geese

all blue, and the turkeys all white, as fast as she could manage.



Every little thing that troubled me or that I wanted, I told him.



He sat there and he couldn't have listened with more interest or

been quieter if I had been a bishop, which is the biggest thing

that ever happened at our house; his name was Ninde and he came

from Chicago to dedicate our church when it was new.  So father

listened and thought and held his arms around me, and--



"And you think the Lord was at the bottom of the thing that makes

you happy?"



"Well, you always go to Him about what concerns you, and you say,

`Praise the Lord,' when things go to please you."



"I do indeed!" said father.  "But I had thought of this running

short of school funds as a calamity.  If I had been praying about

it, I would have asked Him to show me a way to raise money to

continue until middle May at least."



"Oh father!"



I just crumpled up in his arms and began to cry; to save me I

couldn't help it.  He held me tight.  At last he said:  "I think

you are a little overstrained this spring.  Maybe you were sicker

than we knew, or are growing too fast.  Don't worry any more

about school.  Possibly father can fix it."



Next morning when I wakened, my everyday clothes lay across the

foot of the bed, so I called mother and asked if I should put

them on; she took me in her arms, and said father thought I had

better be in the open, and I needn't go to school any more that

spring.  I told her I thought I could bear it a few more days,

now it was going to be over so soon; but she said I might stay at

home, father and Laddie would hear me at night, and I could take

my books anywhere I pleased and study when I chose, if I had my

spelling and reading learned at evening.  NOW, say the Lord

doesn't help those who call on Him in faith believing!



Think of being allowed to learn your lessons on the top of the

granary, where you could look out of a window above the treetops,

lie in the cool wind, and watch swallows and martins.  Think of

studying in the pulpit when the creek ran high, and the wild

birds sang so sweetly you seemed to hear them for the first time

in all your life, and hens, guineas, and turkeys made prime music

in the orchard.  You could see the buds swell, and the little

blue flags push through the grass, where Mrs. Mayer had her

flowerbed, and the cowslips greening under the water of the swale

at the foot of the hill, while there might be a Fairy under any

leaf.  I was so full, so swelled up and excited, that when I got

ready to pick up a book, I could learn a lesson in a few minutes,

tell all about it, spell every word, and read it back, front, and

sideways.  I never learned lessons so quick and so easy in all my

life; father, Laddie, and every one of them had to say so.  One

night, father said to Laddie:  "This child is furnishing evidence

that our school system is wrong, and our methods of teaching far

from right."



"Or is it merely proof that she is different," said Laddie, "and

you can't run her through the same groove you could the rest of

us?"



"A little of both," said father, "but most that the system is

wrong.  We are not going at children in a way to gain and hold

their interest, and make them love their work.  There must be a

better way of teaching, and we should find different teachers. 

You'll have to try the school next year yourself, Laddie."



"I have a little plan about a piece of land I am hoping to take

before then," answered Laddie.  "It's time for me to try my wings

at making a living, and land is my choice.  I have fully decided.

I stick to the soil!"



"Amen!" cried father.  "You please me mightily.  I hate to see

sons of mine thriving on law, literally making their living out

of the fruit of other men's discord.  I dislike seeing them

sharpen their wits in trade, buying at the lowest limit,

extorting the highest.  I don't want their horizons limited by

city blocks, their feet on pavements, everything under the sun in

their heads that concerns a scheme to make money; not room for an

hour's thought or study in a whole day, about the really vital

things of life.  After all, land and its products are the basis

of everything; the city couldn't exist a day unless we feed and

clothe it.  In the things that I consider important, you are a

king among men, with your feet on soil you own."



"So I figure it," said Laddie.



"And you are the best educated man I have reared," said father. 

"Take this other thought with you: on land, the failure of the

bank does not break you.  The fire another man's carelessness

starts, does not wipe out your business or home.  You are not in

easy reach of contagion.  Any time you want to branch out, your

mother and I will stand back of you."



"Thank you!" said Laddie.  "You backed none of the others.  They

would resent it.  I'll make the best start I can myself, and as

they did, stand alone."



Father looked at him and smiled slowly.



"You are right, as always," he said.  "I hadn't thought so far. 

It would make trouble.  At any rate, let me inspect and help you

select your land."



"That of course!" said Laddie.



I suspect it's not a very nice thing for me to tell, but all of

us were tickled silly the day Miss Amelia packed her trunk and

left for sure.  Mother said she never tried harder in all her

days, but Miss Amelia was the most distinctly unlovable person

she ever had met.  She sympathized with us so, she never said a

word when Leon sang:





        "Believe me, if all those endearing young charms,

             Which I gaze on so fondly to-day,

         Were to change by to-morrow, and fleet in my arms,

             Like fairy-gifts fading away,

         Thou wouldst still be adored, as this moment thou art,

             Let thy loveliness fade as it will,

         And around the dear ruin each wish of my heart

             Would entwine itself verdantly still--"



while Miss Amelia drove from sight up the Groveville road.



As he sang Leon stretched out his arms after her vanishing form. 

"I hope," he said, "that you caught that touching reference to

`the dear ruin,' and could anything be expressed more beautifully

and poetically than that `verdantly still?'"



I feel sorry for a snake.  I like hoptoads, owls, and shitepokes.

I envy a buzzard the way it can fly, and polecats are beautiful;

but I never could get up any sort of feeling at all for Miss

Amelia, whether she was birdlike or her true self.  So no one was

any gladder than I when she was gone.



After that, spring came pushing until you felt shoved.  Our

family needed me then.  If they never had known it before, they

found out there was none too many of us.  Every day I had to

watch the blue goose, and bring in her egg before it was chilled,

carrying it carefully so it would not be jarred.  I had to hunt

the turkey nests and gather their eggs so they would be right for

setting.  There had to be straw carried from the stack for new

nests, eggs marked, and hens set by the dozen.  Garden time came,

so leaves had to be raked from the beds and from the dooryard. 

No one was busier than I; but every little while I ran away, and

spent some time all by myself in the pulpit, under the hawk oak,

or on the roof.



Coming from church that Sunday, when we reached the top of the

Big Hill, mother touched father's arm.  "Stop a minute," she

said, and he checked the horses, while we sat there and wondered

why, as she looked and looked all over the farm, then, "Now drive

to the top of the Little Hill and turn, and stop exactly on the

place from which we first viewed this land together," she said. 

"You know the spot, don't you?"



"You may well believe I know it," said father.  "I can hit it to

the inch.  You see, children," he went on, "your mother and I

arranged before the words were said over us"--he always put it

that way--I never in my life heard him say, "when we were

married"; he read so many books he talked exactly like a book--

"that we would be partners in everything, as long as we lived. 

When we decided the Ohio land was not quite what we wanted, she

sent me farther west to prospect, while she stayed at home and

kept the baby.  When I reached this land, found it for sale, and

within my means, I bought it, and started home happy.  Before I'd

gone a mile, I turned to look back, and saw that it was hilly,

mostly woods, and there was no computing the amount of work it

would require to make it what I could see in it; so I began to

think maybe she wouldn't like it, and to wish I had brought her,

before I closed the deal.  By the time I returned home, packed

up, and travelled this far on the way back with her, there was

considerable tension in my feelings--considerable tension,"

repeated father as he turned the horses and began driving

carefully, measuring the distance from Hoods' and the bridge.  At

last he stopped, backed a step, and said:  "There, mommy, did I

hit the spot?"



"You did!" said mother, stepping from the carriage and walking up

beside him.  She raised one hand and laid it on the lamp near

him.  He shifted the lines, picked up her hand, and held it

tight.  Mother stood there looking, just silently looking.  May

jabbed me in the side, leaned over and whispered:



            "Could we but stand where Moses stood,

                 And view the landscape o'er,

             Not our Little Creek, nor dinner getting cold,

                 Could fright us from that shore."





I couldn't help giggling, but I knew that was no proper time, so

I hid my head in her lap and smothered the sound the best I

could; but they were so busy soft-soddering each other they

didn't pay a bit of attention to us.



It was May now, all the leaves were fresh and dustless,

everything that flowered at that time was weighted with bloom,

bees hummed past, butterflies sailed through the carriage, while

birds at the tops of their voices, all of them, every kind there

was, sang fit to split; friendly, unafraid bluebirds darted

around us, and talked a blue streak from every fence rider.  Made

you almost crazy to know what they said.  The Little Creek flowed

at our feet across the road, through the blue-flag swamp, where

the red and the yellow birds lived.  You could see the sun flash

on the water where it emptied into the stream that crossed

Deams', and flowed through our pasture; and away beyond the Big

Hill arose, with the new church on top, the graveyard around it,

the Big Creek flashing at its base.  In the valley between lay

our fields, meadows, the big red barn, the white house with the

yard filled with trees and flowering shrubs, beyond it the

garden, all made up, neat and growing; and back of it the orchard

in full bloom.



Mother looked and looked.  Suddenly she raised her face to

father.  "Paul," she said, "that first day, did you ever dream it

could be made to look like this?"



"No!" said father.  "I never did!  I saw houses, barns, and

cleared fields; I hoped for comfort and prosperity, but I didn't

know any place could grow to be so beautiful, and there is

something about it, even on a rainy November day, there is

something that catches me in the breast, on the top of either of

these hills, until it almost stifles me.  What is it, Ruth?"



"The Home Feeling!" said mother.  "It is in my heart so big this

morning I am filled with worship.  Just filled with the spirit of

worship."



She was rocking on her toes like she does when she becomes too

happy at the Meeting House to be quiet any longer, and cries,

"Glory!" right out loud.  She pointed to the orchard, an immense

orchard of big apple trees in full bloom, with two rows of peach

trees around the sides.  It looked like a great, soft, pinkish

white blanket, with a deep pink border, spread lightly on the

green earth.



"We planted that way because we thought it was best; how could we

know how it would look in bloom time?  It seems as if you came to

these hilltops and figured on the picture you would make before

you cleared, or fenced a field."



"That's exactly what I did," said father.  "Many's the hour, all

told, that I have stopped my horse on one of these hilltops and

studied how to make the place beautiful, as well as productive. 

That was a task you set me, my girl.  You always considered

BEAUTY as well as USE about the house and garden, and wherever

you worked.  I had to hold my part in line."



"You have made it all a garden," said mother.  "You have made it

a garden growing under the smile of the Master; a very garden of

the Lord, father."



Father drew up her hand and held it tight against his heart.



"Your praise is sweet, my girl, sweet!" he said.  "I have tried,

God knows I have tried, to make it first comfortable, then

beautiful, for all of us.  To the depths of my soul I thank Him

for this hour.  I am glad, Oh I am so glad you like your home,

Ruth!  I couldn't endure it if you complained, found fault and

wished you lived elsewhere."



"Why, father!" said my mother in the most surprised voice.  "Why,

father, it would kill me to leave here.  This is ours.  We have

made it by and through the strength of the Lord and our love for

each other.  All my days I want to live here, and when I die, I

want to lie beside my blessed babies and you, Paul, down by the

church we gave the land for, and worked so hard to build.  I love

it, Oh I love it!  See how clean and white the dark evergreens

make the house look!  See how the big chestnuts fit in and point

out the yellow road.  I wish we had a row the length of it!"



"They wouldn't grow," said father.  "You mind the time I had

finding the place those wanted to set their feet?"



"I do indeed!" said mother, drawing her hand and his with it

where she could rub her cheek against it.  "Now we'll go home and

have our dinner and a good rest.  I'm a happy woman this day,

father, a happy, happy woman.  If only one thing didn't worry

me----"



"Must there always be a `fly in the ointment,' mother?"



She looked at him with a smile that was like a hug and kiss, and

she said:  "I have found it so, father, and I have been happy in

spite of it.  Where one has such wide interests, at some point

there is always a pull, but in His own day, in His own way, the

Lord is going to make everything right."



"`Thy faith hath made thee whole,'" quoted father.



Then she stepped into the carriage, and he waited a second, quite

long enough to let her see that he was perfectly willing to sit

there all day if she wanted him to, and then he slowly and

carefully drove home, as he always did when she was in the

carriage.  Times when he had us children out alone, he went until

you couldn't see the spokes in the wheels.  He just loved to

"speed up" once in a while on a piece of fine road to let us know

how going fast felt.



Mother sat there trembling a little, smiling, misty-eyed.  I was

thinking, for I knew what the "fly in the ointment" was.  She had

a letter from Shelley yesterday, and she said there wasn't a

reason on earth why father or Laddie should spend money to come

to Chicago, she would soon be home, she was counting the hours,

and she never wanted to leave again.  In the start she didn't

want to go at all, unless she could stay three years, at the very

least.  Of course it was that dreadful man, who had made her so

beautiful and happy, and then taken away all the joy; how COULD a

man do it?  It was the hardest thing to understand.



Next morning mother was feeling fine, the world was lovely, Miss

Amelia was gone, May was home to help, so she began housecleaning

by washing all the curtains.  She had been in the kitchen to show

Candace how.  I had all my work done, and was making friends with

a robin brooding in my very own catalpa tree, when Mr. Pryor rode

up, tied his horse, and started toward the gate.  I knew he and

father had quarrelled; that is, father had told him he couldn't

say "God was a myth" in this house, and he'd gone home mad as

hops; so I knew it would be something mighty important that was

bringing him back.  I slid from the tree, ran and opened the

gate, and led the way up the walk.  I opened the front door and

asked him in, and then I did the wrong thing.  I should have

taken his hat, told him to be seated, and said I would see if I

could find father; I knew what to do, and how to do it, but

because of that about God, I was so excited I made a mistake.  I

never took his hat, or offered him a chair; I just bolted into

the dining-room, looking for father or mother, and left the door

wide open, so he thought that wasn't the place to sit, because I

didn't give him a chair, and he followed me.  The instant I saw

mother's face, I knew what I had done.  The dining-room was no

place for particular company like him, and bringing him in that

way didn't give her time to smooth her hair, pull shut her dress

band at the neck, put on her collar, and shiny goldstone pin, her

white apron, and rub her little flannel rag, with rice flour on

it, on her nose to take away the shine.  I had made a mess of it.



There she came right in the door, just as she was from the tub. 

Her hair was damp and crinkled around her face, her neckband had

been close in stooping, so she had unfastened it, and tucked it

back in a little V-shaped place to give her room and air.  Her

cheeks were pink, her eyes bright, her lips red as a girl's, and

her neck was soft and white.  The V-shaped place showed a little

spot like baby skin, right where her neck went into her chest. 

Sure as father kissed her lips, he always tipped back her head,

bent lower and kissed that spot too.  I had seen hundreds of them

go there, and I had tried it myself, lots of times, and it WAS

the sweetest place.  Seeing what I had done, I stopped

breathless.  You have to beat most everything you teach a child

right into it properly to keep it from making such a botch of

things as that.  I hardly dared to peep at mother, but when I

did, she took my breath worse than the mistake I had made.



Caught, she stood her ground.  She never paused a second. 

Straight to him she went, holding out her hand, and I could see

that it was red and warm from pressing the lace in the hot suds. 

A something flashed over her, that made her more beautiful than

she was in her silk dress going to town to help Lucy give a

party, and her voice was sweet as the bubbling warbler on the

garden fence when he was trying to coax a mate into the privet

bush to nest.



Mother asked him to be seated, so he took one of the chairs

nearest him, and sat holding his hat in one hand, his whip in the

other.  Mother drew a chair beside the dining table, dropped her

hands on each other, and looking in his eyes, she smiled at him. 

I tell the same thing over about people's looks, but I haven't

told of this smile of mother's; because I never saw exactly how

it was, or what it would do to people, until that morning.  Then

as I watched her--for how she felt decided what would happen to

me, after Mr. Pryor was gone I saw something I never had noticed

until that minute.  She could laugh all over her face, before her

lips parted until her teeth showed.  She was doing it now.  With

a wide smile running from cheek to cheek, pushing up a big dimple

at each end, her lips barely touching, her eyes dancing, she sat

looking at him.



"This IS the most blessed season for warming up the heart," she

said.  "If you want the half of my kingdom, ask quickly.  I'm in

the mood to bestow it."



How she laughed!  He just had to loosen up a little, and smile

back, even though it looked pretty stiff.



"Well, I'll not tax you so far," he said.  "I only want Mr.

Stanton."



"But he is the whole of the kingdom, and the King to boot!" she

laughed, dimpled, and flamed redder.



Mr. Pryor stared at her wonderingly.  You could even see the

wonder, like it was something you could take hold of.  I suppose

he wondered what could make a woman so happy, like that.



"Lucky man!" he said.  "All of us are not so fortunate."



"Then it must be you don't covet the place or the title," said

mother more soberly.  "Any woman will crown the man she marries,

if he will allow her.  Paul went farther.  He compelled it."



"I wonder how!" said Mr. Pryor, his eyes steadily watching

mother's face.



"By never failing in a million little things, that taken as a

whole, make up one mighty big thing, on which he stands like the

Rock of Ages."



"Yet they tell me that you are the mother of twelve children," he

said, as if he marvelled at something.



"Yes!" cried mother, and the word broke right through a bubbling

laugh.  "Am I not fortunate above most women?  We had the grief

to lose two little daughters at the ages of eight and nine, all

the others I have, and I rejoice in them."



She reached out, laid a hand on me, drew me to her, and lightly

touched my arm, sending my spirits sky-high.  She wasn't going to

do a thing to me, not even scold!  Mr. Pryor stared at her like

Jacob Hood does at Laddie when he begins rolling Greek before

him, so I guess what mother said must have been Greek to Mr.

Pryor.



"I came to see Mr. Stanton," he said suddenly, and crosslike as

if he didn't believe a word she said, and had decided she was too

foolish to bother with any longer; but he kept on staring.  He

couldn't quit that, no matter how cross he was.  The funniest

thing came into my mind.  I wondered what on earth he'd have done

if she'd gone over, sat on his lap, put her arms around his neck,

took his face between her hands and kissed his forehead, eyes,

lips, and tousled his hair, like she does father and our boys. 

I'll bet all I got, he'd have turned to stonier stone than

Sabethany.  You could see that no one ever served HIM like that

in all his old, cold, hard, cross, mysterious, shut-in life.  I

was crazy to ask, "Say, did anybody ever kiss you?" but I had

such a close escape bringing him in wrong, I thought it would be

wise not to take any risks so soon after.  It was enough to stand

beside mother, and hear every word they said.  What was more, she

wanted me, because she kept her hand on mine, or touched my apron

every little while.



"I'm so sorry!" she said.  "He was called to town on business. 

The County Commissioners are sitting to-day."



"They are deciding about the Groveville bridge, and pike?"



"Yes.  He is working so hard for them."



"The devil you say!  I beg pardon!  But it was about that I came.



I'm three miles from there, and I'm taxed over sixty pounds for

it."



"But you cross the bridge every time you go to town, and travel

the road.  Groveville is quite a resort on account of the water

and lovely country.  Paul is very anxious to have the work

completed before the summer boarders come from surrounding

cities.  We are even farther from it than you; but it will cost

us as much."



"Are you insane?" cried Mr. Pryor, not at all politely; but you

could see that mother was bound she wouldn't become provoked

about anything, for she never stopped a steady beam on him. 

"Spend all that money for strangers to lazy around on a few weeks

and then go!"



"But a good bridge and fine road will add to their pleasure, and

when they leave, the improvements remain.  They will benefit us

and our children through all the years to come."



"Talk about `the land of the free'!" cried Mr. Pryor.  "This is a

tax-ridden nation.  It's a beastly outrage!  Ever since I came,

it's been nothing but notice of one assessment after another.  I

won't pay it!  I won't endure it.  I'll move!"



Mother let go of me, gripped her hands pretty tight together on

the table, and she began to talk.



"As for freedom--no man ever was, or is, or will be free," she

said, quite as forcibly as he could speak.  "You probably knew

when you came here that you would find a land tax-ridden from a

great civil war of years' duration, and from newness of vast

territory to be opened up and improved.  You certainly studied

the situation."



"`Studied the situation'!"  His whip beat across his knee. 

"`Studied the situation'!  My leaving England was--er--the result

of intolerable conditions there--in the nature of flight from

things not to be endured.  I had only a vague idea of the

States."



"If England is intolerable, and the United States an outrage, I

don't know where in this world you'll go," said mother softly.



Mr. Pryor stared at her sharply.



"Madame is pleased to be facetious," he said sneeringly.



Mother's hands parted, and one of them stretched across the table

toward him.



"Forgive me!" she cried.  "That was unkind.  I know you are in

dreadful trouble.  I'd give--I'd almost give this right hand to

comfort you.  I'd do nearly anything to make you feel that you

need bear no burden alone; that we'd love to help support you."



"I believe you would," he said slowly, his eyes watching her

again.  "I believe you would.  I wonder why!"



"All men are brothers, in the broader sense," said mother, "and

if you'll forgive me, your face bears marks of suffering almost

amounting to torture."



She stretched out the other hand.



"You couldn't possibly let us help you?"



Slowly he shook his head.



"Think again!" urged mother.  "A trouble shared is half over to

start with.  You lay a part of it on your neighbours, and your

neighbours in this case would be glad, glad indeed, to see you

care-free and happy as all men should be."



"We'll not discuss it," he said.  "You can't possibly imagine the

root of my trouble."



"I shan't try!" said mother.  "But let me tell you this:  I don't

care if you have betrayed your country, blasphemed your God, or

killed your own child!  So long, as you're a living man, daily a

picture of suffering before me, you're a burden on my heart. 

You're a load on my shoulders, without your consent.  I have

implored God, I shall never cease to implore Him, until your brow

clears, your head is lifted, and your heart is at rest.  You

can't prevent me!  This hour I shall go to my closet and beg Him

to have mercy on your poor soul, and when His time comes, He

will.  You can't help yourself, or you would have done so, long

ago.  You must accept aid!  This must end, or there will be

tragedy in your house."



"Madame, there has been!" said Mr. Pryor, shaking as he sat.



"I recognize that," said mother.  "The question is whether what

has passed is not enough."



"You simply cannot understand!" he said.



"Mr. Pryor," she said, "you're in the position of a man doubly

bereft.  You are without a country, and without a God.  Your face

tells every passer-by how you are enjoying that kind of life. 

Forgive me, if I speak plainly.  I admire some things about you

so much, I am venturing positive unkindness to try to make you

see that in shutting out your neighbours you will surely make

them think more, and worse things, than are true.  I haven't a

doubt in my mind but that your trouble is not one half so

dreadful as you imagine while brooding over it.  We will pass

that.  Let me tell you how we feel about this road matter.  You

see we did our courting in Pennsylvania, married and tried Ohio,

and then came on here.  We took this land when it was mostly

woods.  I could point you to the exact spot where we stopped; we

visited it yesterday, looked down the hill and selected the place

where we would set this house, when we could afford to build it. 

We moved into the cabin that was on the land first, later built a

larger one, and finally this home as we had planned it.  Every

fruit tree, bush, vine, and flower we planted.  Here our children

have been born, lived, loved, and left us; some for the graveyard

down yonder, some for homes of their own.  Always we have planned

and striven to transform this into the dearest, the most

beautiful spot on earth.  In making our home the best we can, in

improving our township, county, and state, we are doing our share

toward upbuilding this nation."



She began at the a b c's, and gave it to him straight: the whole

thing, just as we saw it; and he listened, as if he were a

prisoner, and she a judge telling him what he must do to gain his

freedom.  She put in the birds to keep away the worms, the trees

to break the wind, the creeks to save the moisture.  She whanged

him, and she banged him, up one side, and down the other.  She

didn't stop to be mincy.  She shot things at him like a man

talking to another man who had plenty of sense but not a particle

of reason.  She gave him the reason.  She told him exactly why,

and how, and where, and also just WHAT he must do to feel RIGHT

toward his neighbours, his family, and his God.  No preacher ever

talked half so well.  Yea verily, she was as interesting as the

Bishop himself, and far pleasanter to look at.  When she ran

short of breath, and out of words, she reached both hands toward

him again.



"OH DO PLEASE THINK OF THESE THINGS!" she begged.  "Do try to

believe that I am a sensible person, and know what I am talking

about."



"Madame," said Mr. Pryor, "there's no doubt in my mind but you

are the most wonderful woman I ever have met.  Surely I believe

you!  Surely I know your plan of life is the true, the only right

way.  It is one degree added to my humiliation that the ban I am

under keeps me from friendly intercourse with so great a lady."



"`Lady'?" said my mother, her eyes widening.  "`Lady'?  Now it is

you who are amused."



"I don't understand!" he said.  "Certainly you are a lady, a very

great lady."



"Goodness, gracious me!" cried my mother, laughing until her

dimples would have held water.  "That's the first time in all my

life I was ever accused of such a thing."



"Again, I do not comprehend," said Mr. Pryor, as if vexed about

all he would endure.



Mother laughed on, and as she did so she drew back her hands and

studied them.  Then she looked at him again, one pink dimple

flashing here and there, all over her face.



"Well, to begin at the root of the matter," she said, "that is an

enormous big word that you are using lightly.  Any one in

petticoats is not a lady--by no means!  A lady must be born of

unsullied blood for at least three generations, on each side of

her house.  Think for a minute about where you are going to

fulfil that condition.  Then she must be gentle by nature, and

rearing.  She must know all there is to learn from books, have

wide experience to cover all emergencies, she must be steeped in

social graces, and diplomatic by nature.  She must rise unruffled

to any emergency, never wound, never offend, always help and

heal, she must be perfect in deportment, virtue, wifehood and

motherhood.  She must be graceful, pleasing and beautiful.  She

must have much leisure to perfect herself in learning, graces and

arts----"



"Madame, you draw an impossible picture!" cried Mr. Pryor.



"I draw the picture of the only woman on earth truly entitled to

be called a lady.  You use a good word lightly.  I have told you

what it takes to make a lady--now look at me!"



How she laughed! Mr. Pryor looked, but he didn't laugh.



"More than ever you convince me that you are a lady, indeed," he

said.



Mother wiped her eyes.



"My dear man!" she cried, "I'm the daughter of a Dutch miller,

who lived on a Pennsylvania mountain stream.  There never was a

school anywhere near us, and father and mother only taught us to

work.  Paul Stanton took a grist there, and saw me.  He married

me, and brought me here.  He taught me to read and write.  I

learned my lessons with my elder children.  He has always kept

school in our house, every night of his life.  Our children

supposed it was for them; I knew it was quite as much for me. 

While I sat at knitting or sewing, I spelled over the words he

gave out.  I know nothing of my ancestors, save that they came

from the lowlands of Holland, down where there were cities,

schools, and business.  They were well educated, but they would

not take the trouble to teach their children.  As I have spoken

to you, my husband taught me.  All I know I learn from him, from

what he reads aloud, and places he takes me.  I exist in a

twenty-mile radius, but through him, I know all lands,

principalities and kingdoms, peoples and customs.  I need never

be ashamed to go, or afraid to speak, anywhere."



"Indeed not!" cried Mr. Pryor.



"But when you think on the essentials of a real lady--and then

picture me patching, with a First Reader propped before me;

facing Indians, Gypsies, wild animals--and they used to be bad

enough--why, I mind one time in Ohio when our first baby was only

able to stand beside a chair, and through the rough puncheon

floor a copperhead stuck up its gleam of bronzy gold, and shot

its darting tongue within a foot of her bare leg.  By all

accounts, a lady would have reached for her smelling salts and

gracefully fainted away; in fact, a lady never would have been in

such a place at all.  It was my job to throw the first thing I

could lay my hands on so straight and true that I would break

that snake's neck, and send its deadly fangs away from my baby. 

I did it with Paul's plane, and neatly too!  Then I had to put

the baby on the bed and tear up every piece of the floor to see

that the snake had not a mate in hiding there, for copperheads at

that season were going pairs.  Once I was driven to face a big

squaw, and threatened the life of her baby with a red-hot poker

while she menaced mine with a hunting knife.  There is not one

cold, rough, hard experience of pioneer life that I have not

endured.  Shoulder to shoulder, and heart to heart, I've stood

beside my man, and done what had to be done, to build this home,

rear our children, save our property.  Many's the night I have

shivered in a barn doctoring sick cattle and horses we could ill

afford to lose.  Time and again I have hung on and brought things

out alive, after the men gave up and quit.  A lady?  How funny!"



"The amusement is all on your part, Madame."



"So it seems!" said mother.  "But you see, I know so well how

ridiculous it is.  When I think of the life a woman must lead in

order to be truly a lady, when I review the life I have been

forced to live to do my share in making this home, and rearing

these children, the contrast is too great.  I thank God for any

part I have been able to take.  Had I life to live over, I see

now where I could do more; but neighbour, believe me, my highest

aspiration is to be a clean, thrifty housekeeper, a bountiful

cook, a faithful wife, a sympathetic mother.  That is life work

for any woman, and to be a good woman is the greatest thing on

earth.  Never mind about the ladies; if you can honestly say of

me, she is a good woman, you have paid me the highest possible

tribute."



"I have nothing to change, in the face of your argument," said

Mr. Pryor.  "Our loved Queen on her throne is no finer lady."



That time mother didn't laugh.  She looked straight at him a

minute and then she said:  "Well, for an Englishman, as I know

them, you have said the last word.  Higher praise there is none. 

But believe me, I make no such claim.  To be a good wife and

mother is the end toward which I aspire.  To hold the respect and

love of my husband is the greatest object of my life."



"Then you have succeeded.  You stand a monument to wifehood; your

children prove your idea of motherhood," said Mr. Pryor.  "How in

this world have you managed it?  The members of your family whom

I have seen are fine, interesting men and women, educated above

the average.  It is not idle curiosity.  I am deeply interested

in knowing how such an end came to be accomplished here on this

farm.  I wish you would tell me just how you have gone about

schooling your children."



"By educating ourselves before their coming, and with them

afterward.  Self-control, study, work, joy of life, satisfaction

with what we have had, never-ending strife to go higher, and to

do better--Dr. Fenner laughs when I talk of these things.  He

says he can take a little naked Hottentot from the jungle, and

educate it to the same degree that I can one of mine.  I don't

know; but if these things do not help before birth, at least they

do not hinder; and afterward, you are in the groove in which you

want your children to run.  With all our twelve there never has

been one who at nine months of age did not stop crying if its

father lifted his finger, or tapped his foot and told it to. 

From the start we have rigorously guarded our speech and actions

before them.  From the first tiny baby my husband has taught all

of them to read, write and cipher some, before they went to

school at all.  He is always watching, observing, studying: the

earth, the stars, growing things; he never comes to a meal but he

has seen something that he has or will study out for all of us. 

There never has been one day in our home on which he did not read

a new interesting article from book or paper; work out a big

problem, or discuss some phase of politics, religion, or war. 

Sometimes there has been a little of all of it in one day, always

reading, spelling, and memory exercises at night.  He has a

sister who twice in her life has repeated the Bible as a test

before a committee.  He, himself, can go through the New

Testament and all of the Old save the books of the generations. 

He always says he considers it a waste of gray matter to learn

them.  He has been a schoolmaster, his home his schoolroom, his

children, wife and helpers his pupils; the common things of life

as he meets them every day, the books from which we learn.



"I was ignorant at first of bookish subjects, but in his

atmosphere, if one were no student, and didn't even try to keep

up, or forge ahead, they would absorb much through association. 

Almost always he has been on the school board and selected the

teachers; we have made a point of keeping them here, at great

inconvenience to ourselves, in order to know as much of them as

possible, and to help and guide them in their work.  When the

children could learn no more here, for most of them we have

managed the high school of Groveville, especially after our

daughter moved there, and for each of them we have added at least

two years of college, music school, or whatever the peculiar bent

of the child seemed to demand.



"Before any daughter has left our home for one of her own, she

has been taught all I know of cleanliness about a house, cookery,

sewing, tending the sick, bathing and dressing the new born.  She

has to bake bread, pie, cake, and cook any meat or vegetable we

have.  She has had her bolt of muslin to make as she chose for

her bedding, and linen for her underclothing.  The quilts she

pieced and the blankets she wove have been hers.  All of them

have been as well provided for as we could afford.  They can

knit, darn, patch, tuck, hem, and embroider, set a hen and plant

a garden.  I go on a vacation and leave each of them to keep

house for her father a month, before she enters a home of her

own.  They are strong, healthy girls; I hope all of them are

making a good showing at being useful women, and I know they are

happy, so far at least."



"Wonderful!" said Mr. Pryor.



"Father takes the boys in hand and they must graduate in a

straight furrow, an even fence, planting and tending crops,

trimming and grafting trees, caring for stock, and handling

plane, auger and chisel.  Each one must select his wood, cure,

fashion, and fit his own ax with a handle, grind and swing it

properly, as well as cradle, scythe and sickle.  They must be

able to select good seed grain, boil sap, and cure meat.  They

must know animals, their diseases and treatment, and when they

have mastered all he can teach them, and done each thing

properly, they may go for their term at college, and make their

choice of a profession.  As yet I'm sorry to say but one of them

has come back to the land."



"You mean Laddie?"



"Yes."



"He has decided to be a farmer?"



"He is determined to make the soil yield his living."



"I am sorry--sorry indeed to hear it," said Mr. Pryor.  "He has

brain and education to make a brilliant figure at law or

statesmanship; he would do well in trade."



"What makes you think he would not do well on land?"



"Wasted!" cried Mr. Pryor.  "He would be wasted!"



"Hold a bit!" said mother, her face flushing as it did when she

was very provoked.  "My husband is, and always has been, on land.

He is far from being wasted.  He is a power in this community. 

He has sons in cities in law and in trade.  Not one of them has

the friends, and the influence on his time, that his father has. 

Any day he says the word, he can stand in legislative halls, and

take any part he chooses in politics.  He prefers his home and

family, and the work he does here, but let me tell you, no son of

his ever had his influence or opportunity, or ever will have."



"All this is news to me," said Mr. Pryor.



"You didn't expect us to come over, force our way in and tell

you?"



It was his turn to blush and he did.



"Laddie has been at our house often," he said.  "He might have

mentioned----"



Mother laughed.  She was the gayest that morning.



"He `might,' but he never would.  Neither would I if you hadn't

seemed to think that the men who do the things Mr. Stanton

REFUSES to do are the ones worth while."



"He could accomplish much in legislative halls."



"He figures in the large.  He thinks that to be a commissioner,

travel his county and make all of it the best possible, to stand

in primaries and choose only worthy men for all offices, is doing

a much bigger work than to take one place for himself, and strive

only for that.  Besides, he really loves his land, his house, and

family.  He says no man has a right to bring twelve children into

the world and not see personally to rearing and educating them. 

He thinks the farm and the children too much for me, and he's

sure he is doing the biggest thing for the community at large, to

go on as he does."



"Perhaps so," said Mr. Pryor slowly.  "He should know best. 

Perhaps he is."



"I make no doubt!" said mother, lifting her head proudly.  "And

as Laddie feels and has fitted himself, I look to see him go head

and shoulders above any other son I have.  Trade is not the only

way to accumulate.  Law is not the only path to the legislature. 

Comfort, independence, and freedom, such as we know here, is not

found in any city I ever have visited.  We think we have the best

of life, and we are content on land.  We have not accumulated

much money; we have spent thousands; we have had a big family for

which to provide, and on account of the newness of the country,

taxes always have been heavy.  But we make no complaint.  We are

satisfied.  We could have branched off into fifty different

things after we had a fair start here.  We didn't, because we

preferred life as we worked it out for ourselves.  Paul says when

he leaves the city, and his horses' hoofs strike the road between

our fields, he always lifts his head higher, squares his

shoulders, and feels a man among men.  To own land, and to love

it, is a wonderful thing, Mr. Pryor."



She made me think of something.  Ever since I had added to my

quill and arrow money, the great big lot at Easter, father had

shared his chest till with me.  The chest stood in our room, and

in it lay his wedding suit, his every Sunday clothes, his best

hat with a red silk handkerchief in the crown, a bundle of

precious newspapers he was saving on account of rare things in

them he wanted for reference, and in the till was the wallet of

ready money he kept in the house for unexpected expense, his

deeds, insurance papers, all his particular private papers, the

bunches of lead pencils, slate pencils, and the box of pens from

which he supplied us for school.  Since I had grown so rich, he

had gone partners with me, and I might lift the lid, open the

till and take out my little purse that May bought from the

huckster for my last birthday.  I wasn't to touch a thing, save

my own, and I never did; but I knew precious well what was there.



If Mr. Pryor thought my father didn't amount to much because he

lived on land; if it made him think more of him, to know that he

could be in the legislature if he chose, maybe he'd think still

more----



I lifted the papers, picked it up carefully, and slipping back

quietly, I laid it on Mr. Pryor's knee.  He picked it up and held

it a minute, until he finished what he was saying to mother, and

then he looked at it.  Then he looked long and hard.  Then he

straightened up and looked again.



"God bless my soul!" he cried.



You see when he was so astonished he didn't know what he was

saying, he called on God, just as father says every one does.  I

took a side look at mother.  Her face was a little extra flushed,

but she was still smiling; so I knew she wasn't angry with me,

though of course she wouldn't have shown the thing herself.  She

and father never did, except as each of us grew big enough to be

taught about the Crusaders.  Father said he didn't care the snap

of his finger about it, except as it stood for hardihood and

bravery.  But Mr. Pryor cared!  He cared more than he could say. 

He stared, and stared, and over and over he wonderingly repeated:



"God bless my soul!"



"Where did you get the crest of the Earl of Eastbrooke, the

master of Stanton house?" he demanded.  "Stanton house!" he

repeated.  "Why--why, the name!  It's scarcely possible, but----"



"But there it is!" laughed mother.  "A mere bauble for show and

amounting to nothing on earth save as it stands a mark for brave

men who have striven to conquer."



"Surgere tento!" read Mr. Pryor, from the little shield.  "Four

shells!  Madame, I know men who would give their lives to own

this, and to have been born with the right to wear it.  It came

to your husband in straight line?"



"Yes," said mother, "but generations back.  He never wore it.  He

never would.  He only saves it for the children."



"It goes to your eldest son?"



"By rights, I suppose it should," said mother.  "But father

mentioned it the other night.  He said none of his boys had gone

as he tried to influence them, unless Laddie does now in choosing

land for his future, and if he does, his father is inclined to

leave it to him, and I agree.  At our death it goes to Laddie I

am quite sure."



"Well, I hope--I hope," said Mr. Pryor, "that the young man has

the wit to understand what this would mean to him in England."



"His wit is just about level with his father's," said mother. 

"He never has been in England, and most probably he never will

be.  I don't think it means a rap more to Laddie than it does to

my husband.  Laddie is so busy developing the manhood born in

him, he has no time to chase the rainbow of reflected glory, and

no belief in its stability if he walked in its light.  The child

of my family to whom that trinket really means something is

Little Sister, here.  When Leon came in with the thief, I thought

he should have it; but after all, she is the staunchest little

Crusader I have."



Mr. Pryor looked me over with much interest.



"Yes, yes!  No doubt!" he said.  "But the male line!  This

priceless treasure should descend to one of the male line!  To

one whose name will remain Stanton!  To Laddie would be best, no

doubt!  No doubt at all!"



"We will think about it," said mother serenely as Mr. Pryor arose

to go.



He apologized for staying so long, and mother said it hadn't been

long, and asked him the nicest ever to come again.  She walked in

the sunlight with him and pointed out the chestnuts.  She asked

what he thought of a line of trees to shade the road, and they

discussed whether the pleasure they would give in summer would

pay for the dampness they would hold in winter.  They wandered

around the yard and into the garden.  She sent me to bring a

knife, trowel, and paper, so when he started for home, he was

carrying a load of cuttings, and roots to plant.



When father came from town that evening, at the first sight of

him, she went straight into his arms, her face beaming; she had

been like a sun all that day.  Some of it must have been joy

carried over from yesterday.



"Praise God, the wedge is in!" she cried.



Father held her tight, stroked her hair, and began smiling

without having the least idea why, but he very well knew that

whatever pleased her like that was going to be good news for him

also.



"What has happened, mother?" he asked.



"Mr. Pryor came over about the road and bridge tax, and oh Paul! 

I've said every word to him I've been bursting to say from the

very start.  Every single word, Paul!"



"How did he take it?"



"Time will tell.  Anyway, he heard it, all of it, and he went

back carrying a load of things to plant.  Only think of that! 

Once he begins planting, and watching things grow, the home

feeling is bound to come.  I tell you, Paul, the wedge is in!  Oh

I'm so happy!"

