





CHAPTER X



Laddie Takes the Plunge





            "This is the state of man: to-day he puts forth

             The tender leaves of hopes; to-morrow blossoms,

             And bears his blushing honors thick upon him;

             The third day comes a frost, a killing frost,

             And, when he thinks, good, easy man, full surely

             His greatness is a-ripening, nips his root,

             And then he falls, as I do."





Watch me take the plunge!" said Laddie.



"`Mad frenzy fires him now,'" quoted Leon.



It was Sunday after dinner.  We had been to church and Sunday-

school in the forenoon, and we had a houseful of company for

dinner.  All of them remained to spend the afternoon, because in

our home it was perfectly lovely.  We had a big dinner with

everything good to start on, and then we talked and visited and

told all the news.  The women exchanged new recipes for cooking,

advised each other about how to get more work done with less

worry, to doctor their sick folks, and to make their dresses.  At

last, when every thing was talked over, and there began to be a

quiet time, father would reach across the table, pick up a paper

and read all the interesting things that had happened in the

country during the past week; the jokes too, and they made people

think of funny stories to tell, and we just laughed.  In the

Agriculturist there were new ways to farm easier, to make land

bear more crops; so he divided that with the neighbours, also how

to make gardens, and prune trees.  Before he finished, he always

managed to work in a lot about being honest, kind, and loving

God.



He and mother felt so good over Leon, and by this time they were

beginning to see that they were mighty glad about the money too. 

It wouldn't have been so easy to work, and earn, and pay back all

that for our school, roads, and the church; and every day you

could see plainer how happy they felt that they didn't have to do

it.  Because they were so glad about these things, they invited

every one they met that day; but we knew Saturday mother felt

that probably she would ask a crowd, from the chickens, pie, and

cake she got ready.  When the reading part was over, and the

women were beginning to look at the clock, and you knew they felt

they should go home, and didn't want to, Laddie arose and said

that, and Leon piped up like he always does and made every one

laugh.  Of course they looked at Laddie, and no one knew what he

meant, so all the women and a few of the men asked him.



"Watch me, I said," laughed Laddie as he left the room.



Soon Mrs. Dover, sitting beside the front window, cried:  "Here

he is at the gate!"



He was on his horse, but he hitched it and went around the house

and up the back way.  Before long the stair door of the sitting-

room opened, and there he stood.  We stared at him.  Of course he

was bathed, and in clean clothing to start with, but he had

washed and brushed some more, until he shone.  His cheeks were as

smooth and as clear pink as any girl's, his eyes blue-gray and

big, with long lashes and heavy brows.  His hair was bright brown

and wavy, and he was so big and broad.  He never had been sick a

day in his life, and he didn't look as if he ever would be.



And clothes DO make a difference.  He would have had exactly the

same hair, face, and body, wearing a hickory shirt and denim

trousers; but he wouldn't have looked as he did in the clothes he

wore at college, when it was Sunday there, or he was invited to a

party at the President's.  I don't see how any man could possibly

be handsomer or look finer.  His shirt, collar, and cuffs were

snow-white, like everything had to be before mother got through

with it; his big loose tie almost reached his shoulders; and our

men could do a thing no other man in the neighbourhood did: they

could appear easier in the finest suit they could put on than in

their working clothes.



Mother used to say one thing she dreaded about Sunday was the

evident tortures of the poor men squirming in boots she knew

pinched them, coats too tight, and collars too high.  She said

they acted like half-broken colts fretting over restriction. 

Always she said to father and the boys when they went to buy

their new clothes:  "Now, DON'T join the harness fighters!  Get

your clothing big enough to set your bodies with comfort and

ease."



I suppose those other men would have looked like ours if their

mothers had told them.  You can always see that a man needs a

woman to help him out awful bad.



Of course Laddie knew he was handsome; he had to know all of them

were looking at him curiously, but he stood there buttoning his

glove and laughing to himself until Sarah Hood asked:  "Now what

are you up to?"



He took a step toward her, ran one hand under her lanternjawed

chin, pulled her head against his side and turned up her face.



"Sarah," he said, "'member the day we spoiled the washing?"



Every one laughed.  They had made jokes about it until our

friends knew what they meant.



"What are you going to spoil now?" asked Sarah.



"The Egyptians!  The `furriners.' I'm going right after them!"



"Well, you could be in better business," said Sarah Hood sharply.



Laddie laughed and squeezed her chin, and hugged her head against

him.



"Listen to that, now!" he cried.  "My best friend going back on

me.  Sarah, I thought you, of all people, would wish me luck."



"I do !" she said instantly.  "And that's the very reason I don't

want you mixed up with that mysterious, offish, stuck-up mess."



"Bless your dear heart!" said Laddie, giving her a harder squeeze

than ever.  "You got that all wrong, Sarah.  You'll live to see

the day, very shortly, when you'll change every word of it."



"I haven't done anything but get surer about it every day for two

years, anyway," said Sarah Hood.



"Exactly!" said Laddie, "but wait until I have taken the plunge! 

Let me tell you how the Pryor family strikes me.  I think he is a

high-tempered, domineering man, proud as Lucifer!  For some

cause, just or not, he is ruining his life and that of his family

because he so firmly believes it just; he is hiding here from his

home country, his relatives, and friends.  I think she is,

barring you and mother, the handsomest woman of her age I ever

saw----"



All of them laughed, because Sarah Hood was nearly as homely as a

woman could grow, and maybe other people didn't find our mother

so lovely as we thought her.  I once heard one of her best

friends say she was "distinctly plain."  I didn't see how she

could; but she said that.



"--and the most pitiful," Laddie went on.  "Sarah, what do you

suppose sends a frail little woman pacing the yard, and up and

down the road, sometimes in storm and rain, gripping both hands

over her heart?"



"I suppose it's some shameful thing I don't want you mixed up

with!" said Sarah Hood promptly, and people just shouted.



"Sarah," said Laddie, "I've seen her closely, watched her move,

and studied her expression.  There's not one grain of possibility

that you, or mother, or Mrs. Fall, or any woman here, could be

any closer connected with SHAME.  Shame there is," said Laddie,

"and what a word!  How it stings, burns, withers, and causes

heart trouble and hiding; but shame in connection with that

woman, more than shame thrust upon her, which might come to any

of us, at any time, shame that is her error, in the life of a

woman having a face like hers, Sarah, I am ashamed of you!  Your

only excuse is that you haven't persisted as I have until you got

to see for yourself."



"I am not much on persistence in the face of a locked door, a

cast-iron man with a big cane, and two raving bulldogs," said

Mrs. Hood.  "Wait, young man!  Just wait until he sets them on

you."



Laddie's head went back and how he laughed.



"Hist!  A word with you, Sarah!" he said.  "'Member I have a sort

of knack with animals.  I never yet have failed with one I

undertook to win.  Now those bulldogs of Pryors' are as mild as

kittens with a man who knows the right word.  Reason I know,

Sarah, I've said the word to them, separately and collectively,

and it worked.  There is a contrast, Sarah, between what I say

and do to those dogs, and the kicks and curses they get from

their owner.  I'll wager you two to one that if you can get Mr.

Pryor to go into a `sic-ing' contest with me, I can have his own

dogs at his throat, when he can't make them do more than to lick

my hands."



They laughed as if that were funny.



"Well, I didn't know about this," said Sarah.  "How long have you

lived at Pryors'?"



You couldn't have heard what Laddie said if he'd spoken; so he

waited until he could be heard, and it never worried him a speck.



He only stood and laughed too; then, "Long enough," he said, "to

know that all of us are making a big and cruel mistake in taking

them at their word, and leaving them penned up there weltering in

misery.  What we should do, is to go over there, one at a time,

or in a body, and batter at the door of their hearts, until we

break down the wall of pride they have built around them, ease

their pain, and bring them with us socially, if they are going to

live among us.  You people who talk loudly and often about loving

God, and `doing unto others,' should have gone long ago, for

Jesus' sake; I'm going for the sake of a girl, with a face as

sweet, and a heart as pure, as any accepted angel at the foot of

the throne.  Mother, I want a cup of peach jelly, and some of

that exceptionally fine cake you served at dinner, to take to our

sick neighbour."



Mother left the room.



"Father, I want permission to cut and carry a generous chestnut

branch, burred, and full fruited, to the young woman.  There is

none save ours in this part of the country, and she may never

have seen any, and be interested.  And I want that article about

foot disease in horses, for Mr. Pryor.  I'll bring it back when

he finishes."



Father folded the paper and handed it to Laddie, who slipped it

in his pocket.



"Take the finest branch you can select," father said, and I

almost fell over.



He had carried those trees from Ohio, before I had been born, and

mother said for years he wrapped them in her shawl in winter and

held an umbrella over them in summer, and father always went red

and grinned when she told it.  He was wild about trees, and

bushes, so he made up his mind he'd have chestnuts.  He planted

them one place, and if they didn't like it, he dug them up and

set them another where he thought they could have what they

needed and hadn't got the last place.  Finally, he put them, on

the fourth move, on a little sandy ridge across the road from the

wood yard, and that was the spot.  They shot up, branched,

spread, and one was a male and two were females, so the pollen

flew, the burrs filled right, and we had a bag of chestnuts to

send each child away from home, every Christmas.  The brown

leaves and burrs were so lovely, mother cut one of the finest

branches she could select and hung it above the steel engraving

of "Lincoln Freeing the Slaves," in the boys' room, and nothing

in the house was looked at oftener, or thought prettier.  That

must have been what was in the back of Laddie's head when he

wanted a branch for the Princess.



Mother came in with the cake and jelly in a little fancy basket,

and Laddie said:  "Thank you!  Now every one wish me luck!  I'm

going to ride to Pryors', knock at the door, and present these

offerings with my compliments.  If I'm invited in, I'm going to

make the effort of my life at driving the entering wedge toward

social intercourse between Pryors and their neighbours.  If I'm

not, I'll be back in thirty minutes and tell you what happened to

me.  If they refuse my gifts, you shall have the jelly, Sarah;

I'll give Mrs. Fall the olive branch, bring back the paper, and

eat the cake to console my wounded spirits."



Of course every one laughed; they couldn't help it.  I watched

father and he laughed hardest of the men, but mother was more

stiff-lipped about it; she couldn't help a little, though.  And I

noticed some of those women acted as if they had lost something. 

Maybe it was a chance to gossip about Laddie, for he hadn't left

them a thing to guess at, and mother says the reason gossip is so

dreadful is because it is always GUESSWORK.  Well, that was all

fair and plain.  He had told those people, our very best friends,

what he thought about everything, the way they acted included. 

He was carrying something to each member of the Pryor family, and

he'd left a way to return joking and unashamed, if they wouldn't

let him in.  He had fixed things so no one had anything to guess

at, and it would look much worse for the Pryors than it would for

him, if he did come back.



I wondered if he had been born that smart, or if he learned it in

college.  If he did, no wonder Leon was bound to go.  Come to

think of it, though, mother said Laddie was always like that. 

She said he never bit her when he nursed; he never mauled her as

if she couldn't be hurt when he was little, he never tore his

clothes and made extra work as he grew, and never in his life

gave her an hour's uneasiness.  But I guess she couldn't have

said that about uneasiness lately, for she couldn't keep from

looking troubled as all of us followed to the gate to see him

start.



How they joked, and tried to tease him!  But they couldn't get a

breath ahead.  He shot back answers as fast as they could ask

questions, while he cut the branch and untied the horse.  He gave

the limb and basket to mother to hold, kissed her good-bye, and

me too, before he mounted.  With my arms around his neck--I never

missed a chance to try to squeeze into him how I loved him--I

whispered:  "Laddie, is it a secret any more?"



He threw back his head and laughed the happiest.



"Not the ghost of a secret!" he said.  "But you let me do the

talking, until I tell you."  Then he went on right out loud: 

"I'm riding up the road waving the banner of peace.  If I suffer

repulse, the same thing has happened to better men before, so

I'll get a different banner and try again."



Laddie mounted, swept a circle in the road, dropped Flos on her

knees in a bow, and waved the branch.  Leon began to sing at the

top of his voice, "Nothing but leaves, nothing but leaves," while

Laddie went flashing up the road.



The women went back to the house; the men stood around the gate,

watched him from sight, talked about his horse, how he rode, and

made wagers that he'd get shut out, like every one did, but they

said if that happened he wouldn't come back.  Father was annoyed.



"You heard Laddie say he'd return immediately if they wouldn't

let him in," he said.  "He's a man of his word.  He will either

enter or come home at once."



It was pitch dark and we had supper before some of them left;

they never stayed so late.  After we came from church, father

read the chapter and we were ready for bed; still Laddie hadn't

come back.  And father liked it!  He just plain liked it!  He

chuckled behind the Advocate until you could see it shake; but

mother had very little to say, and her lips closed tight.



At bedtime he said to mother:  "Well, they don't seem in a hurry

about sending the boy back."



"Did you really think he WOULD be sent back?" asked mother.



"Not ordinarily," said father, "no!  If he had no brain, no wit,

no culture, on an animal basis, a woman would look twice before

she'd send him away; but with such fanatics as Pryors, one can't

always tell what will happen."



"In a case like this, one can be reasonably certain," said

mother.



"You don't know what social position they occupied at home. 

Their earmarks are all good.  We've no such notions here as they

have."



"Thank God for so much, at any rate," said mother.  "How old

England would rise up and exult if she had a man in line with

Laddie's body, blood and brain, to set on her throne.  This talk

about class and social position makes me sick.  Men are men, and

Laddie is as much above the customary timber found in kings and

princes, physically and mentally, as the sky is above the earth. 

Talk me no talk about class!  If I catch it coming from any of

mine, save you, I will beat it out of them.  He has admitted he's

in love with the girl; the real question is, whether she's fit to

be his wife."



"I should say she appears so," said father.



"Drat appearances!" cried mother.  "When it's a question of

lifetime misery, and the soul's salvation of my son, if things go

wrong, I've no time for appearances.  I want to know!"



He might have known he would make her angry when he laughed.  She

punched the pillow, and wouldn't say another word; so I went to

sleep, and didn't miss anything that time.



Next morning at breakfast Laddie was beaming, and father hardly

waited to ask the blessing before he inquired:  "Well, how did

you make it, son?"



Laddie laughed and answered:  "Altogether, it might have been

much worse."



That was all he would say until Miss Amelia started to school,

then he took me on his lap and talked as he buttoned my coat.



"Thomas met me at the gate," he said, "and held my horse while I

went to the door.  One of their women opened it, and I inquired

for Mr. Pryor.  She said he was in the field looking at the

horses, so I asked for Miss Pryor.  She came in a minute, so I

gave her the branch, told her about it, and offered the jelly and

cake for her mother.  The Princess invited me to enter.  I told

her I couldn't without her father's permission, so I went to the

field to see him.  The dogs were with him and he had the surprise

of his life when his man-eaters rolled at my feet, and licked my

hands."



"What did he say?" chuckled father.



"Told Thomas they'd been overfed and didn't amount to a brass

farthing; to take them to the woods and shoot them.  Thomas said

he'd see to it the very first thing in the morning, and then Mr.

Pryor told him he would shoot him if he did."



"Charming man to work for," said mother.



"Then I told him I'd been at the house to carry a little gift to

his wife and daughter, and to inquire if I might visit an hour,

and as he was not there, I had come to the field to ask him. 

Then I looked him in the eye and said:  `May I?'



"`I'll warrant the women asked you to come in,' he said.



"`Miss Pryor was so kind,' I answered, `but I enter no man's

house without his permission.  May I talk with your daughter an

hour, and your wife, if she cares to see me?'



"`It makes no earthly difference to me,' he said, which was not

gracious, but might have been worse, so I thanked him, and went

back to the house.  When I knocked the second time, the Princess

came, and I told her the word was that it made `no difference to

her father' if I came in, so she opened the door widely, took my

hat and offered me a seat.  Then she went to the next room and

said:  `Mother, father has given Mr. Stanton permission to pay us

a call.  Do you feel able to meet him?'  She came at once,

offering her hand and saying:  `I have already met Mr. Stanton so

often, really, we should have the privilege of speaking.'"



"What did she mean by that?" asked mother.



"She meant that I have haunted the road passing their place for

two years, and she'd seen me so frequently that she came to

recognize me."



"Umph!" said mother.



"Laddie tell on!" I begged.



"Well, I sharpened all the wits I had and went to work.  I never

tried so hard in my life to be entertaining.  Of course I had to

feel my way.  I'd no idea what would interest a delicate, high-

bred lady"--mother sniffed again--"so I had to search and probe,

and go by guess until I saw a shade of interest, then I worked in

more of the same.  It was easy enough to talk to the Princess--

all young folks have a lot in common, we could get along on fifty

topics; it was different with the housebound mother.  I did my

best, and after a while Mr. Pryor came in.  I asked him if any of

his horses had been attacked with the trouble some of the

neighbours were having, and told him what it was.  He had the

grace to thank me.  He said he would tell Thomas not to tie his

horse at the public hitching rack when he went to town, and once

he got started, he was wild to talk with a man, and I'd no chance

to say a word to the women.  He was interested in our colleges,

state, and national laws, in land development, and everything

that all live men are.  When a maid announced dinner I apologized

for having stayed so long, and excused myself, because I had been

so interested, but Mrs. Pryor merely said:  `I'm waiting to be

offered your arm.'



"Well, you should have seen me drop my hat and step up.  I did my

best, and while I talked to him a little, I made it most to the

women.  Any one could see they were starved for company, so I

took the job of entertaining them.  I told some college jokes,

funny things that had happened in the neighbourhood, and

everything of interest I could think up.  I know we were at the

table for two hours with things coming and going on silver

platters."



Mother sat straight suddenly.



"Just what did they have to eat, and how did they serve it?" she

asked.



"Couldn't tell if I were to be shot for it, mummy," said Laddie. 

"Forgive me!  Next time I'll take notes for you.  This first

plunge, I had to use all my brains, not to be a bore to them; and

to handle food and cutlery as the women did.  It's quite a

process, but as they were served first, I could do right by

waiting.  I never was where things were done quite so elaborately

before."



"And they didn't know they would have company until you went to

the table?"



"Well, they must have thought likely, there was a place for me."



"Umph!" said mother.  "Fine idea!  Then any one who drops in can

be served, and see that they are not a mite of trouble.  Candace,

always an extra place after this!"



Father just shouted.



"I thought you'd get something out of it!" he said.



"Happy to have justified your faith!" replied mother calmly.  "Go

on, son!"



"That's all!" said Laddie.  "We left the table and talked an hour

more.  The women asked me to come again; he didn't say anything

on that subject; but when he ordered my horse, he asked the

Princess if she would enjoy a little exercise, and she said she

would, so he told Thomas to bring their horses, and we rode

around the section, the Princess and I ahead, Mr. Pryor

following.  Where the road was good and the light fine enough

that there was no danger of laming a horse, we dropped back, one

on either side of him, so we could talk.  Mrs. Pryor ate the cake

and said it was fine; and the `conserve,' she called it,

delicious as she ever had tasted.  She said all our fruits here

had much more flavour than at home; she thought it was the dryer

climate and more sunshine.  She sent her grateful thanks, and she

wants your recipe before next preserving time."



Mother just beamed.  My! but she did love to have the things she

cooked, bragged on.



"Possibly she'd like my strawberries?" she said.



"There isn't a doubt about it," said Laddie.  "I've yet to see

the first person who doesn't."



"Is that all?" asked mother.



"I can think of nothing more at this minute," answered Laddie. 

"If anything comes to my mind later, I won't forget to tell you. 

Oh yes, there was one thing:  You couldn't keep Mr. Pryor from

talking about Leon.  He must have taken a great fancy to him.  He

talked until he worried the Princess, and she tried to keep him

away from the subject, but his mind seemed to run on it

constantly.  When we were riding she talked quite as much as he,

and it will hustle us to think what the little scamp did, any

bigger than they do.  Of course, father, you understood the price

Mr. Pryor made on one of his very finest colts was a joke. 

There's a strain of Arab in the father--he showed me the record--

and the mother is bluegrass.  There you get gentleness and

endurance combined with speed and nerve.  I'd trade Flos for that

colt as it stands to-day.  There's nothing better on earth in the

way of horse.  His offer is practically giving it away.  I know,

with the records to prove its pedigree, what that colt would

bring him in any city market."



"I don't like it," said mother.  "I want Leon to have a horse,

but a boy in a first experience, and reckless as he is, doesn't

need a horse like that, for one thing, and what is more

important, I refuse to be put under any obligations to Pryors."



"That's the reason Mr. Pryor asked anything at all for the horse.



It is my opinion that he would be greatly pleased to give it to

Leon, if he could do what he liked."



"Well, that's precisely the thing he can't do in this family,"

said mother sternly.



"What do you think, father?" asked Laddie.



"I think Amen! to that proposition," said father; "but I would

have to take time to thresh it out completely.  It appeals to me

that Leon is old enough to recognize the value of the animal; and

that the care of it would develop and strengthen his character. 

It would be a responsibility that would steady him.  You could

teach him to tend and break it."



"Break it!" cried Laddie.  "Break it!  Why father, he's riding it

bareback all over the Pryor meadow now, and jumping it over logs.

Whenever he leaves, it follows him to the fence, and the Princess

says almost any hour of the day you look out you can see it

pacing up and down watching this way and whinnying for him to

come."



"And your best judgment is----?"



Laddie laughed as he tied my hood strings.  "Well I don't feel

about the Pryors as the rest of you do," he said.  "If the money

isn't claimed inside the time you specified, I would let Leon and

Mr. Pryor make their own bargain.  The boy won't know for years

that it is practically a gift, and it would please Mr. Pryor

immensely.  Now run, or you'll be late!"



I had to go, so I didn't know how they settled it, but if they

wouldn't let Leon have that horse, it was downright mean.  What

if we were under obligations to Mr. Pryor?  We were to Sarah

Hood, and half the people we knew, and what was more, we LIKED to

be.



When I came from school that night father had been to town.  He

had an ax and was opening a big crate, containing two of the

largest, bluest geese you ever saw.  Laddie said being boxed that

way and seeing them so close made them look so big; really, they

were no finer than Pryors', where he had got the address of the

place that sold them.  Mother was so pleased.  She said she had

needed a new strain, for a long time, to improve her feathers;

now she would have pillows worth while, in a few years.  They put

them in the barn where our geese stayed over night, and how they

did scream.  That is, one of them did; the other acted queerly

and father said to Laddie that he was afraid the trip was hard on

it.  Laddie said it might have been hurt, and mother was worried

too.  Before she had them an hour, she had sold all our ganders;

spring had come, she had saved the blue goose eggs, set them

under a hen, raised the goslings with the little chickens, never

lost one, picked them and made a new pair of pillows too fine for

any one less important than a bishop, or a judge, or Dr. Fenner

to sleep on.  Then she began saving for a featherbed.  And still

the goose didn't act as spry or feel as good as the gander.  He

stuck up his head, screamed, spread his wings and waved them, and

the butts looked so big and hard, I was not right certain whether

it would be safe to tease him or not.



The first person who came to see them was Sarah Hood, and she

left with the promise of a pair as soon as mother could raise

them.  Father said the only reason mother didn't divide her hair

with Sarah Hood was because it was fast, and she couldn't. 

Mother said gracious goodness! she'd be glad to get rid of some

of it if she could, and of course Sarah should have first chance

at it.  Hadn't she kept her over night so she could see her new

home when she was rested, and didn't she come with her, and help

her get settled, and had she ever failed when we had a baby, or

sickness, or trouble, or thrashers, or a party?  Of course she'd

gladly divide, even the hair of her head, with Sarah Hood.  And

father said, "Yes, he guessed she would, and come to think of it,

he'd just as soon spare Sarah part of his," and then they both

laughed, when it was nothing so very funny that I could see.



The next caller the geese had was Mrs. Freshett.  My! she thought

they were big and fine.  Mother promised her a couple of eggs to

set under a hen.  Father said she was gradually coming down the

scale of her feelings, and before two weeks she'd give Isaac

Thomas, at least, a quill for a pen.  Almost no one wrote with

them any more, but often father made a few, and showed us how to

use them.  He said they were gone with candles, sand boxes, and

snuff.  Mother said she had no use for snuff, but candles were

not gone, she'd make and use them to the day of her death, as

they were the nicest light ever invented to carry from room to

room, or when you only wanted to sit and think.  Father said

there was really no good pen except the quill you sharpened

yourself; and while he often used steel ones like we children had

at school to write to the brothers and sisters away, and his

family, he always kept a few choice quills in the till of his

chest, and when he wrote a deed, or any valuable paper, where

there was a deal with money, he used them.  He said it lent the

dignity of a past day to an important occasion.



After mother and Mrs. Freshett had talked over every single thing

about the geese, and that they were like Pryors' had been

settled, Mrs. Freshett said:  "Since he told about it before all

of us, and started out the way he did, would it be amiss to ask

how Laddie got on at Pryors'?"



"Just the way I thought he would," said mother.  "He stayed until

all of us were in bed, and I'd never have known when he came in,

if it were not a habit of his always to come to my door to see if

I'm sleeping.  Sometimes I'm wakeful, and if he pommels my pillow

good, brings me a drink, and rubs my head a few strokes with his

strong, cool hands, I can settle down and have a good night's

rest.  I was awake when he came, or I'd never have known.  It was

almost midnight; but they sat two hours at the table, and then

all of them rode."



"Not the Missus?"



"Oh no!  She's not strong enough.  She really has incurable heart

trouble, the worst kind there is; her daughter told me so."



"Then they better look out," said Mrs. Freshett.  "She is likely

to keel over at a breath."



"They must know it.  That's why she keeps so quiet."



"And they had him to supper?"



"It was a dinner served at night.  Yes.  He took Mrs. Pryor in on

his arm, and it was like a grand party, just as they fixed for

themselves, alone.  Waiters, and silver trays, and things carried

in and out in courses."



"My land!  Well, I s'pose he had enough schoolin' to get him

through it all right!"



My mother's face grew red.  She never left any one in doubt as to

what she meant.  Father said that "was the Dutch of it."  And

mother always answered that if any one living could put things

plainer than the English, she would like to hear them do it.



"He certainly had," said mother, "or they wouldn't have invited

him to come again.  And all mine, Mrs. Freshett, knew how to sit

properly at the table, and manage a knife, fork and napkin,

before they ever took a meal away from home."



"No 'fence," laughed Mrs. Freshett.  "I meant that maybe his

years of college schoolin' had give him ways more like theirs

than most of us have.  For all the money it takes to send a boy

to college, he ought to get somethin' out of it more than jest

fillin' his head with figgers, an' stars, an' oratin'; an' most

always you can see that he does."



"It is contact with cultivated people," said mother.  "You are

always influenced by it, without knowing it often."



"Maybe you are, bein' so fine yourself," said Mrs. Freshett. 

"An' me too, I never get among my betters that I don't carry home

a lot I put right into daily use, an' nobody knows it plainer.  I

come here expectin' to learn things that help me, an' when I go

home I know I have."



"Why, thank you," said mother.  "I'm sure that is a very nice

compliment, and I wish I really could feel that it is well

deserved."



"Oh I guess you do!" said Mrs. Freshett laughing.  "I often

noticed you makin' a special effort to teach puddin' heads like

me somethin', an' I always thank you for it.  There's a world in

right teachin'.  I never had any.  So all I can pick up an'

hammer into mine is a gain for me an' them.  If my Henry had

lived, an' come out anything like that boy o' yourn an' the show

he made last Sunday, I'd do well if I didn't swell up an' bust

with pride.  An' the little tow-haired strip, takin' the gun an'

startin' out alone after a robber, even if he wa'n't much of a

man, that was downright spunky.  If my boys will come out

anywhere near like yourn, I'll be glad."



"I don't know how my boys will come out," said mother.  "But I

work, pray, hope, and hang to them; that's all I know to do."



"Well, if they don't come out right, they ought to be bumped!"

said Mrs. Freshett.  "After all the chances they've had!  I don'

know jest how Freshett was brung up, but I'd no chance at all. 

My folks--well, I guess the less said--little pitchers, you know!

I can't see as I was to blame.  I was the youngest, an' I knew

things was wrong.  I fought to go to school, an' pap let me

enough that I saw how other people lived.  Come night I'd go to

the garret, an' bar the trapdoor; but there would be times when I

couldn't help seein' what was goin' on.  How'd you like chances

such as that for a girl of yourn?"



"Dreadful!" said mother.  "Mrs. Freshett, please do be careful!"



"Sure!" laughed Mrs. Freshett.  "I was jest goin' to tell you

about me an' Josiah.  He come to our house one night, a stranger

off the road.  He said he was sick, an' tired, an' could he have

a bed.  Mother said, `No, for him to move on.'  He tried an' he

couldn't.  They was somethin' about him--well, you know how them

things go!  I wa'n't only sixteen, but I felt so sorry for him,

all fever burned and mumblin', I helped pap put him to bed, an'

doctored him all I could.  Come mornin' he was a sick man.  Pap

went for the county doctor, an' he took jest one look an' says: 

`Small pox!  All of ye git!'



"I was bound I wouldn't go, but pap made me, an' the doctor said

he'd send a man who'd had it; so I started, but I felt so bad,

come a chanct when they got to Groveville, I slipped out an' went

back.  The man hadn't come, so I set to work the best I knowed. 

'Fore long Josiah was a little better an' he asked who I was, an'

where my folks went, an' I told him, an' he asked WHY I came back

an' I didn't know what to say, so I jest hung my head an'

couldn't face him.  After a while he says, `All right!  I guess I

got this sized up.  If you'll stay an' nuss me through, I'll be

well enough to pull you out, by the time you get it, an' soon as

you're able we'll splice, if you say so.'



"`Marry me, you mean?' says I.  They wa'n't ever any talk about

marryin' at our house.  `Sure!' says he.  `You're a mighty likely

lookin' girl!  I'll do fair by ye.'  An' he always has, too!  But

I didn't feel right to let him go it blind, so I jest up and

says.  `You wouldn't if you knowed my folks!'  `You look as

decent as I do,' says he; `I'll chance it!'  Then I tole him I

was as good as I was born, an' he believed me, an' he always has,

an' I was too!  So I nussed him, but I didn't make the job of it

he did.  You 'member he is pitted considerable.  He was so strong

I jest couldn't keep him from disfigerin' himself, but he tied

me.  I begged to be loose, an' he wouldn't listen, so I got a

clean face, only three little scars, an' they ain't deep to speak

of.  He says he looks like a piece of side meat, but say! they

ain't nothin' the matter with his looks to me!



"The nuss man never did come, but the county doctor passed things

in the winder, till I was over the worst, an' Josiah sent for a

preacher an' he married us through the winder--I got the writin's

to show, all framed an' proper.  Josiah said he'd see I got all

they was in it long that line, anyway.  When I was well, hanged

if he didn't perdooce a wad from his clothes before they burnt

'em, an' he got us new things to wear, an' a horse, an' wagon,

an' we driv away here where we thought we could start right, an'

after we had the land, an' built the cabin, an' jest as happy as

heart could wish, long come a man I'd made mad once, an' he tole

everythin' up and down.  Josiah was good about it.  He offered to

sell the land, an' pull up an' go furder.  `What's the use?' says

I.  `Hundreds know it.  We can't go so far it won't be like to

follow us; le's stay here an' fight it.'  `All right,' says

Josiah, but time an' ag'in he has offered to go, if I couldn't

make it.  `Hang on a little longer,' says I, every time he knew I

was snubbed an' slighted.  I never tole what he didn't notice.  I

tried church, when my children began to git a size I wanted 'em

to have right teachin', an' you come an' welcomed me an' you been

my friend, an' now the others is comin' over at last, an'

visitin' me, an' they ain't a thing more I want in life."



"I am so glad!" said mother.  "Oh my dear, I am so glad!"



"Goin' right home an' tell that to Josiah," said Mrs. Freshett,

jumping up laughing and crying like, "an' mebby I'll jest spread

wings and fly!  I never was so happy in all my life as I was

Sunday, when you ast me before all of them, so cordial like, an'

says I to Josiah, `We'll go an' try it once,' an' we come an'

nobody turned a cold shoulder on us, an' I wa'n't wearin' specks

to see if they did, for I never knowed him so happy in all his

days.  Orter heard him whistle goin' home, an' he's tryin' all

them things he learned, on our place, an' you can see it looks a

heap better a'ready, an' now he's talkin' about buildin' in the

spring.  I knowed he had money, but he never mentioned buildin'

before, an' I always thought it was bekase he 'sposed likely we'd

have to move on, some time.  'Pears now as if we can settle, an'

live like other folks, after all these years.  I knowed ye didn't

want me to talk, but I had to tell you!  When you ast us to the

weddin', and others began comin' round, says I to Josiah, `Won't

she be glad to know that my skirts is clear, an' I did as well as

I could?'  An' he says, `That she will!  An' more am I,' says he.



`I mighty proud of you,' says he.  Proud!  Think of that!  Miss

Stanton, I'd jest wade fire and blood for you!"



"Oh my dear !" said mother.  "What a dreadful thing to say!"



"Gimme the chanct, an' watch if I don't," said Mrs. Freshett. 

"Now, Josiah is proud I stuck it out!  Now, I can have a house! 

Now, my children can have all the show we can raise to give 'em! 

I'm done cringin' an' dodgin'!  I've always done my best;

henceforth I mean to hold up my head an' say so.  I sure can't be

held for what was done 'fore I was on earth, or since neither. 

You've given me my show, I'm goin' to take it, but if you want to

know what's in my heart about you, gimme any kind of a chanct to

prove, an' see if I don't pony right up to it!"



Mother laughed until the tears rolled, she couldn't help it.  She

took Mrs. Freshett in her arms and hugged her tight, and kissed

her mighty near like she does Sarah Hood.  Mrs. Freshett threw

her arms around mother, and looked over her shoulder, and said to

me, "Sis, when you grow up, always take a chanct on welcomin' the

stranger, like your maw does, an' heaven's bound to be your home!

My, but your maw is a woman to be proud of!" she said, hugging

mother and patting her on the back.



"All of us are proud of her!" I boasted.



"I doubt if you are proud enough!" cried Mrs. Freshett.  "I have

my doubts!  I don't see how people livin' with her, an' seein'

her every day, are in a shape to know jest what she can do for a

person in the place I was in.  I have my doubts!"



That night when I went home from school mother was worrying over

the blue goose.  When we went to feed, she told Leon that she was

afraid it was weak, and not getting enough to eat when it fed

with the others.  She said after the work was finished, to take

it out alone, and give it all it would eat; so when the horses

were tended, the cows milked, everything watered, and the barn

ready to close for the night, Laddie took the milk to the house,

while Leon and I caught the blue goose, carried her to the well,

and began to shell corn.  She was starved to death, almost.  She

ate a whole ear in no time and looked for more, so Leon sent me

after another.  By the time that was most gone she began to eat

slower, and stick her bill in the air to help the grains slip

down, so I told Leon I thought she had enough.



"No such thing!" said Leon.  "You distinctly heard mother tell me

to give her `all she would eat.'  She's eating, isn't she?  Go

bring another ear!"



So she was, but I was doubtful about more.



Leon said I better mind or he would tell mother, so I got it. 

She didn't begin on it with any enthusiasm.  She stuck her bill

higher, stretched her neck longer, and she looked so funny when

she did it, that we just shrieked.  Then Leon reached over, took

her by the bill, and stripped her neck to help her swallow, and

as soon as he let go, she began to eat again.



"You see!" said Leon, "she's been starved.  She can't get enough.

I must help her!"



So he did help her every little bit.  By that time we were

interested in seeing how much she could hold; and she looked so

funny that Leon sent me for more corn; but I told him I thought

what she needed now was water, so we held her to the trough, and

she tried to drink, but she couldn't swallow much.  We set her

down beside the corn, and she went to eating again.



"Go it, old mill-hopper!" cried Leon.



Right then there was an awful commotion in the barn, and from the

squealing we knew one of the horses was loose, and fighting the

others.  We ran to fix them, and had a time to get Jo back into

his stall, and tied.  Before we had everything safe, the supper

bell rang, and I bet Leon a penny I could reach the house while

he shut the door and got there.  We forgot every single thing

about the goose.



At supper mother asked Leon if he fed the goose all she would

eat, and I looked at him guilty-like, for I remembered we hadn't

put her back.  He frowned at me cross as a bear, and I knew that

meant he had remembered, and would slip back and put her inside

when he finished his supper, so I didn't say anything.



"I didn't feed her ALL she would eat!" said Leon.  "If I had,

she'd be at it yet.  She was starved sure enough!  You never saw

anything like the corn she downed."



"Well I declare!" said mother.  "Now after this, take her out

alone, for a few days, and give her as much as she wants."



"All right!" chuckled Leon, because it was a lot of fun to see

her run her bill around, and gobble up the corn, and stick up her

head.



The next day was Saturday, so after breakfast I went with Leon to

drive the sheep and geese to the creek to water; the trough was

so high it was only for the horses and cattle; when we let out

the geese, the blue one wasn't there.



"Oh Leon, did you forget to come back and put her in?"



"Yes I did!" he said.  "I meant to when I looked at you to keep

still, and I started to do it, but Sammy Deam whistled, so I went

down in the orchard to see what he wanted, and we got to planning

how to get up a fox chase, and I stayed until father called for

night, and then I ran and forgot all about the blame old goose."



"Oh Leon!  Where is she?  What will mother say? 'Spose a fox got

her!"



"It wouldn't help me any if it had, after I was to blame for

leaving her outside.  Blast a girl!  If you ever amounted to

anything, you could have put her in while I fixed the horses.  At

least you could have told me to."



I stood there dumblike and stared at him.  He has got the

awfulest way of telling the truth when he is scared or provoked. 

Of course I should have thought of the goose when he was having

such a hard fight with the horses.  If I'd been like he was, I'd

have told him that he was older, mother told HIM to do it, and it

wasn't my fault; but in my heart I knew he did have his hands

full, and if you're your brother's keeper, you ought to HELP your

brother remember.  So I stood gawking, while Leon slowly turned

whiter and whiter.



"We might as well see if we can find her," he said at last, so

slow and hopeless like it made my heart ache.  So he started

around the straw stack one way, and I the other, looking into all

the holes, and before I had gone far I had a glimpse of her, and

it scared me so I screamed, for her head was down, and she didn't

look right.  Leon came running and pulled her out.  The swelled

corn rolled in a little trail after her, and the pigs ran up and

began to eat it.  Pigs are named righter than anything else I

know.



"Busted!" cried Leon in tones of awe; about the worst awe you

ever heard, and the worst bust you ever saw.



From bill to breast she was wide open, and the hominy spilling. 

We just stood staring at her, and then Leon began to kick the

pigs; because it would be no use to kick the goose; she would

never know.  Then he took her up, carried her into the barn, and

put her on the floor where the other geese had stayed all night. 

We stood and looked at her some more, as if looking and hoping

would make her get up and be alive again.  But there's nothing in

all this world so useless as wishing dead things would come

alive; we had to do something.



"What are you going to tell mother?"



"Shut up!" said Leon.  "I'm trying to think."



"I'll say it was as much my fault as yours.  I'll go with you. 

I'll take half whatever they do to you."



"Little fool!" said Leon.  "What good would that do me?"



"Do you know what they cost?  Could you get another with some of

your horse money?"



I saw it coming and dodged again, before I remembered the

Crusaders.



"All right!" I said.  "If that's the way you are going to act,

Smarty, I'll lay all the blame on you; I won't help you a bit,

and I don't care if you are whipped until the blood runs."



Then I went out of the barn and slammed the door.  For a minute I

felt better; but it was a short time.  I SAID that to be mean,

but I did care.  I cared dreadfully; I was partly to blame, and I

knew it.  Coming around the barn, I met Laddie, and he saw in a

flash I was in trouble, so he stopped and asked:  "What now,

Chicken?"



"Come into the barn where no one will hear us," I said.



So we went around the outside, entered at the door on the

embankment, and he sat in the wheelbarrow on the threshing floor

while I told him.  I thought I felt badly enough, but after I saw

Laddie, it grew worse, for I remembered we were short of money

that fall, that the goose was a fine, expensive one, and how

proud mother was of her, and how she'd be grieved, and that was

trouble for sure.



"Run along and play!" said Laddie, "and don't tell any one else

if you can help it.  I'll hide the goose, and see if I can get

another in time to take the place of this one, so mother won't be

worried."



I walked to the house slowly, but I was afraid to enter.  When

you are all choked up, people are sure to see it, and ask fool

questions.  So I went around to the gate and stood there looking

up and down the road, and over the meadow toward the Big Woods;

and all at once, in one of those high, regular bugle calls, like

they mostly scream in spring, one of Pryors' ganders split the

echoes for a mile; maybe farther.



I was across the road and slinking down inside the meadow fence

before I knew it.  There was no thought or plan.  I started for

Pryors' and went straight ahead, only I kept out of line with our

kitchen windows.  I tramped through the slush, ice, and crossed

fields where I was afraid of horses; but when I got to the top of

the Pryor backyard fence, I stuck there, for the bulldogs were

loose, and came raving at me.  I was going to be eaten alive, for

I didn't know the word Laddie did; and those dogs climbed a fence

like a person; I saw them the time Leon brought back Even So.  I

was thinking what a pity it was, after every one had grown

accustomed to me, and had begun loving me, that I should be

wasted for dog feed, when Mr. Pryor came to the door, and called

them; they didn't mind, so he came to the fence, and crossest you

ever heard, every bit as bad as the dogs, he cried:  "Whose brat

are you, and what are you doing here?"



I meant to tell him; but you must have a minute after a thing

like that.



"God of my life!" he fairly frothed.  "What did anybody send a

dumb child here for?"



"Dumb child!"  I didn't care if Mr. Pryor did wear a Crown of

Glory.  It wasn't going to do him one particle of good, unless he

was found in the way of the Lord.  "Dumb child!"  I was no more

dumb than he was, until his bulldogs scared me so my heart got

all tangled up with my stomach, my lungs, and my liver.  That

made me mad, and there was nothing that would help me to loosen

up and talk fast, like losing my temper.  I wondered what kind of

a father he had.  If he'd been stood against the wall and made to

recite, "Speak gently," as often as all of us, perhaps he'd have

remembered the verse that says:



            "Speak gently to the little child;

                Its love be sure to gain;

             Teach it in accents soft and mild;

                It may not long remain."





I should think not, if it had any chance at all to get away!  I

was so angry by that time I meant to tell him what I thought. 

Polite or not polite, I'd take a switching if I had to, but I

wasn't going to stand that.



"You haven't got any God in your life," I reminded him, "and no

one sent me here.  I came to see the Princess, because I'm in

awful trouble and I hoped maybe she could fix up a way to help

me."



"Ye Gods!" he cried.  He would stick to calling on God, whether

he believed in Him or not.  "If it isn't Nimrod!  I didn't

recognize you in all that bundling."



Probably he didn't know it, but Nimrod was from the Bible too! 

By bundling, he meant my hood and coat.  He helped me from the

fence, sent the bulldogs rolling--sure enough he did kick them,

and they didn't like it either--took my hand and led me straight

into the house, and the Princess was there, and a woman who was

her mother no doubt, and he said:  "Pamela, here is our little

neighbour, and she says she's in trouble, and she thinks you may

be of some assistance to her.  Of course you will be glad if you

can."



"Surely!" said the Princess, and she introduced me to her mother,

so I bowed the best I knew, and took off my wet mitten, dirty

with climbing fences, to shake hands with her.  She was so

gracious and lovely I forgot what I went after.  The Princess

brought a cloth and wiped the wet from my shoes and stockings,

and asked me if I wouldn't like a cup of hot tea to keep me from

taking a chill.



"I've been much wetter than this," I told her, "and I never have

taken a chill, and anyway my throat's too full of trouble to

drink."



"Why, you poor child!" said the Princess.  "Tell me quickly!  Is

your mother ill again?"



"Not now, but she's going to be as soon as she finds out," I

said, and then I told them.



They all listened without a sound until I got where Leon helped

the goose eat, and from that on Mr. Pryor laughed until you could

easily see that he had very little feeling for suffering

humanity.  It was funny enough when we fed her, but now that she

was bursted wide open there was nothing amusing about it; and to

roar when a visitor plainly told you she was in awful trouble,

didn't seem very good manners to me.  The Princess and her mother

never even smiled; and before I had told nearly all of it, Thomas

was called to hitch the Princess' driving cart, and she took me

to their barnyard to choose the goose that looked most like

mother's, and all of them seemed like hers, so we took the first

one Thomas could catch, put it into a bag in the back of the

cart, and then we got in and started for our barn.  As we reached

the road, I said to her:  "You'd better go past Dovers', for if

we come down our Little Hill they will see us sure; it's baking

day."



"All right!" said the Princess, so we went the long way round the

section, but goodness me! when she drove no way was far.



When we were opposite our barn she stopped, hitched her horse to

the fence, and we climbed over, and slipping behind the barn,

carried the goose around to the pen and put it in with ours.  She

said she wanted the broken one, because her father would enjoy

seeing it.  I didn't see how he could!  We were ready to slip

out, when our geese began to run at the new one, hiss and scream,

and make such a racket that Laddie and Leon both caught us.  They

looked at the goose, at me, the Princess, and each other, and

neither said a word.  She looked back a little bit, and then she

laughed as hard as she could.  Leon grew red, and he grinned

ashamed-like, so she laughed worse than ever.  Laddie spoke to

me:  "You went to Mr. Pryor's and asked for that goose?"



"She did not!" said the Princess before I could answer.  "She

never asked for anything.  She was making a friendly morning call

and in the course of her visit she told about the pathetic end of

the goose that was expected to lay the golden egg--I mean stuff

the Bishop's pillow--and as we have a large flock of blue geese,

father gave her one, and he had the best time he's had in years

doing it.  I wouldn't have had him miss the fun he got from it

for any money.  He laughed like home again.  Now I must slip away

before any one sees me, and spoils our secret.  Leon, lad, you

can go to the house and tell your little mother that the feeding

stopped every pain her goose had, and hereafter it looks to you

as if she'd be all right."



"Miss Pryor," said Leon, "did you care about what I said at you

in church that day?"



"`Thou art all fair, my love.  There is no spot in thee.'  Well,

it was a little pointed, but since you ask a plain question, I

have survived it."



"I'm awfully sorry," said Leon.  "Of course I never would, if I'd

known you could be this nice."



The Princess looked at Laddie and almost gasped, and then both of

them laughed.  Leon saw that he had told her he was sorry he said

she was "fair, and no spot in her."



"Oh I don't mean that!" he said.  "What I do mean is that I thank

you awful much for the goose, and helping me out like such a

brick of a good fellow, and what I wish is, that I was as old as

Laddie, and he'd hump himself if he got to be your beau."



The Princess almost ran.  Laddie and I followed to the road,

where he unhitched the horse and helped her in.  Then he stood

stroking its neck, as he held the bridle.



"I don't know what to say!" said Laddie.



"In such case, I would counsel silence," advised the Princess.



"I hope you understand how I thank you."



"I fail to see what for.  Father gave the goose to Little Sister.

Her thanks and Leon's are more than enough for him.  We had great

sport."



"I insist on adding mine.  Deep and fervent!"



"You take everything so serious.  Can't you see the fun of this?"



"No," said Laddie.  "But if you can, I am glad, and I'm thankful

for anything that gives me a glimpse of you."



"Bye, Little Sister," said the Princess, and when she loosened

the lines the mud flew a rod high.

