





CHAPTER XIV



The Crest of Eastbrooke



            "Sow;--and look onward, upward,

                 Where the starry light appears,--

             Where, in spite of coward's doubting,

                 Or your own heart's trembling fears,

             You shall reap in joy the harvest

                 You have sown to-day in tears."



Any objections to my beginning to break ground on the west eighty

to-day?" asked Laddie of father at breakfast Monday morning.



"I had thought we would commence on the east forty, when planning

the work."



"So had I," said Laddie.  "But since I thought that, a very

particular reason has developed for my beginning to plow the west

eighty at once, and there is a charming little ditty I feel

strongly impelled to whistle every step of the way."



Father looked at him sharply, and so, I think, did all of us. 

And because we loved him deeply, we saw that his face was a

trifle pale for him; his clear eyes troubled, in spite of his

laughing way.  He knew we were studying him too, but he wouldn't

have said anything that would make us look and question if he had

minded our doing it.  That was exactly like Laddie.  He meant it

when he said he hated a secret.  He said there was no place on

earth for a man to look for sympathy and love if he couldn't find

it in his own family; and he never had been so happy since I had

been big enough to notice his moods as he had been since all of

us knew about the Princess.  He didn't wait for father to ask why

he'd changed his mind about the place to begin.



"You see," he said, "a very charming friend of mine expressed

herself strongly last night about the degrading influence of

farming, especially that branch of agriculture which evolves

itself in a furrow; hence it is my none too happy work to plow

the west eighty where she can't look our way without seeing me;

and I have got to whistle my favourite `toon' where she must stop

her ears if she doesn't hear; and then it will be my painful

task, I fear, to endeavour to convince her that I am still clean,

decent, and not degraded."



"Oh Laddie!" cried mother.



"Abominable foolishness!" roared father like he does roar once in

about two years.



"Isn't it now?" asked Laddie sweetly.  "I don't know what has got

into her head.  She has seen me plowing fifty times since their

land has joined ours, and she never objected before."



"I can tell you blessed well!" said mother.  "She didn't care two

hoots how much my son plowed, but it makes a difference when it

comes to her lover."



"Maw, you speak amazing reckless," said Laddie, "if I thought

there was anything in THAT feature of the case, I'd attempt a

Highland fling on the ridgepole of our barn."



"Be serious!" said father sternly.  "This is no laughing matter."



"That's precisely why I am laughing," said Laddie.  "Would it

help me any to sit down and weep?  I trow not!  I have thought

most of the silent watches--by the way they are far from silent

in May--and as I read my title clear, it's my job to plow the

west eighty immejit."



Father tried to look stern, but he just had to laugh.



"All right then, plow it!" he said.



"What did she say?" asked mother.



"Phew!" Laddie threw up both hands.  "She must have been bottled

some time on the subject.  The ferment was a spill of

considerable magnitude.  The flood rather overwhelmed me, because

it was so unexpected.  I had been taking for granted that she

accepted my circumstances and surroundings as she did me.  But

no, kind friends, far otherwise!  She said last night, in the

clearest English I ever heard spoken impromptu, that I was a man

suitable for her friend, but I would have to change my occupation

before I could be received on more than a friendly footing."



"`On more than a friendly footing'?" repeated mother.



"You have her exact words," said Laddie.  "Kindly pass the ham."



"What did you say?"



"Nothing!  I am going to plow the answer.  Please don't object to

my beginning this morning."



"You try yourself all winter to get as far as you have, and then

upset the bowl like this?" cried mother.



"Softly, mummy, softly!" said Laddie.  "What am I to do?  I've

definitely decided on my work.  I see land and life, as you and

father taught me, in range and in perspective far more than

you've got from it.  You had a first hand wrestle.  The land I

covet has been greatly improved already.  I can do what I choose

with it, making no more strenuous effort than plowing; and I am

proud to say that I LOVE to plow.  I like my feet in the soil.  I

want my head in the spring air.  I can become almost tipsy on the

odours that fill my nostrils.  Music evolved by the Almighty is

plenty good enough for me.  I'm proud of a spanking big team,

under the control of a touch or a word.  I enjoy farming, and I

am going to be a farmer.  Plowing is one of the most pleasing

parts of the job.  Sowing the seed beats it a little, from an

artistic standpoint, either is preferable to haying, threshing,

or corn cutting: all are parts of my work, so I'm going to begin.



Mother, I hope you don't mind if I take your grays.  I'll be very

careful; but the picture I present to my girl to-day is going to

go hard with her at best, so I'd like to make it level best."



He arose, went around and knelt beside mother.  He took her,

chair and all, in his arms:



            "Best of mothers! on my breast

             Lean thy head, and sink to rest."





She quoted.  Mother laughed.



"Mammy," he asked bending toward her, "am I clean?"



"You goose!" she said, putting her arms around him and holding

him tight.



"Gander love," said Laddie, turning up his face for a kiss. 

"Honest mother, you have been through nigh unto forty years of

it, tell me, can a man be a farmer and keep neat enough not to be

repulsive to a refined woman?"



"Your father is the answer," said mother.  "All of you know how

perfectly repulsive he is and always has been to me."



"`Repulsive,"' said father.  "That's an ugly word!"



"There are a whole lot of unpleasant things that peep around

corners occasionally," said Laddie.  "But whoever of you dear

people it was that showed Mr. Pryor the Crest of Eastbrooke,

brought out this particular dragon for me to slay."



"Tut, tut!  Now what does that mean?" said father.  "Have we had

a little exhibition of that especial brand of pride that goes

before a fall?"



"We have! and I take the tumble," said Laddie.  "Watch me start! 

`Jack fell down and broke his crown.'  Question--will `Jill come

tumbling after?'"



My heart stopped and I was shaking in my bare feet, because I

wore no shoes to shake in.  Oh my soul!  No matter how Laddie

jested I knew he was almost killed; the harder he made fun, the

worse he was hurt.  I opened my mouth to say I did it, I had to,

but Leon began to talk.



"Well, I think she's smart!" he cried.  "If she was going to give

you the mitten, why didn't she do it long ago?"



"She had to find out first whether there were a possibility of

her wanting to keep it," said Laddie.



"You're sure you are all signed, sealed, and delivered on this

plowing business, are you?" asked Leon.



"Dead sure!" said Laddie.



"All right, if you like it!" said Leon.  "None for me after

college!  But say, you can be a farmer and not plow, you know. 

You go trim the trees, and work at cleaner, more gentlemanly

jobs.  I'll plow that field.  I'd just as soon as not.  I plowed

last year and you said I did well, didn't you, father?"



"Yes, on the potato patch," said father.  "A cornfield is a

different thing.  I fear you are too light."



"Oh but that was a year ago!" cried Leon.



He pushed back his chair and went to father.



"Just feel my biceps now!  Most like steel!" he boasted.  "A

fellow can grow a lot in a year, and all the riding I've been

doing, and all the exercise I've had.  Cert' I can plow that

meadow."



"You're all right, shaver," said Laddie.  "I'll not forget your

offer; but in this case it wouldn't help.  Either the Princess

takes her medicine or I take mine.  I'm going to live on land:

I'm going to plow in plain sight of the Pryor house this week, if

I have to hire to Jacob Hood to get the chance.  May I plow, and

may I take the grays, father?"



"Yes!" said father roundly.



"Then here goes!" said Laddie.  "You needn't fret, mother.  I'll

not overheat them.  I must give a concert simultaneous with this

plowing performance, and I'm particular about the music, so I

can't go too fast.  Also, I'll wrap the harness."



"Goodness knows I'm not thinking about the horses," said mother.



"No, but if they turned up next Sunday, wind-broken, and with

nice large patches of hair rubbed from their sides, you would be!

If you were me, would you whistle, or vocalize to start on?"



Mother burst right out crying and laid her face all tear-wet

against him.  Laddie kissed her, and wiped away the tears, teased

her, and soon as he could he bolted from the east door; but I was

closest, so I saw plainly that his eyes were wet too.  My soul

and body!  AND I HAD DONE IT!  I might as well get it over.



"I showed Mr. Pryor the trinket," I said.



"How did you come to do that?" asked father sternly.



"When he was talking with mother.  He told her Laddie would be

`wasted' farming----"



"Wasted?"



"That's what he said.  Mother told him you had always farmed and

you were a `power in this community.'  She told him about what

you did, because you wanted to, and what you COULD do if you

chose, about holding office, you know, and that seemed to make

him think heaps more of you, so I thought it would be a good

thing for him to know about the Crusaders too, and I ran and got

the crest.  I THOUGHT it would help----"



"And so it will," said mother.  "They constantly make the best

showing they can, we might as well, too.  The trouble is they got

more than they expected.  They thought they could look down on

us, and patronize us, if they came near at all; when they found

we were quite as well educated as they, had as much land, could

hold prominent offices if we chose, and had the right to that

bauble, they veered to the other extreme.  Now they seem to

demand that we quit work----"



"Move to the city, `sit on a cushion and sew a fine seam,'"

suggested father.



"Exactly!" said mother.  "They'll have to find out we are running

our own business; but I'm sorry it fell to Laddie to show them. 

You could have done it better.  It will come out all right.  The

Princess is not going to lose a man like Laddie on account of how

he makes his money."



"Don't be too confident," said father.  "With people of their

stripe, how much money a man can earn, and at what occupation,

constitute the whole of life."



She wasn't too confident.  Yesterday she had been so happy she

almost flew.  To-day she kept things going, and sang a lot, but

nearly every time you looked at her you could see her lips draw

tight, a frown cross her forehead, and her head shake.  Pretty

soon we heard a racket on the road, so we went out.  There was

Laddie with the matched team of carriage horses and a plow.  Now,

in dreadfully busy times, father let Ned and Jo work a little,

but not very much.  They were not plow horses; they were

roadsters.  They liked to prance, and bow their necks and dance

to the carriage.  It shamed them to be hitched to a plow.  They

drooped their heads and slunk along like dogs caught sucking

eggs.  But they were a sight on the landscape.  They were lean

and slender and yet round too, matched dapple gray on flank and

side, with long snow-white manes and tails.  No wonder mother

didn't want them to work.  Laddie had reached through the garden

fence and hooked a bunch of red tulips and yellow daffodils.  The

red was at Jo's ear, and the yellow at Ned's, and they did look

fine.  So did he!  Big, strong, clean, a red flower in his floppy

straw hat band; and after he drove through the gate, he began a

shrill, fifelike whistle you could have heard a half mile:



      "See the merry farmer boy, tramp the meadows through,

       Swing his hoe in careless joy, while dashing off the dew.

       Bobolink in maple high, trills a note of glee,

       Farmer boy in gay reply now whistles cheerily."





The chorus was all whistle, and it was written for folks who

could.  It went up until it almost split the echoes, and Laddie

could easily sail a measure above the notes.  He did it too.  As

for me, I kept from sight.  For a week Laddie whistled and

plowed.  He wore that tune threadbare, and got an almost

continuous pucker on his lips.  Leon said if he didn't stop

whistling, and sing more, the girls would think he was doing a

prunes and prisms stunt.  So after that he sang the words, and

whistled the chorus.  But he made no excuse to go, and he didn't

go, to Pryors'.  When Sunday came, he went to Westchester to see

Elizabeth, and stayed until Monday morning.  Not once that week

did the Princess ride past our house, or her father either.  By

noon Monday Laddie was back in the field, and I had all I could

bear.  He was neither whistling nor singing so much now, because

he was away at the south end, where he couldn't be seen or heard

at Pryors'.  He almost scoured the skin from him, and he wore his

gloves more carefully than usual.  If he soiled his clothing in

the least, and it looked as if he would make more than his share

of work, he washed the extra pieces at night.



Tuesday morning I hurried with all my might, and then I ran to

the field where he was.  I climbed on the fence, sat there until

he came up, and then I gave him some cookies.  He stopped the

horses, climbed beside me and ate them.  Then he put his arms

around me and hugged me tight.



"Laddie, do you know I did it?" I wailed.



"Did you now?" said Laddie.  "No, I didn't know for sure, but I

had suspicions.  You always have had such a fondness for that

particular piece of tinware."



"But Laddie, it means so much!"



"Doesn't it?" said Laddie.  "A few days ago no one could have

convinced me that it meant anything at all to me, or ever could. 

Just look at me now!"



"Don't joke, Laddie!  Something must be done."



"Well, ain't I doing it?" asked Laddie.  "Look at all these acres

and acres of Jim-dandy plowing!"



"Don't!" I begged.  "Why don't you go over there?"



"No use, Chicken," said Laddie.  "You see her exact stipulation

was that I must CHANGE MY OCCUPATION before I came again."



"What does she want you to do?"



"Law, I think.  Unfortunately, I showed her a letter from Jerry

asking me to enter his office this fall."



"Hadn't you better do it, Laddie?"



"How would you like to be shut in little, stuffy rooms, and set

to droning over books and papers every hour of the day, all your

life, and to spend the best of your brain and bodily strength

straightening out other men's quarrels?"



"Oh Laddie, you just couldn't!" I cried.



"Precisely!" said Laddie.  "I just couldn't, and I just won't!"



"What can you do?"



"I might compromise on stock," he said.  "I could follow the same

occupation as her father, and with better success.  Neither he

nor his men get the best results from horses.  They don't

understand them, especially the breeds they are attempting to

handle.  Most Arab horsemen are tent dwellers.  They travel from

one oasis to another with their stock.  At night their herds are

gathered around them as children.  As children they love them,

pet them, feed them.  Each is named for a divinity, a planet or a

famous ruler, and the understanding between master and beast is

perfect.  Honestly, Little Sister, I think you have got to

believe in the God of Israel, in order to say the right word to

an Arabian horse; and I know you must believe in the God of love.

A beast of that breed, jerked, kicked, and scolded is a fine

horse ruined.  If I owned half the stock Mr. Pryor has over

there, I could put it in such shape for market that I could get

twice from it what his men will."



"Are Thomas and James rough with the horses?"



"`Like master, like man,' " quoted Laddie.  "They are!  They are

foolish with the Kentucky strain, and fools with the Arab; and

yet, that combination beats the world.  But I must get on with

the P.C. job."



He slid from the fence, took a drink from his water jug, and

pulled a handful of grass for each horse.  As he stood feeding

them, I almost fell from the top rail.



"Laddie!" I whispered.  "Look!  Mr. Pryor is halfway across the

field on Ranger."



"So?" said Laddie.  "Now I wonder----"



"Shall I go?"



"No indeed !" said Laddie.  "Stay right where you are.  It can't

be anything of much importance."



At first it didn't seem to be.  They talked about the weather,

the soil, the team.  Laddie scooped a handful of black earth, and

holding it out, told Mr. Pryor all about how good it was, and

why, and he seemed interested.  Then they talked about

everything; until if he had been Jacob Hood, he would have gone

away.  But just at the time when I expected him to start, he

looked at Laddie straight and hard.



"I missed you Sabbath evening," he said.



Then I looked at him.  He had changed, some way.  He seemed more

human, more like our folks, less cold and stern.



"I sincerely hope it was unanimous," said Laddie.



Mr. Pryor had to laugh.



"It was a majority, at any rate."



Laddie stared dazed.  You see that was kind of a joke.  An easy

one, because I caught it; but we were not accustomed to expecting

a jest from Mr. Pryor.  Not one of us dreamed there was a joke

between his hat crown and his boot soles.  Then Laddie laughed;

but he sobered quickly.



"I'm mighty sorry if Mrs. Pryor missed me," he said.  "I thought

of her.  I have grown to be her devoted slave, and I hoped she

liked me."



"You put it mildly," said Mr. Pryor.  "Since you didn't come when

she expected you, we've had the worst time with her that we have

had since we reached this da--ah--er--um--this country."



"Could you make any suggestion?" asked Laddie.



"I could!  I would suggest that you act like the sensible fellow

I know you to be, and come as usual, at your accustomed times."



"But I'm forbidden, man!" cried Laddie.



Ugh!  Such awful things as Mr. Pryor said.



"Forbidden!" he cried.  "Is a man's roof his own, or is it not? 

While I live, I propose to be the head of my family.  I invite

you!  I ask you!  Mrs. Pryor and I want you!  What more is

necessary?"



"TWO things," said Laddie, just as serenely.  "That Miss Pryor

wants me, and that I want to come."



"D'ye mean to tell me that you DON'T want to come, eh?  After the

fight you put up to force your way in!"



Laddie studied the sky, a whimsy smile on his lips.



"Now wasn't that a good fight?" he inquired.  "I'm mighty proud

of it!  But not now, or ever, do I wish to enter your house

again, if Miss Pryor doesn't want, and welcome me."



Then he went over, took Mr. Pryor's horse by the head, and began

working with its bridle.  It didn't set right some way, and Mr.

Pryor had jerked, spurred, and mauled, until there was a big

space tramped to mortar.  Laddie slid his fingers beneath the

leather, eased it a little, and ran his hands over the fretful

creature's head.  It just stopped, stood still, pushed its nose

under his arm, and pressed against his side.  Mr. Pryor arose in

one stirrup, swung around and alighted.  He looped an arm through

the bridle rein, and with both hands gripped his whipstock.



"How the devil do you do it?" he asked, as if he were provoked.



"First, the bridle was uncomfortable; next, you surely know, Mr.

Pryor, that a man can transfer his mental state to his mount."



Laddie pointed to the churned up earth.



"THAT represents your mental state; THIS"--he slid his hand down

the neck of the horse--"portrays mine."



Mr. Pryor's face reddened, but Laddie was laughing so heartily he

joined in sort of sickly-like.



"Oh I doubt if you are so damnably calm!" he cried.



"I'm CALM enough, so far as that goes," said Laddie.  "I'm not

denying that I've got about all the heartache I can conveniently

carry."



"Do you mind telling me how far this affair has gone?"



"Wouldn't a right-minded man give the woman in the case the first

chance to answer that question?  I greatly prefer that you ask

Miss Pryor."



If ever I felt sorry for any one, I did then for Mr. Pryor.  He

stood there gripping the whip with both hands and he looked

exactly as if the May wind might break him into a thousand tiny

pieces, and every one of them would be glass.



"Um--er----" he said at last.  "You're right, of course, but

unfortunately, Pamela and her mother did not agree with my

motives, or my course in coming to this country; and while there

is no outward demonstration er--um--other than Mrs. Pryor's

seclusion; yet, er--um!--I am forced to the belief that I'm NOT

in their confidence."



"I see!" said Laddie.  "And of course you love your daughter as

any man would love so beautiful a child, and when she is all he

has----"  I thought the break was coming right there, but Mr.

Pryor clenched his whip and put it off; still, any one watching

with half an eye could see that it was only put off, and not for

long at that,--"It has been my idea, Mr. Pryor, that the proper

course for me was to see if I could earn any standing with your

daughter.  If I could, and she gave me permission, then I

intended coming to you the instant I knew how she felt.  But in

such a case as this, I don't think I shall find the slightest

hesitation in telling you anything you want to know, that I am

able."



"You don't know how you stand with her?"



Laddie took off his hat and ran his fingers through his hair. 

His feet were planted widely apart, and his face was sober enough

for any funeral now.  At last he spoke.



"I've been trying to figure that out," he said slowly.  "I

believe the situation is as open to you as it is to me.  She was

a desperately lonely, homesick girl, when she caught my eye and

heart; and I placed myself on her horizon.  In her case the women

were slow in offering friendship, because, on account of Mrs.

Pryor's seclusion, none was felt to be wanted; then Miss Pryor

was different in dress and manner.  I found a way to let her see

that I wanted to be friends, and she accepted my friendship, and

at the same time allowed it go only so far.  On a few rare

occasions, I've met her alone, and we've talked out various

phases of life together; but most of our intercourse has taken

place in your home, and in your presence.  You probably have seen

her meet and entertain her friends frequently.  I should think

you would be more nearly able to gauge my standing with her than

I am."



"You haven't told her that you love her?"



"Haven't I though?" cried Laddie.  "Man alive!  What do you think

I'm made of?  Putty?  Told her?  I've told her a thousand times. 

I've said it, and sung it and whistled it, and looked it, and

lived it.  I've written it, and ridden it, and this week I've

plowed it!  Your daughter knows as she knows nothing else, in all

this world, that she has only to give me one glance, one word,

one gesture of invitation, to find me before her six feet of the

worst demoralized beefsteak a woman ever undertook to handle. 

Told her?  Ye Gods!  I should say I've told her!"



If any of Pryors had been outdoors they certainly could have

heard Mr. Pryor.  How he laughed!  He shook until he tottered. 

Laddie took his arm and led him to the fence.  He lifted a broad

top rail, pushed it between two others across a corner and made a

nice comfortable seat for him.  After a while Mr. Pryor wiped his

eyes.  Laddie stood watching him with a slow grin on his face.



"And she hasn't given the signal you are waiting for?" he asked

at last.



Laddie slowly shook his head.



"Nary the ghost of a signal!" he said.  "Now we come to Sunday

before last.  I only intimated, vaguely, that a hint of where I

stood would be a comfort--and played Jonah.  The whale swallowed

me at a gulp, and for all my inches, never batted an eye.  You

see, a few days before I showed her a letter from my brother

Jerry, because I thought it might interest her.  There was

something in it to which I had paid little or no attention, about

my going to the city and beginning work in his law office; to cap

that, evidently you had mentioned before her our prize piece of

family tinware.  There was a culmination like a thunder clap in a

January sky.  She said everything that was on her mind about a

man of my size and ability doing the work I am, and then she said

I must change my occupation before I came again."



"And for answer you've split the echoes with some shrill,

abominable air, and plowed, before her very eyes, for a week!"



Then Laddie laughed.



"Do you know," he said; "that's a good one on me!  It never

occurred to me that she would not be familiar with that air, and

understand its application.  Do you mean to crush me further by

telling me that all my perfectly lovely vocalizing and whistling

was lost?"



"It was a dem irritating, challenging sort of thing," said Mr.

Pryor.  "I listened to it by the hour, myself, trying to make out

exactly what it did mean.  It seemed to combine defiance with

pleading, and through and over all ran a note of glee that was

really quite charming."



"You have quoted a part of it, literally," said Laddie.  "`A note

of glee'--the cry of a glad heart, at peace with all the world,

busy with congenial work."



"I shouldn't have thought you'd have been so particularly

joyful."



"Oh, the joy was in the music," said Laddie.  "That was a whistle

to keep up my courage.  The joy was in the song, not in me!  Last

week was black enough for me to satisfy the most exacting

pessimist."



"I wish you might have seen the figure you cut!  That fine team,

flower bedecked, and the continuous concert!"



"But I did!" cried Laddie.  "We have mirrors.  That song can't be

beaten.  I know this team is all right, and I'm not dwarfed or

disfigured.  That was the pageant of summer passing in review. 

It represented the tilling of the soil; the sowing of seed,

garnering to come later.  You buy corn and wheat, don't you? 

They are vastly necessary.  Much more so than the settling of

quarrels that never should have taken place.  Do you think your

daughter found the spectacle at all moving?"



"Damn you, sir, what I should do, is to lay this whip across your

shoulders!" cried Mr. Pryor.



But if you will believe it, he was laughing again.



"I prefer that you don't," said Laddie, "or on Ranger either. 

See how he likes being gentled."



Then he straightened and drew a deep breath.



"Mr. Pryor," he said, "as man to man, I have got this to say to

you--and you may use your own discretion about repeating it to

your daughter:  I can offer her six feet of as sound manhood as

you can find on God's footstool.  I never in my whole life have

had enough impure blood in my body to make even one tiny eruption

on my skin.  I never have been ill a day in my life.  I never

have touched a woman save as I lifted and cared for my mother,

and hers, or my sisters.  As to my family and education she can

judge for herself.  I offer her the first and only love of my

heart.  She objects to farming, because she says it is dirty,

offensive work.  There are parts of it that are dirty.  Thank

God, it only soils the body, and that can be washed.  To delve

and to dive into, and to study and to brood over the bigger half

of the law business of any city is to steep your brain in, and

smirch your soul with, such dirt as I would die before I'd make

an occupation of touching.  Will you kindly tell her that word

for word, and that I asked you to?"



Mr. Pryor was standing before I saw him rise.  He said those

awful words again, but between them he cried:  "You're right! 

It's the truth! It's the eternal truth!"



"It IS the truth," said Laddie.  "I've only to visit the offices,

and examine the business of those of my family living by law, to

KNOW that it's the truth.  Of course there's another side!  There

are times when there are great opportunities to do good; I

recognize that.  To some these may seem to overbalance that to

which I object.  If they do, all right.  I am merely deciding for

myself.  Once and for all, for me it is land.  It is born in me

to love it, to handle it easily, to get the best results from

stock.  I am going to take the Merriweather place adjoining ours

on the west, and yours on the south.  I intend to lease it for

ten years, with purchase privilege at the end, so that if I make

of it what I plan, my work will not be lost to me.  I had thought

to fix up the place and begin farming.  If Miss Pryor has any use

whatever for me, and prefers stock, that is all right with me. 

I'll go into the same business she finds suitable for you.  I can

start in a small way and develop.  I can afford a maid for her

from the beginning, but I couldn't clothe her as she has been

accustomed to being dressed, for some time.  I would do my best,

however.  I know what store my mother sets by being well gowned. 

And as a husband, I can offer your daughter as loving

consideration as woman ever received at the hands of man. 

Provided by some miracle I could win her consent, would you even

consider me, and such an arrangement?"



"Frankly sir," said Mr. Pryor, "I have reached the place where I

would be----" whenever you come to a long black line like that,

it means that he just roared a lot of words father never said,

and never will--"glad to!  To tell the truth, the thing you

choose to jestingly refer to as `tinware'--I hope later to

convince of the indelicacy of such allusion--would place you in

England on a social level above any we ever occupied, or could

hope to.  Your education equals ours.  You are a physical

specimen to be reckoned with, and I believe what you say of

yourself.  There's something so clean and manly about you, it

amounts to confirmation.  A woman should set her own valuation on

that; and the height of it should correspond with her knowledge

of the world."



"Thank you!" said Laddie.  "You are more than kind! more than

generous!"



"As to the arrangements you could make for Pamela," said Mr.

Pryor, "she's all we have.  Everything goes to her, ultimately. 

She has her stipulated allowance now; whether in my house or

yours, it would go with her.  Surely you wouldn't be so callous

as to object to our giving her anything that would please us!"



"Why should I?" asked Laddie.  "That's only natural on your part.



Your child is your child; no matter where or what it is, you

expect to exercise a certain amount of loving care over it.  My

father and mother constantly send things to their children absent

from home, and they take much pleasure in doing it.  That is

between you and your daughter, of course.  I shouldn't think of

interfering.  But in the meantime, unless Miss Pryor has been

converted to the beauties of plowing through my continuous

performance of over a week, I stand now exactly where I did

before, so far as she is concerned.  If you and Mrs. Pryor have

no objection to me, if you feel that you could think of me, or

find for me any least part of a son's place in your hearts, I

believe I should know how to appreciate it, and how to go to work

to make myself worthy of it."



Mr. Pryor sat down so suddenly, the rail almost broke.  I thought

the truth was, that he had heart trouble, himself.  He stopped

up, choked on things, flopped around, and turned so white.  I

suppose he thought it was womanish, and a sign of weakness.  and

so he didn't tell, but I bet anything that he had it--bad!



"I'll try to make the little fool see!" he said.



"Gently, gently!  You won't help me any in that mood," said

Laddie.  "The chances are that Miss Pryor repeated what she heard

from you long ago, and what she knows you think and feel, unless

you've changed recently."



"That's the amount of it!" cried Mr. Pryor.  "All my life I've

had a lot of beastly notions in my head about rank, and class,

and here they don't amount to a damn!  There's no place for them.

Things are different.  Your mother, a grand, good woman, opened

my eyes to many things recently, and I get her viewpoint--

clearly, and I agree with her, and with you, sir!--I agree with

you!"



"I am more than glad," said Laddie.  "You certainly make a friend

at court.  Thank you very much!"



"And you will come----?"



"The instant Miss Pryor gives me the slightest sign that I am

wanted, and will be welcomed by her, I'll come like a Dakota

blizzard!  Flos can hump herself on time for once."



"But you won't come until she does?"



"Man alive!  I can't!" cried Laddie.  "Your daughter said

positively exactly what she meant.  It was unexpected and it hit

me so hard I didn't try to argue.  I simply took her at her word,

her very explicit word."



"Fool!" cried Mr. Pryor.  "The last thing on earth any woman ever

wants or expects is for a man to take her at her word."



"What?" cried Laddie.



"She had what she said in her mind of course, but what she wanted

was to be argued out of it!  She wanted to be convinced!"



"I think not!  She was entirely too convincing herself," said

Laddie.  "It's my guess that she has thought matters over, and

that her mind is made up; but I would take it as a mighty big

favour if you would put that little piece of special pleading

squarely up to her.  Will you?"



"Yes," said Mr. Pryor, "I will.  I'll keep cool and do my best,

but I am so unfortunate in my temper.  I could manage slaves

better than women.  This time I'll be calm, and reason things out

with her, or I'll blow out my brains."



"Don't you dare!" laughed Laddie.  "You and I are going to get

much pleasure, comfort and profit from this world, now that we

have come to an understanding."



Mr. Pryor arose and held out his hand.  Laddie grasped it tight,

and they stood there looking straight at each other, while a lark

on the fence post close by cried, "Spring o' ye-ar !" at them,

over and over, but they never paid the least attention.



"You see," said Mr. Pryor, "I've been thinking things over

deeply, deeply! ever since talking with your mother.  I've cut

myself off from going back to England, by sacrificing much of my

property in hasty departure, if by any possibility I should ever

want to return, and there is none, not the slightest!  There's no

danger of any one crossing the sea, and penetrating to this

particular spot so far inland; we won't be molested!  And

lately--lately, despite the rawness, and the newness, there is

something about the land that takes hold, after all.  I should

dislike leaving now!  I found in watching some roots your mother

gave me, that I wanted them to grow, that I very much hoped they

would develop, and beautify our place with flowers, as yours is. 

I find myself watching them, watching them daily, and oftener,

and there seems to be a sort of home feeling creeping around my

heart.  I wish Pamela would listen to reason!  I wish she would

marry you soon!  I wish there would be little children.  Nothing

else on earth would come so close to comforting my wife, and me

also.  Nothing!  Go ahead, lad, plow away!  I'll put your special

pleading up to the girl."



He clasped Laddie's hand, mounted and rode back to the gate he

had entered when he came.  Laddie sat on the rail, so I climbed

down beside him.  He put his arm around me.



"Do I feel any better?" he asked dubiously.



"Of course you do!" I said stoutly.  "You feel whole heaps, and

stacks, and piles better.  You haven't got him to fight any more,

or Mrs. Pryor.  It's now only to convince the Princess about how

it's all right to plow."



"Small matter, that!" said Laddie.  "And easy!  Just as simple

and easy!"



"Have you asked the Fairies to help you?"



"Aye, aye, sir," said Laddie.  "Also the winds, the flowers, the

birds and the bees!  I have asked everything on earth to help me

except you, Little Sister.  I wonder if I have been making a

mistake there?"



"Are you mad at me, Laddie?"



"'Cause for why?"



"About the old crest thing!"



"Forget it!" laughed Laddie.  "I have.  And anyway, in the long

run, I must be honest enough to admit that it may have helped. 

It seems to have had its influence with Mr. Pryor, no doubt it

worked the same on Mrs. Pryor, and it may be that it was because

she had so much more to bank on than she ever expected, that the

Princess felt emboldened to make her demand.  It may be, you

can't tell!  Anyway, it's very evident that it did no real harm. 

And forget my jesting, Chicken.  A man can't always cry because

there are tears in his heart.  I think quite as much of that

crest as you do.  In the sum of human events, it is a big thing. 

No one admires a Crusader more than I.  No one likes a good fight

better.  No Crusader ever put up a stiffer battle than I have in

the past week while working in these fields.  Every inch of them

is battlefield, every furrow a separate conflict.  Gaze upon the

scene of my Waterloo!  When June covers it with green, it will

wave over the resting place of my slain heart!"



"Oh Laddie!" I sobbed.  "There you go again!  How can you?"



"Whoo-pee!" cried Laddie.  "That's the question!  How can I?  Got

to, Little Sister!  There's no other way."



"No," I was forced to admit, "there isn't.  What are we going to

do now?"



"Life-saver, we'll now go to dinner," said Laddie.  "Nothing

except the partnership implied in `we' sustains me now.  YOU'LL

FIND A WAY TO HELP ME OUT, WON'T YOU, LITTLE SISTER?"



"OF COURSE I WILL!" I promised, without ever stopping a minute to

think what kind of a job that was going to be.



Did you ever wish with all your might that something would

happen, and wait for it, expect it, and long for it, and nothing

did, until it grew so bad, it seemed as if you had to go on

another minute you couldn't bear it?  Now I thought when Mr.

Pryor talked to her, maybe she'd send for Laddie that very same

night; but send nothing!  She didn't even ride on our road any

more.  Of course her father had made a botch of it!  Bet I could

have told her Laddie's message straighter than he did.  I could

think it over, and see exactly how he'd do.  He'd talk nicely

about one minute, and the first word she said, that he didn't

like, he'd be ranting, and using unsuitable words.  Just as like

as not he told her that he'd lay his whip across her shoulders,

like he had Laddie.  Any one could see that as long as she was

his daughter, she might be slightly handy with whips herself; at

least she wouldn't be likely to stand still and tell him to go

ahead and beat her.



Sunday Laddie went to Lucy's.  He said he was having a family

reunion on the installment plan.  Of course we laughed, but none

of us missed the long look he sent toward Pryors' as he mounted

to start in the opposite direction.



Everything went on.  I didn't see how it could, but it did.  It

even got worse, for another letter came from Shelley that made

matters concerning her no brighter, and while none of us talked

about Laddie, all of us knew mighty well how we felt; and what

was much worse, how he felt.  Father and mother had quit worrying

about God; especially father.  He seemed to think that God and

Laddie could be trusted to take care of the Princess, and I don't

know exactly what mother thought.  No doubt she saw she couldn't

help herself, and so she decided it was useless to struggle.



The plowing on the west side was almost finished, and some of the

seed was in.  Laddie went straight ahead flower-trimmed and

whistling until his face must have ached as badly as his heart. 

In spite of how hard he tried to laugh, and keep going, all of us

could see that he fairly had to stick up his head and stretch his

neck like the blue goose, to make the bites go down.  And you

couldn't help seeing the roundness and the colour go from his

face, a little more every day.  My! but being in love, when you

couldn't have the one you loved, was the worst of all.  I wore

myself almost as thin as Laddie, hunting a Fairy to ask if she'd

help me to make the Princess let Laddie go on and plow, when he

was so crazy about it.  I prayed beside my bed every night, until

the Lord must have grown so tired He quit listening to me, for I

talked right up as impressively as I knew how, and it didn't do

the least bit of good.  I hadn't tried the one big prayer toward

the east yet; but I was just about to the place where I intended

to do it soon.

