




Laddie, A True Blue Story



by Gene Stratton Porter








To

LEANDER ELLIOT STRATTON

"The Way to Be Happy Is to Be Good"










CHAPTER I



Little Sister





            "And could another child-world be my share,

             I'd be a Little Sister there."





Have I got a Little Sister anywhere in this house?" inquired

Laddie at the door, in his most coaxing voice.



"Yes sir," I answered, dropping the trousers I was making for

Hezekiah, my pet bluejay, and running as fast as I could.  There

was no telling what minute May might take it into her head that

she was a little sister and reach him first.  Maybe he wanted me

to do something for him, and I loved to wait on Laddie.



"Ask mother if you may go with me a while."



"Mother doesn't care where I am, if I come when the supper bell

rings."



"All right!" said Laddie.



He led the way around the house, sat on the front step and took

me between his knees.



"Oh, is it going to be a secret?" I cried.



Secrets with Laddie were the greatest joy in life.  He was so big

and so handsome.  He was so much nicer than any one else in our

family, or among our friends, that to share his secrets, run his

errands, and love him blindly was the greatest happiness. 

Sometimes I disobeyed father and mother; I minded Laddie like his

right hand.



"The biggest secret yet," he said gravely.



"Tell quick!" I begged, holding my ear to his lips.



"Not so fast!" said Laddie.  "Not so fast!  I have doubts about

this.  I don't know that I should send you.  Possibly you can't

find the way.  You may be afraid.  Above all, there is never to

be a whisper.  Not to any one!  Do you understand?"



"What's the matter?" I asked.



"Something serious," said Laddie.  "You see, I expected to have

an hour or two for myself this afternoon, so I made an engagement

to spend the time with a Fairy Princess in our Big Woods.  Father

and I broke the reaper taking it from the shed just now and you

know how he is about Fairies."



I did know how he was about Fairies.  He hadn't a particle of

patience with them.  A Princess would be the Queen's daughter. 

My father's people were English, and I had heard enough talk to

understand that.  I was almost wild with excitement.



"Tell me the secret, hurry!" I cried.



"It's just this," he said.  "It took me a long time to coax the

Princess into our Big Woods.  I had to fix a throne for her to

sit on; spread a Magic Carpet for her feet, and build a wall to

screen her.  Now, what is she going to think if I'm not there to

welcome her when she comes?  She promised to show me how to make

sunshine on dark days."



"Tell father and he can have Leon help him."



"But it is a secret with the Princess, and it's HERS as much as

mine.  If I tell, she may not like it, and then she won't make me

her Prince and send me on her errands."



"Then you don't dare tell a breath," I said.



"Will you go in my place, and carry her a letter to explain why

I'm not coming, Little Sister?"



"Of course!" I said stoutly, and then my heart turned right over;

for I never had been in our Big Woods alone, and neither mother

nor father wanted me to go.  Passing Gypsies sometimes laid down

the fence and went there to camp.  Father thought all the wolves

and wildcats were gone, he hadn't seen any in years, but every

once in a while some one said they had, and he was not quite sure

yet.  And that wasn't the beginning of it.  Paddy Ryan had come

back from the war wrong in his head.  He wore his old army

overcoat summer and winter, slept on the ground, and ate whatever

he could find.  Once Laddie and Leon, hunting squirrels to make

broth for mother on one of her bad days, saw him in our Big Woods

and he was eating SNAKES.  If I found Pat Ryan eating a snake, it



would frighten me so I would stand still and let him eat me, if

he wanted to, and perhaps he wasn't too crazy to see how plump I

was.  I seemed to see swarthy, dark faces, big, sleek cats

dropping from limbs, and Paddy Ryan's matted gray hair, the

flying rags of the old blue coat, and a snake in his hands. 

Laddie was slipping the letter into my apron pocket.  My knees

threatened to let me down.



"Must I lift the leaves and hunt for her, or will she come to

me?" I wavered.



"That's the biggest secret of all," said Laddie.  "Since the

Princess entered them, our woods are Enchanted, and there is no

telling what wonderful things may happen any minute.  One of them

is this: whenever the Princess comes there, she grows in size

until she is as big as, say our Sally, and she fills all the

place with glory, until you are so blinded you scarcely can see

her face."



"What is she like, Laddie?" I questioned, so filled with awe and

interest, that fear was forgotten.



"She is taller than Sally," said Laddie.  "Her face is oval, and

her cheeks are bright.  Her eyes are big moonlit pools of

darkness, and silken curls fall over her shoulders.  One hair is

strong enough for a lifeline that will draw a drowning man

ashore, or strangle an unhappy one.  But you will not see her. 

I'm purposely sending you early, so you can do what you are told

and come back to me before she even reaches the woods."



"What am I to do, Laddie?"



"You must put one hand in your apron pocket and take the letter

in it, and as long as you hold it tight, nothing in the world can

hurt you.   Go out our lane to the Big Woods, climb the gate and

walk straight back the wagon road to the water.  When you reach

that, you must turn to your right and go toward Hoods' until you

come to the pawpaw thicket.   Go around that, look ahead, and

you'll see the biggest beech tree you ever saw.  You know a

beech, don't you?"



"Of course I do," I said indignantly.  "Father taught me beech

with the other trees."



"Well then," said Laddie, "straight before you will be a purple

beech, and under it is the throne of the Princess, the Magic

Carpet, and the walls I made.  Among the beech roots there is a

stone hidden with moss.  Roll the stone back and there will be a

piece of bark.  Lift that, lay the letter in the box you'll find,

and scamper to me like flying.  I'll be at the barn with father."



"Is that all?"



"Not quite," said Laddie.  "It's possible that the Fairy Queen

may have set the Princess spinning silk for the caterpillars to

weave their little houses with this winter; and if she has, she

may have left a letter there to tell me.  If there is one, put it

in your pocket, hold it close every step of the way, and you'll

be safe coming home as you were going.  But you mustn't let a

soul see it; you must slip it into my pocket when I'm not

looking.  If you let any one see, then the Magic will be spoiled,

and the Fairy won't come again."



"No one shall see," I promised.



"I knew you could be trusted," said Laddie, kissing and hugging

me hard.  "Now go!  If anything gets after you that such a big

girl as you really wouldn't be ashamed to be afraid of, climb on

a fence and call.  I'll be listening, and I'll come flying.  Now

I must hurry.  Father will think it's going to take me the

remainder of the day to find the bolts he wants."



We went down the front walk between the rows of hollyhocks and

tasselled lady-slippers, out the gate, and followed the road. 

Laddie held one of my hands tight, and in the other I gripped the

letter in my pocket.  So long as Laddie could see me, and the

lane lay between open fields, I wasn't afraid.  I was thinking so

deeply about our woods being Enchanted, and a tiny Fairy growing

big as our Sally, because she was in them, that I stepped out

bravely.



Every few days I followed the lane as far back as the Big Gate. 

This stood where four fields cornered, and opened into the road

leading to the woods.  Beyond it, I had walked on Sunday

afternoons with father while he taught me all the flowers, vines,

and bushes he knew, only he didn't know some of the prettiest

ones; I had to have books for them, and I was studying to learn

enough that I could find out.  Or I had ridden on the wagon with

Laddie and Leon when they went to bring wood for the cookstove,

outoven, and big fireplace.  But to walk!  To go all alone!  Not

that I didn't walk by myself over every other foot of the acres

and acres of beautiful land my father owned; but plowed fields,

grassy meadows, wood pasture, and the orchard were different.  I

played in them without a thought of fear.



The only things to be careful about were a little, shiny, slender

snake, with a head as bright as mother's copper kettle, and a big

thick one with patterns on its back like those in Laddie's

geometry books, and a whole rattlebox on its tail; not to eat any

berry or fruit I didn't know without first asking father; and

always to be sure to measure how deep the water was before I

waded in alone.



But our Big Woods!  Leon said the wildcats would get me there.  I

sat in our catalpa and watched the Gypsies drive past every

summer.  Mother hated them as hard as ever she could hate any

one, because once they had stolen some fine shirts, with linen

bosoms, that she had made by hand for father, and was bleaching

on the grass.  If Gypsies should be in our west woods to-day and

steal me, she would hate them worse than ever; because my mother

loved me now, even if she didn't want me when I was born.



But you could excuse her for that.  She had already bathed,

spanked, sewed for, and reared eleven babies so big and strong

not one of them ever even threatened to die.  When you thought of

that, you could see she wouldn't be likely to implore the

Almighty to send her another, just to make her family even

numbers.  I never felt much hurt at her, but some of the others I

never have forgiven and maybe I never will.  As long as there had

been eleven babies, they should have been so accustomed to

children that they needn't all of them have objected to me, all

except Laddie, of course.  That was the reason I loved him so and

tried to do every single thing he wanted me to, just the way he

liked it done.  That was why I was facing the only spot on our

land where I was in the slightest afraid; because he asked me to.



If he had told me to dance a jig on the ridgepole of our barn, I

would have tried it.



So I clasped the note, set my teeth, and climbed over the gate. 

I walked fast and kept my eyes straight before me.  If I looked

on either side, sure as life I would see something I never had

before, and be down digging up a strange flower, chasing a

butterfly, or watching a bird.  Besides, if I didn't look in the

fence corners that I passed, maybe I wouldn't see anything to

scare me.  I was going along finely, and feeling better every

minute as I went down the bank of an old creek that had gone dry,

and started up the other side toward the sugar camp not far from

the Big Woods.  The bed was full of weeds and as I passed

through, away! went Something among them.



Beside the camp shed there was corded wood, and the first thing I

knew, I was on top of it.  The next, my hand was on the note in

my pocket.  My heart jumped until I could see my apron move, and

my throat went all stiff and dry.  I gripped the note and waited.



Father believed God would take care of him.  I was only a little

girl and needed help much more than a man; maybe God would take

care of me.  There was nothing wrong in carrying a letter to the

Fairy Princess.  I thought perhaps it would help if I should

kneel on the top of the woodpile and ask God to not let anything

get me.



The more I thought about it, the less I felt like doing it,

though, because really you have no business to ask God to take

care of you, unless you KNOW you are doing right.  This was

right, but in my heart I also knew that if Laddie had asked me, I

would be shivering on top of that cordwood on a hot August day,

when it was wrong.  On the whole, I thought it would be more

honest to leave God out of it, and take the risk myself.  That

made me think of the Crusaders, and the little gold trinket in

father's chest till.  There were four shells on it and each one

stood for a trip on foot or horseback to the Holy City when you

had to fight almost every step of the way.  Those shells meant

that my father's people had gone four times, so he said; that,

although it was away far back, still each of us had a tiny share

of the blood of the Crusaders in our veins, and that it would

make us brave and strong, and whenever we were afraid, if we

would think of them, we never could do a cowardly thing or let

any one else do one before us.  He said any one with Crusader

blood had to be brave as Richard the Lion-hearted.  Thinking

about that helped ever so much, so I gripped the note and turned

to take one last look at the house before I made a dash for the

gate that led into the Big Woods.



Beyond our land lay the farm of Jacob Hood, and Mrs. Hood always

teased me because Laddie had gone racing after her when I was

born.  She was in the middle of Monday's washing, and the bluing

settled in the rinse water and stained her white clothes in

streaks it took months to bleach out.  I always liked Sarah Hood

for coming and dressing me, though, because our Sally, who was

big enough to have done it, was upstairs crying and wouldn't come

down.  I liked Laddie too, because he was the only one of our

family who went to my mother and kissed her, said he was glad,

and offered to help her.  Maybe the reason he went was because he

had an awful scare, but anyway he WENT, and that was enough for

me.



You see it was this way: no one wanted me; as there had been

eleven of us, every one felt that was enough.  May was six years

old and in school, and my mother thought there never would be any

more babies.  She had given away the cradle and divided the baby

clothes among my big married sisters and brothers, and was having

a fine time and enjoying herself the most she ever had in her

life.  The land was paid for long ago; the house she had planned,

builded as she wanted it; she had a big team of matched grays and

a carriage with side lamps and patent leather trimmings; and

sometimes there was money in the bank.  I do not know that there

was very much, but any at all was a marvel, considering how many

of us there were to feed, clothe, and send to college.  Mother

was forty-six and father was fifty; so they felt young enough yet

to have a fine time and enjoy life, and just when things were

going best, I announced that I was halfway over my journey to

earth.



You can't blame my mother so much.  She must have been tired of

babies and disliked to go back and begin all over after resting

six years.  And you mustn't be too hard on my father if he was

not just overjoyed.  He felt sure the cook would leave, and she

did.  He knew Sally would object to a baby, when she wanted to

begin having beaus, so he and mother talked it over and sent her

away for a long visit to Ohio with father's people, and never

told her.  They intended to leave her there until I was over the

colic, at least.  They knew the big married brothers and sisters

would object, and they did.  They said it would be embarrassing

for their children to be the nieces and nephews of an aunt or

uncle younger than themselves.  They said it so often and so

emphatically that father was provoked and mother cried.  Shelley

didn't like it because she was going to school in Groveville,

where Lucy, one of our married sisters, lived, and she was afraid

I would make so much work she would have to give up her books and

friends and remain at home.  There never was a baby born who was

any less wanted than I was.  I knew as much about it as any one

else, because from the day I could understand, all of them,

father, mother, Shelley, Sarah Hood, every one who knew, took

turns telling me how badly I was not wanted, how much trouble I

made, and how Laddie was the only one who loved me at first. 

Because of that I was on the cordwood trying to find courage to

go farther.  Over and over Laddie had told me himself.  He had

been to visit our big sister Elizabeth over Sunday and about

eight o'clock Monday morning he came riding down the road, and

saw the most dreadful thing.  There was not a curl of smoke from

the chimneys, not a tablecloth or pillowslip on the line, not a

blind raised.  Laddie said his heart went--just like mine did

when the Something jumped in the creek bed, no doubt.  Then he

laid on the whip and rode.



He flung the rein over the hitching post, leaped the fence and

reached the back door.  The young green girl, who was all father

could get when the cook left, was crying.  So were Shelley and

little May, although she said afterward she had a boil on her

heel and there was no one to poultice it.  Laddie leaned against

the door casing, and it is easy enough to understand what he

thought.  He told me he had to try twice before he could speak,

and then he could only ask:  "What's the matter?"



Probably May never thought she would have the chance, but the

others were so busy crying harder, now that they had an audience,

that she was first to tell him:  "We have got a little sister."



"Great Day!" cried Laddie.  "You made me think we had a funeral! 

Where is mother, and where is my Little Sister?"



He went bolting right into mother's room and kissed her like the

gladdest boy alive; because he was only a boy then, and he told

her how happy he was that she was safe, and then he ASKED for me.



He said I was the only living creature in that house who was not

shedding tears, and I didn't begin for about six months

afterward.  In fact, not until Shelley taught me by pinching me

if she had to rock the cradle; then I would cry so hard mother

would have to take me.  He said he didn't believe I'd ever have

learned by myself.



He took a pillow from the bed, fixed it in the rocking chair and

laid me on it.  When he found that father was hitching the horses

to send Leon for Doctor Fenner, Laddie rode back after Sarah Hood

and spoiled her washing.  It may be that the interest he always

took in me had its beginning in all of them scaring him with

their weeping; even Sally, whom father had to telegraph to come

home, was upstairs crying, and she was almost a woman.  It may be

that all the tears they shed over not wanting me so scared Laddie

that he went farther in his welcome than he ever would have

thought of going if he hadn't done it for joy when he learned his

mother was safe.  I don't care about the reason.  It is enough

for me that from the hour of my birth Laddie named me Little

Sister, seldom called me anything else, and cared for me all he

possibly could to rest mother.  He took me to the fields with him

in the morning and brought me back on the horse before him at

noon.  He could plow with me riding the horse, drive a reaper

with me on his knees, and hoe corn while I slept on his coat in a

fence corner.  The winters he was away at college left me lonely,

and when he came back for a vacation I was too happy for words. 

Maybe it was wrong to love him most.  I knew my mother cared for

and wanted me now.  And all my secrets were not with Laddie.  I

had one with father that I was never to tell so long as he lived,

but it was about the one he loved best, next after mother. 

Perhaps I should never tell it, but I wouldn't be surprised if

the family knew.  I followed Laddie like a faithful dog, when I

was not gripping his waving hair and riding in triumph on his

shoulders.  He never had to go so fast he couldn't take me on his

back.  He never was in too big a hurry to be kind.  He always had

patience to explain every shell, leaf, bird, and flower I asked

about.  I was just as much his when pretty young girls were

around, and the house full of company, as when we were alone. 

That was the reason I was shivering on the cordwood, gripping his

letter and thinking of all these things in order to force myself

to go farther.



I was excited about the Fairies too.  I often had close chances

of seeing them, but I always just missed.  Now here was Laddie

writing letters and expecting answers; our Big Woods Enchanted, a

Magic Carpet and the Queen's daughter becoming our size so she

could speak with him.  No doubt the Queen had her grow big as

Shelley, when she sent her on an errand to tell Laddie about how

to make sunshine; because she was afraid if she went her real

size he would accidentally step on her, he was so dreadfully big.



Or maybe her voice was so fine he could not hear what she said. 

He had told me I was to hurry, and I had gone as fast as I could

until Something jumped; since, I had been settled on that

cordwood like Robinson Crusoe on his desert island.  I had to get

down some time; I might as well start.



I gripped the letter, slid to the ground, and ran toward the big

gate straight before me.  I climbed it, clutched the note again,

and ran blindly down the road through the forest toward the

creek.  I could hurry there.  On either side of it I could not

have run ten steps at a time.  The big trees reached so high

above me it seemed as if they would push through the floor of

Heaven.  I tried to shut my ears and run so fast I couldn't hear

a sound, and so going, I soon came to the creek bank.  There I

turned to my right and went slower, watching for the pawpaw

thicket.  On leaving the road I thought I would have to crawl

over logs and make my way; but there seemed to be kind of a path

not very plain, but travelled enough to follow.  It led straight

to the thicket.  At the edge I stopped to look for the beech.  It

could be reached in one breathless dash, but there seemed to be a

green enclosure, so I walked around until I found an entrance. 

Once there I was so amazed I stood and stared.  I was half

indignant too.



Laddie hadn't done a thing but make an exact copy of my playhouse

under the biggest maiden's-blush in our orchard.  He used the

immense beech for one corner, where I had the apple tree.  His

Magic Carpet was woolly-dog moss, and all the magic about it, was

that on the damp woods floor, in the deep shade, the moss had

taken root and was growing as if it always had been there.  He

had been able to cut and stick much larger willow sprouts for his

walls than I could, and in the wet black mould they didn't look

as if they ever had wilted.  They were so fresh and green, no

doubt they had taken root and were growing.  Where I had a low

bench under my tree, he had used a log; but he had hewed the top

flat, and made a moss cover.  In each corner he had set a fern as

high as my head.  On either side of the entrance he had planted a

cluster of cardinal flower that was in full bloom, and around the

walls in a few places thrifty bunches of Oswego tea and foxfire,

that I would have walked miles to secure for my wild garden under

the Bartlett pear tree.  It was so beautiful it took my breath

away.



"If the Queen's daughter doesn't like this," I said softly,

"she'll have to go to Heaven before she finds anything better,

for there can't be another place on earth so pretty."



It was wonderful how the sound of my own voice gave me courage,

even if it did seem a little strange.  So I hurried to the beech,

knelt and slipped the letter in the box, and put back the bark

and stone.  Laddie had said that nothing could hurt me while I

had the letter, so my protection was gone as soon as it left my

hands.



There was nothing but my feet to save me now.  I thanked goodness

I was a fine runner, and started for the pawpaw thicket.  Once

there, I paused only one minute to see whether the way to the

stream was clear, and while standing tense and gazing, I heard

something.  For an instant it was every bit as bad as at the dry

creek.  Then I realized that this was a soft voice singing, and I

forgot everything else in a glow of delight.  The Princess was

coming!



Never in all my life was I so surprised, and astonished, and

bewildered.  She was even larger than our Sally; her dress was

pale green, like I thought a Fairy's should be; her eyes were

deep and dark as Laddie had said, her hair hung from a part in

the middle of her forehead over her shoulders, and if she had

been in the sun, it would have gleamed like a blackbird's wing. 

She was just as Laddie said she would be; she was so much more

beautiful than you would suppose any woman could be, I stood

there dumbly staring.  I wouldn't have asked for any one more

perfectly beautiful or more like Laddie had said the Princess

would be; but she was no more the daughter of the Fairy Queen

than I was.  She was not any more of a Princess.  If father ever

would tell all about the little bauble he kept in the till of his

big chest, maybe she was not as near!  She was no one on earth

but one of those new English people who had moved on the land

that cornered with ours on the northwest.  She had ridden over

the roads, and been at our meeting house.  There could be no

mistake.



And neither father nor mother would want her on our place.  They

didn't like her family at all.  Mother called them the

neighbourhood mystery, and father spoke of them as the Infidels. 

They had dropped from nowhere, mother said, bought that splendid

big farm, moved on and shut out every one.  Before any one knew

people were shut out, mother, dressed in her finest, with Laddie

driving, went in the carriage, all shining, to make friends with

them.  This very girl opened the door and said that her mother

was "indisposed," and could not see callers.  "In-dis-posed!" 

That's a good word that fills your mouth, but our mother didn't

like having it used to her.  She said the "saucy chit" was

insulting.  Then the man came, and he said he was very sorry, but

his wife would see no one.  He did invite mother in, but she

wouldn't go.  She told us she could see past him into the house

and there was such finery as never in all her days had she laid

eyes on.  She said he was mannerly as could be, but he had the

coldest, severest face she ever saw.



They had two men and a woman servant, and no one could coax a

word from them, about why those people acted as they did.  They

said 'orse, and 'ouse, and Hengland.  They talked so funny you

couldn't have understood them anyway.  They never plowed or put

in a crop.  They made everything into a meadow and had more

horses, cattle, and sheep than a county fair, and everything you

ever knew with feathers, even peacocks.  We could hear them

scream whenever it was going to rain.  Father said they sounded

heathenish.  I rather liked them.  The man had stacks of money or

they couldn't have lived the way they did.  He came to our house

twice on business: once to see about road laws, and again about

tax rates.  Father was mightily pleased at first, because Mr.

Pryor seemed to have books, and to know everything, and father

thought it would be fine to be neighbours.  But the minute Mr.

Pryor finished business he began to argue that every single thing

father and mother believed was wrong.  He said right out in plain

English that God was a myth.  Father told him pretty quickly that

no man could say that in his house; so he left suddenly and had

not been back since, and father didn't want him ever to come

again.



Then their neighbours often saw the woman around the house and

garden.  She looked and acted quite as well as any one, so

probably she was not half so sick as my mother, who had nursed

three of us through typhoid fever, and then had it herself when

she was all tired out.  She wouldn't let a soul know she had a

pain until she dropped over and couldn't take another step, and

father or Laddie carried her to bed.  But she went everywhere,

saw all her friends, and did more good from her bed than any

other woman in our neighbourhood could on her feet.  So we

thought mighty little of those Pryor people.



Every one said the girl was pretty.  Then her clothes drove the

other women crazy.  Some of our neighbourhood came from far down

east, like my mother.  Our people back a little were from over

the sea, and they knew how things should be, to be right.  Many

of the others were from Kentucky and Virginia, and they were well

dressed, proud, handsome women; none better looking anywhere. 

They followed the fashions and spent much time and money on their

clothes.  When it was Quarterly Meeting or the Bishop dedicated

the church or they went to town on court days, you should have

seen them--until Pryors came.  Then something new happened, and

not a woman in our neighbourhood liked it.  Pamela Pryor didn't

follow the fashions.  She set them.  If every other woman made

long tight sleeves to their wrists, she let hers flow to the

elbow and filled them with silk lining, ruffled with lace.  If

they wore high neckbands, she had none, and used a flat lace

collar.  If they cut their waists straight around and gathered

their skirts on six yards full, she ran hers down to a little

point front and back, that made her look slenderer, and put only

half as much goods in her skirt.  Maybe Laddie rode as well as

she could; he couldn't manage a horse any better, and aside from

him there wasn't a man we knew who would have tried to ride some

of the animals she did.



If she ever worked a stroke, no one knew it.  All day long she

sat in the parlour, the very best one, every day; or on benches

under the trees with embroidery frames or books, some of them

fearful, big, difficult looking ones, or rode over the country. 

She rode in sunshine and she rode in storm, until you would think

she couldn't see her way through her tangled black hair.  She

rode through snow and in pouring rain, when she could have stayed

out of it, if she had wanted to.  She didn't seem to be afraid of

anything on earth or in Heaven.  Every one thought she was like

her father and didn't believe there was any God; so when she came

among us at church or any public gathering, as she sometimes did,

people were in no hurry to be friendly, while she looked straight

ahead and never spoke until she was spoken to, and then she was

precise and cold, I tell you.



Men took off their hats, got out of the road when she came

pounding along, and stared after her like "be-addled mummies," my

mother said.  But that was all she, or any one else, could say. 

The young fellows were wild about her, and if they tried to sidle

up to her in the hope that they might lead her horse or get to

hold her foot when she mounted, they always saw when they reached

her, that she wasn't there.



But she was here!  I had seen her only a few times, but this was

the Pryor girl, just as sure as I would have known if it had been

Sally.  What dazed me was that she answered in every particular

the description Laddie had given me of the Queen's daughter.  And

worst of all, from the day she first came among us, moving so

proud and cold, blabbing old Hannah Dover said she carried

herself like a Princess--as if Hannah Dover knew HOW a Princess

carried herself!--every living soul, my father even, had called

her the Princess.  At first it was because she was like they

thought a Princess would be, but later they did it in meanness,

to make fun.  After they knew her name, they were used to calling

her the Princess, so they kept it up, but some of them were

secretly proud of her; because she could look, and do, and be

what they would have given anything to, and knew they couldn't to

save them.



I was never in such a fix in all my life.  She looked more as

Laddie had said the Princess would than you would have thought

any woman could, but she was Pamela Pryor, nevertheless.  Every

one called her the Princess, but she couldn't make reality out of

that.  She just couldn't be the Fairy Queen's daughter; so the

letter couldn't possibly be for her.



She had no business in our woods; you could see that they had

plenty of their own.  She went straight to the door of the willow

room and walked in as if she belonged there.  What if she found

the hollow and took Laddie's letter!  Fast as I could slip over

the leaves, I went back.  She was on the moss carpet, on her

knees, and the letter was in her fingers.  It's a good thing to

have your manners soundly thrashed into you.  You've got to be

scared stiff before you forget them.  I wasn't so afraid of her

as I would have been if I had known she WAS the princess, and

have Laddies letter, she should not.  What had the kind of girl

she was, from a home like hers, to teach any one from our house

about making sunshine?  I was at the willow wall by that time

peering through, so I just parted it a little and said:  "Please

put back that letter where you got it.  It isn't for you."



She knelt on the mosses, the letter in her hand, and her face, as

she turned to me, was rather startled; but when she saw me she

laughed, and said in the sweetest voice I ever heard:  "Are you

so very sure of that?"



"Well I ought to be," I said.  "I put it there."



"Might I inquire for whom you put it there?"



"No ma'am!  That's a secret."



You should have seen the light flame in her eyes, the red deepen

on her cheeks, and the little curl of laughter that curved her

lips.



"How interesting!" she cried.  "I wonder now if you are not

Little Sister."



"I am to Laddie and our folks," I said.  "You are a stranger."



All the dancing lights went from her face.  She looked as if she

were going to cry unless she hurried up and swallowed it down

hard and fast.



"That is quite true," she said.  "I am a stranger.  Do you know

that being a stranger is the hardest thing that can happen to any

one in all this world?"



"Then why don't you open your doors, invite your neighbours in,

go to see them, and stop your father from saying such dreadful

things?"



"They are not my doors," she said, "and could you keep your

father from saying anything he chooses?"



I stood and blinked at her.  Of course I wouldn't even dare try

that.



"I'm so sorry," was all I could think to say.



I couldn't ask her to come to our house.  I knew no one wanted

her.  But if I couldn't speak for the others, surely I might for

myself.  I let go the willows and went to the door.  The Princess

arose and sat on the seat Laddie had made for the Queen's

daughter.  It was an awful pity to tell her she shouldn't sit

there, for I had my doubts if the real, true Princess would be

half as lovely when she came--if she ever did.  Some way the

Princess, who was not a Princess, appeared so real, I couldn't

keep from becoming confused and forgetting that she was only just

Pamela Pryor.  Already the lovely lights had gone from her face

until it made me so sad I wanted to cry, and I was no easy cry-

baby either.  If I couldn't offer friendship for my family I

would for myself.



"You may call me Little Sister, if you like," I said.  "I won't

be a stranger."



"Why how lovely!" cried the Princess.



You should have seen the dancing lights fly back to her eyes. 

Probably you won't believe this, but the first thing I knew I was

beside her on the throne, her arm was around me, and it's the

gospel truth that she hugged me tight.  I just had sense enough

to reach over and pick Laddie's letter from her fingers, and then

I was on her side.  I don't know what she did to me, but all at

once I knew that she was dreadfully lonely; that she hated being

a stranger; that she was sorry enough to cry because their house

was one of mystery, and that she would open the door if she

could.



"I like you," I said, reaching up to touch her curls.



I never had seen her that I did not want to.  They were like I

thought they would be.  Father and Laddie and some of us had wavy

hair, but hers was crisp--and it clung to your fingers, and

wrapped around them and seemed to tug at your heart like it does

when a baby grips you.  I drew away my hand, and the hair

stretched out until it was long as any of ours, and then curled

up again, and you could see that no tins had stabbed into her

head to make those curls.  I began trying to single out one hair.



"What are you doing?" she asked.



"I want to know if only one hair is strong enough to draw a

drowning man from the water or strangle an unhappy one," I said.



"Believe me, no!" cried the Princess.  "It would take all I have,

woven into a rope, to do that."



"Laddie knows curls that just one hair of them is strong enough,"

I boasted.



"I wonder now!" said the Princess.  "I think he must have been

making poetry or telling Fairy tales."



"He was telling the truth," I assured her.  "Father doesn't

believe in Fairies, and mother laughs, but Laddie and I know.  Do

you believe in Fairies?"



"Of course I do!" she said.



"Then you know that this COULD be an Enchanted Wood?"



"I have found it so," said the Princess.



"And MAYBE this is a Magic Carpet?"



"It surely is a Magic Carpet."



"And you might be the daughter of the Queen?  Your eyes are

`moonlit pools of darkness.'  If only your hair were stronger,

and you knew about making sunshine!"



"Maybe it is stronger than I think.  It never has been tested. 

Perhaps I do know about making sunshine.  Possibly I am as true

as the wood and the carpet."



I drew away and stared at her.  The longer I looked the more

uncertain I became.  Maybe her mother was the Queen.  Perhaps

that was the mystery.  It might be the reason she didn't want the

people to see her.  Maybe she was so busy making sunshine for the

Princess to bring to Laddie that she had no time to sew carpet

rags, and to go to quiltings, and funerals, and make visits.  It

was hard to know what to think.



"I wish you'd tell me plain out if you are the Queen's daughter,"

I said.  "It's most important.  You can't have this letter unless

I KNOW.  It's the very first time Laddie ever trusted me with a

letter, and I just can't give it to the wrong person."



"Then why don't you leave it where he told you?"



"But you have gone and found the place.  You started to take it

once; you would again, soon as I left."



"Look me straight in the eyes, Little Sister," said the Princess

softly.  "Am I like a person who would take anything that didn't

belong to her?"



"No!" I said instantly.



"How do you think I happened to come to this place?"



"Maybe our woods are prettier than yours."



"How do you think I knew where the letter was?"



I shook my head.



"If I show you some others exactly like the one you have there,

then will you believe that is for me?"



"Yes," I answered.



I believed it anyway.  It just SEEMED so, the better you knew

her.  The Princess slipped her hand among the folds of the

trailing pale green skirt, and from a hidden pocket drew other

letters exactly like the one I held.  She opened one and ran her

finger along the top line and I read, "To the Princess," and then

she pointed to the ending and it was merely signed, "Laddie," but

all the words written between were his writing.  Slowly I handed

her the letter.



"You don't want me to have it?" she asked.



"Yes," I said.  "I want you to have it if Laddie wrote it for

you--but mother and father won't, not at all."



"What makes you think so?" she asked gently.



"Don't you know what people say about you?"



"Some of it, perhaps."



"Well?"



"Do you think it is true?"



"Not that you're stuck up, and hateful and proud, not that you

don't want to be neighbourly with other people, no, I don't think

that.  But your father said in our home that there was no God,

and you wouldn't let my mother in when she put on her best dress

and went in the carriage, and wanted to be friends.  I have to

believe that."



"Yes, you can't help believing that," said the Princess.



"Then can't you see why you'll be likely to show Laddie the way

to find trouble, instead of sunshine?"



"I can see," said the Princess.



"Oh Princess, you won't do it, will you?" I cried.



"Don't you think such a big man as Laddie can take care of

himself?" she asked, and the dancing lights that had begun to

fade came back.  "Over there," she pointed through our woods

toward the southwest, "lives a man you know.  What do his

neighbours call him?"



"Stiff-necked Johnny," I answered promptly.



"And the man who lives next him?"



"Pinch-fist Williams."



Her finger veered to another neighbour's.



"The girls of that house?"



"Giggle-head Smithsons."



"What about the man who lives over there?"



"He beats his wife."



"And the house beyond?"



"Mother whispers about them.  I don't know."



"And the woman on the hill?"



"She doesn't do anything but gussip and make every one trouble."



"Exactly!" said the Princess.  "Yet most of these people come to

your house, and your family goes to theirs.  Do you suppose

people they know nothing about are so much worse than these

others?"



"If your father will take it back about God, and your mother will

let people in--my mother and father both wanted to be friends,

you know."



"That I can't possibly do," she said, "but maybe I could change

their feelings toward me."



"Do it!" I cried.  "Oh, I'd just love you to do it!  I wish you

would come to our house and be friends.  Sally is pretty as you

are, only a different way, and I know she'd like you, and so

would Shelley.  If Laddie writes you letters and comes here about

sunshine, of course he'd be delighted if mother knew you; because

she loves him best of any of us.  She depends on him most as much

as father."



"Then will you keep the secret until I have time to try--say

until this time next year?"



"I'll keep it just as long as Laddie wants me to."



"Good!" said the Princess.  "No wonder Laddie thinks you the

finest Little Sister any one ever had."



"Does Laddie think that?" I asked



"He does indeed!" said the Princess.



"Then I'm not afraid to go home," I said.  "And I'll bring his

letter the next time he can't come."



"Were you scared this time?"



I told her about that Something in the dry bed, the wolves,

wildcats, Paddy Ryan, and the Gypsies.



"You little goosie," said the Princess.  "I am afraid that

brother Leon of yours is the biggest rogue loose in this part of

the country.  Didn't it ever occur to you that people named Wolfe

live over there, and they call that crowd next us `wildcats,'

because they just went on some land and took it, and began living

there without any more permission than real wildcats ask to enter

the woods?  Do you suppose I would be here, and everywhere else I

want to go, if there were any danger?  Did anything really harm

you coming?"



"You're harmed when you're scared until you can't breathe," I

said.  "Anyway, nothing could get me coming, because I held the

letter tight in my hand, like Laddie said.  If you'd write me one

to take back, I'd be safe going home."



"I see," said the Princess.  "But I've no pencil, and no paper,

unless I use the back of one of Laddie's letters, and that

wouldn't be polite."



"You can make new fashions," I said, "but you don't know much

about the woods, do you?  I could fix fifty ways to send a

message to Laddie."



"How would you?" asked the Princess.



Running to the pawpaw bushes I pulled some big tender leaves. 

Then I took the bark from the box and laid a leaf on it.



"Press with one of your rings," I said, "and print what you want

to say.  I write to the Fairies every day that way, only I use an

old knife handle."



She tried.  She spoiled two or three by bearing down so hard she

cut the leaves.  She didn't even know enough to write on the

frosty side, until she was told.  But pretty soon she got along

so well she printed all over two big ones.  Then I took a stick

and punched little holes and stuck a piece of foxfire bloom

through.



"What makes you do that?" she asked.



"That's the stamp," I explained.



"But it's my letter, and I didn't put it there."



"Has to be there or the Fairies won't like it," I said.



"Well then, let it go," said the Princess.



I put back the bark and replaced the stone, gathered up the

scattered leaves, and put the two with writing on between fresh

ones.



"Now I must run," I said, "or Laddie will think the Gypsies have

got me sure."



"I'll go with you past the dry creek," she offered.



"You better not," I said.  "I'd love to have you, but it would be

best for you to change their opinion, before father or mother

sees you on their land."



"Perhaps it would," said the Princess.  "I'll wait here until you

reach the fence and then you call and I'll know you are in the

open and feel comfortable."



"I am most all over being afraid now," I told her.



Just to show her, I walked to the creek, climbed the gate and

went down the lane.  Almost to the road I began wondering what I

could do with the letter, when looking ahead I saw Laddie coming.



"I was just starting to find you.  You've been an age, child," he

said.



I held up the letter.



"No one is looking," I said, "and this won't go in your pocket."



You should have seen his face.



"Where did you get it?" he asked.



I told him all about it.  I told him everything--about the hair

that maybe was stronger than she thought, and that she was going

to change father's and mother's opinions, and that I put the red

flower on, but she left it; and when I was done Laddie almost

hugged the life out of me.  I never did see him so happy.



"If you be very, very careful never to breathe a whisper, I'll

take you with me some day," he promised.


