





CHAPTER II



Our Angel Boy



            "I had a brother once--a gracious boy,

             Full of all gentleness, of calmest hope,

             Of sweet and quiet joy,--there was the look

             Of heaven upon his face."



It was supper time when we reached home, and Bobby was at the

front gate to meet me.  He always hunted me all over the place

when the big bell in the yard rang at meal time, because if he

crowed nicely when he was told, he was allowed to stand on the

back of my chair and every little while I held up my plate and

shared bites with him.  I have seen many white bantams, but never

another like Bobby.  My big brothers bought him for me in Fort

Wayne, and sent him in a box, alone on the cars.  Father and I

drove to Groveville to meet him.  The minute father pried off the

lid, Bobby hopped on the edge of the box and crowed--the biggest

crow you ever heard from such a mite of a body; he wasn't in the

least afraid of us and we were pleased about it.  You scarcely

could see his beady black eyes for his bushy topknot, his wing

tips touched the ground, his tail had two beautiful plumy

feathers much longer than the others, his feet were covered with

feathers, and his knee tufts dragged.  He was the sauciest,

spunkiest little fellow, and white as muslin.  We went to supper

together, but no one asked where I had been, and because I was so

bursting full of importance, I talked only to Bobby, in order to

be safe.



After supper I finished Hezekiah's trousers, and May cut his coat

for me.  School would begin in September and our clothes were

being made, so I used the scraps to dress him.  His suit was done

by the next forenoon, and father never laughed harder than when

Hezekiah hopped down the walk to meet him dressed in pink

trousers and coat.  The coat had flowing sleeves like the

Princess wore, so Hezekiah could fly, and he seemed to like them.



His suit was such a success I began a sunbonnet, and when that

was tied on him, the folks almost had spasms.  They said he

wouldn't like being dressed; that he would fly away to punish me,

but he did no such thing.  He stayed around the house and was

tame as ever.



When I became tired sewing that afternoon, I went down the lane

leading to our meadow, where Leon was killing thistles with a

grubbing hoe.  I thought he would be glad to see me, and he was. 

Every one had been busy in the house, so I went to the cellar the

outside way and ate all I wanted from the cupboard.  Then I

spread two big slices of bread the best I could with my fingers,

putting apple butter on one, and mashed potatoes on the other. 

Leon leaned on the hoe and watched me coming.  He was a hungry

boy, and lonesome too, but he couldn't be forced to say so.



"Laddie is at work in the barn," he said.



"I'm going to play in the creek," I answered.



Crossing our meadow there was a stream that had grassy banks, big

trees, willows, bushes and vines for shade, a solid pebbly bed;

it was all turns and bends so that the water hurried until it

bubbled and sang as it went; in it lived tiny fish coloured

brightly as flowers, beside it ran killdeer, plover and solemn

blue herons almost as tall as I was came from the river to fish;

for a place to play on an August afternoon, it couldn't be

beaten.  The sheep had been put in the lower pasture; so the

cross old Shropshire ram was not there to bother us.



"Come to the shade," I said to Leon, and when we were comfortably

seated under a big maple weighted down with trailing grapevines,

I offered the bread.  Leon took a piece in each hand and began to

eat as if he were starving.  Laddie would have kissed me and

said:  "What a fine treat!  Thank you, Little Sister."



Leon was different.  He ate so greedily you had to know he was

glad to get it, but he wouldn't say so, not if he never got any

more.  When you knew him, you understood he wouldn't forget it,

and he'd be certain to do something nice for you before the day

was over to pay back.  We sat there talking about everything we

saw, and at last Leon said with a grin:  "Shelley isn't getting

much grape sap is she?"



"I didn't know she wanted grape sap."



"She read about it in a paper.  It said to cut the vine of a wild

grape, catch the drippings and moisten your hair.  This would

make it glossy and grow faster."



"What on earth does Shelley want with more hair than she has?"



"Oh, she has heard it bragged on so much she thinks people would

say more if she could improve it."



I looked and there was the vine, dry as could be, and a milk

crock beneath it.



"Didn't the silly know she had to cut the vine in the spring when

the sap was running?"



"Bear witness, O vine! that she did not," said Leon, "and speak,

ye voiceless pottery, and testify that she expected to find you

overflowing."



"Too bad that she's going to be disappointed."



"She isn't!  She's going to find ample liquid to bathe her

streaming tresses.  Keep quiet and watch me."



He picked up the crock, carried it to the creek and dipped it

full of water.



"That's too much," I objected.  "She'll know she never got a

crock full from a dry vine."



"She'll think the vine bled itself dry for her sake."



"She isn't that silly."



"Well then, how silly is she?" asked Leon, spilling out half. 

"About so?"



"Not so bad as that.  Less yet!"



"Anything to please the ladies," said Leon, pouring out more.

Then we sat and giggled a while.



"What are you going to do now?" asked Leon.



"Play in the creek," I answered.



"All right!  I'll work near you." 



He rolled his trousers above his knees and took the hoe, but he

was in the water most of the time.  We had to climb on the bank

when we came to the deep curve, under the stump of the old oak

that father cut because Pete Billings would climb it and yowl

like a wildcat on cold winter nights.  Pete was wrong in his head

like Paddy Ryan, only worse.  As we passed we heard the faintest

sounds, so we lay and looked, and there in the dark place under

the roots, where the water was deepest, huddled some of the

cunningest little downy wild ducks you ever saw.  We looked at

each other and never said a word.  Leon chased them out with the

hoe and they swam down stream faster than old ones.  I stood in

the shallow water behind them and kept them from going back to

the deep place, while Leon worked to catch them.  Every time he

got one he brought it to me, and I made a bag of my apron front

to put them in.  The supper bell rang before we caught all of

them.  We were dripping wet with creek water and perspiration,

but we had the ducks, every one of them, and proudly started

home.  I'll wager Leon was sorry he didn't wear aprons so he

could carry them.  He did keep the last one in his hands, and

held its little fluffy body against his cheeks every few minutes.



"Couldn't anything be prettier than a young duck."



"Except a little guinea," I said.



"That's so!" said Leon.  "They are most as pretty as quail.  I

guess all young things that have down are about as cunning as

they can be.  I don't believe I know which I like best, myself."



"Baby killdeers."



"I mean tame.  Things we raise."



"I'll take guineas."



"I'll say white turkeys.  They seem so innocent.  Nothing of ours

is pretty as these."



"But these are wild."



"So they are," said Leon.  "Twelve of them.  Won't mother be

pleased?"



She was not in the least.  She said we were a sight to behold;

that she was ashamed to be the mother of two children who didn't

know tame ducks from wild ones.  She remembered instantly that

Amanda Deam had set a speckled Dorking hen on Mallard duck

eggs, where she got the eggs, and what she paid for them.  She

said the ducks had found the creek that flowed beside Deams'

barnyard before it entered our land, and they had swum away from

the hen, and both the hen and Amanda would be frantic.  She put

the ducks into a basket and said to take them back soon as ever

we got our suppers, and we must hurry because we had to bathe and

learn our texts for Sunday-school in the morning.



We went through the orchard, down the hill and across the meadow

until we came to the creek.  By that time we were tired of the

basket.  It was one father had woven himself of shaved and soaked

hickory strips, and it was heavy.  The sight of water suggested

the proper place for ducks, anyway.  We talked it over and

decided that they would be much more comfortable swimming than in

the basket, and it was more fun to wade than to walk, so we went

above the deep place, I stood in the creek to keep them from

going down, and Leon poured them on the water.  Pigs couldn't

have acted more contrary.  Those ducks LIKED us.  They wouldn't

go to Deams'.  They just fought to swim back to us.  Anyway, we

had the worst time you ever saw.  Leon cut long switches to herd

them with, and both of us waded and tried to drive them, but they

would dart under embankments and roots, and dive and hide.



Before we reached the Deams' I wished that we had carried them as

mother told us, for we had lost three, and if we stopped to hunt

them, more would hide.  By the time we drove them under the

floodgate crossing the creek between our land and the Deams' four

were gone.  Leon left me on the gate with both switches to keep

them from going back and he ran to call Mrs. Deam.  She had red

hair and a hot temper, and we were not very anxious to see her,

but we had to do it.  While Leon was gone I was thinking pretty

fast and I knew exactly how things would happen.  First time

mother saw Mrs. Deam she would ask her if the ducks were all

right, and she would tell that four were gone.  Mother would ask

how many she had, and she would say twelve, then mother would

remember that she started us with twelve in the basket--Oh what's

the use!  Something had to be done.  It had to be done quickly

too, for I could hear Amanda Deam, her boy Sammy and Leon coming

across the barnyard.  I looked around in despair, but when things

are the very worst, there is almost always some way out.



On the dry straw worked between and pushing against the panels of

the floodgate, not far from me, I saw a big black water snake.  I

took one good look at it: no coppery head, no geometry patterns,

no rattlebox, so I knew it wasn't poisonous and wouldn't bite

until it was hurt, and if it did, all you had to do was to suck


the place, and it wouldn't amount to more than two little pricks

as if pins had stuck you; but a big snake was a good excuse.  I

rolled from the floodgate among the ducks, and cried, "Snake!" 

They scattered everywhere.  The snake lazily uncoiled and slid

across the straw so slowly that--thank goodness! Amanda Deam got

a fair look at it.  She immediately began to jump up and down and

scream.  Leon grabbed a stick and came running to the water.  I

cried so he had to help me out first.



"Don't let her count them!" I whispered.



Leon gave me one swift look and all the mischief in his blue eyes

peeped out.  He was the funniest boy you ever knew, anyway. 

Mostly he looked scowly and abused.  He had a grievance against

everybody and everything.  He said none of us liked him, and we

imposed on him.  Father said that if he tanned Leon's jacket for

anything, and set him down to think it over, he would pout a

while, then he would look thoughtful, suddenly his face would

light up and he would go away sparkling; and you could depend

upon it he would do the same thing over, or something worse,

inside an hour.  When he wanted to, he could smile the most

winning smile, and he could coax you into anything.  Mother said

she dreaded to have to borrow a dime from him, if a peddler

caught her without change, because she knew she'd be kept paying

it back for the next six months.  Right now he was the busiest

kind of a boy.



"Where is it?  Let me get a good lick at it!  Don't scare the

ducks!" he would cry, and chase them from one bank to the other,

while Amanda danced and fought imaginary snakes.  For a woman who

had seen as many as she must have in her life, it was too funny. 

I don't think I could laugh harder, or Leon and Sammy.  We

enjoyed ourselves so much that at last she began to be angry. 

She quit dancing, and commenced hunting ducks, for sure.  She

held her skirts high, poked along the banks, jumped the creek and

didn't always get clear across.  Her hair shook down, she lost a

sidecomb, and she couldn't find half the ducks.



"You younguns pack right out of here," she said.  "Me and Sammy

can get them better ourselves, and if we don't find all of them,

we'll know where they are."



"We haven't got any of your ducks," I said angrily, but Leon

smiled his most angelic smile, and it seemed as if he were going

to cry.



"Of course, if you want to accuse mother of stealing your ducks,

you can," he said plaintively, "but I should think you'd be

ashamed to do it, after all the trouble we took to catch them

before they swam to the river, where you never would have found

one of them.  Come on, Little Sister, let's go home."



He started and I followed.  As soon as we got around the bend we

sat on the bank, hung our feet in the water, leaned against each

other and laughed.  We just laughed ourselves almost sick.  When

Amanda's face got fire red, and her hair came down, and she

jumped and didn't go quite over, she looked a perfect fright.



"Will she ever find all of them?" I asked at last.



"Of course," said Leon.  "She will comb the grass and strain the

water until she gets every one."



"Hoo-hoo!"



I looked at Leon.  He was so intently watching an old turkey

buzzard hanging in the air, he never heard the call that meant it

was time for us to be home and cleaning up for Sunday.  It was

difficult to hurry, for after we had been soaped and scoured, we

had to sit on the back steps and commit to memory verses from the

Bible.  At last we waded toward home.  Two of the ducks we had

lost swam before us all the way, so we knew they were alive, and

all they needed was finding.



"If she hadn't accused mother of stealing her old ducks, I'd

catch those and carry them back to her," said Leon.  "But since

she thinks we are so mean, I'll just let her and little Sammy

find them."



Then we heard their voices as they came down the creek, so Leon

reached me his hand and we scampered across the water and meadow,

never stopping until we sat on the top rail of our back orchard

fence.  There we heard another call, but that was only two.  We

sat there, rested and looked at the green apples above our heads,

wishing they were ripe, and talking about the ducks.  We could

see Mrs. Deam and Sammy coming down the creek, one on each side. 

We slid from the fence and ran into a queer hollow that was cut

into the hill between the never-fail and the Baldwin apple trees.



That hollow was overgrown with weeds, and full of trimmings from

trees, stumps, everything that no one wanted any place else in

the orchard.  It was the only unkept spot on our land, and I

always wondered why father didn't clean it out and make it look

respectable.  I said so to Leon as we crouched there watching

down the hill where Mrs. Deam and Sammy hunted ducks with not

such very grand success.  They seemed to have so many they

couldn't decide whether to go back or go on, so they must have

found most of them.



"You know I've always had my suspicions about this place," said

Leon.  "There is somewhere on our land that people can be hidden

for a long time.  I can remember well enough before the war ever

so long, and while it was going worst, we would find the wagon

covered with more mud in the morning than had been on it at

night; and the horses would be splashed and tired.  Once I was

awake in the night and heard voices.  It made me want a drink, so

I went downstairs for it, and ran right into the biggest,

blackest man who ever grew.  If father and mother hadn't been

there I'd have been scared into fits.  Next morning he was gone

and there wasn't a whisper.  Father said I'd had bad dreams. 

That night the horses made another mysterious trip.  Now where

did they keep the black man all that day?"



"What did they have a black man for?"



"They were helping him run away from slavery to be free in

Canada.  It was all right.  I'd have done the same thing.  They

helped a lot.  Father was a friend of the Governor.  There were

letters from him, and there was some good reason why father

stayed at home, when he was crazy about the war.  I think this

farm was what they called an Underground Station.  What I want to

know is where the station was."



"Maybe it's here.  Let's hunt," I said.  "If the black men were

here some time, they would have to be fed, and this is not far

from the house."



So we took long sticks and began poking into the weeds.  Then we

moved the brush, and sure as you live, we found an old door with

a big stone against it.  I looked at Leon and he looked at me.



"Hoo-hoo!" came mother's voice, and that was the third call.



"Hum!  Must be for us," said Leon.  "We better go as soon as we

get a little dryer."



He slid down the bank on one side, and I on the other, and we

pushed at the stone.  I thought we never would get it rolled away

so we could open the door a crack, but when we did what we saw

was most surprising.  There was a little room, dreadfully small. 

but a room.  There was straw scattered over the floor, very deep

on one side, where an old blanket showed that it had been a bed. 

Across the end there was a shelf.  On it was a candlestick, with

a half-burned candle in it, a pie pan with some mouldy crumbs,

crusts, bones in it, and a tin can.  Leon picked up the can and

looked in.  I could see too.



It had been used for water or coffee, as the plate had for food,

once, but now it was stuffed full of money.  I saw Leon pull some

out and then shove it back, and he came to the door white as

could be, shut it behind him and began to push at the stone. 

When we got it in place we put the brush over it, and fixed

everything like it had been.



At last Leon said:  "That's the time we got into something not

intended for us, and if father finds it out, we are in for a good

thrashing.  Are you just a blubbering baby, or are you big enough

to keep still?"



"I am old enough that I could have gone to school two years ago,

and I won't tell!" I said stoutly.



"All right!  Come on then," said Leon.  "I don't know but mother

has been calling us."



We started up the orchard path at the fourth call.



"Hoo-hoo!" answered Leon in a sick little voice to make it sound

far away.  Must have made mother think we were on Deams' hill. 

Then we went on side by side.



"Say Leon, you found the Station, didn't you?"



"Don't talk about it!" snapped Leon.



I changed the subject



"Whose money do you suppose that is?"



"Oh crackey!  You can depend on a girl to see everything,"

groaned Leon.  "Do you think you'll be able to stand the

switching that job will bring you, without getting sick in bed?"



Now I never had been sick in bed, and from what I had seen of

other people who were, I never wanted to be.  The idea of being

switched until it made me sick was too much for me.  I shut my

mouth tight and I never opened it about the Station place.  As we

reached the maiden's-blush apple tree came another call, and it

sounded pretty cross, I can tell you.  Leon reached his hand.



"Now, it's time to run.  Let me do the talking."



We were out of breath when we reached the back door.  There stood

the tub on the kitchen floor, the boiler on the stove, soap,

towels, and clean clothing on chairs.  Leon had his turn at

having his ears washed first, because he could bathe himself

while mother did my hair.



"Was Mrs. Deam glad to get her ducks back?" she asked as she

fine-combed Leon.



"Aw, you never can tell whether she's glad about anything or

not," growled Leon.  "You'd have thought from the way she acted,

that we'd been trying to steal her ducks.  She said if she missed

any she'd know where to find them."



"Well as I live!" cried mother.  "Why I wouldn't have believed

that of Amanda Deam.  You told her you thought they were wild, of

course."



"I didn't have a chance to tell her anything.  The minute the

ducks struck the water they started right back down stream, and

there was a big snake, and we had an awful time.  We got wet

trying to head them back, and then we didn't find all of them."



"They are like little eels.  You should have helped Amanda."



"Well, you called so cross we thought you would come after us, so

we had to run."



"One never knows," sighed mother.  "I thought you were loitering.



Of course if I had known you were having trouble with the ducks! 

I think you had better go back and help them."



"Didn't I do enough to take them home?  Can't Sammy Deam catch

ducks as fast as I can?"



"I suppose so," said mother.  "And I must get your bathing out of

the way of supper.  You use the tub while I do Little Sister's

hair."



I almost hated Sunday, because of what had to be done to my hair

on Saturday, to get ready for it.  All week it hung in two long

braids that were brushed and arranged each morning.  But on

Saturday it had to be combed with a fine comb, oiled and rolled

around strips of tin until Sunday morning.  Mother did everything

thoroughly.  She raked that fine comb over our scalps until she

almost raised the blood.  She hadn't time to fool with tangles,

and we had so much hair she didn't know what to do with all of

it, anyway.  When she was busy talking she reached around too far

and combed across our foreheads or raked the tip of an ear.



But on Sunday morning we forgot all that, when we walked down the

aisle with shining curls hanging below our waists.  Mother was

using the fine comb, when she looked up, and there stood Mrs.

Freshett.  We could see at a glance that she was out of breath.



"Have I beat them?" she cried.



"Whom are you trying to beat?" asked mother as she told May to

set a chair for Mrs. Freshett and bring her a drink.  



"The grave-kiver men," she said.  "I wanted to get to you first."



"Well, you have," said mother.  "Rest a while and then tell me."



But Mrs. Freshett was so excited she couldn't rest.



"I thought they were coming straight on down," she said, "but

they must have turned off at the cross roads.  I want to do

what's right by my children here or there," panted Mrs. Freshett,

"and these men seemed to think the contrivance they was sellin'

perfectly grand, an' like to be an aid to the soul's salvation. 

Nice as it seemed, an' convincin' as they talked, I couldn't get

the consent of my mind to order, until I knowed if you was goin'

to kiver your dead with the contraption.  None of the rest of the

neighbours seem over friendly to me, an' I've told Josiah many's

the time, that I didn't care a rap if they wa'n't, so long as I

had you.  Says I, `Josiah, to my way of thinkin', she is top

crust in this neighbourhood, and I'm on the safe side apin' her

ways clost as possible.'"



"I'll gladly help you all I can," said my mother.



"Thanky!" said Mrs. Freshett.  "I knowed you would.  Josiah he

says to me, `Don't you be apin' nobody.'  `Josiah,' says I, `it

takes a pretty smart woman in this world to realize what she

doesn't know.  Now I know what I know, well enough, but all I

know is like to keep me an' my children in a log cabin an' on log

cabin ways to the end of our time.  You ain't even got the

remains of the cabin you started in for a cow shed.'  Says I,

`Josiah, Miss Stanton knows how to get out of a cabin an' into a

grand big palace, fit fur a queen woman.  She's a ridin' in a

shinin' kerridge, 'stid of a spring wagon.  She goes abroad

dressed so's you men all stand starin' like cabbage heads.  All

hern go to church, an' Sunday-school, an' college, an' come out

on the top of the heap.  She does jest what I'd like to if I

knowed how.  An' she ain't come-uppety one morsel.'  If I was to

strike acrost fields to them stuck-up Pryors, I'd get the door

slammed in my face if 'twas the missus, a sneer if 'twas the man,

an' at best a nod cold as an iceberg if 'twas the girl.  Them as

want to call her kind `Princess,' and encourage her in being more

stuck up 'an she was born to be, can, but to my mind a Princess

is a person who thinks of some one besides herself once in a

while."



"I don't find the Pryors easy to become acquainted with," said

mother.  "I have never met the woman; I know the man very

slightly; he has been here on business once or twice, but the

girl seems as if she would be nice, if one knew her."



"Well, I wouldn't have s'posed she was your kind," said Mrs.

Freshett.  "If she is, I won't open my head against her any more.



Anyway, it was the grave-kivers I come about."



"Just what is it, Mrs. Freshett?" asked mother.



"It's two men sellin' a patent iron kiver for to protect the

graves of your dead from the sun an' the rain."



"Who wants the graves of their dead protected from the sun and

the rain?" demanded my mother sharply.



"I said to Josiah, `I don't know how she'll feel about it, but I

can't do more than ask.'"



"Do they carry a sample?  What is it like?"



"Jest the len'th an' width of a grave.  They got from baby to

six-footer sizes.  They are cast iron like the bottom of a cook

stove on the under side, but atop they are polished so they shine

somethin' beautiful.  You can get them in a solid piece, or with

a hole in the centre about the size of a milk crock to set

flowers through.  They come ten to the grave, an' they are mighty

stylish lookin' things.  I have been savin' all I could skimp

from butter, an' eggs, to get Samantha a organ; but says I to

her:  `You are gettin' all I can do for you every day; there lays

your poor brother 'at ain't had a finger lifted for him since he

was took so sudden he was gone before I knowed he was goin'.'  I

never can get over Henry bein' took the way he was, so I says: 

`If this would be a nice thing to have for Henry's grave, and the

neighbours are goin' to have them for theirn, looks to me like

some of the organ money will have to go, an' we'll make it up

later.'  I don't 'low for Henry to be slighted bekase he rid

himself to death trying to make a president out of his pa's

gin'ral."



"You never told me how you lost your son," said mother, feeling

so badly she wiped one of my eyes full of oil.



"Law now, didn't I?" inquired Mrs. Freshett.  "Well mebby that is

bekase I ain't had a chance to tell you much of anythin', your

bein' always so busy like, an' me not wantin' to wear out my

welcome.  It was like this:  All endurin' the war Henry an' me

did the best we could without pa at home, but by the time it was

over, Henry was most a man.  Seemed as if when he got home, his

pa was all tired out and glad to set down an' rest, but Henry was

afire to be up an' goin'.  His pa filled him so full o' Grant, it

was runnin' out of his ears.  Come the second run the Gin'ral

made, peered like Henry set out to 'lect him all by hisself.  He

wore every horse on the place out, ridin' to rallies.  Sometimes

he was gone three days at a stretch.  He'd git one place an' hear

of a rally on ten miles or so furder, an' blest if he didn't ride

plum acrost the state 'fore he got through with one trip.  He set

out in July, and he rid right straight through to November, nigh

onto every day of his life.  He got white, an' thin, an' narvous,

from loss of sleep an' lack of food, an' his pa got restless,

said Henry was takin' the 'lection more serious 'an he ever took

the war.  Last few days before votin' was cold an' raw an' Henry

rid constant.  'Lection day he couldn't vote, for he lacked a

year of bein' o' age, an' he rid in with a hard chill, an' white

as a ghost, an' he says:  `Ma,' says he, `I've 'lected Grant, but

I'm all tuckered out.  Put me to bed an' kiver me warm.'"



I forgot the sting in my eyes watching Mrs. Freshett.  She was

the largest woman I knew, and strong as most men.  Her hair was

black and glisteny, her eyes black, her cheeks red, her skin a

clear, even dark tint.  She was handsome, she was honest, and she

was in earnest over everything.  There was something about her,

or her family, that had to be told in whispers, and some of the

neighbours would have nothing to do with her.  But mother said

Mrs. Freshett was doing the very best she knew, and for the sake

of that, and of her children, anyone who wouldn't help her was

not a Christian, and not to be a Christian was the very worst

thing that could happen to you.  I stared at her steadily.  She

talked straight along, so rapidly you scarcely could keep up with

the words; you couldn't if you wanted to think about them any

between.  There was not a quiver in her voice, but from her eyes

there rolled, steadily, the biggest, roundest tears I ever saw. 

They ran down her cheeks, formed a stream in the first groove of

her double chin, overflowed it, and dripped drop, drop, a drop at

a time, on the breast of her stiffly starched calico dress, and

from there shot to her knees.



"'Twa'n't no time at all 'til he was chokin' an' burnin' red with

fever, an' his pa and me, stout as we be, couldn't hold him down

nor keep him kivered.  He was speechifyin' to beat anythin' you

ever heard.  His pa said he was repeatin' what he'd heard said by

every big stump speaker from Greeley to Logan.  When he got so

hoarse we couldn't tell what he said any more, he jest mouthed

it, an' at last he dropped back and laid like he was pinned to

the sheets, an' I thought he was restin', but 'twa'n't an hour

'til he was gone."



Suddenly Mrs. Freshett lifted her apron, covered her face and

sobbed until her broad shoulders shook.



"Oh you poor soul!" said my mother.  "I'm so sorry for you!"



"I never knowed he was a-goin' until he was gone," she said.  "He

was the only one of mine I ever lost, an' I thought it would jest

lay me out.  I couldn't 'a' stood it at all if I hadn't 'a'

knowed he was saved.  I well know my Henry went straight to

Heaven.  Why Miss Stanton, he riz right up in bed at the last,

and clear and strong he jest yelled it:  `Hurrah fur Grant!'"



My mother's fingers tightened in my hair until I thought she

would pull out a lot, and I could feel her knees stiffen.  Leon

just whooped.  Mother sprang up and ran to the door.



"Leon!" she cried.  Then there was a slam.  "What in the world is

the matter?" she asked.



"Stepped out of the tub right on the soap, and it threw me down,"

explained Leon.



"For mercy sake, be careful!" said my mother, and shut the door.



It wasn't a minute before the knob turned and it opened again a

little.



I never saw mother's face look so queer, but at last she said

softly:  "You were thinking of the grave cover for him?"



"Yes, but I wanted to ask you before I bound myself.  I heard you

lost two when the scarlet fever was ragin' an' I'm goin' to do

jest what you do.  If you have kivers, I will.  If you don't like

them when you see how bright and shiny they are, I won't get any

either."



"I can tell you without seeing them, Mrs. Freshett," said my

mother, wrapping a strand of hair around the tin so tight I

slipped up my fingers to feel whether my neck wasn't like a buck-

eye hull looks, and it was.  "I don't want any cover for the

graves of my dead but grass and flowers, and sky and clouds.  I

like the rain to fall on them, and the sun to shine, so that the

grass and flowers will grow.  If you are satisfied that the soul

of Henry is safe in Heaven, that is all that is necessary. 

Laying a slab of iron on top of earth six feet above his body

will make no difference to him.  If he is singing with the

angels, by all means save your money for the organ."



"I don't know about the singin', but I'd stake my last red cent

he's still hollerin' fur Grant.  I was kind o' took with the

idea; the things was so shiny and scilloped at the edges, peered

like it was payin' considerable respect to the dead to kiver them

that-a-way."



"What good would it do?" asked mother.  "The sun shining on the

iron would make it so hot it would burn any flower you tried to

plant in the opening; the water couldn't reach the roots, and all

that fell on the slab would run off and make it that much wetter

at the edges.  The iron would soon rust and grow dreadfully ugly

lying under winter snow.  There is nothing at all in it, save a

method to work on the feelings of the living, and get them to pay

their money for something that wouldn't affect their dead a

particle."



"'Twould be a poor idea for me," said Mrs. Freshett.  "I said to

the men that I wanted to honour Henry all I could, but with my

bulk, I'd hev all I could do, come Jedgment Day, to bust my box,

an' heave up the clods, without havin' to hist up a piece of iron

an' klim from under it."



Mother stiffened and Leon slipped again.  He could have more

accidents than any boy I ever knew.  But it was only a few

minutes until he came to mother and gave her a Bible to mark the

verses he had to learn to recite at Sunday-school next day. 

Mother couldn't take the time when she had company, so she asked

if he weren't big enough to pick out ten proper verses and learn

them by himself, and he said of course he was.  He took his Bible

and he and May and I sat on the back steps and studied our

verses.  He and May were so big they had ten; but I had only two,

and mine were not very long.  Leon giggled half the time he was

studying.  I haven't found anything so very funny in the Bible. 

Every few minutes he would whisper to himself:  "THAT'S A GOOD

ONE!"



He took the book and heard May do hers until she had them

perfectly, then he went and sat on the back fence with his book

and studied as I never before had seen him.  Mrs. Freshett stayed

so long mother had no time to hear him, but he told her he had

them all learned so he could repeat them without a mistake.



Next morning mother was busy, so she had no time then.  Father,

Shelley, and I rode on the front seat, mother, May, and Sally on

the back, while the boys started early and walked.



When we reached the top of the hill, the road was lined with

carriages, wagons, spring wagons, and saddle horses.  Father

found a place for our team and we went down the walk between the

hitching rack and the cemetery fence.  Mother opened the gate and

knelt beside two small graves covered with grass, shaded by

yellow rose bushes, and marked with little white stones.  She

laid some flowers on each and wiped the dust from the carved

letters with her handkerchief.  The little sisters who had

scarlet fever and whooping cough lay there.  Mother was still a

minute and then she said softly:  "`The Lord has given and the

Lord has taken away.  Blessed be the name of the Lord.'"



She was very pale when she came to us, but her eyes were bright

and she smiled as she put her arms around as many of us as she

could reach.



"What a beautiful horse!" said Sally.  "Look at that saddle and

bridle!  The Pryor girl is here."



"Why should she come?" asked Shelley.



"To show her fine clothes and queen it over us!"



"Children, children!" said mother.  "`Judge not!'  This is a

house of worship.  The Lord may be drawing her in His own way. 

It is for us to help Him by being kind and making her welcome."



At the church door we parted and sat with our teachers, but for

the first time as I went down the aisle I was not thinking of my

linen dress, my patent leather slippers, and my pretty curls.  It

suddenly seemed cheap to me to twist my hair when it was straight

as a shingle, and cut my head on tin.  If the Lord had wanted me

to have curls, my hair would have been like Sally's.  Seemed to

me hers tried to see into what big soft curls it could roll.  May

said ours was so straight it bent back the other way.  Anyway, I

made up my mind to talk it over with father and always wear

braids after that, if I could get him to coax mother to let me.



Our church was quite new and it was beautiful.  All the casings

were oiled wood, and the walls had just a little yellow in the

last skin coating used to make them smooth, so they were a creamy

colour, and the blinds were yellow.  The windows were wide open

and the wind drifted through, while the birds sang as much as

they ever do in August, among the trees and bushes of the

cemetery.  Every one had planted so many flowers of all kinds on

the graves you could scent sweet odours.  Often a big, black-

striped, brown butterfly came sailing in through one of the

windows, followed the draft across the room, and out of another. 

I was thinking something funny: it was about what the Princess

had said of other people, and whether hers were worse.  I looked

at my father sitting in calm dignity in his Sunday suit and

thought him quite as fine and handsome as mother did.  Every

Sabbath he wore the same suit, he sat in the same spot, he

worshipped the Lord in his calm, earnest way.  The ministers

changed, but father was as much a part of the service as the

Bible on the desk or the communion table.  I wondered if people

said things about him, and if they did, what they were.  I never

had heard.  Twisting in my seat, one by one I studied the faces

on the men's side, and then the women.  It was a mighty good-

looking crowd.  Some had finer clothes than others--that is

always the way--but as a rule every one was clean, neat, and good

to see.  From some you scarcely could turn away.  There was Widow

Fall.  She was French, from Virginia, and she talked like little

tinkly notes of music.  I just loved to hear her, and she walked

like high-up royalty.  Her dress was always black, with white

bands at the neck and sleeves, black rustly silk, and her eyes

and hair were like the dress.  There was a little red on her

cheeks and lips, and her face was always grave until she saw you

directly before her, and then she smiled the sweetest smile.



Maybe Sarah Hood was not pretty, but there was something about

her lean face and shining eyes that made you look twice before

you were sure of it, and by that time you had got so used to her,

you liked her better as she was, and wouldn't have changed her

for anything.  Mrs. Fritz had a pretty face and dresses and

manners, and so did Hannah Dover, only she talked too much.  So I

studied them and remembered what the Princess had said, and I

wondered if she heard some one say that Peter Justice beat his

wife, or if she showed it in her face and manner.  She reminded

me of a scared cowslip that had been cut and laid in the sun an

hour.  I don't know as that expresses it.  Perhaps a flower

couldn't look scared, but it could be wilted and faded.  I

wondered if she ever had bright hair, laughing eyes, and red in

her lips and cheeks.  She must have been pretty if she had.



At last I reached my mother.  There was nothing scared or faded

about her, and she was dreadfully sick too, once in a while since

she had the fever.  She was a little bit of a woman, coloured

like a wild rose petal, face and body--a piece of pink porcelain

Dutch, father said.  She had brown eyes, hair like silk, and she

always had three best dresses.  There was one of alpaca or

woollen, of black, gray or brown, and two silks.  Always there

was a fine rustly black one with a bonnet and mantle to match,

and then a softer, finer one of either gold brown, like her hair,

or dainty gray, like a dove's wing.  When these grew too old for

fine use, she wore them to Sunday-school and had a fresh one for

best.  There was a new gray in her closet at home, so she put on

the old brown to-day, and she was lovely in it.



Usually the minister didn't come for church services until

Sunday-school was half over, so the superintendent read a

chapter, Daddy Debs prayed, and all of us stood up and sang: 

"Ring Out the Joy Bells."  Then the superintendent read the

lesson over as impressively as he could.  The secretary made his

report, we sang another song, gathered the pennies, and each

teacher took a class and talked over the lesson a few minutes. 

Then we repeated the verses we had committed to memory to our

teachers; the member of each class who had learned the nicest

texts, and knew them best, was selected to recite before the

school.  Beginning with the littlest people, we came to the big

folks.  Each one recited two texts until they reached the class

above mine.  We walked to the front, stood inside the altar, made

a little bow, and the superintendent kept score.  I could see

that mother appeared worried when Leon's name was called for his

class, for she hadn't heard him, and she was afraid he would

forget.



Among the funny things about Leon was this: while you had to

drive other boys of his age to recite, you almost had to hold him

to keep him from it.  Father said he was born for a politician or

a preacher, if he would be good, and grow into the right kind of

a man to do such responsible work.



"I forgot several last Sabbath, so I have thirteen to-day," he

said politely.



Of course no one expected anything like that.  You never knew

what might happen when Leon did anything.  He must have been

about sixteen.  He was a slender lad, having almost sandy hair,

like his English grandfather.  He wore a white ruffled shirt with

a broad collar, and cuffs turning back over his black jacket, and

his trousers fitted his slight legs closely.  The wind whipped

his soft black tie a little and ruffled the light hair where it

was longest and wavy above his forehead.  Such a perfect picture

of innocence you never saw.  There was one part of him that

couldn't be described any better than the way Mr. Rienzi told

about his brother in his "Address to the Romans," in McGuffey's

Sixth.  "The look of heaven on his face" stayed most of the time;

again, there was a dealish twinkle that sparkled and flashed

while he was thinking up something mischievous to do.  When he

was fighting angry, and going to thrash Absalom Saunders or die

trying, he was plain white and his eyes were like steel.  Mother

called him "Weiscope," half the time.  I can only spell the way

that sounds, but it means "white-head," and she always used that

name when she loved him most.  "The look of heaven" was strong on

his face now.



"One," said the recording secretary.



"Jesus wept," answered Leon promptly.



There was not a sound in the church.  You could almost hear the

butterflies pass.  Father looked down and laid his lower lip in

folds with his fingers, like he did sometimes when it wouldn't

behave to suit him.



"Two," said the secretary after just a breath of pause.



Leon looked over the congregation easily and then fastened his

eyes on Abram Saunders, the father of Absalom, and said

reprovingly:  "Give not sleep to thine eyes nor slumber to thine

eyelids."



Abram straightened up suddenly and blinked in astonishment, while

father held fast to his lip.



"Three," called the secretary hurriedly.



Leon shifted his gaze to Betsy Alton, who hadn't spoken to her

next door neighbour in five years.



"Hatred stirreth up strife," he told her softly, "but love

covereth all sins."



Things were so quiet it seemed as if the air would snap.



"Four."



The mild blue eyes travelled back to the men's side and settled

on Isaac Thomas, a man too lazy to plow and sow land his father

had left him.  They were not so mild, and the voice was touched

with command:  "Go to the ant, thou sluggard, consider her ways

and be wise."



Still that silence.



"Five," said the secretary hurriedly, as if he wished it were

over.  Back came the eyes to the women's side and past all

question looked straight at Hannah Dover.



"As a jewel of gold in a swine's snout, so is a fair woman

without discretion."



"Six," said the secretary and looked appealingly at father, whose

face was filled with dismay.



Again Leon's eyes crossed the aisle and he looked directly at the

man whom everybody in the community called "Stiff-necked Johnny."



I think he was rather proud of it, he worked so hard to keep them

doing it.



"Lift not up your horn on high: speak not with a stiff neck,"

Leon commanded him.



Toward the door some one tittered.



"Seven," called the secretary hastily.



Leon glanced around the room.



"But how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell

together in unity," he announced in delighted tones as if he had

found it out by himself.



"Eight," called the secretary with something like a breath of

relief.



Our angel boy never had looked so angelic, and he was beaming on

the Princess.



"Thou art all fair, my love; there is no spot in thee," he told

her.



Laddie would thrash him for that.



Instantly after, "Nine," he recited straight at Laddie:  "I made

a covenant with mine eyes; why then should I think upon a maid?"



More than one giggled that time.



"Ten!" came almost sharply.



Leon looked scared for the first time.  He actually seemed to

shiver.  Maybe he realized at last that it was a pretty serious

thing he was doing.  When he spoke he said these words in the

most surprised voice you ever heard:  "I was almost in all evil

in the midst of the congregation and assembly."



"Eleven."



Perhaps these words are in the Bible.  They are not there to read

the way Leon repeated them, for he put a short pause after the

first name, and he glanced toward our father:  "Jesus Christ, the

SAME, yesterday, and to-day, and forever!"



Sure as you live my mother's shoulders shook.



"Twelve."



Suddenly Leon seemed to be forsaken.  He surely shrank in size

and appeared abused.



"When my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take

me up," he announced, and looked as happy over the ending as he

had seemed forlorn at the beginning.



"Thirteen."



"The Lord is on my side; I will not fear; what can man do unto

me?" inquired Leon of every one in the church.  Then he soberly

made a bow and walked to his seat.



Father's voice broke that silence.  "Let us kneel in prayer," he

said.



He took a step forward, knelt, laid his hands on the altar,

closed his eyes and turned his face upward.



"Our Heavenly Father, we come before Thee in a trying situation,"

he said.  "Thy word of truth has been spoken to us by a

thoughtless boy, whether in a spirit of helpfulness or of jest,

Thou knowest.  Since we are reasoning creatures, it little

matters in what form Thy truth comes to us; the essential thing

is that we soften our hearts for its entrance, and grow in grace

by its application.  Tears of compassion such as our dear Saviour

wept are in our eyes this morning as we plead with Thee to help

us to apply these words to the betterment of this community."



Then father began to pray.  If the Lord had been standing six

feet in front of him, and his life had depended on what he said,

he could have prayed no harder.  Goodness knows how fathers

remember.  He began at "Jesus wept" and told about this sinful

world and why He wept over it; then one at a time he took those

other twelve verses and hammered them down where they belonged

much harder than Leon ever could by merely looking at people. 

After that he prayed all around each one so fervently that those

who had been hit the very worst cried aloud and said:  "Amen!" 

You wouldn't think any one could do a thing like that; but I

heard and saw my father do it.



When he arose the tears were running down his cheeks, and before

him stood Leon.  He was white as could be, but he spoke out

loudly and clearly.



"Please forgive me, sir; I didn't intend to hurt your feelings.

Please every one forgive me.  I didn't mean to offend any one. 

It happened through hunting short verses.  All the short ones

seemed to be like that, and they made me think----"



He got no farther.  Father must have been afraid of what he might

say next.  He threw his arms around Leon's shoulders, drew him to

the seat, and with the tears still rolling, he laughed as happily

as you ever heard, and he cried:  "`Sweeping through the Gates!' 

All join in!"



You never heard such singing in your life.  That was another

wonderful thing.  My father didn't know the notes.  He couldn't

sing; he said so himself.  Neither could half the people there,

yet all of them were singing at the tops of their voices, and I

don't believe the angels in Heaven could make grander music.  My

father was leading:



"These, these are they, who in the conflict dire----"





You could tell Emanuel Ripley had been in the war from the way he

roared:





"Boldly have stood amidst the hottest fire----"





The Widow Fall soared above all of them on the next line; her man

was there, and maybe she was lonely and would have been glad to

go to him:





"Jesus now says, `Come up higher----'"





Then my little mother:





"Washed in the blood of the Lamb----"





Like thunder all of them rolled into the chorus:





"Sweepin, through the gates to the New Jerusalem----"





You wouldn't have been left out of that company for anything in

all this world, and nothing else ever could make you want to go

so badly as to hear every one sing, straight from the heart, a

grand old song like that.  It is no right way to have to sit and

keep still, and pay other people money to sing about Heaven to

you.  No matter if you can't sing by note, if your heart and soul

are full, until they are running over, so that you are forced to

sing as those people did, whether you can or not, you are sure to

be straight on the way to the Gates.



Before three lines were finished my father was keeping time like

a choirmaster, his face all beaming with shining light; mother

was rocking on her toes like a wood robin on a twig at twilight,

and at the end of the chorus she cried "Glory!" right out loud,

and turned and started down the aisle, shaking hands with every

one, singing as she went.  When she reached Betsy Alton she held

her hand and led her down the aisle straight toward Rachel Brown.



When Rachel saw them coming she hurried to meet them, and they

shook hands and were glad to make up as any two people you ever

saw.  It must have been perfectly dreadful to see a woman every

day for five years, and not to give her a pie, when you felt sure

yours were better than she could make, or loan her a new pattern,

or tell her first who had a baby, or was married, or dead, or

anything like that.  It was no wonder they felt glad.  Mother

came on, and as she passed me the verses were all finished and

every one began talking and moving.  Johnny Dover forgot his neck

and shook hands too, and father pronounced the benediction.  He

always had to when the minister wasn't there, because he was

ordained himself, and you didn't dare pronounce the benediction

unless you were.



Every one began talking again, and wondering if the minister

wouldn't come soon, and some one went out to see.  There was

mother standing only a few feet from the Princess, and I thought

of something.  I had seen it done often enough, but I never had

tried it myself, yet I wanted to so badly, there was no time to

think how scared I would be.  I took mother's hand and led her a

few steps farther and said:  "Mother, this is my friend, Pamela

Pryor."



I believe I did it fairly well.  Mother must have been surprised,

but she put out her hand.



"I didn't know Miss Pryor and you were acquainted."



"It's only been a little while," I told her.  "I met her when I

was on some business with the Fairies.  They know everything and

they told me her father was busy"--I thought she wouldn't want me

to tell that he was plain CROSS, where every one could hear, so I

said "busy" for politeness--"and her mother not very strong, and

that she was a good girl, and dreadfully lonesome.  Can't you do

something, mother?"



"Well, I should think so!" said mother, for her heart was soft as

rose leaves.  Maybe you won't believe this, but it's quite true. 

My mother took the Princess' arm and led her to Sally and

Shelley, and introduced her to all the girls.  By the time the

minister came and mother went back to her seat, she had forgotten

all about the "indisposed" word she disliked, and as you live!

she invited the Princess to go home with us to dinner.  She stood

tall and straight, her eyes very bright, and her cheeks a little

redder than usual, as she shook hands and said a few pleasant

words that were like from a book, they fitted and were so right. 

When mother asked her to dinner she said:  "Thank you kindly.  I

should be glad to go, but my people expect me at home and they

would be uneasy.  Perhaps you would allow me to ride over some

week day and become acquainted?"



Mother said she would be happy to have her, and Shelley said so

too, but Sally was none too cordial.  She had dark curls and pink

cheeks herself, and every one had said she was the prettiest girl

in the county before Shelley began to blossom out and show what

she was going to be.  Sally never minded that, but when the

Princess came she was a little taller, and her hair was a trifle

longer, and heavier, and blacker, and her eyes were a little

larger and darker, and where Sally had pink skin and red lips,

the Princess was dark as olive, and her lips and cheeks were like

red velvet.  Anyway, the Princess had said she would come over;

mother and Shelley had been decent to her, and Sally hadn't been

exactly insulting.  It would be a little more than you could

expect for her to be wild about the Princess.  I believe she was

pleased over having been invited to dinner, and as she was a

stranger she couldn't know that mother had what we called the

"invitation habit."



I have seen her ask from fifteen to twenty in one trip down the

aisle on Sunday morning.  She wanted them to come too; the more

who came, the better she liked it.  If the hitching rack and

barnyard were full on Sunday she just beamed.  If the sermon

pleased her, she invited more.  That morning she was feeling so

good she asked seventeen; and as she only had dressed six

chickens--third table, backs and ham, for me as usual; but when

the prospects were as now, I always managed to coax a few

gizzards from Candace; she didn't dare give me livers--they were

counted.  Almost everyone in the church was the happiest that

morning they had been in years.  When the preacher came, he

breathed it from the air, and it worked on him so he preached the

best sermon he ever had, and never knew that Leon made him do it.



Maybe after all it's a good thing to tell people about their

meanness and give them a stirring up once in a while.


