





CHAPTER VIII



The Shropshire and the Crusader



        "For, among the rich and gay,

            Fine, and grand, and decked in laces,

         None appear more glad then they,

            With happier hearts, or happier faces."



Every one told mother for a week before the wedding that she

would be sick when it was over, and sure enough she was.  She had

been on her feet too much, and had so many things to think about,

and there had been such a dreadful amount of work for her and

Candace, even after all the neighbours helped, that she was sick

in bed and we couldn't find a thing she could eat, until she was

almost wild with hunger and father seemed as if he couldn't

possibly bear it a day longer.



After Candace had tried everything she could think of, I went up

and talked it over with Sarah Hood, and she came down, pretending

she happened in, and she tried thickened milk, toast and mulled

buttermilk; she kept trying for two days before she gave up. 

Candace thought of new things, and Mrs. Freshett came and made

all the sick dishes she knew, but mother couldn't even taste

them; so we were pretty blue, and we nearly starved ourselves,

for how could we sit and eat everything you could mention, and

mother lying there, almost crying with hunger?



Saturday morning I was hanging around her room hoping maybe she

could think of some least little thing I could do for her, even

if no more than to bring a glass of water, or a late rose to lay

on her pillow; it would be better than not being able to do

anything at all.  After a while she opened her eyes and looked at

me, and I scarcely knew her.  She smiled the bravest she could

and said:  "Sorry for mother, dear?"



I nodded.  I couldn't say much, and she tried harder than ever to

be cheerful and asked:  "What are you planning to do to-day?"



"If you can't think of one thing I can do for you, guess I'll go

fishing," I said.



Her eyes grew brighter and she seemed half interested.



"Why, Little Sister," she said, "if you can catch some of those

fish like you do sometimes, I believe I could eat one of them."



I never had such a be-hanged time getting started.  I slipped

from the room, and never told a soul even where I was going.  I

fell over the shovel and couldn't find anything quick enough but

my pocket to put the worms in, and I forgot my stringer.  At

last, when I raced down the hill to the creek and climbed over

the water of the deep place, on the roots of the Pete Billings

yowling tree, I had only six worms, my apple sucker pole, my

cotton cord line, and bent pin hook.  I put the first worm on

carefully, and if ever I prayed!  Sometimes it was hard to

understand about this praying business.  My mother was the best

and most beautiful woman who ever lived.  She was clean, and

good, and always helped "the poor and needy who cluster round

your door," like it says in the poetry piece, and there never

could have been a reason why God would want a woman to suffer

herself, when she went flying on horseback even dark nights

through rain or snow, to doctor other people's pain, and when she

gave away things like she did--why, I've seen her take a big

piece of meat from the barrel, and a sack of meal, and heaps of

apples and potatoes to carry to Mandy Thomas--when she gave away

food by the wagonload at a time, God couldn't have WANTED her to

be hungry, and yet she WAS that very minute almost crying for

food; and I prayed, oh how I did pray! and a sneaking old back-

ended crayfish took my very first worm.  I just looked at the sky

and said:  "Well, when it's for a sick woman, can't You do any

better than that?"



I suppose I shouldn't have said it, but if it had been your

mother, how would you have felt?  I pinched the next worm in two,

so if a crayfish took that, it wouldn't get but half.  I lay down

across the roots and pulled my bonnet far over my face and tried

to see to the bottom.  I read in school the other day:





            "And by those little rings on the water I know

             The fishes are merrily swimming below."





There were no rings on the water, but after a while I saw some

fish darting around, only they didn't seem to be hungry; for they

would come right up and nibble a tiny bit at my worm, but they

wouldn't swallow it.  Then one did, so I jerked with all my

might, jerked so hard the fish and worm both flew off, and I had

only the hook left.  I put on the other half and tried again.  I

prayed straight along, but the tears would come that time, and

the prayer was no powerful effort like Brother Hastings would

have made; it was little torn up pieces mostly:  "O Lord, please

do make only one fish bite!"  At last one did bite good, so I

swung carefully that time, and landed it on the grass, but it was

so little and it hit a stone and was killed.  I had no stringer

to put it back in the water to keep cool, and the sun was hot

that day, like times in the fall.  Stretched on the roots, with

it shining on my back, and striking the water and coming up from

below, I dripped with heat and excitement.



I threw that one away, put on another worm, and a big turtle took

it, the hook, and broke my line, and almost pulled me in.  I

wouldn't have let go if it had, for I just had to have a fish. 

There was no help from the Lord in that, so I quit praying, only

what I said when I didn't know it.  Father said man was born a

praying animal, and no matter how wicked he was, if he had an

accident, or saw he had just got to die, he cried aloud to the

Lord for help and mercy before he knew what he was doing.



I could hear the roosters in the barnyard, the turkey gobbler,

and the old ganders screamed once in a while, and sometimes a

bird sang a skimpy little fall song; nothing like spring, except

the killdeers and larks; they were always good to hear--and then

the dinner bell rang.  I wished I had been where I couldn't have

heard that, because I didn't intend going home until I had a fish

that would do for mother if I stayed until night.  If the best

one in the family had to starve, we might as well all go

together; but I wouldn't have known how hungry I was, if the bell

hadn't rung and told me the others were eating.  So I bent

another pin and tried again.  I lost the next worm without

knowing how, and then I turned baby and cried right out loud.  I

was so thirsty, the salty tears running down my cheeks tasted

good, and doing something besides fishing sort of rested me; so I

looked around and up at the sky, wiped my face on the skirt of my

sunbonnet, and put on another worm.  I had only one more left,

and I began to wonder if I could wade in and catch a fish by

hand; I did teeny ones sometimes, but I knew the water there was

far above my head, for I had measured it often with the pole; it

wouldn't do to try that; instead of helping mother any, a funeral

would kill her, too, so I fell back on the Crusaders, and tried

again.



Strange how thinking about them helped.  I pretended I was

fighting my way to the Holy City, and this was the Jordan just

where it met the sea, and I had to catch enough fish to last me

during the pilgrimage west or I'd never reach Jerusalem to bring

home a shell for the Stanton crest.  I pretended so hard, that I

got braver and stronger, and asked the Lord more like there was

some chance of being heard.  All at once there was a jerk that

almost pulled me in, so I jerked too, and a big fish flew over my

head and hit the bank behind me with a thump.  Of course by a big

fish I don't mean a red horse so long as my arm, like the boys

bring from the river; I mean the biggest fish I ever caught with

a pin in our creek.  It looked like the whale that swallowed

Jonah, as it went over my head.  I laid the pole across the

roots, jumped up and turned, and I had to grab the stump to keep

from falling in the water and dying.  There lay the fish, the

biggest one I ever had seen, but it was flopping wildly, and it

wasn't a foot from a hole in the grass where a muskrat had

burrowed through.  If it gave one flop that way, it would slide

down the hole straight back into the water; and between me and

the fish stood our cross old Shropshire ram.  I always looked to

see if the sheep were in the meadow before I went to the creek,

but that morning I had been so crazy to get something for mother

to eat, I never once thought of them--and there it stood!



That ram hadn't been cross at first, and father said it never

would be if treated right, and not teased, and if it were, there

would be trouble for all of us.  I was having more than my share

that minute, and it bothered me a lot almost every day.  I never

dared enter a field any more if it were there, and now it was

stamping up and down the bank, shaking its head, and trying to

get me; with one flop the fish went ALMOST in the hole, and the

next a little away from it.  Everything put together, I thought I

couldn't stand it.  I never wanted anything as I wanted that

fish, and I never hated anything as I hated that sheep.  It

wasn't the sheep's fault either; Leon teased it on purpose, just

to see it chase Polly Martin; but that was more her doings than

his.



She was a widow and she crossed our front meadow going to her

sister's.  She had two boys big as Laddie, and three girls, and

father said they lived like "the lilies of the field; they toiled

not, neither did they spin."  They never looked really hungry or

freezing, but they never plowed, or planted, they had no cattle

or pigs or chickens, only a little corn for meal, and some

cabbage, and wild things they shot for meat, and coons to trade

the skins for more powder and lead--bet they ate the coons--never

any new clothes, never clean, they or their house.  Once when

father and mother were driving past, they saw Polly at the well

and they stopped for politeness sake to ask how she was, like

they always did with every one.  Polly had a tin cup of water and

was sopping at her neck with a carpet rag, and when mother asked,

"How are you, Mrs. Martin?" she answered:  "Oh I ain't very well

this spring; I gest I got the go-backs!"



Mother said Polly looked as if she'd been born with the "go-

backs," and had given them to all her children, her home, garden,

fields, and even the FENCES.  We hadn't a particle of patience

with such people.  When you are lazy like that it is very

probable that you'll live to see the day when your children will

peep through the fence cracks and cry for bread.  I have seen

those Martin children come mighty near doing it when the rest of

us opened our dinner baskets at school; and if mother hadn't

always put in enough so that we could divide, I bet they would. 

If Polly Martin had walked up as if she were alive, and had been

washed and neat, and going somewhere to do some one good, Leon

never would have dreamed of such a thing as training the

Shropshire to bunt her.  She was so long and skinny, always wore

a ragged shawl over her head, a floppy old dress that the wind

whipped out behind, and when she came to the creek, she sat

astride the foot log, and hunched along with her hands; that

tickled the boys so, Leon began teasing the sheep on purpose to

make it get her.  But inasmuch as she saw fit to go abroad

looking so funny, that any one could see she'd be a perfect

circus if she were chased, I didn't feel that it was Leon's

fault.  If, like the little busy bee, she had "improved each

shining hour," he never would have done it.  Seems to me, she

brought the trouble on her own head.



First, Leon ran at the Shropshire and then jumped aside; but soon

it grew so strong and quick he couldn't manage that, so he put

his hat on a stick and poked it back and forth through a fence

crack, and that made the ram raving mad.  At last it would butt

the fence until it would knock itself down, and if he dangled the

hat again, get right up and do it over.  Father never caught

Leon, so he couldn't understand what made the sheep so dreadfully

cross, because he had thought it was quite peaceable when he

bought it.  The first time it got after Polly, she threw her

shawl over its head, pulled up her skirts, and Leon said she hit

just eleven high places crossing an eighty-acre field; she came

to the house crying, and father had to go after her shawl, and

mother gave her a roll of butter and a cherry pie to comfort her.



The Shropshire never really got Polly, but any one could easily

see what it would do to me if I dared step around that stump, and

it was dancing and panting to begin.  If whoever wrote that

"Gentle Sheep, pray tell me why," piece ever had seen a sheep

acting like that, it wouldn't have been in the books; at least I

think it wouldn't, but one can't be sure.  He proved that he

didn't know much about anything outdoors or he wouldn't have said

that sheep were "eating grass and daisies white, from the morning

till the night," when daisies are bitter as gall.



Flop! went the fish, and its tail touched the edge of the hole. 

Then I turned around and picked up the pole.  I put my sunbonnet

over the big end of it, and poked it at the ram, and drew it back

as Leon did his hat.  One more jump and mother's fish would be

gone.  I stood on the roots and waved my bonnet.  The sheep

lowered its head and came at it with a rush.  I drew back the

pole, and the sheep's forefeet slid over the edge, and it braced

and began to work to keep from going in.  The fish gave a big

flop and went down the hole.  Then I turned Crusader and began to

fight, and I didn't care if I were whipped black and blue, I

meant to finish that old black-faced Shropshire.  I set the pole

on the back of its neck and pushed with all my might, and I got

it in, too.  My, but it made a splash!  It wasn't much good at

swimming either, and it had no chance, for I stood on the roots

and pushed it down, and hit it over the nose with all my might,

and I didn't care how far it came on the cars, or how much money

it cost, it never would chase me, and make me lose my fish again.



I didn't hear him until he splashed under the roots and then I

was so mad I didn't see that it was Laddie; I only knew that it

was someone who was going to help out that miserable ram, so I

struck with all my might, the sheep when I could hit it, if not,

the man.



"You little demon, stop!" cried Laddie.



I got in a good one right on the ram's nose.  Then Laddie dropped

the sheep and twisted the fish pole from my fingers, and I pushed

him as hard as I could, but he was too strong.  He lifted the

sheep, pulled it to the bank, and rolled it, worked its jaws, and

squeezed water from it, and worked and worked.



"I guess you've killed it!" he said at last.



"Goody!" I shouted.  "Goody!  Oh but I am glad it's dead!"



"What on earth has turned you to a fiend?" asked Laddie,

beginning work on the sheep again.



"That ram!" I said.  "Ever since Leon made it cross so it would

chase Polly Martin, it's got me oftener than her.  I can't go

anywhere for it, and to-day it made me lose a big fish, and

mother is waiting.  She thought maybe she could eat some."



Then I roared; bet I sounded like Bashan's bull.



"Dear Lord!" said Laddie dropping the sheep and taking me in his

wet arms.  "Tell me, Biddy!  Tell me how it is."



Then I forgot I was a Crusader, and told him all about it as well

as I could for choking, and when I finished he bathed my hot

face, and helped me from the roots.  Then he went and looked down

the hole I showed him and he cried out quicklike, and threw

himself on the grass, and in a second up came the fish.  Some one

had rolled a big stone in the hole, so the fish was all right,

not even dead yet, and Laddie said it was the biggest one he ever

had seen taken from the creek.  Then he said if I'd forgive him

and all our family, for spoiling the kind of a life I had a

perfect right to lead, and if I'd run to the house and get a big

bottle from the medicine case quick, he would see to it that some

place was fixed for that sheep where it would never bother me

again.  So I took the fish and ran as fast as I could, but I sent

May back with the bottle, and did the scaling myself.  No one at

our house could do it better, for Laddie taught me the right way

long ago, when I was small, and I'd done it hundreds of times.



Then I went to Candace and she put a little bit of butter and a

speck of lard in a skillet, and cooked the fish brown.  She made

a slice of toast and boiled a cup of water and carried it to the

door; then she went in and set the table beside the bed, and I

took in the tray, and didn't spill a drop.  Mother never said a

word; she just reached out and broke off a tiny speck and nibbled

it, and it stayed; she tried a little bigger piece, and another,

and she said:  "Take out the bones, Candace!"  She ate every

scrap of that fish like the hungriest traveller who ever came to

our door, and the toast, and drank the hot water.  Then she went

into a long sleep and all of us walked tiptoe, and when she waked

up she was better, and in a few days she could sit in her chair

again, and she began getting Shelley ready to go to music school.



I have to tell you the rest, too.  Laddie made the ram come

alive, and father sold it the next day for more than he paid for

it.  He said he hoped I'd forgive him for not having seen how it

had been bothering me, and that he never would have had it on the

place a day if he'd known.  The next time he went to town he

bought me a truly little cane rod, a real fishing line, several

hooks, and a red bobber too lovely to put into the water.  I

thought I was a great person from the fuss all of them made over

me, until I noticed Laddie shrug his shoulders, and reach back

and rub one, and then I remembered.



I went flying, and thank goodness! he held out his arms.



"Oh Laddie!  I never did it!" I cried.  "I never, never did!  I

couldn't!  Laddie, I love you best of any one; you know I do!"



"Of course you didn't!" said Laddie.  "My Little Sister wasn't

anywhere around when that happened.  That was a poor little girl

I never saw before, and she was in such trouble she didn't know

WHAT she was doing.  And I hope I'll never see her again," he

ended, twisting his shoulder.  But he kissed me and made it all

right, and really I didn't do that; I just simply couldn't have

struck Laddie.



Marrying off Sally was little worse than getting Shelley ready

for school.  She had to have three suits of everything, and a new

dress of each kind, and three hats; her trunk wouldn't hold all

there was to put in it; and father said he never could pay the

bills.  He had promised her to go, and he didn't know what in

this world to do; because he never had borrowed money in his

life, and he couldn't begin; for if he died suddenly, that would

leave mother in debt, and they might take the land from her. 

That meant he'd spent what he had in the bank on Sally's wedding,

and all that was in the Underground Station, or maybe the Station

money wasn't his.



Just when he was awfully bothered, mother said to never mind, she

believed she could fix it.  She sent all of us into the orchard

to pick the fine apples that didn't keep well, and father made

three trips to town to sell them.  She had big jars of lard she

wouldn't need before butchering time came again, and she sold

dried apples, peaches, and raspberries from last year.  She got

lots of money for barrels of feathers she'd saved to improve her

feather beds and pillows; she said she would see to that later. 

Father was so tickled to get the money to help him out that he

said he'd get her a pair of those wonderful new blue geese like

Pryors had, that every one stopped to look at.  When there was

not quite enough yet, from somewhere mother brought out money

that she'd saved for a long time, from butter and eggs, and

chickens, and turkeys, and fruit and lard, and things that

belonged to her.  Father hated to use it the worst way, but she

said she'd saved it for an emergency, and now seemed to be the

time.



She said if the child really had talent, she should be about

developing it, and while there would be many who would have far

finer things than Shelley, still she meant her to have enough

that she wouldn't be the worst looking one, and so ashamed she

couldn't keep her mind on her work.  Father said, with her face

it didn't make any difference what she wore, and mother said that

was just like a man; it made all the difference in the world what

a girl wore.  Father said maybe it did to the girl, and other

women; what he meant was that it made none to a man.  Mother said

the chief aim and end of a girl's life was not wrapped up in a

man; and father said maybe not with some girls, but it would be

with Shelley: she was too pretty to escape.  I do wonder if I'm

going to be too pretty to escape, when I put on long dresses. 

Sometimes I look in the glass to see if it's coming, but I don't

suppose it's any use.  Mother says you can't tell a thing at the

growing age about how a girl is going to look at eighteen.



When everything was almost ready, Leon came in one day and said: 

"Shelley, what about improving your hair?  Have you tried your

wild grape sap yet?"



Shelley said:  "Why, goodness me!  We've been so busy getting

Sally married, and my clothes made, I forgot all about that. 

Have you noticed the crock in passing?  Is there anything in it?"



"It was about half full, once when I went by," said Leon. "I

haven't seen it lately."



"Do please be a dear and look, when you go after the cows this

evening," said Shelley.  "If there's anything in it, bring it

up."



            "Do it yourself for want of me,

             The boy replied quite manfully,"





quoted Leon from "The Little Lord and the Farmer."  He was always

teasing.



"I think you're mean as dirt if you don t bring it," said

Shelley.



Leon grinned and you should have heard the nasty, teasing way he

said more of that same piece:



            "Anger and pride are both unwise,

             Vinegar never catches flies----"





I wondered she didn't slap him.  You could see she wanted to.  "I

can get it myself," she said angrily.



"What will you give me to bring it?" asked Leon, who never missed

a chance to make a bargain.



"My grateful thanks.  Are they not a proper reward?" asked

Shelley.



"Thanks your foot!" said Leon.  "Will you bring something pretty

from Chicago for Susie Fall's Christmas present?"



Every one laughed, but Leon never cared.  He liked Susie best of

any of the girls, and he wanted every one to know it.  He went

straight to her whenever he had a chance, and he'd already told

her mother to keep all the other boys away, because he meant to

marry her when he grew up, and Widow Fall said that was fair

enough, and she'd save her for him.  So Shelley said she would

get him something for Susie, and Leon brought the crock.  Shelley

looked at it sort of dubious-like, tipped it, and stared at the

dirt settled in the bottom, and then stuck in her finger and

tasted it.  She looked at Leon with a queer grin and said: 

"Smarty, smarty, think you're smart!"  She threw the creek water

into the swill bucket.  No one said a word, but Leon looked much

sillier than she did.  After he was gone I asked her if she would

bring him a Christmas present for Susie NOW, and she said she

ought to bring him a pretty glass bottle labelled perfume, with

hartshorn in it, and she would, if she thought he'd smell it

first.



Shelley felt badly about leaving mother when she wasn't very

well; but mother said it was all right, she had Candace to keep

house and May and me, and father, and all of us to take care of

her, and it would be best for Shelley to go now and work hard as

she could, while she had the chance.  So one afternoon father

took her trunk to the depot and bought the tickets and got the

checks, and the next day Laddie drove to Groveville with father

and Shelley, and she was gone.  Right at the last, she didn't

seem to want to leave so badly, but all of them said she must. 

Peter's cousin, who had gone last year, was to meet her, and have

a room ready where she boarded if she could, and if she couldn't

right away, then the first one who left, Shelley was to have the

place, so they'd be together.



There were eight of us left, counting Candace and Miss Amelia,

and you wouldn't think a house with eight people living in it

would be empty, but ours was.  Everything seemed to wilt.  The

roses on the window blinds didn't look so bright as they had;

mother said the only way she could get along was to keep right on

working.  She helped Candace all she could, but she couldn't be

on her feet very much, so she sat all day long and peeled peaches

to dry, showed Candace how to jelly, preserve, and spice them,

and peeled apples for butter and to dry, quantities more than we

could use, but she said she always could sell such things, and

with the bunch of us to educate yet, we'd need the money.



When it grew cold enough to shut the doors, and have fire at

night, first thing after supper all of us helped clear the table,

then we took our slates and books and learned our lessons for the

next day, and then father lined us against the wall, all in a row

from Laddie down, and he pronounced words--easy ones that divided

into syllables nicely, for me, harder for May, and so up until I

might sit down.  For Laddie, May and Leon he used the geography,

the Bible, Roland's history, the Christian Advocate, and the

Agriculturist.  My, but he had them so they could spell!  After

that, as memory tests, all of us recited our reading lesson for

the next day, especially the poetry pieces.  I knew most of them,

from hearing the big folks repeat them so often and practise the

proper way to read them.  I could do "Rienzi's Address to the

Romans," "Casablanca," "Gray's Elegy," or "Mark Antony's Speech,"

but best of all, I liked "Lines to a Water-fowl."  When he was

tired, if it were not bedtime yet, all of us, boys too, sewed

rags for carpet and rugs.  Laddie braided corn husks for the

kitchen and outside door mats, and they were pretty, and "very

useful too," like the dog that got his head patted in McGuffey's

Second.



Then they picked the apples.  These had to be picked by hand,

wrapped in soft paper, packed in barrels, and shipped to Fort

Wayne.  Where they couldn't reach by hand, they stood on barrels

or ladders, and used a long handled picker, so as not to bruise

the fruit.  Laddie helped with everything through the day, worked

at his books at night, and whenever he stepped outside he looked

in the direction of Pryors'.  He climbed to the topmost limbs of

the trees with a big basket, picked it full and let it down with

a long piece of clothesline.  I loved to be in the orchard when

they were working; there were plenty of summer apples to eat yet;

it was fun to watch the men, and sometimes I could be useful by

handing baskets or heaping up apples to be buried for us.



One night father read about a man who had been hanged for killing

another man, and they cut him down too soon, so he came alive,

and they had to hang him over; and father got all worked up about

it.  He said the man had suffered death the first time to "all

intents and purposes," so that fulfilled the requirements of the

law, and they were wrong when they hanged him again.  Laddie said

it was a piece of bungling sure enough, but the law said a man

must be "hanged by his neck until he was dead," and if he weren't

dead, why, it was plain he hadn't fulfilled the requirements of

the law, so they were forced to hang him again.  Father said that

law was wrong; the man never should have been hanged in the first

place.  They talked and argued until we were all excited about

it, and the next evening after school Leon and I were helping

pick apples, and when father and Laddie went to the barn with a

load we sat down to rest and we thought about what they said.



"Gee, that was tough on the man!" said Leon, "but I guess the law

is all right.  Of course he wouldn't want to die, and twice over

at that, but I don't suppose the man he killed liked to die

either.  I think if you take a life, it's all right to give your

own to pay for it."



"Leon," I said, "some time when you are fighting Absalom Saunders

or Lou Wicks, just awful, if you hit them too hard on some tender

spot and kill them, would you want to die to pay for it?"



"I wouldn't want to, but I guess I'd have to," said Leon. 

"That's the law, and it's as good a way to make it as any.  But

I'm not going to kill any one.  I've studied my physiology hard

to find all the spots that will kill.  I never hit them behind

the ear, or in the pit of the stomach; I just black their eyes,

bloody their snoots, and swat them on the chin to finish off

with."



"Well, suppose they don't study their physiologies like you do,

and hit YOU in the wrong place, and kill you, would you want THEM

hanged by the neck until they were dead, to pay for it?"



"I don't think I'd want anything if I were dead," he said.  "I

wonder how it feels to die.  Now THAT man knew.  I'd like to be

hanged enough to find out how it goes, and then come back, and

brag about it.  I don't think it hurts much; I believe I'll try

it."



So Leon took the rope Laddie lowered the baskets with, and threw

it over a big limb.  Then he rolled up a barrel and stood on it

and put my sunbonnet on with the crown over his face, for a black

cap, and made the rope into a slip noose over his head, and told

me to stand back by the apple tree and hold the rope tight, until

he said he was hanged enough.  Then he stepped from the barrel. 

It jerked me toward him about a yard, as he came down smash! on

his feet.  I held with all my might, but he was too heavy--and

falling that way.  So he went to trying to fix some other plan,

and I told him the sensible thing to do would be for him to hang

me, because he'd be strong enough to hold me and I could tell him

how it felt just as well.  So we fixed me up like we had him, and

when Leon got the rope stretched, he wrapped it twice around the

apple tree so it wouldn't jerk him as it had me, and when he said

"Ready," I stepped from the barrel.  The last thing I heard was

Leon telling me to say when I was hanged enough.  I was so heavy,

the rope stretched, and I went down until it almost tore off my

head, and I couldn't get a single breath, so of course I didn't

tell him, and I couldn't get on the barrel, and my tongue went

out, and my chest swelled up, and my ears roared, and I kicked

and struggled, and all the time I could hear Leon laughing, and

shouting to keep it up, that I was dying fine; only he didn't

know that I really was, and at last I didn't feel or know

anything more.



When I came to, I was lying on the grass, while father was

pumping my arms, and Laddie was pouring creek water on my face

from his hat, and Leon was running around in circles, clear

crazy.  I heard father tell him he'd give him a scutching he'd

remember to the day of his death; but inasmuch as I had told Leon

to do it, I had to grab father and hold to him tight as I could,

until I got breath enough to explain how it happened.  Even then

I wasn't sure what he was going to do.



After all that, when I tried to tell Leon how it felt, he just

cried like a baby, and he wouldn't listen to a word, even when

he'd wanted to know so badly.  He said if I hadn't come back,

he'd have gone to the barn and used the swing rope on himself, so

it was a good thing I did, for one funeral would have cost

enough, when we needed money so badly, not to mention how mother

would have felt to have two of us go at once, like she had

before.  And anyway, it didn't amount to so awful much.  It was

pretty bad at first, but it didn't last long, and the next day my

neck was only a little blue and stiff, and in three days it was

all over, only a rough place where the rope grained the skin as I

went down; but I never got to tell Leon how it felt; I just

couldn't talk him into hearing, and it was quite interesting too;

but still I easily saw why the man in the paper would object to

dying twice, to pay for killing another man once.



When the apples were picked and the cabbage, beets, turnips, and

potatoes were buried, some corn dried in the garret for new meal,

pumpkins put in the cellar, the field corn all husked, and the

butchering done, father said the work was in such fine shape,

with Laddie to help, and there was so much more corn than he

needed for us, and the price was so high, and the turkeys did so

well, and everything, that he could pay back what mother helped

him, and have quite a sum over.



It was Thanksgiving by that time, and all of Winfield's, Lucy's,

Sally and Peter, and our boys came home.  We had a big time, all

but Shelley; it was too expensive for her to come so far for one

day, but mother sent her a box with a whole turkey for herself

and her friends; and cake, popcorn, nuts, and just everything

that wasn't too drippy.  Shelley wrote such lovely letters that

mother saved them and after we had eaten as much dinner as we

could, she read them before we left the table.



I had heard most of them, but I liked to listen again, because

they sounded so happy.  You could hear Shelley laugh on every

page.  She told about how Peter's cousin was waiting when the

train stopped.  They couldn't room together right away, but they

were going to the first chance they had.  Shelley felt badly

because they were so far apart, but she was in a nice place,

where she could go with other girls of the school until she

learned the way.  She told about her room and the woman she

boarded with and what she had to eat; she wrote mother not to

worry about clothes, because most of the others were from the

country, or small towns, and getting ready to teach, and lots of

them didn't have NEARLY as many or as pretty dresses as she did. 

She told about the big building, the classes, the professors, and

of going to public recitals where some of the pupils who knew

enough played; and she was working her fingers almost to the

bone, so she could next year.  She told of people she met, and

how one of the teachers took a number of girls in his class to

see a great picture gallery.  She wrote pages about a young

Chicago lawyer she met there, and only a few lines about the

pictures, so father said as that was the best collection of art

work in Chicago, it was easy enough to see that Shelley had been

far more impressed with the man than she had been with the

pictures.  Mother said she didn't see how he could say a thing

like that about the child.  Of course she couldn't tell in a

letter about hundreds of pictures, but it was easy enough to tell

all about a man.



Father got sort of spunky at that, and he said it was mighty

little that mattered most, that could be told about a Chicago

lawyer; and mother had better caution Shelley to think more about

her work, and write less of the man.  Mother said that would stop

the child's confidences completely and she'd think all the time

about the man, and never mention him again, so she wouldn't know

what WAS going on.  She said she was glad Shelley had found

pleasing, refined friends, and she'd encourage her all she could

in cultivating them; but of course she'd caution her to be

careful, and she'd tell her what the danger was, and after that

Shelley wrote and wrote.  Mother didn't always read the letters

to us, but she answered every one she got that same night. 

Sometimes she pushed the pen so she jabbed the paper, and often

she smiled or laughed softly.



I liked Thanksgiving.  We always had a house full of company, and

they didn't stay until we were tired of them, as they did at

Christmas, and there was as much to eat; the only difference was

that there were no presents.  It wasn't nearly so much work to

fix for one day as it was for a week; so it wasn't so hard on

mother and Candace, and father didn't have to spend much money. 

We were wearing all our clothes from last fall that we could, and

our coats from last winter to help out, but we didn't care.  We

had a lot of fun, and we wanted Sally and Shelley to have fine

dresses, because they were in big cities where they needed them,

and in due season, no doubt, we would have much more than they,

because, as May figured it, there would be only a few of us by

that time, so we could have more to spend.  That looked sensible,

and I thought it would be that way, too.  We were talking it over

coming from school one evening, and when we had settled it, we

began to play "Dip and Fade."  That was a game we made up from

being at church, and fall and spring were the only times we could

play it, because then the rains filled all the ditches beside the

road where the dirt was plowed up to make the bed higher, and we

had to have the water to dip in and fade over.



We played it like that, because it was as near as we could come

to working out a song Isaac Thomas sang every time he got happy. 

He had a lot of children at home, and more who had died, from

being half-fed and frozen, mother thought; and he was always

talking about meeting the "pore innocents" in Heaven, and singing

that one song.  Every time he made exactly the same speech in

meeting.  It began like reciting poetry, only it didn't rhyme,

but it sort of cut off in lines, and Isaac waved back and forth

on his feet, and half sung it, and the rags waved too, but you

just couldn't feel any thrills of earnestness about what he said,

because he needed washing, and to go to work and get him some

clothes and food to fill out his frame.  He only looked funny,

and made you want to laugh.  It took Emanuel Ripley to raise your

hair.  I don't know why men like my father, and the minister, and

John Dover stood it; they talked over asking Isaac to keep quiet

numbers of times, but the minister said there were people like

that in every church, they always came among the Lord's anointed,

and it was better to pluck out your right eye than to offend one

of them, and he was doubtful about doing it.  So we children all

knew that the grown people scarcely could stand Isaac's speech,

and prayer, and song, and that they were afraid to tell him plain

out that he did more harm than good.  Every meeting about the

third man up was Isaac, and we had to watch him wave, and rant,

and go sing-songy:



        "Oh brethering and sistering--ah,

         It delights my heart--ah to gather with you,

         In this holy house of worship--ah.

         In his sacred word--ah,

         The Lord--ah tells us,

         That we are all his childring--ah.

         And now, lemme exhort you to-night--ah,

         As one that loves you--ah,

         To choose that good part, that Mary chose--ah,

         That the worrrr-uld kin neither give ner take away--ah."



That went on until he was hoarse, then he prayed, and arose and

sang his song.  Other men spoke where they stood.  Isaac always

walked to the altar, faced the people, and he was tired out when

he finished, but so proud of himself, so happy, and he felt so

sure that his efforts were worth a warm bed, sausage, pancakes,

maple syrup, and coffee for breakfast, that it was mighty seldom

he failed to fool some one else into thinking so too, and if he

could, he wouldn't have to walk four miles home on cold nights,

with no overcoat.  In summer, mostly, they let him go.  Isaac

always was fattest in winter, especially during revivals, but at

any time mother said he looked like a sheep's carcass after the

buzzards had picked it.  It could be seen that he was perfectly

strong, and could have fed and clothed himself, and Mandy and the

children, quite as well as our father did us, if he had wanted to

work, for we had the biggest family of the neighbourhood.  So we

children made fun of him and we had to hold our mouths shut when

he got up all tired and teary-like, and began to quaver:



        "Many dear childurn we know dew stan'

         Un toon ther harps in the better lan',

         Ther little hans frum each soundin' string,

         Bring music sweet, wile the Anguls sing,

         Bring music sweet, wile the Anguls sing,--

                 We shell meet them agin on that shore,

                 We shell meet them agin on that shore,

                 With fairer face, un angel grace,

                 Each loved un ull welcome us ther.



        "They uster mourn when the childurn died,

         Un said goo-bye at the river side,

         They dipped ther feet in the glidin' stream,

         Un faded away, like a loveli dream,

         Un faded away like a loveli dream."





Then the chorus again, and then Isaac dropped on the front seat

exhausted, and stayed there until some good-hearted woman, mostly

my mother, felt so sorry about his shiftlessness she asked him to

go home with us and warmed and fed him, and put him in the

traveller's bed to sleep.  The way we played it was this: we

stood together at the edge of a roadside puddle and sang the

first verse and the chorus exactly as Isaac did.  Then I sang the

second verse, and May was one of the "many dear childurn," and as

I came to the lines she dipped her feet in the "glidin' stream,"

and for "fading away," she jumped across.



Now May was a careful little soul, and always watched what she

was doing, so she walked up a short way, chose a good place, and

when I sang the line, she was almost birdlike, she dipped and

faded so gracefully.  Then we laughed like dunces, and then May

began to sway and swing, and drone through her nose for me, and I

was so excited I never looked.  I just dipped and faded on the

spot.  I faded all right too, for I couldn't jump nearly across,

and when I landed in pure clay that had been covered with water

for three weeks, I went down to my knees in mud, to my waist in

water, and lost my balance and fell backward.



A man passing on horseback pried me out with a rail and helped me

home.  Of course he didn't know how I happened to fall in, and I

was too chilled to talk.  I noticed May only said I fell, so I

went to bed scorched inside with red pepper tea, and never told a

word about dipping and fading.  Leon whispered and said he bet it

was the last time I would play that, so as soon as my coat and

dress were washed and dried, and I could go back to school, I did

it again, just to show him I was no cowardy-calf; but I had

learned from May to choose a puddle I could manage before I

faded.


