



                                    BOOK IV

                         CONTAINING THE TIME OF A YEAR




                                Chapter 1



  Containing five pages of paper



  As truth distinguishes our writings from those idle romances which

are filled with monsters, the productions, not of nature, but of

distempered brains; and which have been therefore recommended by an

eminent critic to the sole use of the pastry-cook; so, on the other

hand, we would avoid any resemblance to that kind of history which a

celebrated poet seems to think is no less calculated for the emolument

of the brewer, as the reading it should be always attended with a

tankard of good ale-



     While- history with her comrade ale,

     Soothes the sad series of her serious tale.



  For as this is the liquor of modern historians, nay, perhaps their

muse, if we may believe the opinion of Butler, who attributes

inspiration to ale, it ought likewise to be the potation of their

readers, since every book ought to be read with the same spirit and in

the same manner as it is writ. Thus the famous author of

Hurlothrumbo told a learned bishop, that the reason his lordship could

not taste the excellence of his piece was, that he did not read it

with a fiddle in his hand; which instrument he himself had always

had in his own, when he composed it.

  That our work, therefore, might be in no danger of being likened

to the labours of these historians, we have taken every occasion of

interspersing through the whole sundry similes, descriptions, and

other kind of poetical embellishments. These are, indeed, designed

to supply the place of the said ale, and to refresh the mind, whenever

those slumbers, which in a long work are apt to invade the reader as

well as the writer, shall begin to creep upon him. Without

interruptions of this kind, the best narrative of plain matter of fact

must overpower every reader; for nothing but the everlasting

watchfulness, which Homer has ascribed only to Jove himself, can be

proof against a newspaper of many volumes.

  We shall leave to the reader to determine with what judgment we have

chosen the several occasions for inserting those ornamental parts of

our work. Surely it will be allowed that none could be more proper

than the present, where we are about to introduce a considerable

character on the scene; no less, indeed, than the heroine of this

heroic, historical, prosaic poem. Here, therefore, we have thought

proper to prepare the mind of the reader for her reception, by filling

it with every pleasing image which we can draw from the face of

nature. And for this method we plead many precedents. First, this is

an art well known to, and much practised by, our tragick poets, who

seldom fail to prepare their audience for the reception of their

principal characters.

  Thus the heroe is always introduced with a flourish of drums and

trumpets, in order to rouse a martial spirit in the audience, and to

accommodate their ears to bombast and fustian, which Mr. Locke's blind

man would not have grossly erred in likening to the sound of a

trumpet. Again, when lovers are coming forth, soft music often

conducts them on the stage, either to soothe the audience with the

softness of the tender passion, or to lull and prepare them for that

gentle slumber in which they will most probably be composed by the

ensuing scene.

  And not only the poets, but the masters of these poets, the managers

of playhouses, seem to be in this secret; for, besides the aforesaid

kettle-drums, &c., which denote the heroe's approach, he is

generally ushered on the stage by a large troop of half a dozen

scene-shifters; and how necessary these are imagined to his

appearance, may be concluded from the following theatrical story:-

  King Pyrrhus was at dinner at an ale-house bordering on the theatre,

when he was summoned to go on the stage. The heroe, being unwilling to

quit his shoulder of mutton, and as unwilling to draw on himself the

indignation of Mr. Wilks (his brother-manager) for making the audience

wait, had bribed these his harbingers to be out of the way. While

Mr. Wilks, therefore, was thundering out, "Where are the carpenters to

walk on before King Pyrrhus?" that monarch very quietly eat his

mutton, and the audience, however impatient, were obliged to entertain

themselves with music in his absence.

  To be plain, I much question whether the politician, who hath

generally a good nose, hath not scented out somewhat of the utility of

this practice. I am convinced that awful magistrate my lord-mayor

contracts a good deal of that reverence which attends him through

the year, by the several pageants which precede his pomp. Nay, I

must confess, that even I myself, who am not remarkably liable to be

captivated with show, have yielded not a little to the impressions

of much preceding state. When I have seen a man strutting in a

procession, after others whose business was only to walk before him, I

have conceived a higher notion of his dignity than I have felt on

seeing him in a common situation. But there is one instance, which

comes exactly up to my purpose. This is the custom of sending on a

basket-woman, who is to precede the pomp at a coronation, and to strew

the stage with flowers, before the great personages begin their

procession. The antients would certainly have invoked the goddess

Flora for this purpose, and it would have been no difficulty for their

priests, or politicians to have persuaded the people of the real

presence of the deity, though a plain mortal had personated her and

performed her office. But we have no such design of imposing on our

reader; and therefore those who object to the heathen theology, may,

if they please, change our goddess into the above-mentioned

basket-woman. Our intention, in short, is to introduce our heroine

with the utmost solemnity in our power, with an elevation of stile,

and all other circumstances proper to raise the veneration of our

reader. Indeed we would, for certain causes, advise those of our

male readers who have any hearts, to read no farther, were we not well

assured, that how amiable soever the picture of our heroine will

appear, as it is really a copy from nature, many of our fair

country-women will be found worthy to satisfy any passion, and to

answer any idea of female perfection which our pencil will be able

to raise.

  And now, without any further preface, we proceed to our next

chapter.





                                Chapter 2



  A short hint of what we can do in the sublime, and a description

of Miss Sophia Western



  Hushed be every ruder breath. May the heathen ruler of the winds

confine in iron chains the boisterous limbs of noisy Boreas, and the

sharp-pointed nose of bitter-biting Eurus. Do thou, sweet Zephyrus,

rising from thy fragrant bed, mount the western sky, and lead on those

delicious gales, the charms of which call forth the lovely Flora

from her chamber, perfumed with pearly dews, when on the 1st of

June, her birth-day, the blooming maid, in loose attire, gently

trips it over the verdant mead, where every flower rises to do her

homage, till the whole field becomes enamelled, and colours contend

with sweets which shall ravish her most.

 So charming may she now appear! and you the feathered choristers of

nature, whose sweetest notes not even Handel can excell, tune your

melodious throats to celebrate her appearance. From love proceeds your

music, and to love it returns. Awaken therefore that gentle passion in

every swain: for lo! adorned with all the charms in which nature can

array her; bedecked with beauty, youth, sprightliness, innocence,

modesty, and tenderness, breathing sweetness from her rosy lips, and

darting brightness from her sparkling eyes, the lovely Sophia comes!

  Reader, perhaps thou hast seen the statue of the Venus de Medicis.

Perhaps, too, thou hast seen the gallery of beauties at Hampton Court.

Thou may'st remember each bright Churchill of the galaxy, and all

the toasts of the Kit-cat. Or, if their reign was before thy times, at

least thou hast seen their daughters, the no less dazzling beauties of

the present age; whose names, should we here insert, we apprehend they

would fill the whole volume.

  Now if thou hast seen all these, be not afraid of the rude answer

which Lord Rochester once gave to a man who had seen many things.

No. If thou hast seen all these without knowing what beauty is, thou

hast no eyes; if without feeling its power, thou hast no heart.

  Yet is it possible, my friend, that thou mayest have seen all

these without being able to form an exact idea of Sophia; for she

did not exactly resemble any of them. She was most like the picture of

Lady Ranelagh: and, I have heard, more still to the famous dutchess of

Mazarine; but most of all she resembled one whose image never can

depart from my breast, and whom, if thou dost remember, thou hast

then, my friend, an adequate idea of Sophia.

  But lest this should not have been thy fortune, we will endeavour

with our utmost skill to describe this paragon, though we are sensible

that our highest abilities are very inadequate to the task.

  Sophia, then, the only daughter of Mr. Western, was a middle-sized

woman; but rather inclining to tall. Her shape was not only exact, but

extremely delicate: and the nice proportion of her arms promised the

truest symmetry in her limbs. Her hair, which was black, was so

luxuriant, that it reached her middle, before she cut it to comply

with the modern fashion; and it was now curled so gracefully in her

neck, that few could believe it to be her own. If envy could find

any part of the face which demanded less commendation than the rest,

it might possibly think her forehead might have been higher without

prejudice to her. Her eyebrows were full, even, and arched beyond

the power of art to imitate. Her black eyes had a lustre in them,

which all her softness could not extinguish. Her nose was exactly

regular, and her mouth, in which were two rows of ivory, exactly

answered Sir John Suckling's description in those lines:-



     Her lips were red, and one was thin,

     Compar'd to that was next her chin,

       Some bee had stung it newly.



Her cheeks were of the oval kind; and in her right she had a dimple,

which the least smile discovered. Her chin had certainly its share

in forming the beauty of her face; but it was difficult to say it

was either large or small, though perhaps it was rather of the

former kind. Her complexion had rather more of the lily than of the

rose; but when exercise or modesty increased her natural colour, no

vermilion could equal it. Then one might indeed cry out with the

celebrated Dr. Donne:



     --Her Pure and eloquent blood

     Spoke in her cheeks, and so distinctly wrought

     That one might almost say her body thought.



Her neck was long and finely turned: and here, if I was not afraid

of offending her delicacy, I might justly say, the highest beauties of

the famous Venus de Medicis were outdone. Here was whiteness which

no lilies, ivory, nor alabaster could match. The finest cambric

might indeed be supposed from envy to cover that bosom which was

much whiter than itself.- It was indeed,



     Nitor splendens Pario marmore purius.



     A gloss shining beyond the purest brightness of Parian marble.



  Such was the outside of Sophia; nor was this beautiful frame

disgraced by an inhabitant unworthy of it. Her mind was every way

equal to her person; nay, the latter borrowed some charms from the

former; for when she smiled, the sweetness of her temper diffused that

glory over her countenance which no regularity of features can give.

But as there are no perfections of the mind which do not discover

themselves in that perfect intimacy to which we intend to introduce

our reader with this charming young creature, so it is needless to

mention them here: nay, it is a kind of tacit affront to our

reader's understanding, and may also rob him of that pleasure which he

will receive in forming his own judgment of her character.

  It may, however, be proper to say, that whatever mental

accomplishments she had derived from nature, they were somewhat

improved and cultivated by art: for she had been educated under the

care of an aunt, who was a lady of great discretion, and was

thoroughly acquainted with the world, having lived in her youth

about the court, whence she had retired some years since into the

country. By her conversation and instructions, Sophia was perfectly

well bred, though perhaps she wanted a little of that ease in her

behaviour which is to be acquired only by habit, and living within

what is called the polite circle. But this, to say the truth, is often

too dearly purchased; and though it hath charms so inexpressible, that

the French, perhaps, among other qualities, mean to express this, when

they declare they know not what it is; yet its absence is well

compensated by innocence; nor can good sense and a natural gentility

ever stand in need of it.





                                Chapter 3



  Wherein the history goes back to commemorate a trifling incident

that happened some years since; but which, trifling as it was, had

some future consequences



  The amiable Sophia was now in her eighteenth year, when she is

introduced into this history. Her father, as hath been said, was

fonder of her than of any other human creature. To her, therefore, Tom

Jones applied, in order to engage her interest on the behalf of his

friend the gamekeeper.

  But before we proceed to this business, a short recapitulation of

some previous matters may be necessary.

  Though the different tempers of Mr. Allworthy and of Mr. Western did

not admit of a very intimate correspondence, yet they lived upon

what is called a decent footing together; by which means the young

people of both families had been acquainted from their infancy; and as

they were all near of the same age, had been frequent playmates

together.

  The gaiety of Tom's temper suited better with Sophia, than the grave

and sober disposition of Master Blifil. And the preference which she

gave the former of these, would often appear so plainly, that a lad of

a more passionate turn than Master Blifil was, might have shown some

displeasure at it.

  As he did not, however, outwardly express any such disgust, it would

be an ill office in us to pay a visit to the inmost recesses of his

mind, as some scandalous people search into the most secret affairs of

their friends, and often pry into their closets and cupboards, only to

discover their poverty and meanness to the world.

  However, as persons who suspect they have given others cause of

offence, are apt to conclude they are offended; so Sophia imputed an

action of Master Blifil to his anger, which the superior sagacity of

Thwackum and Square discerned to have arisen from a much better

principle.

  Tom Jones, when very young, had presented Sophia with a little bird,

which he had taken from the nest, had nursed up, and taught to sing.

  Of this bird, Sophia, then about thirteen years old, was so

extremely fond, that her chief business was to feed and tend it, and

her chief pleasure to play with it. By these means little Tommy, for

so the bird was called, was become so tame, that it would feed out

of the hand of its mistress, would perch upon the finger, and lie

contented in her bosom, where it seemed almost sensible of its own

happiness; though she always kept a small string about its leg, nor

would ever trust it with the liberty of flying away.

  One day, when Mr. Allworthy and his whole family dined at Mr.

Western's, Master Blifil, being in the garden with little Sophia,

and observing the extreme fondness that she showed for her little

bird, desired her to trust it for a moment in his hands. Sophia

presently complied with the young gentleman's request, and after

some previous caution, delivered him her bird; of which he was no

sooner in possession, than he slipt the string from its leg and tossed

it into the air.

  The foolish animal no sooner perceived itself at liberty, than

forgetting all the favours it had received from Sophia, it flew

directly from her, and perched on a bough at some distance.

  Sophia, seeing her bird gone, screamed out so loud, that Tom

Jones, who was at a little distance, immediately ran to her

assistance.

  He was no sooner informed of what had happened, than he cursed

Blifil for a pitiful malicious rascal; and then immediately

stripping off his coat he applied himself to climbing the tree to

which the bird escaped.

  Tom had almost recovered his little namesake, when the branch on

which it was perched, and that hung over a canal, broke, and the

poor lad plumped over head and ears into the water.

  Sophia's concern now changed its object. And as she apprehended

the boy's life was in danger, she screamed ten times louder than

before; and indeed Master Blifil himself now seconded her with all the

vociferation in his power.

  The company, who were sitting in a room next the garden, were

instantly alarmed, and came all forth; but just as they reached the

canal, Tom (for the water was luckily pretty shallow in that part)

arrived safely on shore.

  Thwackum fell violently on poor Tom, who stood dropping and

shivering before him, when Mr. Allworthy desired him to have patience;

and turning to Master Blifil, said, "Pray, child, what is the reason

of all this disturbance?"

  Master Blifil answered, "Indeed, uncle, I am very sorry for what I

have done; I have been unhappily the occasion of it all. I had Miss

Sophia's bird in my hand, and thinking the poor creature languished

for liberty, I own I could not forbear giving it what it desired;

for I always thought there was something very cruel in confining

anything. It seemed to be against the law of nature, by which

everything hath a right to liberty; nay, it is even unchristian, for

it is not doing what we would be done by; but if I had imagined Miss

Sophia would have been so much concerned at it, I am sure I never

would have done it; nay, if I had known what would have happened to

the bird itself: for when Master Jones, who climbed up that tree after

it, fell into the water, the bird took a second flight, and

presently a nasty hawk carried it away."

  Poor Sophia, who now first heard of her little Tommy's fate (for her

concern for Jones had prevented her perceiving it when it happened),

shed a shower of tears. These Mr. Allworthy endeavoured to assuage,

promising her a much finer bird: but she declared she would never have

another. Her father chid her for crying so for a foolish bird; but

could not help telling young Blifil, if he was a son of his, his

backside should be well flead.

  Sophia now returned to her chamber, the two young gentlemen were

sent home, and the rest of the company returned to their bottle; where

a conversation ensued on the subject of the bird, so curious, that

we think it deserves a chapter by itself.





                                Chapter 4



  Containing such very deep and grave matters, that some readers,

perhaps, may not relish it



  Square had no sooner lighted his pipe, than, addressing himself to

Allworthy, he thus began: "Sir, I cannot help congratulating you on

your nephew; who, at an age when few lads have any ideas but of

sensible objects, is arrived at a capacity of distinguishing right

from wrong. To confine anything, seems to me against the law of

nature, by which everything hath a right to liberty. These were his

words; and the impression they have made on me is never to be

eradicated. Can any man have a higher notion of the rule of right, and

the eternal fitness of things? I cannot help promising myself, from

such a dawn, that the meridian of this youth will be equal to that

of either the elder or the younger Brutus."

  Here Thwackum hastily interrupted, and spilling some of his wine,

and swallowing the rest with great eagerness, answered, "From

another expression he made use of, I hope he will resemble much better

men. The law of nature is a jargon of words, which means nothing. I

know not of any such law, nor of any right which can be derived from

it. To do as we would be done by, is indeed a Christian motive, as the

boy well expressed himself; and I am glad to find my instructions have

borne such good fruit."

  "If vanity was a thing fit," says Square, "I might indulge some on

the same occasion; for whence only he can have learnt his notions of

right or wrong, I think is pretty apparent. If there be no law of

nature, there is no right nor wrong."

  "How!" says the parson, "do you then banish revelation? Am I talking

with a deist or an atheist?"

  "Drink about," says Western. "Pox of your laws of nature! I don't

know what you mean, either of you, by right and wrong. To take away my

girl's bird was wrong, in my opinion; and my neighbour Allworthy may

do as he pleases; but to encourage boys in such practices, is to breed

them up to the gallows."

  Allworthy answered, "That he was sorry for what his nephew had done,

but could not consent to punish him, as he acted rather from a

generous than unworthy motive." He said, "If the boy had stolen the

bird, none would have been more ready to vote for a severe

chastisement than himself; but it was plain that was not his

design": and, indeed, it was as apparent to him, that he could have no

other view but what he had himself avowed. (For as to that malicious

purpose which Sophia suspected, it never once entered into the head of

Mr. Allworthy.) He at length concluded with again blaming the action

as inconsiderate, and which, he said, was pardonable only in a child.

  Square had delivered his opinion so openly, that if he was now

silent, he must submit to have his judgment censured. He said,

therefore, with some warmth, "That Mr. Allworthy had too much

respect to the dirty consideration of property. That in passing our

judgments on great and mighty actions, all private regards should be

laid aside; for by adhering to those narrow rules, the younger

Brutus had been condemned of ingratitude, and the elder of parricide."

  "And if they had been hanged too for those crimes," cried

Thwackum, "they would have had no more than their deserts. A couple of

heathenish villains! Heaven be praised we have no Brutuses now-a-days!

I wish, Mr. Square, you would desist from filling the minds of my

pupils with such antichristian stuff; for the consequence must be,

while they are under my care, its being well scourged out of them

again. There is your disciple Tom almost spoiled already. I

overheard him the other day disputing with Master Blifil that there

was no merit in faith without works. I know that is one of your

tenets, and I suppose he had it from you."

  "Don't accuse me of spoiling him," says Square. "Who taught him to

laugh at whatever is virtuous and decent, and fit and right in the

nature of things? He is your own scholar, and I disclaim him. No,

no, Master Blifil is my boy. Young as he is, that lad's notions of

moral rectitude I defy you ever to eradicate."

  Thwackum put on a contemptuous sneer at this, and replied, "Ay,

ay, I will venture him with you. He is too well grounded for all

your philosophical cant to hurt. No, no, I have taken care to instil

such principles into him--"

  "And I have instilled principles into him too," cries Square.

"What but the sublime idea of virtue could inspire a human mind with

the generous thought of giving liberty? And I repeat to you again,

if it was a fit thing to be proud, I might claim the honour of

having infused that idea."-

  "And if pride was not forbidden," said Thwackum, "I might boast of

having taught him that duty which he himself assigned as his motive."

  "So between you both," says the squire, "the young gentleman hath

been taught to rob my daughter of her bird. I find I must take care of

my partridge-mew. I shall have some virtuous religious man or other

set all my partridges at liberty." Then slapping a gentleman of the

law, who was present, on the back, he cried out, "What say you to

this, Mr. Counsellor? Is not this against law?"

  The lawyer with great gravity delivered himself as follows:-

  "If the case be put of a partridge, there can be no doubt but an

action would lie; for though this be ferae naturae, yet being

reclaimed, property vests: but being the case of a singing bird,

though reclaimed, as it is a thing of base nature, it must be

considered as nullius in bonis. In this case, therefore, I conceive

the plaintiff must be non-suited; and I should disadvise the

bringing any such action."

  "Well," says the squire, "if it be nullus bonus, let us drink about,

and talk a little of the state of the nation, or some such discourse

that we all understand; for I am sure I don't understand a word of

this. It may be learning and sense for aught I know: but you shall

never persuade me into it. Pox! you have neither of you mentioned a

word of that poor lad who deserves to be commended: to venture

breaking his neck to oblige my girl was a generous-spirited action:

I have learning enough to see that. D--n me, here's Tom's health! I

shall love the boy for it the longest day I have to live."

  Thus was the debate interrupted; but it would probably have been

soon resumed, had not Mr. Allworthy presently called for his coach,

and carried off the two combatants.

  Such was the conclusion of this adventure of the bird, and of the

dialogue occasioned by it; which we could not help recounting to our

reader, though it happened some years before that stage or period of

time at which our history is now arrived.





                                Chapter 5



  Containing matter accommodated to every taste



  "Parva leves capiunt animos- Small things affect light minds," was

the sentiment of a great master of the passion of love. And certain it

is, that from this day Sophia began to have some little kindness for

Tom Jones, and no little aversion for his companion.

  Many accidents from time to time improved both these passions in her

breast; which, without our recounting, the reader may well conclude,

from what we have before hinted of the different tempers of these

lads, and how much the one suited with her own inclinations more

than the other. To say the truth, Sophia, when very young, discerned

that Tom, though an idle, thoughtless, rattling rascal, was nobody's

enemy but his own; and that Master Blifil, though a prudent, discreet,

sober young gentleman, was at the same time strongly attached to the

interest only of one single person; and who that single person was the

reader will be able to divine without any assistance of ours.

  These two characters are not always received in the world with the

different regard which seems severally due to either; and which one

would imagine mankind, from self-interest, should show towards them.

But perhaps there may be a political reason for it: in finding one

of a truly benevolent disposition, men may very reasonably suppose

they have found a treasure, and be desirous of keeping it, like all

other good things, to themselves. Hence they may imagine, that to

trumpet forth the praises of such a person, would, in the vulgar

phrase, be crying Roast-meat, and calling in partakers of what they

intend to apply solely to their own use. If this reason does not

satisfy the reader, I know no other means of accounting for the little

respect which I have commonly seen paid to a character which really

does great honour to human nature, and is productive of the highest

good to society. But it was otherwise with Sophia. She honoured Tom

Jones, and scorned Master Blifil, almost as soon as she knew the

meaning of those two words.

  Sophia had been absent upwards of three years with her aunt;

during all which time she had seldom seen either of these young

gentlemen. She dined, however, once, together with her aunt, at Mr.

Allworthy's. This was a few days after the adventure of the partridge,

before commemorated. Sophia heard the whole story at table, where

she said nothing: nor indeed could her aunt get many words from her as

she returned home; but her maid, when undressing her, happening to

say, "Well, miss, I suppose you have seen young Master Blifil

to-day?" she answered with much passion, "I hate the name of Master

Blifil, as I do whatever is base and treacherous: and I wonder Mr.

Allworthy would suffer that old barbarous schoolmaster to punish a

poor boy so cruelly for what was only the effect of his

good-nature." She then recounted the story to her maid, and

concluded with saying, "Don't you think he is a boy of noble spirit?"

  This young lady was now returned to her father; who gave her the

command of his house, and placed her at the upper end of his table,

where Tom (who for his great love of hunting was become a great

favourite of the squire) often dined. Young men of open, generous

dispositions are naturally inclined to gallantry, which, if they

have good understandings, as was in reality Tom's case, exerts

itself in an obliging complacent behaviour to all women in general.

This greatly distinguished Tom from the boisterous brutality of mere

country squires on the one hand, and from the solemn and somewhat

sullen deportment of Master Blifil on the other; and he began now,

at twenty, to have the name of a pretty fellow among all the women

in the neighbourhood.

  Tom behaved to Sophia with no particularity, unless perhaps by

showing her a higher respect than he paid to any other. This

distinction her beauty, fortune, sense, and amiable carriage, seemed

to demand; but as to design upon her person he had none; for which

we shall at present suffer the reader to condemn him of stupidity; but

perhaps we shall be able indifferently well to account for it

hereafter.

  Sophia, with the highest degree of innocence and modesty, had a

remarkable sprightliness in her temper. This was so greatly

increased whenever she was in company with Tom, that had he not been

very young and thoughtless, he must have observed it: or had not Mr.

Western's thoughts been generally either in the field, the stable,

or the dog-kennel, it might have perhaps created some jealousy in him:

but so far was the good gentleman from entertaining any such

suspicions, that he gave Tom every opportunity with his daughter which

any lover could have wished; and this Tom innocently improved to

better advantage, by following only the dictates of his natural

gallantry and good-nature, than he might perhaps have done had he

had the deepest designs on the young lady.

  But indeed it can occasion little wonder that this matter escaped

the observation of others, since poor Sophia herself never remarked

it; and her heart was irretrievably lost before she suspected it was

in danger.

  Matters were in this situation, when Tom, one afternoon, finding

Sophia alone, began, after a short apology, with a very serious

face, to acquaint her that he had a favour to ask of her which he

hoped her goodness would comply with.

  Though neither the young man's behaviour, nor indeed his manner of

opening this business, were such as could give her any just cause of

suspecting he intended to make love to her; yet whether Nature

whispered something into her ear, or from what cause it arose I will

not determine; certain it is, some idea of that kind must have

intruded itself; for her colour forsook her cheeks, her limbs

trembled, and her tongue would have faltered, had Tom stopped for an

answer; but he soon relieved her from her perplexity, by proceeding to

inform her of his request; which was to solicit her interest on behalf

of the gamekeeper, whose own ruin, and that of a large family, must

be, he said, the consequence of Mr. Western's pursuing his action

against him.

  Sophia presently recovered her confusion, and, with a smile full

of sweetness, said, "Is this the mighty favour you asked with so

much gravity? I will do it with all my heart. I really pity the poor

fellow, and no longer ago than yesterday sent a small matter to his

wife." This small matter was one of her gowns, some linen, and ten

shillings in money, of which Tom had heard, and it had, in reality,

put this solicitation into his head.

  Our youth, now, emboldened with his success, resolved to push the

matter farther, and ventured even to beg her recommendation of him

to her father's service; protesting that he thought him one of the

honestest fellows in the country, and extremely well qualified for the

place of a gamekeeper, which luckily then happened to be vacant.

  Sophia answered, "Well, I will undertake this too; but I cannot

promise you as much success as in the former part, which I assure

you I will not quit my father without obtaining. However, I will do

what I can for the poor fellow; for I sincerely look upon him and

his family as objects of great compassion. And now, Mr. Jones, I

must ask you a favour."

  "A favour, madam!" cries Tom: "if you knew the pleasure you have

given me in the hopes of receiving a command from you, you would think

by mentioning it you did confer the greatest favour on me; for by this

dear hand I would sacrifice my life to oblige you."

  He then snatched her hand, and eagerly kissed it, which was the

first time his lips had ever touched her. The blood, which before

had forsaken her cheeks, now made her sufficient amends, by rushing

all over her face and neck with such violence, that they became all of

a scarlet colour. She now first felt a sensation to which she had been

before a stranger, and which, when she had leisure to reflect on it,

began to acquaint her with some secrets, which the reader, if he

doth not already guess them, will know in due time.

  Sophia, as soon as she could speak (which was not instantly),

informed him that the favour she had to desire of him was, not to lead

her father through so many dangers in hunting; for that, from what she

had heard, she was terribly frightened every time they went out

together, and expected some day or other to see her father brought

home with broken limbs. She therefore begged him, for her sake, to

be more cautious; and as he well knew Mr. Western would follow him,

not to ride so madly, nor to take dangerous leaps for the future.

  Tom promised faithfully to obey her commands; and after thanking her

for her kind compliance with his request, took his leave, and departed

highly charmed with his success.

  Poor Sophia was charmed too, but in a very different way. Her

sensations, however, the reader's heart (if he or she have any) will

better represent than I can, if I had as many mouths as ever poet

wished for, to eat, I suppose, those many dainties with which he was

so plentifully provided.

  It was Mr. Western's custom every afternoon, as soon as he was

drunk, to hear his daughter play on the harpsichord; for he was a

great lover of music, and perhaps, had he lived in town, might have

passed for a connoisseur; for he always excepted against the finest

compositions of Mr. Handel. He never relished any music but what was

light and airy; and indeed his most favourite tunes were Old Sir Simon

the King, St. George he was for England, Bobbing Joan, and some

others.

  His daughter, though she was a perfect mistress of music, and

would never willingly have played any but Handel's, was so devoted

to her father's pleasure, that she learnt all those tunes to oblige

him. However, she would now and then endeavour to lead him into her

own taste; and when he required the repetition of his ballads, would

answer with a "Nay, dear sir"; and would often beg him to suffer her

to play something else.

  This evening, however, when the gentleman was retired from his

bottle, she played all his favourites three times over without any

solicitation. This so pleased the good squire, that he started from

his couch, gave his daughter a kiss, and swore her hand was greatly

improved. She took this opportunity to execute her promise to Tom;

in which she succeeded so well, that the squire declared, if she would

give him t'other bout of Old Sir Simon, he would give the gamekeeper

his deputation the next morning. Sir Simon was played again and again,

till the charms of the music soothed Mr. Western to sleep. In the

morning Sophia did not fail to remind him of his engagement; and his

attorney was immediately sent for, ordered to stop any further

proceedings in the action, and to make out the deputation.

  Tom's success in this affair soon began to ring over the country,

and various were the censures passed upon it; some greatly

applauding it as an act of good nature; others sneering, and saying,

"No wonder that one idle fellow should love another." Young Blifil was

greatly enraged at it. He had long hated Black George in the same

proportion as Jones delighted in him; not from any offence which he

had ever received, but from his great love to religion and virtue;-

for Black George had the reputation of a loose kind of a fellow.

Blifil therefore represented this as flying in Mr. Allworthy's face;

and declared, with great concern, that it was impossible to find any

other motive for doing good to such a wretch.

  Thwackum and Square likewise sung to the same tune. They were now

(especially the latter) become greatly jealous of young Jones with the

widow; for he now approached the age of twenty, was really a fine

young fellow, and that lady, by her encouragements to him, seemed

daily more and more to think him so.

  Allworthy was not, however, moved with their malice. He declared

himself very well satisfied with what Jones had done. He said the

perseverance and integrity of his friendship was highly commendable,

and he wished he could see more frequent instances of that virtue.

  But Fortune, who seldom greatly relishes such sparks as my friend

Tom, perhaps because they do not pay more ardent addresses to her,

gave now a very different turn to all his actions, and showed them

to Mr. Allworthy in a light far less agreeable than that gentleman's

goodness had hitherto seen them in.





                                Chapter 6



  An apology for the insensibility of Mr. Jones to all the charms of

the lovely Sophia; in which possibly we may, in a considerable degree,

lower his character in the estimation of those men of wit and

gallantry who approve the heroes in most of our modern comedies



  There are two sorts of people, who, I am afraid, have already

conceived some contempt for my heroe, on account of his behaviour to

Sophia. The former of these will blame his prudence in neglecting an

opportunity to possess himself of Mr. Western's fortune; and the

latter will no less despise him his backwardness to so fine a girl,

who seemed ready to fly into his arms, if he would open them to

receive her.

  Now, though I shall not perhaps be able absolutely to acquit him

of either of these charges (for want of prudence admits of no

excuse; and what I shall produce against the latter charge will, I

apprehend, be scarce satisfactory); yet, as evidence may sometimes

be offered in mitigation, I shall set forth the plain matter of

fact, and leave the whole to the reader's determination.

  Mr. Jones had somewhat about him, which, though I think writers

are not thoroughly agreed in its name, doth certainly inhabit some

human breasts; whose use is not so properly to distinguish right

from wrong, as to prompt and incite them to the former, and to

restrain and withhold them from the latter.

  This somewhat may be indeed resembled to the famous trunk-maker in

the playhouse; for, whenever the person who is possessed of it doth

what is right, no ravished or friendly spectator is so eager or so

loud in his applause: on the contrary, when he doth wrong, no critic

is so apt to hiss and explode him.

  To give a higher idea of the principle I mean, as well as one more

familiar to the present age; it may be considered as sitting on its

throne in the mind, like the Lord High Chancellor of this kingdom in

his court; where it presides, governs, directs, judges, acquits, and

condemns according to merit and justice, with a knowledge which

nothing escapes, a penetration which nothing can deceive, and an

integrity which nothing can corrupt.

  This active principle may perhaps be said to constitute the most

essential barrier between us and our neighbours the brutes; for if

there be some in the human shape who are not under any such

dominion, I choose rather to consider them as deserters from us to our

neighbours; among whom they will have the fate of deserters, and not

be placed in the first rank.

  Our heroe, whether he derived it from Thwackum or Square I will

not determine, was very strongly under the guidance of this principle;

for though he did not always act rightly, yet he never did otherwise

without feeling and suffering for it. It was this which taught him,

that to repay the civilities and little friendships of hospitality

by robbing the house where you have received them, is to be the basest

and meanest of thieves. He did not think the baseness of this

offence lessened by the height of the injury committed; on the

contrary, if to steal another's plate deserved death and infamy, it

seemed to him difficult to assign a punishment adequate to the robbing

a man of his whole fortune, and of his child into the bargain.

  This principle, therefore, prevented him from any thought of

making his fortune by such means (for this, as I have said, is an

active principle, and doth not content itself with knowledge or belief

only). Had he been greatly enamoured of Sophia, he possibly might have

thought otherwise; but give me leave to say, there is great difference

between running away with man's daughter from the motive of love,

and doing the same thing from the motive of theft.

  Now, though this young gentleman was not insensible of the charms of

Sophia; though he greatly liked her beauty, and esteemed all her other

qualifications, she had made, however, no deep impression on his

heart; for which, as it renders him liable to the charge of stupidity,

or at least of want of taste, we shall now proceed to account.

  The truth then is, his heart was in the possession of another woman.

Here I question not but the reader will be surprized at our long

taciturnity as to this matter; and quite at a loss to divine who

this woman was, since we have hitherto not dropt a hint of any one

likely to be a rival to Sophia; for as to Mrs. Blifil, though we

have been obliged to mention some suspicions of her affection for Tom,

we have not hitherto given the least latitude for imagining that he

had any for her; and, indeed, I am sorry to say it, but the youth of

both sexes are too apt to be deficient in their gratitude for that

regard with which persons more advanced in years are sometimes so kind

to honour them.

  That the reader may be no longer in suspense, he will be pleased

to remember, that we have often mentioned the family of George Seagrim

(commonly called Black George, the gamekeeper), which consisted at

present of a wife and five children.

  The second of these children was a daughter, whose name was Molly,

and who was esteemed one of the handsomest girls in the whole country.

  Congreve well says there is in true beauty something which vulgar

souls cannot admire; so can no dirt or rags hide this something from

those souls which are not of the vulgar stamp.

  The beauty of this girl made, however, no impression on Tom, till

she grew towards the age of sixteen, when Tom, who was near three

years older, began first to cast the eyes of affection upon her. And

this affection he had fixed on the girl long before he could bring

himself to attempt the possession of her person: for though his

constitution urged him greatly to this his principles no less forcibly

restrained him. To debauch a young woman, however low her condition

was, appeared to him a very heinous crime; and the good-will he bore

the father, with the compassion he had for his family, very strongly

corroborated all such sober reflections; so that he once resolved to

get the better of his inclinations, and he actually abstained three

whole months without ever going to Seagrim's house, or seeing his

daughter.

  Now, though Molly was, as we have said, generally thought a very

fine girl, and in reality she was so, yet her beauty was not of the

most amiable kind. It had, indeed, very little of feminine in it,

and would have become a man at least as well as a woman; for, to say

the truth, youth and florid health had a very considerable share in

the composition.

  Nor was her mind more effeminate than her person. As this was tall

and robust, so was that bold and forward. So little had she of

modesty, that Jones had more regard for her virtue than she herself.

And as most probably she liked Tom as well as he liked her, so when

she perceived his backwardness she herself grew proportionably

forward; and when she saw he had entirely deserted the house, she

found means of throwing herself in his way, and behaved in such a

manner that the youth must have had very much or very little of the

heroe if her endeavours had proved unsuccessful. In a word, she soon

triumphed over all the virtuous resolutions of Jones; for though she

behaved at last with all decent reluctance, yet I rather chuse to

attribute the triumph to her, since, in fact, it was her design

which succeeded.

  In the conduct of this matter, I say, Molly so well played her part,

that Jones attributed the conquest entirely to himself, and considered

the young woman as one who had yielded to the violent attacks of his

passion. He likewise imputed her yielding to the ungovernable force of

her love towards him; and this the reader will allow to have been a

very natural and probable supposition, as we have more than once

mentioned the uncommon comeliness of his person: and, indeed, he was

one of the handsomest young fellows in the world.

  As there are some minds whose affections, like Master Blifil's,

are solely placed on one single person, whose interest and

indulgence alone they consider on every occasion; regarding the good

and ill of all others as merely indifferent, any farther than as

they contribute to the pleasure or advantage of that person: so

there is a different temper of mind which borrows a degree of virtue

even from self-love. Such can never receive any kind of satisfaction

from another, without loving the creature to whom that satisfaction is

owing, and without making its well-being in some sort necessary to

their own ease.

  Of this latter species was our heroe. He considered this poor girl

as one whose happiness or misery he had caused to be dependent on

himself. Her beauty was still the object of desire, though greater

beauty, or a fresher object, might have been more so; but the little

abatement which fruition had occasioned to this was highly

overbalanced by the considerations of the affection which she

visibly bore him, and of the situation into which he had brought

her. The former of these created gratitude, the latter compassion; and

both, together with his desire for her person, raised in him a passion

which might, without any great violence to the word, be called love;

though, perhaps, it was at first not very judiciously placed.

  This, then, was the true reason of that insensibility which he had

shown to the charms of Sophia, and that behaviour in her which might

have been reasonably enough interpreted as an encouragement to his

addresses; for as he could not think of abandoning his Molly, poor and

destitute as she was, so no more could he entertain a notion of

betraying such a creature as Sophia. And surely, had he given the

least encouragement to any passion for that young lady, he must have

been absolutely guilty of one or other of those crimes; either of

which would, in my opinion, have very justly subjected him to that

fate, which, at his first introduction into this history, I

mentioned to have been generally predicted as his certain destiny.





                                Chapter 7



  Being the shortest chapter in this book



  Her mother first perceived the alteration in the shape of Molly; and

in order to hide it from her neighbours, she foolishly clothed her

in that sack which Sophia had sent her; though, indeed, that young

lady had little apprehension that the poor woman would have been

weak enough to let any of her daughters wear it in that form.

  Molly was charmed with the first opportunity she ever had of showing

her beauty to advantage; for though she could very well bear to

contemplate herself in the glass, even when dressed in rags; and

though she had in that dress conquered the heart of Jones, and perhaps

of some others; yet she thought the addition of finery would much

improve her charms, and extend her conquests.

  Molly, therefore, having dressed herself out in this sack, with a

new laced cap, and some other ornaments which Tom had given her,

repairs to church with her fan in her hand the very next Sunday. The

great are deceived if they imagine they have appropriated ambition and

vanity to themselves. These noble qualities flourish as notably in a

country church and churchyard as in the drawing-room, or in the

closet. Schemes have indeed been laid in the vestry which would hardly

disgrace the conclave. Here is a ministry, and here is an

opposition. Here are plots and circumventions, parties and factions,

equal to those which are to be found in courts.

  Nor are the women here less practised in the highest feminine arts

than their fair superiors in quality and fortune. Here are prudes

and coquettes. Here are dressing and ogling, falsehood, envy,

malice, scandal; in short, everything which is common to the most

splendid assembly, or politest circle. Let those of high life,

therefore, no longer despise the ignorance of their inferiors; nor the

vulgar any longer rail at the vices of their betters.

  Molly had seated herself some time before she was known by her

neighbours. And then a whisper ran through the whole congregation,

"Who is she?" but when she was discovered, such sneering, giggling,

tittering, and laughing ensued among the women, that Mr. Allworthy was

obliged to exert his authority to preserve any decency among them.





                                Chapter 8



  A battle sung by the muse in the Homerican stile, and which none but

the classical reader can taste



  Mr. Western had an estate in this parish; and as his house stood

at little greater distance from this church than from his own, he very

often came to Divine Service here; and both he and the charming Sophia

happened to be present at this time.

  Sophia was much pleased with the beauty of the girl, whom she pitied

for her simplicity in having dressed herself in that manner, as she

saw the envy which it had occasioned among her equals. She no sooner

came home than she sent for the gamekeeper, and ordered him to bring

his daughter to her; saying she would provide for her in the family,

and might possibly place the girl about her own person, when her own

maid, who was now going away, had left her.

  Poor Seagrim was thunderstruck at this; for he was no stranger to

the fault in the shape of his daughter. He answered, in a stammering

voice, "That he was afraid Molly would be too awkward to wait on her

ladyship, as she had never been at service." "No matter for that,"

says Sophia; "she will soon improve. I am pleased with the girl, and

am resolved to try her."

  Black George now repaired to his wife, on whose prudent counsel he

depended to extricate him out of this dilemma; but when he came

thither he found his house in some confusion. So great envy had this

sack occasioned, that when Mr. Allworthy and the other gentry were

gone from church, the rage, which had hitherto been confined, burst

into an uproar; and, having vented itself at first in opprobrious

words, laughs, hisses, and gestures, betook itself at last to

certain missile weapons; which, though from their plastic nature

they threatened neither the loss of life or of limb, were however

sufficiently dreadful to a well-dressed lady. Molly had too much

spirit to bear this treatment tamely. Having therefore- but hold, as

we are diffident of our own abilities, let us here invite a superior

power to our assistance.

  Ye Muses, then, whoever ye are, who love to sing battles, and

principally thou who whilom didst recount the slaughter in those

fields where Hudibras and Trulla fought, if thou wert not starved with

thy friend Butler, assist me on this great occasion. All things are

not in the power of all.

  As a vast herd of cows in a rich farmer's yard, if, while they are

milked, they hear their calves at a distance, lamenting the robbery

which is then committing, roar and bellow; so roared forth the

Somersetshire mob an hallaloo, made up of almost as many squalls,

screams, and other different sounds as there were persons, or indeed

passions among them: some were inspired by rage, others alarmed by

fear, and others had nothing in their heads but the love of fun; but

chiefly Envy, the sister of Satan, and his constant companion,

rushed among the crowd, and blew up the fury of the women; who no

sooner came up to Molly than they pelted her with dirt and rubbish.

  Molly, having endeavoured in vain to make a handsome retreat,

faced about; and laying hold of ragged Bess, who advanced in the front

of the enemy, she at one blow felled her to the ground. The whole army

of the enemy (though near a hundred in number), seeing the fate of

their general, gave back many paces, and retired behind a new-dug

grave; for the churchyard was the field of battle, where there was

to be a funeral that very evening. Molly pursued her victory, and

catching up a skull which lay on the side of the grave, discharged

it with such fury, that having hit a taylor on the head, the two

skulls sent equally forth a hollow sound at their meeting, and the

taylor took presently measure of his length on the ground, where the

skulls lay side by side, and it was doubtful which was the more

valuable of the two. Molly then taking a thigh-bone in her hand,

fell in among the flying ranks, and dealing her blows with great

liberality on either side, overthrew the carcass of many a mighty

heroe and heroine.

  Recount, O Muse, the names of those who fell on this fatal day.

First, Jemmy Tweedle felt on his hinder head the direful bone. Him the

pleasant banks of sweetly-winding Stour had nourished, where he

first learnt the vocal art, with which, wandering up and down at wakes

and fairs, he cheered the rural nymphs and swains, when upon the green

they interweaved the sprightly dance; while he himself stood

fiddling and jumping to his own music. How little now avails his

fiddle! He thumps the verdant floor with his carcass. Next, old

Echepole, the sowgelder, received a blow in his forehead from our

Amazonian heroine, and immediately fell to the ground. He was a

swinging fat fellow, and fell with almost as much noise as a house.

His tobacco-box dropped at the same time from his pocket, which

Molly took up as lawful spoils. Then Kate of the Mill tumbled

unfortunately over a tombstone, which catching hold of her

ungartered stocking inverted the order of nature, and gave her heels

the superiority to her head. Betty Pippin, with young Roger her lover,

fell both to the ground; where, oh perverse fate! she salutes the

earth, and he the sky. Tom Freckle, the smith's son, was the next

victim to her rage. He was an ingenious workman, and made excellent

pattens; nay, the very patten with which he was knocked down was his

own workmanship. Had he been at that time singing psalms in the

church, he would have avoided a broken head. Miss Crow, the daughter

of a farmer; John Giddish, himself a farmer; Nan Slouch, Esther

Codling, Will Spray, Tom Bennet; the three Misses Potter, whose father

keeps the sign of the Red Lion; Betty Chambermaid, Jack Ostler, and

many others of inferior note, lay rolling among the graves.

  Not that the strenuous arm of Molly reached all these; for many of

them in their flight overthrew each other.

  But now Fortune, fearing she had acted out of character, and had

inclined too long to the same side, especially as it was the right

side, hastily turned about: for now Goody Brown- whom Zekiel Brown

caressed in his arms; nor he alone, but half the parish besides; so

famous was she in the fields of Venus, nor indeed less in those of

Mars. The trophies of both these her husband always bore about on

his head and face; for if ever human head did by its horns display the

amorous glories of a wife, Zekiel's did; nor did his well-scratched

face less denote her talents (or rather talons) of a different kind.

  No longer bore this Amazon the shameful flight of her party. She

stopt short, and, calling aloud to all who fled, spoke as follows: "Ye

Somersetshire men, or rather ye Somersetshire women, are ye not

ashamed thus to fly from a single woman? But if no other will oppose

her, I myself and Joan Top here will have the honour of the

victory." Having thus said, she flew at Molly Seagrim, and easily

wrenched the thigh-bone from her hand, at the same time clawing off

her cap from her head. Then laying hold of the hair of Molly with

her left hand, she attacked her so furiously in the face with the

right, that the blood soon began to trickle from her nose. Molly was

not idle this while. She soon removed the clout from the head of Goody

Brown, and then fastening on her hair with one hand, with the other

she caused another bloody stream to issue forth from the nostrils of

the enemy.

  When each of the combatants had borne off sufficient spoils of

hair from the head of her antagonist, the next rage was against the

garments. In this attack they exerted so much violence, that in a very

few minutes they were both naked to the middle.

  It is lucky for the women that the seat of fistycuff war is not

the same with them as among men; but though they may seem a little

to deviate from their sex, when they go forth to battle, yet I have

observed, they never so far forget, as to assail the bosoms of each

other; where a few blows would be fatal to most of them. This, I know,

some derive from their being of a more bloody inclination than the

males. On which account they apply to the nose, as to the part

whence blood may most easily be drawn; but this seems a far-fetched as

well as ill-natured supposition.

  Goody Brown had great advantage of Molly in this particular; for the

former had indeed no breasts, her bosom (if it may be so called), as

well in colour as in many other properties, exactly resembling an

antient piece of parchment, upon which any one might have drummed a

considerable while without doing her any great damage.

  Molly, beside her present unhappy condition, was differently

formed in those parts, and might, perhaps, have tempted the envy of

Brown to give her a fatal blow, had not the lucky arrival of Tom Jones

at this instant put an immediate end to the bloody scene.

  This accident was luckily owing to Mr. Square; for he, Master

Blifil, and Jones, had mounted their horses, after church, to take the

air, and had ridden about a quarter of a mile, when Square, changing

his mind (not idly, but for a reason which we shall unfold as soon

as we have leisure), desired the young gentlemen to ride with him

another way than they had at first purposed. This motion being

complied with, brought them of necessity back again to the churchyard.

  Master Blifil, who rode first, seeing such a mob assembled, and

two women in the posture in which we left the combatants, stopt his

horse to enquire what was the matter. A country fellow, scratching his

head, answered him: "I don't know, measter, un't I; an't please your

honour, here hath been a vight, I think, between Goody Brown and

Moll Seagrim."

  "Who, who?" cries Tom; but without waiting for an answer, having

discovered the features of his Molly through all the discomposure in

which they now were, he hastily alighted, turned his horse loose, and,

leaping over the wall, ran to her. She now first bursting into

tears, told him how barbarously she had been treated. Upon which,

forgetting the sex of Goody Brown, or perhaps not knowing it in his

rage- for, in reality, she had no feminine appearance but a

petticoat, which he might not observe- he gave her a lash or two with

his horsewhip; and then flying at the mob, who were all accused by

Moll, he dealt his blows so profusely on all sides, that unless I

would again invoke the muse (which the good-natured reader may think a

little too hard upon her, as she hath so lately been violently

sweated), it would be impossible for me to recount the

horse-whipping of that day.

  Having scoured the whole coast of the enemy, as well as any of

Homer's heroes ever did, or as Don Quixote or any knight-errant in the

world could have done, he returned to Molly, whom he found in a

condition which must give both me and my reader pain, was it to be

described here. Tom raved like a madman, beat his breast, tore his

hair, stamped on the ground, and vowed the utmost vengeance on all who

had been concerned. He then pulled off his coat, and buttoned it round

her, put his hat upon her head, wiped the blood from her face as

well as he could with his handkerchief, and called out to the

servant to ride as fast as possible for a side-saddle, or a pillion,

that he might carry her safe home.

  Master Blifil objected to the sending away the servant, as they

had only one with them; but as Square seconded the order of Jones,

he was obliged to comply.

  The servant returned in a very short time with the pillion, and

Molly, having collected her rags as well as she could, was placed

behind him. In which manner she was carried home, Square, Blifil,

and Jones attending.

  Here Jones having received his coat, given her a sly kiss, and

whispered her, that he would return in the evening, quitted his Molly,

and rode on after his companions.





                                Chapter 9



  Containing matter of no very peaceable colour



  Molly had no sooner apparelled herself in her accustomed rags,

than her sisters began to fall violently upon her, particularly her

eldest sister, who told her she was well enough served. "How had she

the assurance to wear a gown which young Madam Western had given to

mother! If one of us was to wear it, I think, says she, "I myself have

the best right; but I warrant you think it belongs to your beauty. I

suppose you think yourself more handsomer than any of us."- "Hand her

down the bit of glass from over the cupboard," cries another; "I'd

wash the blood from my face before I talked of my beauty."- "You'd

better have minded what the parson says," cries the eldest, "and not a

harkened after men voke."- "Indeed, child, and so she had," says the

mother, sobbing: "she hath brought a disgrace upon us all. She's the

vurst of the vamily that ever was a whore."

  "You need not upbraid me with that, mother," cried Molly; "you

yourself was brought-to-bed of sister there, within a week after you

was married."

  "Yes, hussy," answered the enraged mother, "so I was, and what was

the mighty matter of that? I was made an honest woman then; and if you

was to be made an honest woman, I should not be angry; but you must

have to doing with a gentleman, you nasty slut; you will have a

bastard, hussy, you will; and that I defy any one to say of me."

  In this situation Black George found his family, when he came home

for the purpose before mentioned. As his wife and three daughters were

all of them talking together, and most of them crying, it was some

time before he could get an opportunity of being heard; but as soon as

such interval occurred, he acquainted the company with what Sophia had

said to him.

  Goody Seagrim then began to revile her daughter afresh. "Here," says

she, "you have brought us into a fine quandary indeed. What will madam

say to that big belly? Oh that ever I should live to see this day!"

  Molly answered with great spirit, "And what is this mighty place

which you have got for me, father?" (for he had not well understood

the phrase used by Sophia of being about her person). "I suppose it is

to be under the cook; but I shan't wash dishes for anybody. My

gentleman will provide better for me. See what he hath given me this

afternoon. He hath promised I shall never want money; and you shan't

want money neither, mother, if you will hold your tongue, and know

when you are well." And so saying, she pulled out several guineas, and

gave her mother one of them.

  The good woman no sooner felt the gold within her palm, than her

temper began (such is the efficacy of that panacea) to be mollified.

"Why, husband," says she, "would any but such a blockhead as you not

have enquired what place this was before he had accepted it?

Perhaps, as Molly says, it may be in the kitchen; and truly I don't

care my daughter should be a scullion wench; for, poor as I am, I am a

gentlewoman. And thof I was obliged, as my father, who was a

clergyman, died worse than nothing, and so could not give me a

shilling of portion, to undervalue myself by marrying a poor man;

yet I would have you to know, I have a spirit above all them things.

Marry come up! it would better become Madam Western to look at home,

and remember who her own grandfather was. Some of my family, for aught

I know, might ride in their coaches, when the grandfathers of some

voke walked a-voot. I warrant she fancies she did a mighty matter,

when she sent us that old gownd; some of my family would not have

picked up such rags in the street; but poor people are always trampled

upon.- The parish need not have been in such a fluster with Molly.

You might have told them, child, your grandmother wore better things

new out of the shop."

  "Well, but consider," cried George, "what answer shall I make to

madam?"

  "I don't know what answer," says she; "you are always bringing

your family into one quandary or other. Do you remember when you

shot the partridge, the occasion of all our misfortunes? Did not I

advise you never to go into Squire Western's manor? Did not I tell you

many a good year ago what would come of it? But you would have your

own headstrong ways; yes, you would, you villain."

  Black George was, in the main, a peaceable kind of fellow, and

nothing choleric nor rash; yet did he bear about him something of what

the antients called the irascible, and which his wife, if she had been

endowed with much wisdom, would have feared. He had long

experienced, that when the storm grew very high, arguments were but

wind, which served rather to increase, than to abate it. He was

therefore seldom unprovided with a small switch, a remedy of wonderful

force, as he had often essayed, and which the word villain served as a

hint for his applying.

  No sooner, therefore, had this symptom appeared, than he had

immediate recourse to the said remedy, which though, as it is usual in

all very efficacious medicines, it at first seemed to heighten and

inflame the disease, soon produced a total calm, and restored the

patient to perfect ease and tranquillity.

  This is, however, a kind of horse-medicine, which requires a very

robust constitution to digest, and is therefore proper only for the

vulgar, unless in one single instance, viz., where superiority of

birth breaks out; in which case, we should not think it very

improperly applied by any husband whatever, if the application was not

in itself so base, that, like certain applications of the physical

kind which need not be mentioned, it so much degrades and contaminates

the hand employed in it, that no gentleman should endure the thought

of anything so low and detestable.

  The whole family were soon reduced to a state of perfect quiet;

for the virtue of this medicine, like that of electricity, is often

communicated through one person to many others, who are not touched by

the instrument. To say the truth, as they both operate by friction, it

may be doubted whether there is not something analogous between

them, of which Mr. Freke would do well to enquire, before he publishes

the next edition of his book.

  A council was now called, in which, after many debates, Molly

still persisting that she would not go to service, it was at length

resolved, that Goody Seagrim herself should wait on Miss Western,

and endeavour to procure the place for her eldest daughter, who

declared great readiness to accept it: but Fortune, who seems to

have been an enemy of this little family, afterwards put a stop to her

promotion.





                                Chapter 10



  A story told by Mr. Supple, the curate. The penetration of Squire

Western. His great love for his daughter, and the return to it made by

her



  The next morning Tom Jones hunted with Mr. Western, and was at his

return invited by that gentleman to dinner.

  The lovely Sophia shone forth that day with more gaiety and

sprightliness than usual. Her battery was certainly levelled at our

heroe; though, I believe, she herself scarce yet knew her own

intention; but if she had any design of charming him, she now

succeeded.

  Mr. Supple, the curate of Mr. Allworthy's parish, made one of the

company. He was a good-natured worthy man; but chiefly remarkable

for his great taciturnity at table, though his mouth was never shut at

it. In short, he had one of the best appetites in the world.

However, the cloth was no sooner taken away, than he always made

sufficient amends for his silence: for he was a very hearty fellow;

and his conversation was often entertaining, never offensive.

  At his first arrival, which was immediately before the entrance of

the roast-beef, he had given an intimation that he had brought some

news with him, and was beginning to tell, that he came that moment

from Mr. Allworthy's, when the sight of the roast-beef struck him

dumb, permitting him only to say grace, and to declare he must pay his

respect to the baronet, for so he called the sirloin.

  When dinner was over, being reminded by Sophia of his news, he began

as follows: "I believe, lady, your ladyship observed a young woman

at church yesterday at even-song, who was drest in one of your

outlandish garments; I think I have seen your ladyship in such a

one. However, in the country, such dresses are



     Rara avis in terris, nigroque simillima cygno.



That is, madam, as much as to say, 'A rare bird upon the earth, and

very like a black swan.' The verse is in Juvenal. But to return to

what I was relating. I was saying such garments are rare sights in the

country; and perchance, too, it was thought the more rare, respect

being had to the person who wore it, who, they tell me, is the

daughter of Black George, your worship's gamekeeper, whose sufferings,

I should have opined, might have taught him more wit, than to dress

forth his wenches in such gaudy apparel. She created so much confusion

in the congregation, that if Squire Allworthy had not silenced it,

it would have interrupted the service: for I was once about to stop in

the middle of the first lesson. Howbeit, nevertheless, after prayer

was over, and I was departed home, this occasioned a battle in the

churchyard, where, amongst other mischief, the head of a travelling

fidler was very much broken. This morning the fidler came to Squire

Allworthy for a warrant, and the wench was brought before him. The

squire was inclined to have compounded matters; when, lo! on a

sudden the wench appeared (I ask your ladyship's pardon) to be, as

it were, at the eve of bringing forth a bastard. The squire demanded

of her who was the father? But she pertinaciously refused to make

any response. So that he was about to make her mittimus to Bridewell

when I departed."

  "And is a wench having a bastard all your news, doctor?" cries

Western; "I thought it might have been some public matter, something

about the nation."

  "I am afraid it is too common, indeed," answered the parson; "but

I thought the whole story altogether deserved commemorating. As to

national matters, your worship knows them best. My concerns extend

no farther than my own parish."

  "Why, ay," says the squire, "I believe I do know a little of that

matter, as you say. But come, Tommy, drink about; the bottle stands

with you."

  Tom begged to be excused, for that he had particular business; and

getting up from table, escaped the clutches of the squire, who was

rising to stop him, and went off with very little ceremony.

  The squire gave him a good curse at his departure; and then

turning to the parson, he cried out, "I smoke it: I smoke it. Tom is

certainly the father of this bastard. Zooks, parson, you remember

how he recommended the veather o' her to me. D--n un, what a sly b--ch

'tis. Ay, ay, as sure as two-pence, Tom is the veather of the

bastard."

  "I should be very sorry for that," says the parson.

  "Why sorry," cries the squire: "Where is the mighty matter o't?

What, I suppose dost pretend that thee hast never got a bastard?

Pox! more good luck's thine! for I warrant hast a done a therefore

many's the good time and often."

  "Your worship is pleased to be jocular," answered the parson; "but I

do not only animadvert on the sinfulness of the action- though that

surely is to be greatly deprecated- but I fear his unrighteousness

may injure him with Mr. Allworthy. And truly I must say, though he

hath the character of being a little wild, I never saw any harm in the

young man; nor can I say I have heard any, save what your worship

now mentions. I wish, indeed, he was a little more regular in his

responses at church; but altogether he seems



     Ingenui vultus puer ingenuique pudoris.



That is a classical line, young lady; and, being rendered into

English, is, 'a lad of an ingenuous countenance, and of an ingenuous

modesty'; for this was a virtue in great repute both among the

Latins and Greeks. I must say, the young gentleman (for so I think I

may call him, notwithstanding his birth) appears to me a very

modest, civil lad, and I should be sorry that he should do himself any

injury in Squire Allworthy's opinion."

  "Poogh!" says the squire: "Injury, with Allworthy! Why, Allworthy

loves a wench himself. Doth not all the country know whose son Tom is?

You must talk to another person in that manner. I remember Allworthy

at college."

  "I thought," said the parson, "he had never been at the university."

  "Yes, yes, he was," says the squire: "and many a wench have we two

had together. As arrant a whore-master as any within five miles

o'un. No, no. It will do'n no harm with he, assure yourself; nor

with anybody else. Ask Sophy there- You have not the worse opinion of

a young fellow for getting a bastard, have you, girl? No, no, the

women will like un the better for't."

  This was a cruel question to poor Sophia. She had observed Tom's

colour change at the parson's story; and that, with his hasty and

abrupt departure, gave her sufficient reason to think her father's

suspicion not groundless. Her heart now at once discovered the great

secret to her which it had been so long disclosing by little and

little; and she found herself highly interested in this matter. In

such a situation, her father's malapert question rushing suddenly upon

her, produced some symptoms which might have alarmed a suspicious

heart; but, to do the squire justice, that was not his fault. When she

rose therefore from her chair, and told him a hint from him was always

sufficient to make her withdraw, he suffered her to leave the room,

and then with great gravity of countenance remarked, "That it was

better to see a daughter over-modest than over-forward";- a sentiment

which was highly applauded by the parson.

  There now ensued between the squire and the parson a most

excellent political discourse, framed out of newspapers and

political pamphlets; in which they made a libation of four bottles

of wine to the good of their country: and then, the squire being

fast asleep, the parson lighted his pipe, mounted his horse, and

rode home.

  When the squire had finished his half-hour's nap, he summoned his

daughter to her harpsichord; but she begged to be excused that

evening, on account of a violent head-ache. This remission was

presently granted; for indeed she seldom had occasion to ask him

twice, as he loved her with such ardent affection, that, by gratifying

her, he commonly conveyed the highest gratification to himself. She

was really, what he frequently called her, his little darling, and she

well deserved to be so; for she returned all his affection in the most

ample manner. She had preserved the most inviolable duty to him in all

things; and this her love made not only easy, but so delightful,

that when one of her companions laughed at her for placing so much

merit in such scrupulous obedience, as that young lady called it,

Sophia answered, "You mistake me, madam, if you think I value myself

upon this account; for besides that I am barely discharging my duty, I

am likewise pleasing myself. I can truly say I have no delight equal

to that of contributing to my father's happiness; and if I value

myself, my dear, it is on having this power, and not on executing it."

  This was a satisfaction, however, which poor Sophia was incapable of

tasting this evening. She therefore not only desired to be excused

from her attendance at the harpsichord, but likewise begged that he

would suffer her to absent herself from supper. To this request

likewise the squire agreed, though not without some reluctance; for he

scarce ever permitted her to be out of his sight, unless when he was

engaged with his horses, dogs, or bottle. Nevertheless he yielded to

the desire of his daughter, though the poor man was at the same time

obliged to avoid his own company (if I may so express myself), by

sending for a neighbouring farmer to sit with him.





                                Chapter 11



  The narrow escape of Molly Seagrim, with some observations for which

we have been forced to dive pretty deep into nature



  Tom Jones had ridden one of Mr. Western's horses that morning in the

chase; so that having no horse of his own in the squire's stable, he

was obliged to go home on foot: this he did so expeditiously that he

ran upwards of three miles within the half-hour.

  Just as he arrived at Mr. Allworthy's outward gate, he met the

constable and company with Molly in their possession, whom they were

conducting to that house where the inferior sort of people may learn

one good lesson, viz., respect and deference to their superiors; since

it must show them the wide distinction Fortune intends between those

persons who are to be corrected for their faults, and those who are

not; which lesson if they do not learn, I am afraid they very rarely

learn any other good lesson, or improve their morals, at the House

of Correction.

  A lawyer may perhaps think Mr. Allworthy exceeded his authority a

little in this instance. And, to say the truth, I question, as here

was no regular information before him, whether his conduct was

strictly regular. However, as his intention was truly upright, he

ought to be excused in foro conscientiae; since so many arbitrary acts

are daily committed by magistrates who have not this excuse to plead

for themselves.

  Tom was no sooner informed by the constable whither they were

proceeding (indeed he pretty well guessed it of himself), than he

caught Molly in his arms, and embracing her tenderly before them

all, swore he would murder the first man who offered to lay hold of

her. He bid her dry her eyes and be comforted; for, wherever she went,

he would accompany her. Then turning to the constable, who stood

trembling with his hat off, he desired him, in a very mild voice, to

return with him for a moment only to his father (for so he now

called Allworthy); for he durst, he said, be assured, that, when he

had alledged what he had to say in her favour, the girl would be

discharged.

  The constable, who, I make no doubt, would have surrendered his

prisoner had Tom demanded her, very readily consented to this request.

So back they all went into Mr. Allworthy's hall; where Tom desired

them to stay till his return, and then went himself in pursuit of

the good man. As soon as he was found, Tom threw himself at his

feet, and having begged a patient hearing, confessed himself to be the

father of the child of which Molly was then big. He entreated him to

have compassion on the poor girl, and to consider, if there was any

guilt in the case, it lay principally at his door.

  "If there is any guilt in the case!" answered Allworthy warmly: "Are

you then so profligate and abandoned a libertine to doubt whether

the breaking the laws of God and man, the corrupting and ruining a

poor girl be guilt? I own, indeed, it doth lie principally upon you;

and so heavy it is, that you ought to expect it should crush you."

  "Whatever may be my fate," says Tom, "let me succeed in my

intercessions for the poor girl. I confess I have corrupted her! but

whether she shall be ruined, depends on you. For Heaven's sake, sir,

revoke your warrant, and do not send her to a place which must

unavoidably prove her destruction."

  Allworthy bid him immediately call a servant. Tom answered there was

no occasion; for he had luckily met them at the gate, and relying upon

his goodness, had brought them all back into his hall, where they

now waited his final resolution, which upon his knees he besought

him might be in favour of the girl; that she might be permitted to

go home to her parents, and not be exposed to a greater degree of

shame and scorn than must necessarily fall upon her. "I know," said

he, "that is too much. I know I am the wicked occasion of it. I will

endeavour to make amends, if possible; and if you shall have hereafter

the goodness to forgive me, I hope I shall deserve it."

  Allworthy hesitated some time, and at last said, "Well, I will

discharge my mittimus.- You may send the constable to me." He was

instantly called, discharged, and so was the girl.

  It will be believed that Mr. Allworthy failed not to read Tom a very

severe lecture on this occasion; but it is unnecessary to insert it

here, as we have faithfully transcribed what he said to Jenny Jones in

the first book, most of which may be applied to the men, equally

with the women. So sensible an effect had these reproofs on the

young man, who was no hardened sinner that he retired to his own room,

where he passed the evening alone, in much melancholy contemplation.

  Allworthy was sufficiently offended by this transgression of

Jones; for notwithstanding the assertions of Mr. Western, it is

certain this worthy man had never indulged himself in any loose

pleasures with women, and greatly condemned the vice of incontinence

in others. Indeed, there is much reason to imagine that there was

not the least truth in what Mr. Western affirmed, especially as he

laid the scene of those impurities at the university, where Mr.

Allworthy had never been. In fact, the good squire was a little too

apt to indulge that kind of pleasantry which is generally called

rhodomontade: but which may, with as much propriety, be expressed by a

much shorter word; and perhaps we too often supply the use of this

little monosyllable by others; since very much of what frequently

passes in the world for wit and humour, should, in the strictest

purity of language, receive that short appellation, which, in

conformity to the well-bred laws of custom, I here suppress.

  But whatever detestation Mr. Allworthy had to this or to any other

vice, he was not so blinded by it but that he could discern any virtue

in the guilty person, as clearly indeed as if there had been no

mixture of vice in the same character. While he was angry therefore

with the incontinence of Jones, he was no less pleased with the honour

and honesty of his self-accusation. He began now to form in his mind

the same opinion of this young fellow, which, we hope, our reader

may have conceived. And in balancing his faults with his

perfections, the latter seemed rather to preponderate.

  It was to no purpose, therefore, that Thwackum, who was

immediately charged by Mr. Blifil with the story, unbended all his

rancour against poor Tom. Allworthy gave a patient hearing to their

invectives, and then answered coldly: "That young men of Tom's

complexion were too generally addicted to this vice; but he believed

that youth was sincerely affected with what he had said to him on

the occasion, and he hoped he would not transgress again." So that, as

the days of whipping were at an end, the tutor had no other vent but

his own mouth for his gall, the usual poor resource of impotent

revenge.

  But Square, who was a less violent, was a much more artful man;

and as he hated Jones more perhaps than Thwackum himself did, so he

contrived to do him more mischief in the mind of Mr. Allworthy.

  The reader must remember the several little incidents of the

partridge, the horse, and the Bible, which were recounted in the

second book. By all which Jones had rather improved than injured the

affection which Mr. Allworthy was inclined to entertain for him. The

same, I believe, must have happened to him with every other person who

hath any idea of friendship, generosity, and greatness of spirit, that

is to say, who hath any traces of goodness in his mind.

  Square himself was not unacquainted with the true impression which

those several instances of goodness had made on the excellent heart of

Allworthy; for the philosopher very well knew what virtue was,

though he was not always perhaps steady in its pursuit; but as for

Thwackum, from what reason I will not determine, no such thoughts ever

entered into his head: he saw Jones in a bad light, and he imagined

Allworthy saw him in the same, but that he was resolved, from pride

and stubbornness of spirit, not to give up the boy whom he had once

cherished; since by so doing, he must tacitly acknowledge that his

former opinion of him had been wrong.

  Square therefore embraced this opportunity of injuring Jones in

the tenderest part, by giving a very bad turn to all these

before-mentioned occurrences. "I am sorry, sir," said he, "to own I

have been deceived as well as yourself. I could not, I confess, help

being pleased with what I ascribed to the motive of friendship, though

it was carried to an excess, and all excess is faulty and vicious: but

in this I made allowance for youth. Little did I suspect that the

sacrifice of truth, which we both imagined to have been made to

friendship, was in reality a prostitution of it to a depraved and

debauched appetite. You now plainly see whence all the seeming

generosity of this young man to the family of the gamekeeper

proceeded. He supported the father in order to corrupt the daughter,

and preserved the family from starving, to bring one of them to

shame and ruin. This is friendship! this is generosity! As Sir Richard

Steele says, 'Gluttons who give high prices for delicacies, are very

worthy to be called generous.' In short I am resolved, from this

instance, never to give way to the weakness of human nature nor to

think anything virtue which doth not exactly quadrate with the

unerring rule of right."

  The goodness of Allworthy had prevented those considerations from

occurring to himself; yet were they too plausible to be absolutely and

hastily rejected, when laid before his eyes by another. Indeed what

Square had said sunk very deeply into his mind, and the uneasiness

which it there created was very visible to the other; though the

good man would not acknowledge this, but made a very slight answer,

and forcibly drove off the discourse to some other subject. It was

well perhaps for poor Tom, that no such suggestions had been made

before he was pardoned; for they certainly stamped in the mind of

Allworthy the first bad impression concerning Jones.





                                Chapter 12



  Containing much clearer matters; but which flowed from the same

fountain with those in the preceding chapter



  The reader will be pleased, I believe, to return with me to

Sophia. She passed the night, after we saw her last, in no very

agreeable manner. Sleep befriended her but little, and dreams less. In

the morning, when Mrs. Honour, her maid, attended her at the usual

hour, she was found already up and drest.

  Persons who live two or three miles' distance in the country are

considered as next-door neighbours, and transactions at the one

house fly with incredible celerity to the other. Mrs. Honour,

therefore, had heard the whole story of Molly's shame; which she,

being of a very communicative temper, had no sooner entered the

apartment of her mistress, than she began to relate in the following

manner:-

  "La, ma'am, what doth your la'ship think? the girl that your la'ship

saw at church on Sunday, whom you thought so handsome; though you

would not have thought her so handsome neither, if you had seen her

nearer, but to be sure she hath been carried before the justice for

being big with child. She seemed to me to look like a confident

slut: and to be sure she hath laid the child to young Mr. Jones. And

all the parish says Mr. Allworthy is so angry with young Mr. Jones,

that he won't see him. To be sure, one can't help pitying the poor

young man, and yet he doth not deserve much pity neither, for

demeaning himself with such kind of trumpery. Yet he is so pretty a

gentleman, I should be sorry to have him turned out of doors. I

dares to swear the wench was as willing as he; for she was always a

forward kind of body. And when wenches are so coming, young men are

not so much to be blamed neither; for to be sure they do no more

than what is natural. Indeed it is beneath them to meddle with such

dirty draggle-tails; and whatever happens to them, it is good enough

for them. And yet, to be sure, the vile baggages are most in fault.

I wishes, with all my heart, they were well to be whipped at the

cart's tail; for it is pity they should be the ruin of a pretty

young gentleman; and nobody can deny but that Mr. Jones is one of

the most handsomest young men that ever-"

  She was running on thus, when Sophia, with a more peevish voice than

she had ever spoken to her in before, cried, "Prithee, why dost thou

trouble me with all this stuff? What concern have I in what Mr.

Jones doth? I suppose you are all alike. And you seem to me to be

angry it was not your own case."

  "I, ma'am!" answered Mrs. Honour, "I am sorry your ladyship should

have such an opinion of me. I am sure nobody can say any such thing of

me. All the young fellows in the world may go to the divil for me.

Because I said he was a handsome man? Everybody says it as well as

I. To be sure, I never thought as it was any harm to say a young man

was handsome; but to be sure I shall never think him so any more

now; for handsome is that handsome does. A beggar wench!--"

  "Stop thy torrent of impertinence," cries Sophia, "and see whether

my father wants me at breakfast."

  Mrs. Honour then flung out of the room, muttering much to herself,

of which "Marry come up, I assure you," was all that could be

plainly distinguished.

  Whether Mrs. Honour really deserved that suspicion, of which her

mistress gave her a hint, is a matter which we cannot indulge our

reader's curiosity by resolving. We will, however, make him amends

in disclosing what passed in the mind of Sophia.

  The reader will be pleased to recollect, that a secret affection for

Mr. Jones had insensibly stolen into the bosom of this young lady.

That it had there grown to a pretty great height before she herself

had discovered it. When she first began to perceive its symptoms,

the sensations were so sweet and pleasing, that she had not resolution

sufficient to check or repel them; and thus she went on cherishing a

passion of which she never once considered the consequences.

  This incident relating to Molly first opened her eyes. She now first

perceived the weakness of which she had been guilty; and though it

caused the utmost perturbation in her mind, yet it had the effect of

other nauseous physic, and for the time expelled her distemper. Its

operation indeed was most wonderfully quick; and in the short

interval, while her maid was absent, so entirely removed all symptoms,

that when Mrs. Honour returned with a summons from her father, she was

become perfectly easy, and had brought herself to a thorough

indifference for Mr. Jones.

  The diseases of the mind do in almost every particular imitate those

of the body. For which reason, hope, that learned faculty, for whom we

have so profound a respect, will pardon us the violent hands we have

been necessitated to lay on several words and phrases, which of

right belong to them, and without which our descriptions must have

been ten unintelligible.

  Now there is no one circumstance in which the distempers of the mind

bear a more exact analogy to those which are called bodily, than

that aptness which both have to a relapse. This is plain in the

violent diseases of ambition and avarice. I have known ambition,

when cured at court by frequent disappointments (which are the only

physic for it), to break out again in a contest for foreman of the

grand jury at an assizes; and have heard of a man who had so far

conquered avarice, as to give away many a sixpence, that comforted

himself, at last, on his deathbed, by making a crafty and advantageous

bargain concerning his ensuing funeral, with an undertaker who had

married his only child.

  In the affair of love, which, out of strict conformity with the

Stoic philosophy, we shall here treat as a disease, this proneness

to relapse is no less conspicuous. Thus it happened to poor Sophia;

upon whom, the very next time she saw young Jones, all the former

symptoms returned, and from that time cold and hot fits alternately

seized her heart.

  The situation of this young lady was now very different from what it

had ever been before. That passion which had formerly been so

exquisitely delicious, became now a scorpion in her bosom. She

resisted it therefore with her utmost force, and summoned every

argument her reason (which was surprisingly strong for her age)

could suggest, to subdue and expel it. In this she so far succeeded,

that she began to hope from time and absence a perfect cure. She

resolved therefore to avoid Tom Jones as much as possible; for which

purpose she began to conceive a design of visiting her aunt, to

which she made no doubt of obtaining her father's consent.

  But Fortune, who had other designs in her head, put an immediate

stop to any such proceeding, by introducing an accident, which will be

related in the next chapter.





                                Chapter 13



  A dreadful accident which befel Sophia. The gallant behaviour of

Jones, and the more dreadful consequence of that behaviour to the

young lady; with a short digression in favour of the female sex



  Mr. Western grew every day fonder and fonder of Sophia, insomuch

that his beloved dogs themselves almost gave place to her in his

affections; but as he could not prevail on himself to abandon these,

he contrived very cunningly to enjoy their company, together with that

of his daughter, by insisting on her riding a-hunting with him.

  Sophia, to whom her father's word was a law, readily complied with

his desires, though she had not the least delight in a sport, which

was of too rough and masculine a nature to suit with her

disposition. She had however another motive, beside her obedience,

to accompany the old gentleman in the chase; for by her presence she

hoped in some measure to restrain his impetuosity, and to prevent

him from so frequently exposing his neck to the utmost hazard.

  The strongest objection was that which would have formerly been an

inducement to her, namely, the frequent meeting with young Jones, whom

she had determined to avoid; but as the end of the hunting season

now approached, she hoped, by a short absence with her aunt, to reason

herself entirely out of her unfortunate passion; and had not any doubt

of being able to meet him in the field the subsequent season without

the least danger.

  On the second day of her hunting, as she was returning from the

chase, and was arrived within a little distance from Mr. Western's

house, her horse, whose mettlesome spirit required a better rider,

fell suddenly to prancing and capering in such a manner that she was

in the most imminent peril of falling. Tom Jones, who was at a

little distance behind, saw this, and immediately galloped up to her

assistance. As soon as he came up, he leapt from his own horse, and

caught hold of hers by the bridle. The unruly beast presently reared

himself on end on his hind legs, and threw his lovely burthen from his

back, and Jones caught her in his arms.

  She was so affected with the fright, that she was not immediately

able to satisfy Jones, who was very sollicitous to know whether she

had received any hurt. She soon after, however, recovered her spirits,

assured him she was safe, and thanked him for the care he had taken of

her. Jones answered, "If I have preserved you, madam, I am

sufficiently repaid; for I promise you, I would have secured you

from the least harm at the expense of a much greater misfortune to

myself than I have suffered on this occasion."

  "What misfortune?" replied Sophia eagerly; "I hope you have come

to no mischief?"

  "Be not concerned, madam," answered Jones. "Heaven be praised you

have escaped so well, considering the danger you was in. If I have

broke my arm, I consider it as a trifle, in comparison of what I

feared upon your account."

  Sophia then screamed out, "Broke your arm! Heaven forbid."

  "I am afraid I have, madam," says Jones: "but I beg you will

suffer me first to take care of you. I have a right hand yet at your

service, to help you into the next field, whence we have but a very

little walk to your father's house."

  Sophia seeing his left arm dangling by his side, while he was

using the other to lead her, no longer doubted of the truth. She now

grew much paler than her fears for herself had made her before. All

her limbs were seized with a trembling, insomuch that Jones could

scarce support her; and as her thoughts were in no less agitation, she

could not refrain from giving Jones a look so full of tenderness, that

it almost argued a stronger sensation in her mind, than even gratitude

and pity united can raise in the gentlest female bosom, without the

assistance of a third more powerful passion.

  Mr. Western, who was advanced at some distance when this accident

happened, was now returned, as were the rest of the horsemen. Sophia

immediately acquainted them with what had befallen Jones, and begged

them to take care of him. Upon which Western, who had been much

alarmed by meeting his daughter's horse without its rider, and was now

overjoyed to find her unhurt, cried out, "I am glad it is no worse. If

Tom hath broken his arm, we will get a joiner to mend un again."

  The squire alighted from his horse, and proceeded to his house on

foot, with his daughter and ones. An impartial spectator, who had

met them on the way, would, on viewing their several countenances,

have concluded Sophia alone to have been the object of compassion: for

as to Jones, he exulted in having probably saved the life of the young

lady, at the price only of a broken bone; and Mr. Western, though he

was not unconcerned at the accident which had befallen Jones, was,

however, delighted in a much higher degree with the fortunate escape

of his daughter.

  The generosity of Sophia's temper construed this behaviour of

Jones into great bravery; and it made a deep impression on her

heart: for certain it is, that there is no one quality which so

generally recommends men to women as this; proceeding, if we believe

the common opinion, from that natural timidity of the sex, which is,

says Mr. Osborne, "so great, that a woman is the most cowardly of

all the creatures God ever made";- a sentiment more remarkable for

its bluntness than for its truth. Aristotle, in his Politics, doth

them, I believe, more justice, when he says, "The modesty and

fortitude of men differ from those virtues in women; for the fortitude

which becomes a woman, would be cowardice in a man; and the modesty

which becomes a man, would be pertness in a woman." Nor is there,

perhaps, more of truth in the opinion of those who derive the

partiality which women are inclined to show to the brave, from this

excess of their fear. Mr. Bayle (I think, in his article of Helen)

imputes this, and with greater probability, to their violent love of

glory; for the truth of which, we have the authority of him who of all

others saw farthest into human nature, and who introduces the

heroine of his Odyssey, the great pattern of matrimonial love and

constancy, assigning the glory of her husband as the only source of

her affection towards him.*



  *The English reader will not find this in the poem; for the

sentiment is entirely left out in the translation.



  However this be, certain it is that the accident operated very

strongly on Sophia; and, indeed, after much enquiry into the matter, I

am inclined to believe, that, at this very time, the charming Sophia

made no less impression on the heart of Jones; to say truth, he had

for some time become sensible of the irresistible power of her charms.





                                Chapter 14



  The arrival of a surgeon- his operations, and a long dialogue

between Sophia and her maid



  When they arrived at Mr. Western's hall, Sophia, who had tottered

along with much difficulty, sunk down in her chair; but by the

assistance of hartshorn and water, she was prevented from fainting

away, and had pretty well recovered her spirits, when the surgeon

who was sent for to Jones appeared. Mr. Western, who imputed these

symptoms in his daughter to her fall, advised her to be presently

blooded by way of prevention. In this opinion he was seconded by the

surgeon, who gave so many reasons for bleeding, and quoted so many

cases where persons had miscarried for want of it, that the squire

became very importunate, and indeed insisted peremptorily that his

daughter should be blooded.

  Sophia soon yielded to the commands of her father, though entirely

contrary to her own inclinations, for she suspected, I believe, less

danger from the fright, than either the squire or the surgeon. She

then stretched out her beautiful arm, and the operator began to

prepare for his work.

  While the servants were busied in providing materials, the

surgeon, who imputed the backwardness which had appeared in Sophia

to her fears, began to comfort her with assurances that there was

not the least danger; for no accident, he said, could ever happen in

bleeding, but from the monstrous ignorance of pretenders to surgery,

which he pretty plainly insinuated was not at present to be

apprehended. Sophia declared she was not under the least apprehension;

adding, "If you open an artery, I promise you I'll forgive you." "Will

you?" cries Western: "D--n me, if I will. If he does thee the least

mischief, d--n me if I don't ha' the heart's blood o'un out." The

surgeon assented to bleed her upon these conditions, and then

proceeded to his operation, which he performed with as much

dexterity as he had promised; and with as much quickness: for he

took but little blood from her, saying, it was much safer to bleed

again and again, than to take away too much at once.

  Sophia, when her arm was bound up, retired: for she was not

willing (nor was it, perhaps, strictly decent) to be present at the

operation on Jones. Indeed, one objection which she had to bleeding

(though she did not make it) was the delay which it would occasion

to setting the broken bone. For Western, when Sophia was concerned,

had no consideration but for her; and as for Jones himself, he "sat

like patience on a monument smiling at grief." To say the truth,

when he saw the blood springing from the lovely arm of Sophia, he

scarce thought of what had happened to himself.

  The surgeon now ordered his patient to be stript to his shirt, and

then entirely baring the arm, he began to stretch and examine it, in

such a manner that the tortures he put him to caused Jones to make

several wry faces; which the surgeon observing, greatly wondered at,

crying, "What is the matter, sir? I am sure it is impossible I

should hurt you." And then holding forth the broken arm, he began a

long and very learned lecture of anatomy, in which simple and double

fractures were most accurately considered; and the several ways in

which Jones might have broken his arm were discussed, with proper

annotations showing how many of these would have been better, and

how many worse than the present case.

  Having at length finished his laboured harangue, with which the

audience, though had greatly raised their attention and admiration,

were not much edified, as they really understood not a single syllable

of all he had said, he proceeded to business, which he was more

expeditious in finishing, than he had been in beginning.

  Jones was then ordered into a bed, which Mr. Western compelled him

to accept at his own house, and sentence of water gruel was passed

upon him.

  Among the good company which had attended in the hall during the

bone-setting, Mrs. Honour was one; who being summoned to her

mistress as soon as it was over, and asked by her how the young

gentleman did, presently launched into extravagant praises on the

magnanimity, as she called it, of his behaviour, which, she said, "was

so charming in so pretty a creature." She then burst forth into much

warmer encomiums on the beauty of his person; enumerating many

particulars, and ending with the whiteness of his skin.

  This discourse had an effect on Sophia's countenance, which would

not perhaps have escaped the observance of the sagacious

waiting-woman, had she once looked her mistress in the face, all the

time she was speaking: but as a looking-glass, which was most

commodiously placed opposite to her, gave her an opportunity of

surveying those features, in which, of all others, she took most

delight; so she had not once removed her eyes from that amiable object

during her whole speech.

  Mrs. Honour was so intirely wrapped up in the subject on which she

exercised her tongue, and the object before her eyes, that she gave

her mistress time to conquer her confusion; which having done, she

smiled on her maid, and told her, "she was certainly in love with this

young fellow."- "I in love, madam!" answers she: "upon my word,

ma'am, I assure you, ma'am, upon my soul, ma'am, I am not."- "Why, if

you was," cries her mistress, "I see no reason that you should be

ashamed of it; for he is certainly a pretty fellow."- "Yes, ma'am,"

answered the other, "that he is, the most handsomest man I ever saw in

my life. Yes, to be sure, that he is, and, as your ladyship says, I

don't know why I should be ashamed of loving him, though he is my

betters. To be sure, gentlefolks are but flesh and blood no more

than us servants. Besides, as for Mr. Jones, thof Squire Allworthy

hath made a gentleman of him, he was not so good as myself by birth:

for thof I am a poor body, I am an honest person's child, and my

father and mother were married, which is more than some people can

say, as high as they hold their heads. Marry, come up! I assure you,

my dirty cousin! thof his skin be so white, and to be sure it is the

most whitest that ever was seen, I am a Christian as well as he, and

nobody can say that I am base born: my grandfather was a clergyman,*

and would have been very angry, I believe, to have thought any of

his family should have taken up with Molly Seagrim's dirty leavings."



  *This is the second person of low condition whom we have recorded in

this history to have sprung from the clergy. It is to be hoped such

instances will, in future ages, when some provision is made for the

families of the inferior clergy, appear stranger than they can be

thought at present.



  Perhaps Sophia might have suffered her maid to run on in this

manner, from wanting sufficient spirits to stop her tongue, which

the reader may probably conjecture was no very easy task; for

certainly there were some passages in her speech which were far from

being agreeable to the lady. However, she now checked the torrent,

as there seemed no end of its flowing. "I wonder," says she, "at

your assurance in daring to talk thus of one of my father's friends.

As to the wench, I order you never to mention her name to me. And with

regard to the young gentleman's birth, those who can say nothing

more to his disadvantage, may as well be silent on that head, as I

desire you will be for the future."

  "I am sorry I have offended your ladyship," answered Mrs. Honour. "I

am sure I hate Molly Seagrim as much as your ladyship can; and as

for abusing Squire Jones, I can call all the servants in the house

to witness, that whenever any talk hath been about bastards, I have

always taken his part; for which of you, says I to the footman,

would not be a bastard, if he could, to be made a gentleman of? And,

says I, I am sure he is a very fine gentleman; and he hath one of

the whitest hands in the world; for to be sure so he hath: and, says

I, one of the sweetest temperedest, best naturedest men in the world

he is; and, says I, all the servants and neighbours all round the

country loves him. And, to be sure, I could tell your ladyship

something, but that I am afraid it would offend you."- "What could

you tell me, Honour?" says Sophia. "Nay, ma'am, to be sure he meant

nothing by it, therefore I would not have your ladyship be

offended."- "Prithee tell me," says Sophia; "I will know it this

instant."- "Why, ma'am," answered Mrs. Honour, "he came into the room

one day last week when I was at work, and there lay your ladyship's

muff on a chair, and to be sure he put his hands into it; that very

muff your ladyship gave me but yesterday. La! says I, Mr. Jones, you

will stretch my lady's muff, and spoil it: but he still kept his hands

in it: and then he kissed it- to be sure I hardly ever saw such a

kiss in my life as he gave it."- "I suppose he did not know it was

mine," replied Sophia. "Your ladyship shall hear, ma'am. He kissed

it again and again, and said it was the prettiest muff in the world.

La! sir, says I, you have seen it a hundred times. Yes, Mrs. Honour,

cried he; but who can see anything beautiful in the presence of your

lady but herself?- Nay, that's not all neither; but I hope your

ladyship won't be offended, for to be sure he meant nothing. One

day, as your ladyship was playing on the harpsichord to my master, Mr.

Jones was sitting in the next room, and methought he looked

melancholy. La! says I, Mr. Jones, what's the matter? a penny for your

thoughts, says I. Why, hussy, says he, starting up from a dream,

what can I be thinking of, when that angel your mistress is playing?

And then squeezing me by the hand, Oh! Mrs. Honour, says he, how happy

will that man be!- and then he sighed. Upon my troth, his breath is

as sweet as a nosegay.- But to be sure he meant no harm by it. So I

hope your ladyship will not mention a word; for he gave me a crown

never to mention it, and made me swear upon a book, but I believe,

indeed, it was not the Bible."

  Till something of a more beautiful red than vermilion be found

out, I shall say nothing of Sophia's colour on this occasion.

"Honour," says she, "I- if you will not mention this any more to me-

nor to anybody else, I will not betray you-I mean, I will not be

angry; but I am afraid of your tongue. Why, my girl, will you give it

such liberties?"- "Nay, ma'am," answered she, "to be sure, I would

sooner cut out my tongue than offend your ladyship. To be sure I shall

never mention a word that your ladyship would not have me."- "Why, I

would not have you mention this any more," said Sophia, "for it may

come to my father's ears, and he would be angry with Mr. Jones; though

I really believe, as you say, he meant nothing. I should be very angry

myself, if I imagined-" - "Nay, ma'am," says Honour, "I protest I

believe he meant nothing. I thought he talked as if he was out of

his senses; nay, he said he believed he was beside himself when he had

spoken the words. Ay, sir, says I, I believe so too. Yes, says he,

Honour.- But I ask your ladyship's pardon; I could tear my tongue out

for offending you." "Go on," says Sophia; "you may mention anything

you have not told me before."- "Yes, Honour, says he (this was some

time afterwards, when he gave me the crown), I am neither such a

coxcomb, or such a villain, as to think of her in any other delight

but as my goddess; as such I will always worship and adore her while I

have breath.- This was all, ma'am, I will be sworn, to the best of my

remembrance. I was in a passion with him myself, till I found he meant

no harm."- "Indeed, Honour," says Sophia, "I believe you have a real

affection for me. I was provoked the other day when I gave you

warning; but if you have a desire to stay with me, you shall."- "To

be sure, ma'am," answered Mrs. Honour, "I shall never desire to part

with your ladyship. To be sure, I almost cried my eyes out when you

gave me warning. It would be very ungrateful in me to desire to

leave your ladyship; because as why, I should never get so good a

place again. I am sure I would live and die with your ladyship; for,

as poor Mr. Jones said, happy is the man--"

  Here the dinner bell interrupted a conversation which had wrought

such an effect on Sophia, that she was, perhaps, more obliged to her

bleeding in the morning, than she, at the time, had apprehended she

should be. As to the present situation of her mind, I shall adhere

to a rule of Horace, by not attempting to describe it, from despair of

success. Most of my readers will suggest it easily to themselves;

and the few who cannot, would not understand the picture, or at

least would deny it to be natural, if ever so well drawn.

