



                                    BOOK II

       CONTAINING SCENES OF MATRIMONIAL FELICITY IN DIFFERENT DEGREES OF

        LIFE; AND VARIOUS OTHER TRANSACTIONS DURING THE FIRST TWO YEARS

      AFTER THE MARRIAGE BETWEEN CAPTAIN BLIFIL AND MISS BRIDGET ALLWORTHY




                                Chapter 1



  Showing what kind of a history this is; what it is like, and what it

is not like



  Though we have properly enough entitled this our work, a history,

and not a life; nor an apology for a life, as is more in fashion;

yet we intend in it rather to pursue the method of those writers,

who profess to disclose the revolutions of countries, than to

imitate the painful and voluminous historian, who, to preserve the

regularity of his series, thinks himself obliged to fill up as much

paper with the detail of months and years in which nothing

remarkable happened, as he employs upon those notable aeras when the

greatest scenes have been transacted on the human stage.

  Such histories as these do, in reality, very much resemble a

newspaper, which consists of just the same number of words, whether

there be any news in it or not. They may likewise be compared to a

stage coach, which performs constantly the same course, empty as

well as full. The writer, indeed, seems to think himself obliged to

keep even pace with time, whose amanuensis he is; and, like his

master, travels as slowly through centuries of monkish dulness, when

the world seems to have been asleep, as through that bright and busy

age so nobly distinguished by the excellent Latin poet-



     Ad confligendum venientibus undique poenis,

     Omnia cum belli trepido concussa tumultu

     Horrida contremuere sub altis aetheris auris;

     In dubioque fuit sub utrorum regna cadendum

     Omnibus humanis esset, terraque marique.



Of which we wish we could give our readers a more adequate translation

than that by Mr. Creech-



     When dreadful Carthage frighted Rome with arms,

     And all the world was shook with fierce alarms;

     Whilst undecided yet, which part should fall,

     Which nation rise the glorious lord of all.



  Now it is our purpose, in the ensuing pages, to pursue a contrary

method. When any extraordinary scene presents itself (as we trust will

often be the case), we shall spare no pains nor paper to open it at

large to our reader; but if whole years should pass without

producing anything worthy his notice, we shall not be afraid of a

chasm in our history; but shall hasten on to matters of consequence,

and leave such periods of time totally unobserved.

  These are indeed to be considered as blanks in the grand lottery

of time. We therefore, who are the registers of that lottery, shall

imitate those sagacious persons who deal in that which is drawn at

Guildhall, and who never trouble the public with the many blanks

they dispose of; but when a great prize happens to be drawn, the

newspapers are presently filled with it, and the world is sure to be

informed at whose office it was sold: indeed, commonly two or three

different offices lay claim to the honour of having disposed of it; by

which, I suppose, the adventurers are given to understand that certain

brokers are in the secrets of Fortune, and indeed of her cabinet

council.

  My reader then is not to be surprized, if, in the course of this

work, he shall find some chapters very short, and others altogether as

long; some that contain only the time of a single day, and others that

comprise years; in a word, if my history sometimes seems to stand

still, and sometimes to fly. For all which I shall not look on

myself as accountable to any court of critical jurisdiction

whatever: for as I am, in reality, the founder of a new province of

writing, so I am at liberty to make what laws I please therein. And

these laws, my readers, whom I consider as my subjects, are bound to

believe in and to obey; with which that they may readily and

cheerfully comply, I do hereby assure them that I shall principally

regard their ease and advantage in all such institutions: for I do

not, like a jure divino* tyrant, imagine that they are my slaves, or

my commodity. I am, indeed, set over them for their own good only, and

was created for their use, and not they for mine. Nor do I doubt,

while I make their interest the great rule of my writings, they will

unanimously concur in supporting my dignity, and in rendering me all

the honour I shall deserve or desire.



  *By divine right.





                                Chapter 2



  Religious cautions against showing too much favour to bastards;

and a great discovery made by Mrs. Deborah Wilkins



  Eight months after the celebration of the nuptials between Captain

Blifil and Miss Bridget Allworthy, a young lady of great beauty,

merit, and fortune, was Miss Bridget, by reason of a fright, delivered

of a fine boy. The child was indeed to all appearances perfect; but

the midwife discovered it was born a month before its full time.

  Though the birth of an heir by his beloved sister was a circumstance

of great joy to Mr. Allworthy, yet it did not alienate his

affections from the little foundling, to whom he had been godfather,

had given his own name of Thomas, and whom he had hitherto seldom

failed of visiting, at least once a day, in his nursery.

  He told his sister, if she pleased, the newborn infant should be

bred up together with little Tommy; to which she consented, though

with some little reluctance: for she had truly a great complacence for

her brother; and hence she had always behaved towards the foundling

with rather more kindness than ladies of rigid virtue can sometimes

bring themselves to show to these children, who, however innocent, may

be truly called the living monuments of incontinence.

  The captain could not so easily bring himself to bear what he

condemned as a fault in Mr. Allworthy. He gave him frequent hints,

that to adopt the fruits of sin, was to give countenance to it. He

quoted several texts (for he was well read in Scripture), such as,

He visits the sins of the fathers upon the children; and the fathers

have eaten sour grapes, and children's teeth are set on edge, &c.

Whence he argued the legality of punishing the crime of the parent

on the bastard. He said, "Though the law did not positively allow

the destroying such base-born children, yet it held them to be the

children of nobody; that the Church considered them as the children of

nobody; and that at the best, they ought to be brought up to the

lowest and vilest offices of the commonwealth."

  Mr. Allworthy answered to all this, and much more, which the captain

had urged on this subject, "That, however guilty the parents might be,

the children were certainly innocent: that as to the texts he had

quoted, the former of them was a particular denunciation against the

jews, for the sin of idolatry, of relinquishing and hating their

heavenly King; and the latter was parabolically spoken, and rather

intended to denote the certain and necessary consequences of sin, than

any express judgment against it. But to represent the Almighty as

avenging the sins of the guilty on the innocent, was indecent, if

not blasphemous, as it to represent him acting against the first

principles of natural justice, and against the original notions of

right and wrong, which he himself had implanted in our minds; by which

we were to judge not only in all matters which were not revealed,

but even of the truth of revelation itself." He said he knew many held

the same principles with the captain on this head; but he was

himself firmly convinced to the contrary, and would provide in the

same manner for this poor infant, as if a legitimate child had had

fortune to have been found in the same place.

  While the captain was taking all opportunities to press these and

such like arguments, to remove the little foundling from Mr.

Allworthy's, of whose fondness for him he began to be jealous, Mrs.

Deborah had made a discovery, which, in its event, threatened at least

to prove more fatal to poor Tommy than all the reasonings of the

captain.

  Whether the insatiable curiosity of this good woman had carried

her on to that business, or whether she did it to confirm herself in

the good graces of Mrs. Blifil, who, notwithstanding her outward

behaviour to the foundling, frequently abused the infant in private,

and her brother too, for his fondness to it, I will not determine; but

she had now, as she conceived, fully detected the father of the

foundling.

  Now, as this was a discovery of great consequence, it may be

necessary to trace it from the fountain-head. We shall therefore

very minutely lay open those previous matters by which it was

produced; and for that purpose we shall be obliged to reveal all the

secrets of a little family with which my reader is at present entirely

unacquainted; and of which the oeconomy was so rare and extraordinary,

that I fear it will shock the utmost credulity of many married

persons.





                                Chapter 3



  The description of a domestic government founded upon rules directly

contrary to those of Aristotle



  My reader may please to remember he hath been informed that Jenny

Jones had lived some years with a certain schoolmaster, who had, at

her earnest desire, instructed her in Latin, in which, to do justice

to her genius, she had so improved herself, that she was become a

better scholar than her master.

  Indeed, though this poor man had undertaken a profession to which

learning must be allowed necessary, this was the least of his

commendations. He was one of the best-natured fellows in the world,

and was, at the same time, master of so much pleasantry and humour,

that he was reputed the wit of the country; and all the neighbouring

gentlemen were so desirous of his company, that as denying was not his

talent, he spent much time at their houses, which he might, with

more emolument, have spent in his school.

  It may be imagined that a gentleman so qualified and so disposed,

was in no danger of becoming formidable to the learned seminaries of

Eton or Westminster. To speak plainly, his scholars were divided

into two classes: in the upper of which was a young gentleman, the son

of a neighboring squire, who, at the age of seventeen, was just

entered into his Syntaxis; and in the lower was a second son of the

same gentleman, who, together with seven parish-boys, was learning

to read and write.

  The stipend arising hence would hardly have indulged the

schoolmaster in the luxuries of life, had he not added to this

office those of clerk and barber, and had not Mr. Allworthy added to

the whole an annuity of ten pounds, which the poor man received

every Christmas, and with which he was enabled to cheer his heart

during that sacred festival.

  Among his other treasures, the pedagogue had a wife, whom he had

married out of Mr. Allworthy's kitchen for her fortune, viz., twenty

pounds, which she had there amassed.

  This woman was not very amiable in her person. Whether she sat to my

friend Hogarth, or no, I will not determine; but she exactly resembled

the young woman who is pouring out her mistress's tea in the third

picture of the Harlot's Progress. She was, besides, a profest follower

of that noble sect founded by Xantippe of old; by means of which she

became more formidable in the school than her husband; for, to confess

the truth, he was never master there, or anywhere else, in her

presence.

  Though her countenance did not denote much natural sweetness of

temper, yet this was, perhaps, somewhat soured by a circumstance which

generally poisons matrimonial felicity; for children are rightly

called the pledges of love; and her husband, though they had been

married nine years, had given her no such pledges; a default for which

he had no excuse, either from age or health, being not yet thirty

years old, and what they call a jolly brisk young man.

  Hence arose another evil, which produced no little uneasiness to the

poor pedagogue, of whom she maintained so constant a jealousy, that he

durst hardly speak to one woman in the parish; for the least degree of

civility, or even correspondence, with any female, was sure to bring

his wife upon her back, and his own.

  In order to guard herself against matrimonial injuries in her own

house, as she kept one maid-servant, she always took care to chuse her

out of that order of females whose faces are taken as a kind of

security for their virtue; of which number Jenny Jones, as the

reader hath been before informed, was one.

  As the face of this young woman might be called pretty good security

of the before-mentioned kind, and as her behaviour had been always

extremely modest, which is the certain consequence of understanding in

women; she had passed above four years at Mr. Partridge's (for that

was the schoolmaster's name) without creating the least suspicion in

her mistress. Nay, she had been treated with uncommon kindness, and

her mistress had permitted Mr. Partridge to give her those

instructions which have been before commemorated.

  But it is with jealousy as with the gout: when such distempers are

in the blood, there is never any security against their breaking

out; and that often on the slightest occasions, and when least

suspected.

  Thus it happened to Mrs. Partridge, who had submitted four years

to her husband's teaching this young woman, and had suffered her often

to neglect her work in order to pursue her learning. For, passing by

one day, as the girl was reading, and her master leaning over her, the

girl, I know not for what reason, suddenly started up from her

chair: and this was the first time that suspicion ever entered into

the head of her mistress.

  This did not, however, at that time discover itself, but lay lurking

in her mind, like a concealed enemy, who waits for a reinforcement

of additional strength before he openly declares himself and

proceeds upon hostile operations: and such additional strength soon

arrived to corroborate her suspicion; for not long after, the

husband and wife being at dinner, the master said to his maid, Da mihi

aliquid potum: upon which the poor girl smiled, perhaps at the badness

of the Latin, and, when her mistress cast her eyes on her, blushed,

possibly with a consciousness of having laughed at her master. Mrs.

Partridge, upon this, immediately fell into a fury, and discharged the

trencher on which she was eating, at the head of poor Jenny, crying

out, "You impudent whore, do you play tricks with my husband before my

face?" and at the same instant rose from her chair with a knife in her

hand, with which, most probably, she would have executed very tragical

vengeance, had not the girl taken the advantage of being nearer the

door than her mistress, and avoided her fury by running away: for,

as to the poor husband, whether surprize had rendered him

motionless, or fear (which is full as probable) had restrained him

from venturing at any opposition, he sat staring and trembling in

his chair; nor did he once offer to move or speak, till his wife,

returning from the pursuit of Jenny, made some defensive measures

necessary for his own preservation; and he likewise was obliged to

retreat, after the example of the maid.

  This good woman was, no more than Othello, of a disposition



     To make a life of jealousy,

     And follow still the changes of the moon

     With fresh suspicions-



With her, as well as him,



     ----To be once in doubt,

     Was once to be resolv'd-----



she therefore ordered Jenny immediately to pack up her alls and

begone, for that she was determined she should not sleep that night

within her walls.

  Mr. Partridge had profited too much by experience to interpose in

a matter of this nature. He therefore had recourse to his usual

receipt of patience; for, though he was not a great adept in Latin, he

remembered, and well understood, the advice contained in these words:



     ----Leve fit, quod bene fertur onus-



in English:



     A burden becomes lightest when it is well borne-



which he had always in his mouth; and of which, to say the truth, he

had often occasion to experience the truth.

  Jenny offered to make protestations of her innocence; but the

tempest was too strong for her to be heard. She then betook herself to

the business of packing, for which a small quantity of brown paper

sufficed; and, having received her small pittance of wages, she

returned home.

  The schoolmaster and his consort passed their time unpleasantly

enough that evening; but something or other happened before the next

morning, which a little abated the fury of Mrs. Partridge; and she

at length admitted her husband to make his excuses: to which she

gave the readier belief, as he had, instead of desiring her to

recall Jenny, professed a satisfaction in her being dismissed, saying,

she was grown of little use as a servant, spending all her time in

reading, and was become, moreover, very pert and obstinate; for,

indeed, she and her master had lately had frequent disputes in

literature; in which, as hath been said, she was become greatly his

superior. This, however, he would by no means allow; and as he

called her persisting in the right, obstinacy, he began to hate her

with no small inveteracy.





                                Chapter 4



  Containing one of the most bloody battles, or rather duels, that

were ever recorded in domestic history



  For the reasons mentioned in the preceding chapter, and from some

other matrimonial concessions, well known to most husbands, and which,

like the secrets of freemasonry, should be divulged to none who are

not members of that honourable fraternity, Mrs. Partridge was pretty

well satisfied that she had condemned her husband without cause, and

endeavoured by acts of kindness to make him amends for her false

suspicion. Her passions were indeed equally violent, whichever way

they inclined; for as she could be extremely angry, so could she be

altogether as fond.

  But though these passions ordinarily succeed each other, and

scarce twenty-four hours ever passed in which the pedagogue was not,

in some degree, the object of both; yet, on extraordinary occasions,

when the passion of anger had raged very high, the remission was

usually longer: and so was the case at present; for she continued

longer in a state of affability, after this fit of jealousy was ended,

than her husband had ever known before: and, had it not been for

some little exercises, which all the followers of Xantippe are obliged

to perform daily, Mr. Partridge would have enjoyed a perfect

serenity of several months.

  Perfect calms at sea are always suspected by the experienced mariner

to be the forerunners of a storm: and I know some persons, who,

without being generally the devotees of superstition, are apt to

apprehend that great and unusual peace or tranquillity will be

attended with its opposite. For which reason the antients used, on

such occasions, to sacrifice to the goddess Nemesis, a deity who was

thought by them to look with an invidious eye on human felicity, and

to have a peculiar delight in overturning it.

  As we are very far from believing in any such heathen goddess, or

from encouraging any superstition, so we wish Mr. John Fr--, or some

other such philosopher, would bestir himself a little, in order to

find out the real cause of this sudden transition from good to bad

fortune, which hath been so often remarked, and of which we shall

proceed to give an instance; for it is our province to relate facts,

and we shall leave causes to persons of much higher genius.

  Mankind have always taken great delight in knowing and descanting on

the actions of others. Hence there have been, in all ages and nations,

certain places set apart for public rendezvous, where the curious

might meet and satisfy their mutual curiosity. Among these, the

barbers' shops have justly borne the preeminence. Among the Greeks,

barbers' news was a proverbial expression; and Horace, in one of his

epistles, makes honourable mention of the Roman barbers in the same

light.

  Those of England are known to be no wise inferior to their Greek

or Roman predecessors. You there see foreign affairs discussed in a

manner little inferior to that with which they are handled in the

coffee-houses; and domestic occurrences are much more largely and

freely treated in the former than in the latter. But this serves

only for the men. Now, whereas the females of this country, especially

those of the lower order, do associate themselves much more than those

of other nations, our polity would be highly deficient, if they had

not some place set apart likewise for the indulgence of their

curiosity, seeing they are in this no way inferior to the other half

of the species.

  In enjoying, therefore, such place of rendezvous, the British fair

ought to esteem themselves more happy than any of their foreign

sisters; as I do not remember either to have read in history, or to

have seen in my travels, anything of the like kind.

  This place then is no other than the chandler's shop, the known seat

of all the news; or, as it is vulgarly called, gossiping, in every

parish in England.

  Mrs. Partridge being one day at this assembly of females, was

asked by one of her neighbours, if she had heard no news lately of

Jenny Jones? To which she answered in the negative. Upon this the

other replied, with a smile, That the parish was very much obliged

to her for having turned Jenny away as she did.

  Mrs. Partridge, whose jealousy, as the reader well knows, was long

since cured, and who had no other quarrel to her maid, answered

boldly, She did not know any obligation the parish had to her on

that account; for she believed Jenny had scarce left her equal

behind her.

  "No, truly," said the gossip, "I hope not, though I fancy we have

sluts enow too. Then you have not heard, it seems, that she hath

been brought to bed of two bastards? but as they are not born here, my

husband and the other overseer says we shall not be obliged to keep

them."

  "Two bastards!" answered Mrs. Partridge hastily: "you surprize me! I

don't know whether we must keep them; but I am sure they must have

been begotten here, for the wench hath not been nine months gone

away."

  Nothing can be so quick and sudden as the operations of the mind,

especially when hope, or fear, or jealousy, to which the two others

are but journeymen, set it to work. It occurred instantly to her, that

Jenny had scarce ever been out of her own house while she lived with

her. The leaning over the chair, the sudden starting up, the Latin,

the smile, and many other things, rushed upon her all at once. The

satisfaction her husband expressed in the departure of Jenny, appeared

now to be only dissembled; again, in the same instant, to be real; but

yet to confirm her jealousy, proceeding from satiety, and a hundred

other bad causes. In a word, she was convinced of her husband's guilt,

and immediately left the assembly in confusion.

  As fair Grimalkin, who, though the youngest of the feline family,

degenerates not in ferocity from the elder branches of her house,

and though inferior in strength, is equal in fierceness to the noble

tiger himself, when a little mouse, whom it hath long tormented in

sport, escapes from her clutches for a while, frets, scolds, growls,

swears; but if the trunk, or box, behind which the mouse lay hid be

again removed, she flies like lightning on her prey, and, with

envenomed wrath, bites, scratches, mumbles, and tears the little

animal.

  Not with less fury did Mrs. Partridge fly on the poor pedagogue. Her

tongue, teeth, and hands, fell all upon him at once. His wig was in an

instant torn from his head, his shirt from his back, and from his face

descended five streams of blood, denoting the number of claws with

which nature had unhappily armed the enemy.

  Mr. Partridge acted for some time on the defensive only; indeed he

attempted only to guard his face with his hands; but as he found

that his antagonist abated nothing of her rage, he thought he might,

at least, endeavour to disarm her, or rather to confine her arms; in

doing which her cap fell off in the struggle, and her hair being too

short to reach her shoulders, erected itself on her head; her stays

likewise, which were laced through one single hole at the bottom,

burst open; and her breasts, which were much more redundant than her

hair, hung down below her middle; her face was likewise marked with

the blood of her husband: her teeth gnashed with rage; and fire,

such as sparkles from a smith's forge, darted from her eyes. So

that, altogether, this Amazonian heroine might have been an object

of terror to a much bolder man than Mr. Partridge.

  He had, at length, the good fortune, by getting possession of her

arms, to render those weapons which she wore at the ends of her

fingers useless; which she no sooner perceived, than the softness of

her sex prevailed over her rage, and she presently dissolved in tears,

which soon after concluded in a fit.

  That small share of sense which Mr. Partridge had hitherto preserved

through this scene of fury, of the cause of which he was hitherto

ignorant, now utterly abandoned him. He ran instantly into the street,

hallowing out that his wife was in the agonies of death, and

beseeching the neighbours to fly with the utmost haste to her

assistance. Several good women obeyed his summons, who entering his

house, and applying the usual remedies on such occasions, Mrs.

Partridge was at length, to the great joy of her husband, brought to

herself.

  As soon as she had a little recollected her spirits, and somewhat

composed herself with a cordial, she began to inform the company of

the manifold injuries she had received from her husband; who, she

said, was not contented to injure her in her bed; but, upon her

upbraiding him with it, had treated her in the cruelest manner

imaginable; had tore her cap and hair from her head, and her stays

from her body, giving her, at the same time, several blows, the

marks of which she should carry to the grave.

  The poor man, who bore on his face many more visible marks of the

indignation of his wife, stood in silent astonishment at this

accusation; which the reader will, I believe, bear witness for him,

had greatly exceeded the truth; for indeed he had not struck her once;

and this silence being interpreted to be a confession of the charge by

the whole court, they all began at once, una voce,* to rebuke and

revile him, repeating often, that none but a coward ever struck a

woman.



  *In one voice.



  Mr. Partridge bore all this patiently; but when his wife appealed to

the blood on her face, as an evidence of his barbarity, he could not

help laying claim to his own blood, for so it really was; as he

thought it very unnatural, that this should rise up (as we are

taught that of a murdered person often doth) in vengeance against him.

  To this the women made no other answer, than that it was a pity it

had not come from his heart, instead of his face; all declaring, that,

if their husbands should lift their hands against them, they would

have their hearts' bloods out of their bodies.

  After much admonition for what was past, and much good advice to Mr.

Partridge for his future behaviour, the company at length departed,

and left the husband and wife to a personal conference together, in

which Mr. Partridge soon learned the cause of all his sufferings.





                                Chapter 5



  Containing much matter to exercise the judgment and reflection of

the reader



  I believe it is a true observation, that few secrets are divulged to

one person only; but certainly, it would be next to a miracle that a

fact of this kind should be known to a whole parish, and not transpire

any farther.

  And, indeed, a very few days had past, before the country, to use

a common phrase, rung of the schoolmaster of Little Baddington; who

was said to have beaten his wife in the most cruel manner. Nay, in

some places it was reported he had murdered her; in others, that he

had broke her arms; in others, her legs: in short, there was scarce an

injury which can be done to a human creature, but what Mrs.

Partridge was somewhere or other affirmed to have received from her

husband.

  The cause of this quarrel was likewise variously reported; for as

some people said that Mrs. Partridge had caught her husband in bed

with his maid, so many other reasons, of a very different kind, went

abroad. Nay, some transferred the guilt to the wife, and the

jealousy to the husband.

  Mrs. Wilkins had long ago heard of this quarrel; but, as a different

cause from the true one had reached her ears, she thought proper to

conceal it; and the rather, perhaps, as the blame was universally laid

on Mr. Partridge; and his wife, when she was servant to Mr. Allworthy,

had in something offended Mrs. Wilkins, who was not of a very

forgiving temper.

  But Mrs. Wilkins, whose eyes could see objects at a distance, and

who could very well look forward a few years into futurity, had

perceived a strong likelihood of Captain Blifil's being hereafter

her master; and as she plainly discerned that the captain bore no

great goodwill to the little foundling, she fancied it would be

rendering him an agreeable service, if she could make any

discoveries that might lessen the affection which Mr. Allworthy seemed

to have contracted for this child, and which gave visible uneasiness

to the captain, who could not entirely conceal it even before

Allworthy himself; though his wife, who acted her part much better

in public, frequently recommended to him her own example, of conniving

at the folly of her brother, which, she said, she at least as well

perceived, and as much resented, as any other possibly could.

  Mrs. Wilkins having therefore, by accident, gotten a true scent of

the above story, though long after it had happened, failed not to

satisfy herself thoroughly of all the particulars; and then acquainted

the captain, that she had at last discovered the true father of the

little bastard, which she was sorry, she said, to see her master

lose his reputation in the country, by taking so much notice of.

  The captain chid her for the conclusion of her speech, as an

improper assurance in judging of her master's actions: for if his

honour, or his understanding, would have suffered the captain to

make an alliance with Mrs. Wilkins, his pride would by no means have

admitted it. And to say the truth, there is no conduct less politic,

than to enter into any confederacy with your friend's servants against

their master: for by these means you afterwards become the slave of

these very servants; by whom you are constantly liable to be betrayed.

And this consideration, perhaps it was, which prevented Captain Blifil

from being more explicit with Mrs. Wilkins, or from encouraging the

abuse which she had bestowed on Allworthy.

  But though he declared no satisfaction to Mrs. Wilkins at this

discovery, he enjoyed not a little from it in his own mind, and

resolved to make the best use of it he was able.

  He kept this matter a long time concealed within his own breast,

in hopes that Mr. Allworthy might hear it from some other person;

but Mrs. Wilkins, whether she resented the captain's behaviour, or

whether his cunning was beyond her, and she feared the discovery might

displease him, never afterwards opened her lips about the matter.

  I have thought it somewhat strange, upon reflection, that the

housekeeper never acquainted Mrs. Blifil with this news, as women

are more inclined to communicate all pieces of intelligence to their

own sex, than to ours. The only way, as it appears to me, of solving

this difficulty, is, by imputing it to that distance which was now

grown between the lady and the housekeeper: whether this arose from

a jealousy in Mrs. Blifil, that Wilkins showed too great a respect

to the foundling; for while she was endeavouring to ruin the little

infant, in order to ingratiate herself with the captain, she was every

day more and more commending it before Allworthy, as his fondness

for it every day increased. This, notwithstanding all the care she

took at other times to express the direct contrary to Mrs. Blifil,

perhaps offended that delicate lady, who certainly now hated Mrs.

Wilkins; and though she did not, or possibly could not, absolutely

remove her from her place, she found, however, the means of making her

life very uneasy. This Mrs. Wilkins, at length, so resented, that

she very openly showed all manner of respect and fondness to little

Tommy, in opposition to Mrs. Blifil.

  The captain, therefore, finding the story in danger of perishing, at

last took an opportunity to reveal it himself.

  He was one day engaged with Mr. Allworthy in a discourse on charity:

in which the captain, with great learning, proved to Mr. Allworthy,

that the word charity in Scripture nowhere means beneficence or

generosity.

  "The Christian religion," he said, "was instituted for much nobler

purposes, than to enforce a lesson which many heathen philosophers had

taught us long before, and which, though it might perhaps be called

a moral virtue, savoured but little of that sublime, Christian-like

disposition, that vast elevation of thought, in purity approaching

to angelic perfection, to be attained, expressed, and felt only by

grace. Those," he said, "came nearer to the Scripture meaning, who

understood by it candour, or the forming of a benevolent opinion of

our brethren, and passing a favourable judgment on their actions; a

virtue much higher, and more extensive in its nature, than a pitiful

distribution of alms, which, though we would never so much

prejudice, or even ruin our families, could never reach many;

whereas charity, in the other and truer sense, might be extended to

all mankind."

  He said, "Considering who the disciples were, it would be absurd

to conceive the doctrine of generosity, or giving alms, to have been

preached to them. And, as we could not well imagine this doctrine

should be preached by its Divine Author to men who could not

practise it, much less should we think it understood so by those who

can practise it, and do not.

  "But though," continued he, "there is, I am afraid, little merit

in these benefactions, there would, I must confess, be much pleasure

in them to a good mind, if it was not abated by one consideration. I

mean, that we are liable to be imposed upon, and to confer our

choicest favours often on the undeserving, as you must own was your

case in your bounty to that worthless fellow Partridge: for two or

three such examples must greatly lessen the inward satisfaction

which a good man would otherwise find in generosity; nay, may even

make him timorous in bestowing, lest he should be guilty of supporting

vice, and encouraging the wicked; a crime of a very black dye, and for

which it will by no means be a sufficient excuse, that we have not

actually intended such an encouragement; unless we have used the

utmost caution in chusing the objects of our beneficence. A

consideration which, I make no doubt, hath greatly checked the

liberality of many a worthy and pious man."

  Mr. Allworthy answered, "He could not dispute with the captain in

the Greek language, and therefore could say nothing as to the true

sense of the word which is translated charity; but that he had

always thought it was interpreted to consist in action, and that

giving alms constituted at least one branch of that virtue.

  "As to the meritorious part," he said, "he readily agreed with the

captain; for where could be the merit of barely discharging a duty?

which," he said, "let the world charity have what construction it

would, it sufficiently appeared to be from the whole tenor of the

New Testament. And as he thought it an indispensable duty, enjoined

both by the Christian law, and by the law of nature itself; so was

it withal so pleasant, that if any duty could be said to be its own

reward, or to pay us while we are discharging it, it was this.

  "To confess the truth," said he, "there is one degree of

generosity (of charity I would have called it), which seems to have

some show of merit, and that is, where, from a principle of

benevolence and Christian love, we bestow on another what we really

want ourselves; where, in order to lessen the distresses of another,

we condescend to share some part of them, by giving what even our

own necessities cannot well spare. This is, I think, meritorious;

but to relieve our brethren only with our superfluities; to be

charitable (I must use the word) rather at the expense of our

coffers than ourselves; to save several families from misery rather

than hang up an extraordinary picture in our houses or gratify any

other idle ridiculous vanity- this seems to be only being human

creatures. Nay, I will venture to go farther, it is being in some

degree epicures: for what could the greatest epicure wish rather

than to eat with many mouths instead of one? which I think may be

predicated of any one who knows that the bread of many is owing to his

own largesses.

  "As to the apprehension of bestowing bounty on such as may hereafter

prove unworthy objects, because many have proved such; surely it can

never deter a good man from generosity. I do not think a few or many

examples of ingratitude can justify a man's hardening his heart

against the distresses of his fellow-creatures; nor do I believe it

can ever have such effect on a truly benevolent mind. Nothing less

than a persuasion of universal depravity can lock up the charity of a

good man; and this persuasion must lead him, I think, either into

atheism, or enthusiasm; but surely it is unfair to argue such

universal depravity from a few vicious individuals; nor was this, I

believe, ever done by a man, who, upon searching his own mind, found

one certain exception to the general rule." He then concluded by

asking, "who that Partridge was, whom he had called a worthless

fellow?"

  "I mean," said the captain, "Partridge the barber, the schoolmaster,

what do you call him? Partridge, the father of the little child

which you found in your bed."

  Mr. Allworthy exprest great surprize at this account, and the

captain as great at his ignorance of it; for he said he had known it

above a month: and at length recollected with much difficulty that

he was told it by Mrs. Wilkins.

  Upon this, Wilkins was immediately summoned; who having confirmed

what the captain had said, was by Mr. Allworthy, by and with the

captain's advice, dispatched to Little Baddington, to inform herself

of the truth of the fact: for the captain exprest great dislike at all

hasty proceedings in criminal matters, and said he would by no means

have Mr. Allworthy take any resolution either to the prejudice of

the child or its father, before he was satisfied that the latter was

guilty; for though he had privately satisfied himself of this from one

of Partridge's neighbours, yet he was too generous to give any such

evidence to Mr. Allworthy.





                                Chapter 6



  The trial of Partridge, the schoolmaster, for incontinency; the

evidence of his wife; a short reflection on the wisdom of our law;

with other grave matters, which those will like best who understand

them most



  It may be wondered that a story so well known, and which had

furnished so much matter of conversation, should never have been

mentioned to Mr. Allworthy himself, who was perhaps the only person in

that country who had never heard of it.

  To account in some measure for this to the reader, I think proper to

inform him, that there was no one in the kingdom less interested in

opposing that doctrine concerning the meaning of the word charity,

which hath been seen in the preceding chapter, than our good man.

Indeed, he was equally intitled to this virtue in either sense; for as

no man was ever more sensible of the wants, or more ready to relieve

the distresses of others, so none could be more tender of their

characters, or slower to believe anything to their disadvantage.

  Scandal, therefore, never found any access to his table; for as it

hath been long since observed that you may know a man by his

companions, so I will venture to say, that, by attending to the

conversation at a great man's table, you may satisfy yourself of his

religion, his politics, his taste, and indeed of his entire

disposition: for though a few odd fellows will utter their own

sentiments in all places, yet much the greater part of mankind have

enough of the courtier to accommodate their conversation to the

taste and inclination of their superiors.

  But to return to Mrs. Wilkins, who, having executed her commission

with great dispatch, though at fifteen miles distance, brought back

such confirmation of the schoolmaster's guilt, that Mr. Allworthy

determined to send for the criminal, and examine him viva voce. Mr.

Partridge, therefore, was summoned to attend, in order to his

defence (if he could make any) against this accusation.

  At the time appointed, before Mr. Allworthy himself, at

Paradise-hall, came as well the said Partridge, with Anne, his wife,

as Mrs. Wilkins his accuser.

  And now Mr. Allworthy being seated in the chair of justice, Mr.

Partridge was brought before him. Having heard his accusation from the

mouth of Mrs. Wilkins, he pleaded not guilty, making many vehement

protestations of his innocence.

  Mrs. Partridge was then examined, who, after a modest apology for

being obliged to speak the truth against her husband, related all

the circumstances with which the reader hath already been

acquainted; and at last concluded with her husband's confession of his

guilt.

  Whether she had forgiven him or no, I will not venture to determine;

but it is certain she was an unwilling witness in this cause; and it

is probable from certain other reasons, would never have been

brought to depose as she did, had not Mrs. Wilkins, with great art,

fished all out of her at her own house, and had she not indeed made

promises, in Mr. Allworthy's name, that the punishment of her

husband should not be such as might anywise affect his family.

  Partridge still persisted in asserting his innocence, though he

admitted he had made the above-mentioned confession; which he

however endeavoured to account for, by protesting that he was forced

into it by the continued importunity she used: who vowed, that, as she

was sure of his guilt, she would never leave tormenting him till he

had owned it; and faithfully promised, that, in such case, she would

never mention it to him more. Hence, he said, he had been induced

falsely to confess himself guilty, though he was innocent; and that he

believed he should have confest a murder from the same motive.

  Mrs. Partridge could not bear this imputation with patience; and

having no other remedy in the present place but tears, she called

forth a plentiful assistance from them, and then addressing herself to

Mr. Allworthy, she said (or rather cried), "May it please your

worship, there never was any poor woman so injured as I am by that

base man; for this is not the only instance of his falsehood to me.

No, may it please your worship, he hath injured my bed many's the good

time and often. I could have put up with his drunkenness and neglect

of his business, if he had not broke one of the sacred commandments.

Besides, if it had been out of doors I had not mattered it so much;

but with my own servant, in my own house, under my own roof, to defile

my own chaste bed, which to be sure he hath, with his beastly stinking

whores. Yes, you villain, you have defiled my own bed, you have; and

then you have charged me with bullocking you into owning the truth. Is

it very likely, an't please your worship, that I should bullock him? I

have marks enow about my body to show of his cruelty to me. If you had

been a man, you villain, you would have scorned to injure a woman in

that manner. But you an't half a man, you know it. Nor have you been

half a husband to me. You need run after whores, you need, when I'm

sure-- And since he provokes me, I am ready, an't please your

worship, to take my bodily oath that I found them a-bed together.

What, you have forgot, I suppose, when you beat me into a fit, and

made the blood run down my forehead, because I only civilly taxed

you with adultery! but I can prove it by all my neighbours. You have

almost broke my heart, you have, you have."

  Here Mr. Allworthy interrupted, and begged her to be pacified,

promising her that she should have justice; then turning to Partridge,

who stood aghast, one half of his wits being hurried away by

surprize and the other half by fear, he said he was sorry to see there

was so wicked a man in the world. He assured him that his

prevaricating and lying backward and forward was a great aggravation

of his guilt; for which the only atonement he could make was by

confession and repentance. He exhorted him, therefore, to begin by

immediately confessing the fact, and not to persist in denying what

was so plainly proved against him even by his own wife.

  Here, reader, I beg your patience a moment, while I make a just

compliment to the great wisdom and sagacity of our law, which

refuses to admit the evidence of a wife for or against her husband.

This, says a certain learned author, who, I believe, was never

quoted before in any but a law-book, would be the means of creating an

eternal dissension between them. It would, indeed, be the means of

much perjury, and of much whipping, fining, imprisoning, transporting,

and hanging.

  Partridge stood a while silent, till, being bid to speak, he said he

had already spoken the truth, and appealed to Heaven for his

innocence, and lastly to the girl herself, whom he desired his worship

immediately to send for; for he was ignorant, or at least pretended to

be so, that she had left that part of the country.

  Mr. Allworthy, whose natural love of justice, joined to his coolness

of temper, made him always a most patient magistrate in hearing all

the witnesses which an accused person could produce in his defence,

agreed to defer his final determination of this matter till the

arrival of Jenny, for whom he immediately dispatched a messenger;

and then having recommended peace between Partridge and his wife

(though he addressed himself chiefly to the wrong person), he

appointed them to attend again the third day; for he had sent Jenny

a whole day's journey from his own house.

  At the appointed time the parties all assembled, when the

messenger returning brought word, that Jenny was not to be found;

for that she had left her habitation a few days before, in company

with a recruiting officer.

  Mr. Allworthy then declared that the evidence of such a slut as

she appeared to be would have deserved no credit; but he said he could

not help thinking that, had she been present, and would have

declared the truth, she must have confirmed what so many

circumstances, together with his own confession, and the declaration

of his wife that she had caught her husband in the fact, did

sufficiently prove. He therefore once more exhorted Partridge to

confess; but he still avowing his innocence, Mr. Allworthy declared

himself satisfied of his guilt, and that he was too bad a man to

receive any encouragement from him. He therefore deprived him of his

annuity, and recommended repentance to him on account of another

world, and industry to maintain himself and his wife in this.

  There were not, perhaps, many more unhappy persons than poor

Partridge. He had lost the best part of his income by the evidence

of his wife, and yet was daily upbraided by her for having, among

other things, been the occasion of depriving her of that benefit;

but such was his fortune, and he was obliged to submit to it.

  Though I called him poor Partridge in the last paragraph, I would

have the reader rather impute that epithet to the compassion in my

temper than conceive it to be any declaration of his innocence.

Whether he was innocent or not will perhaps appear hereafter; but if

the historic muse hath entrusted me with any secrets, I will by no

means be guilty of discovering them till she shall give me leave.

  Here therefore the reader must suspend his curiosity. Certain it

is that, whatever was the truth of the case, there was evidence more

than sufficient to convict him before Allworthy; indeed, much less

would have satisfied a bench of justices on an order of bastardy;

and yet, notwithstanding the positiveness of Mrs. Partridge, who would

have taken the sacrament upon the matter, there is a possibility

that the schoolmaster was entirely innocent: for though it appeared

clear on comparing the time when Jenny departed from Little Baddington

with that of her delivery that she had there conceived this infant,

yet it by no means followed of necessity that Partridge must have been

its father; for, to omit other particulars, there was in the same

house a lad near eighteen, between whom and Jenny there had

subsisted sufficient intimacy to found a reasonable suspicion; and

yet, so blind is jealousy, this circumstance never once entered into

the head of the enraged wife.

  Whether Partridge repented or not, according to Mr. Allworthy's

advice, is not so apparent. Certain it is that his wife repented

heartily of the evidence she had given against him: especially when

she found Mrs. Deborah had deceived her, and refused to make any

application to Mr. Allworthy on her behalf. She had, however, somewhat

better success with Mrs. Blifil, who was, as the reader must have

perceived, a much better-tempered woman, and very kindly undertook

to solicit her brother to restore the annuity; in which, though

good-nature might have some share, yet a stronger and more natural

motive will appear in the next chapter.

  These solicitations were nevertheless unsuccessful: for though Mr.

Allworthy did not think, with some late writers, that mercy consists

only in punishing offenders; yet he was as far from thinking that it

is proper to this excellent quality to pardon great criminals

wantonly, without any reason whatever. Any doubtfulness of the fact,

or any circumstance of mitigation, was never disregarded: but the

petitions of an offender, or the intercessions of others, did not in

the least affect him. In a word, he never pardoned because the

offender himself, or his friends, were unwilling that he should be

punished.

  Partridge and his wife were therefore both obliged to submit to

their fate; which was indeed severe enough: for so far was he from

doubling his industry on the account of his lessened income, that he

did in a manner abandon himself to despair; and as he was by nature

indolent, that vice now increased upon him, which means he lost the

little school he had; so that neither his wife nor himself would

have had any bread to eat, had not the charity of some good

Christian interposed, and provided them with what was just

sufficient for their sustenance.

  As this support was conveyed to them by an unknown hand, they

imagined, and so, I doubt not, will the reader, that Mr. Allworthy

himself was their secret benefactor; who, though he would not openly

encourage vice, could yet privately relieve the distresses of the

vicious themselves, when these became too exquisite and

disproportionate to their demerit. In which light their wretchedness

appeared now to Fortune herself; for she at length took pity on this

miserable couple, and considerably lessened the wretched state of

Partridge, by putting a final end to that of his wife, who soon

after caught the small-pox, and died.

  The justice which Mr. Allworthy had executed on Partridge at first

met with universal approbation; but no sooner had he felt its

consequences, than his neighbours began to relent, and to

compassionate his case; and presently after, to blame that as rigour

and severity which they before called justice. They now exclaimed

against punishing in cold blood, and sang forth the praises of mercy

and forgiveness.

  These cries were considerably increased by the death of Mrs.

Partridge, which, though owing to the distemper above mentioned, which

is no consequence of poverty or distress, many were not ashamed to

impute to Mr. Allworthy's severity, or, as they now termed it,

cruelty.

  Partridge having now lost his wife, his school, and his annuity, and

the unknown person having now discontinued the last-mentioned charity,

resolved to change the scene, and left the country, where he was in

danger of starving, with the universal compassion of all his

neighbours.





                                Chapter 7



  A short sketch of that felicity which prudent couples may extract

from hatred: with a short apology for those people who overlook

imperfections in their friends



  Though the captain had effectually demolished poor Partridge, yet

had he not reaped the harvest he hoped for, which was to turn the

foundling out of Mr. Allworthy's house.

  On the contrary, that gentleman grew every day fonder of little

Tommy, as if he intended to counterbalance his severity to the

father with extraordinary fondness and affection towards the son.

  This a good deal soured the captain's temper, as did all the other

daily instances of Mr. Allworthy's generosity; for he looked on all

such largesses to be diminutions of his own wealth.

  In this, we have said, he did not agree with his wife; nor,

indeed, in anything else: for though an affection placed on the

understanding is, by many wise persons, thought more durable than that

which is founded on beauty, yet it happened otherwise in the present

case. Nay, the understandings of this couple were their principal bone

of contention, and one great cause of many quarrels, which from time

to time arose between them; and which at last ended, on the side of

the lady, in a sovereign contempt for her husband; and on the

husband's, in an utter abhorrence of his wife.

  As these had both exercised their talents chiefly in the study of

divinity, this was, from their first acquaintance, the most common

topic of conversation between them. The captain, like a well-bred man,

had, before marriage, always given up his opinion to that of the lady;

and this, not in the clumsy awkward manner of a conceited blockhead,

who, while he civilly yields to a superior in an argument, is desirous

of being still known to think himself in the right. The captain, on

the contrary, though one of the proudest fellows in the world, so

absolutely yielded the victory to his antagonist, that she, who had

not the least doubt of his sincerity, retired always from the

dispute with an admiration of her own understanding and a love for

his.

  But though this complacence to one whom the captain thoroughly

despised, was not so uneasy to him as it would have been had any hopes

of preferment made it necessary to show the same submission to a

Hoadley, or to some other of great reputation in the science, yet even

this cost him too much to be endured without some motive. Matrimony,

therefore, having removed all such motives, he grew weary of this

condescension, and began to treat the opinions of his wife with that

haughtiness and insolence, which none but those who deserve some

contempt themselves can bestow, and those only who deserve no contempt

can bear.

  When the first torrent of tenderness was over, and when, in the calm

and long interval between the fits, reason began to open the eyes of

the lady, and she saw this alteration of behaviour in the captain, who

at length answered all her arguments only with pish and pshaw, she was

far from enduring the indignity with a tame submission. Indeed, it

at first so highly provoked her, that it might have produced some

tragical event, had it not taken a more harmless turn, by filling

her with the utmost contempt for her husband's understanding, which

somewhat qualified her hatred towards him; though of this likewise she

had a pretty moderate share.

  The captain's hatred to her was of a purer kind: for as to any

imperfections in her knowledge or understanding, he no more despised

her for them, than for her not being six feet high. In his opinion

of the female sex, he exceeded the moroseness of Aristotle himself: he

looked on a woman as on an animal of domestic use, of somewhat

higher consideration than a cat, since her offices were of rather more

importance; but the difference between these two was, in his

estimation, so small, that, in his marriage contracted with Mr.

Allworthy's lands and tenements, it would have been pretty equal which

of them he had taken into the bargain. And yet so tender was his

pride, that it felt the contempt which his wife now began to express

towards him; and this, added to the surfeit he had before taken of her

love, created in him a degree of disgust and abhorrence, perhaps

hardly to be exceeded.

  One situation only of the married state is excluded from pleasure:

and that is, a state of indifference: but as many of my readers, I

hope, know what an exquisite delight there is in conveying pleasure to

a beloved object, so some few, I am afraid, may have experienced the

satisfaction of tormenting one we hate. It is, I apprehend, to come at

this latter pleasure, that we see both sexes often give up that ease

in marriage which they might otherwise possess, though their mate

was never so disagreeable to them. Hence the wife often puts on fits

of love and jealousy, nay, even denies herself any pleasure, to

disturb and prevent those of her husband; and he again, in return,

puts frequent restraints on himself, and stays at home in company

which he dislikes, in order to confine his wife to what she equally

detests. Hence, too, must flow those tears which a widow sometimes

so plentifully sheds over the ashes of a husband with whom she led a

life of constant disquiet and turbulency, and whom now she can never

hope to torment any more.

  But if ever any couple enjoyed this pleasure, it was at present

experienced by the captain and his lady. It was always a sufficient

reason to either of them to be obstinate in any opinion, that the

other had previously asserted the contrary. If the one proposed any

amusement, the other constantly objected to it: they never loved or

hated, commended or abused, the same person. And for this reason, as

the captain looked with an evil eye on the little foundling, his

wife began now to caress it almost equally with her own child.

  The reader will be apt to conceive, that this behaviour between

the husband and wife did not greatly contribute to Mr. Allworthy's

repose, as it tended so little to that serene happiness which he had

designed for all three from this alliance; but the truth is, though he

might be a little disappointed in his sanguine expectations, yet he

was far from being acquainted with the whole matter; for, as the

captain was, from certain obvious reasons, much on his guard before

him, the lady was obliged, for fear of her brother's displeasure, to

pursue the same conduct. In fact, it is possible for a third person to

be very intimate, nay even to live long in the same house, with a

married couple, who have any tolerable discretion, and not even

guess at the sour sentiments which they bear to each other: for though

the whole day may be sometimes too short for hatred, as well as for

love; yet the many hours which they naturally spend together, apart

from all observers, furnish people of tolerable moderation with such

ample opportunity for the enjoyment of either passion, that, if they

love, they can support being a few hours in company without toying, or

if they hate, without spitting in each other's faces.

  It is possible, however, that Mr. Allworthy saw enough to render him

a little uneasy; for we are not always to conclude, that a wise man is

not hurt, because he doth not cry out and lament himself, like those

of a childish or effeminate temper. But indeed it is possible he might

see some faults in the captain without any uneasiness at all; for

men of true wisdom and goodness are contented to take persons and

things as they are, without complaining of their imperfections, or

attempting to amend them. They can see a fault in a friend, a

relation, or an acquaintance, without ever mentioning it to the

parties themselves, or to any others; and this often without lessening

their affection. Indeed, unless great discernment be tempered with

this overlooking disposition, we ought never to contract friendship

but with a degree of folly which we can deceive; for I hope my friends

will pardon me when I declare, I know none of them without a fault;

and I should be sorry if I could imagine I had any friend who could

not see mine. Forgiveness of this kind we give and demand in turn.

It is an exercise of friendship, and perhaps none of the least

pleasant. And this forgiveness we must bestow, without desire of

amendment. There is, perhaps, no surer mark of folly, than an

attempt to correct the natural infirmities of those we love. The

finest composition of human nature, as well as the finest china, may

have a flaw in it; and this, I am afraid, in either case, is equally

incurable; though, nevertheless, the pattern may remain of the highest

value.

  Upon the whole, then, Mr. Allworthy certainly saw some imperfections

in the captain; but as this was a very artful man, and eternally

upon his guard before him, these appeared to him no more than

blemishes in a good character, which his goodness made him overlook,

and his wisdom prevented him from discovering to the captain

himself. Very different would have been his sentiments had he

discovered the whole; which perhaps would in time have been the

case, had the husband and wife long continued this kind of behaviour

to each other; but this kind Fortune took effectual means to

prevent, by forcing the captain to do that which rendered him again

dear to his wife, and restored all her tenderness and affection

towards him.





                                Chapter 8



  A receipt to regain the lost affections of a wife, which hath

never been known to fail in the most desperate cases



  The captain was made large amends for the unpleasant minutes which

he passed in the conversation of his wife (and which were as few as he

could contrive to make them), by the pleasant meditations he enjoyed

when alone.

  These meditations were entirely employed on Mr. Allworthy's fortune;

for, first, he exercised much thought in calculating, as well as he

could, the exact value of the whole: which calculations he often saw

occasion to alter in his own favour: and, secondly and chiefly, he

pleased himself with intended alterations in the house and gardens,

and in projecting many other schemes, as well for the improvement of

the estate as of the grandeur of the place: for this purpose he

applied himself to the studies of architecture and gardening, and read

over many books on both these subjects; for these sciences, indeed,

employed his whole time, and formed his only amusement. He at last

completed a most excellent plan: and very sorry we are, that it is not

in our power to present it to our reader, since even the luxury of the

present age, I believe, would hardly match it. It had, indeed, in a

superlative degree, the two principal ingredients which serve to

recommend all great and noble designs of this nature; for it

required an immoderate expense to execute, and a vast length of time

to bring it to any sort of perfection. The former of these, the

immense wealth of which the captain supposed Mr. Allworthy

possessed, and which he thought himself sure of inheriting, promised

very effectually to supply; and the latter, the soundness of his own

constitution, and his time of life, which was only what is called

middle-age, removed all apprehension of his not living to accomplish.

  Nothing was wanting to enable him to enter upon the immediate

execution of this plan, but the death of Mr. Allworthy; in calculating

which he had employed much of his own algebra, besides purchasing

every book extant that treats of the value of lives, reversions, &c.

From all which he satisfied himself, that as he had every day a chance

of this happening, so had he more than an even chance of its happening

within a few years.

  But while the captain was one day busied in deep contemplations of

this kind, one of the most unlucky as well as unseasonable accidents

happened to him. The utmost malice of Fortune could, indeed, have

contrived nothing so cruel, so mal-a-propos, so absolutely destructive

to all his schemes. In short, not to keep the reader in long suspense,

just at the very instant when his heart was exulting in meditations on

the happiness which would accrue to him by Mr. Allworthy's death, he

himself- died of an apoplexy.

  This unfortunately befel the captain as he was taking his evening

walk by himself, so that nobody was present to lend him any

assistance, if indeed, any assistance could have preserved him. He

took, therefore, measure of that proportion of soil which was now

become adequate to all his future purposes, and he lay dead on the

ground, a great (though not a living) example of the truth of that

observation of Horace:



     Tu secanda marmora

       Locas sub ipsum funus; et sepulchri

     Immemor, struis domos.



Which sentiment I shall thus give to the English reader: "You

provide the noblest materials for building, when a pickaxe and a spade

are only necessary: and build houses of five hundred by a hundred

feet, forgetting that of six by two."





                                Chapter 9



  A proof of the infallibility of the foregoing receipt, in the

lamentations of the widow; with other suitable decorations of death,

such as physicians, &c., and an epitaph in the true stile



  Mr. Allworthy, his sister, and another lady, were assembled at the

accustomed hour in the supper-room, where, having waited a

considerable time longer than usual, Mr. Allworthy first declared he

began to grow uneasy at the captain's stay (for he was always most

punctual at his meals); and gave orders that the bell should be rung

without the doors, and especially towards those walks which the

captain was wont to use.

  All these summons proving ineffectual (for the captain had, by

perverse accident, betaken himself to a new walk that evening), Mrs.

Blifil declared she was seriously frightened. Upon which the other

lady, who was one of her most intimate acquaintance, and who well knew

the true state of her affections, endeavoured all she could to

pacify her, telling her- To be sure she could not help being uneasy;

but that she should hope the best. That, perhaps the sweetness of

the evening had inticed the captain to go farther than his usual walk:

or he might be detained at some neighbour's. Mrs. Blifil answered, No;

she was sure some accident had befallen him; for that he would never

stay out without sending her word, as he must know how uneasy it would

make her. The other lady, having no other arguments to use, betook

herself to the entreaties usual on such occasions, and begged her

not to frighten herself, for it might be of very ill consequence to

her own health; and, filling out a very large glass of wine,

advised, and at last prevailed with her to drink it.

  Mr. Allworthy now returned into the parlour; for he had been himself

in search after the captain. His countenance sufficiently showed the

consternation he was under, which, indeed, had a good deal deprived

him of speech; but as grief operates variously on different minds,

so the same apprehension which depressed his voice, elevated that of

Mrs. Blifil. She now began to bewail herself in very bitter terms, and

floods of tears accompanied her lamentations; which the lady, her

companion, declared she could not blame, but at the same time

dissuaded her from indulging; attempting to moderate the grief of

her friend by philosophical observations on the many disappointments

to which human life is daily subject, which, she said, was a

sufficient consideration to fortify our minds against any accidents,

how sudden or terrible soever. She said her brother's example ought to

teach her patience, who, though indeed he could not be supposed as

much concerned as herself, yet was, doubtless, very uneasy, though his

resignation to the Divine will had restrained his grief within due

bounds.

  "Mention not my brother," said Mrs. Blifil; "I alone am the object

of your pity. What are the terrors of friendship to what a wife

feels on these occasions? Oh, he is lost! Somebody hath murdered him-

I shall never see him more!"- Here a torrent of tears had the same

consequence with what the suppression had occasioned to Mr. Allworthy,

and she remained silent.

  At this interval a servant came running in, out of breath, and cried

out, The captain was found; and, before he could proceed farther, he

was followed by two more, bearing the dead body between them.

  Here the curious reader may observe another diversity in the

operations of grief: for as Mr. Allworthy had been before silent, from

the same cause which had made his sister vociferous; so did the

present sight, which drew tears from the gentleman, put an entire stop

to those of the lady; who first gave a violent scream, and presently

after fell into a fit.

  The room was soon full of servants, some of whom, with the lady

visitant, were employed in care of the wife; and others, with Mr.

Allworthy, assisted in carrying off the captain to a warm bed; where

every method was tried, in order to restore him to life.

  And glad should we be, could we inform the reader that both these

bodies had been attended with equal success; for those who undertook

the care of the lady succeeded so well, that, after the fit had

continued a decent time, she again revived, to their great

satisfaction: but as to the captain, all experiments of bleeding,

chafing, dropping, &c., proved ineffectual. Death, that inexorable

judge, had passed sentence on him, and refused to grant him a

reprieve, though two doctors who arrived, and were fee'd at one and

the same instant, were his counsel.

  These two doctors, whom, to avoid any malicious applications, we

shall distinguish by the names of Dr. Y. and Dr. Z., having felt his

pulse; to wit, Dr. Y. his right arm, and Dr. Z. his left; both

agreed that he was absolutely dead; but as to the distemper, or

cause of his death, they differed; Dr. Y. holding that he died of an

apoplexy, and Dr. Z. of an epilepsy.

  Hence arose a dispute between the learned men, in which each

delivered the reasons of their several opinions. These were of such

equal force, that they served both to confirm either doctor in his own

sentiments, and made not the least impression on his adversary.

  To say the truth, every physician almost hath his favourite disease,

to which he ascribes all the victories obtained over human nature. The

gout, the rheumatism, the stone, the gravel, and the consumption, have

all their several patrons in the faculty; and none more than the

nervous fever, or the fever on the spirits. And here we may account

for those disagreements in opinion, concerning the cause of a

patient's death, which sometimes occur, between the most learned of

the college; and which have greatly surprized that part of the world

who have been ignorant of the fact we have above asserted.

  The reader may perhaps be surprized, that, instead of endeavouring

to revive the patient, the learned gentlemen should fall immediately

into a dispute on the occasion of his death; but in reality all such

experiments had been made before their arrival: for the captain was

put into a warm bed, had his veins scarified, his forehead chafed, and

all sorts of strong drops applied to his lips and nostrils.

  The physicians, therefore, finding themselves anticipated in

everything they ordered, were at a loss how to apply that portion of

time which it is usual and decent to remain for their fee, and were

therefore necessitated to find some subject or other for discourse;

and what could more naturally present itself than that before

mentioned?

  Our doctors were about to take their leave, when Mr. Allworthy,

having given over the captain, and acquiesced in the Divine will,

began to enquire after his sister, whom he desired them to visit

before their departure.

  This lady was now recovered of her fit, and, to use the common

phrase, as well as could be expected for one in her condition. The

doctors, therefore, all previous ceremonies being complied with, as

this was a new patient, attended, according to desire, and laid hold

on each of her hands, as they had before done on those of the corpse.

  The case of the lady was in the other extreme from that of her

husband: for as he was past all the assistance of physic, so in

reality she required none.

  There is nothing more unjust than the vulgar opinion, by which

physicians are misrepresented, as friends to death. On the contrary, I

believe, if the number of those who recover by physic could be opposed

to that of the martyrs to it, the former would rather exceed the

latter. Nay, some are so cautious on this head, that, to avoid a

possibility of killing the patient, they abstain from all methods of

curing, and prescribe nothing but what can neither do good nor harm. I

have heard some of these, with great gravity, deliver it as a maxim,

"That Nature should be left to do her own work, while the physician

stands by as it were to clap her on the back, and encourage her when

she doth well."

  So little then did our doctors delight in death, that they

discharged the corpse after a single fee; but they were not so

disgusted with their living patient; concerning whose case they

immediately agreed, and fell to prescribing with great diligence.

  Whether, as the lady had at first persuaded her physicians to

believe her ill, they had now, in return, persuaded her to believe

herself so, I will not determine; but she continued a whole month with

all the decorations of sickness. During this time she was visited by

physicians, attended by nurses, and received constant messages from

her acquaintance to enquire after her health.

  At length the decent time for sickness and immoderate grief being

expired, the doctors were discharged, and the lady began to see

company; being altered only from what she was before, by that colour

of sadness in which she had dressed her person and countenance.

  The captain was now interred, and might, perhaps, have already

made a large progress towards oblivion, had not the friendship of

Mr. Allworthy taken care to preserve his memory, by the following

epitaph, which was written by a man of as great genius as integrity,

and one who perfectly well knew the captain.



                                HERE LIES,

                    IN EXPECTATION OF A JOYFUL RISING,

                               THE BODY OF

                           CAPTAIN JOHN BLIFIL.

                                  LONDON

                       HAD THE HONOUR OF HIS BIRTH,

                                  OXFORD

                            OF HIS EDUCATION.



                                HIS PARTS

                     WERE AN HONOUR TO HIS PROFESSION

                            AND TO HIS COUNTRY

                        HIS LIFE, TO HIS RELIGION

                            AND HUMAN NATURE.



                          HE WAS A DUTIFUL SON,

                            A TENDER HUSBAND,

                         AN AFFECTIONATE FATHER,

                           A MOST KIND BROTHER,

                            A SINCERE FRIEND,

                           A DEVOUT CHRISTIAN,

                             AND A GOOD MAN.



                          HIS INCONSOLABLE WIDOW

                         HATH ERECTED THIS STONE,

                             THE MONUMENT OF

                               HER VIRTUES

                          AND OF HER AFFECTION.

