



                                    BOOK XI

                          CONTAINING ABOUT THREE DAYS



                                Chapter 1



  A crust for the critics



  In our last initial chapter we may be supposed to have treated

that formidable set of men who are called critics with more freedom

than becomes us; since they exact, and indeed generally receive, great

condescension from authors. We shall in this, therefore, give the

reasons of our conduct to this august body; and here we shall,

perhaps, place them in a light in which they have not hitherto been

seen.

  This word critic is of Greek derivation, and signifies judgment.

Hence I presume some persons who have not understood the original, and

have seen the English translation of the primitive, have concluded

that it meant judgment in the legal sense, in which it is frequently

used as equivalent to condemnation.

  I am rather inclined to be of that opinion, as the greatest number

of critics hath of late years been found amongst the lawyers. Many

of these gentlemen, from despair, perhaps, of ever rising to the bench

in Westminster-hall, have placed themselves on the benches at the

playhouse, where they have exerted their judicial capacity, and have

given judgment, i.e., condemned without mercy.

  The gentlemen would, perhaps, be well enough pleased, if we were

to leave them thus compared to one of the most important and

honourable offices in the commonwealth, and, if we intended to apply

to their favour, we would do so; but, as we design to deal very

sincerely and plainly too with them, we must remind them of another

officer of justice of much lower rank; to whom as they not only

pronounce, but execute, their own judgment, they bear likewise some

remote resemblance.

  But in reality there is another light, in which these modern critics

may, with great justice and propriety, be seen; and this is that of

a common slanderer. If a person who prys into the characters of

others, with no other design but to discover their faults, and to

publish them to the world, deserves the title of a slanderer of the

reputations of men, why should not a critic, who reads with the same

malevolent view, be as properly stiled the slanderer of the reputation

of books?

  Vice hath not, I believe, a more abject slave; society produces

not a more odious vermin; nor can the devil receive a guest more

worthy of him, nor possibly more welcome to him, than a slanderer. The

world, I am afraid, regards not this monster with half the

abhorrence which he deserves; and I am more afraid to assign the

reason of this criminal lenity shown towards him; yet it is certain

that the thief looks innocent in the comparison; nay, the murderer

himself can seldom stand in competition with his guilt: for slander is

a more cruel weapon than a sword, as the wounds which the former gives

are always incurable. One method, indeed, there is of killing, and

that the basest and most execrable of all, which bears an exact

analogy to the vice here disclaimed against, and that is poison: a

means of revenge so base, and yet so horrible, that is was once wisely

distinguished by our laws from all other murders, in the peculiar

severity of the punishment.

  Besides the dreadful mischiefs done by slander, and the baseness

of the means by which they are effected, there are other circumstances

that highly aggravate its atrocious quality; for it often proceeds

from no provocation, and seldom promises itself any reward, unless

some black infernal mind may propose a reward in the thoughts of

having procured the ruin and misery of another.

  Shakespear hath nobly touched this vice, when he says-



     Who steals my purse steals trash; 'tis something, nothing;

     'Twas mine, 'tis his, and hath been slave to thousands:

     But he that filches from me my good name

     Robs me of that which not enriches him,

     But makes me poor indeed.



  With all this my good reader will doubtless agree; but much of it

will probably seem too severe, when applied to the slanderer of books.

But let it here be considered that both proceed from the same wicked

disposition of mind, and are alike void of the excuse of temptation.

Nor shall we conclude the injury done this way to be very slight, when

we consider a book as the author's offspring, and indeed as the

child of his brain.

  The reader who hath suffered his muse to continue hitherto in a

virgin state can have but a very inadequate idea of this kind of

paternal fondness. To such we may parody the tender exclamation of

Macduff, "Alas! Thou hast written no book." But the author whose

muse hath brought forth will feel the pathetic strain, perhaps will

accompany me with tears (especially if his darling be already no

more), while I mention the uneasiness with which the big muse bears

about her burden, the painful labour with which she produces it, and

lastly, the care, the fondness, with which the tender father nourishes

his favourite, till it be brought to maturity, and produced into the

world.

  Nor is there any paternal fondness which seems less to savour of

absolute instinct, and which may so well be reconciled to worldly

wisdom, as this. These children may most truly be called the riches of

their father; and many of them have with true filial piety fed their

parent in his old age: so that not only the affection, but the

interest, of the author may be highly injured by these slanderers,

whose poisonous breath brings his book to an untimely end.

  Lastly, the slander of a book is, in truth, the slander of the

author: for, as no one can call another bastard, without calling the

mother a whore, so neither can any one give the names of sad stuff,

horrid nonsense, &c., to a book, without calling the author a

blockhead; which, though in a moral sense it is a preferable

appellation to that of villain, is perhaps rather more injurious to

his worldly interest.

  Now, however ludicrous all this may appear to some, others, I

doubt not, will feel and acknowledge the truth of it; nay, may,

perhaps, think I have not treated the subject with decent solemnity;

but surely a man may speak truth with a smiling countenance. In

reality, to depreciate a book maliciously, or even wantonly, is at

least a very ill-natured office; and a morose snarling critic may, I

believe, be suspected to be a bad man.

  I will therefore endeavour, in the remaining part of this chapter,

to explain the marks of this character, and to show what criticism I

here intend to obviate: for I can never be understood, unless by the

very persons here meant, to insinuate that there are no proper

judges of writing, or to endeavour to exclude from the commonwealth of

literature any of those noble critics to whose labours the learned

world are so greatly indebted. Such were Aristotle, Horace, and

Longinus, among the antients, Dacier and Bossu among the French, and

some perhaps among us; who have certainly been duly authorized to

execute at least a judicial authority in foro literario.

  But without ascertaining all the proper qualifications of a

critic, which I have touched on elsewhere, I think I may very boldly

object to the censures of any one past upon works which he hath not

himself read. Such censurers as these, whether they speak from their

own guess or suspicion, or from the report and opinion of others,

may properly be said to slander the reputation of the book they

condemn.

  Such may likewise be suspected of deserving this character, who,

without assigning any particular faults, condemn the whole in

general defamatory terms; such as vile, dull, d--d stuff, &c., and

particularly by the use of the monosyllable low; a word which

becomes the mouth of no critic who is not RIGHT HONOURABLE.

  Again, though there may be some faults justly assigned in the

work, yet, if those are not in the most essential parts, or if they

are compensated by greater beauties, it will savour rather of the

malice of a slanderer than of the judgment of a true critic to pass

a severe sentence upon the whole, merely on account of some vicious

part. This is directly contrary to the sentiments of Horace:



     Verum ubi plura nitent in carmine, non ego paucis

     Offendor maculis, quas aut incuria fudit,

     Aut humana parum cavit natura--



  But where the beauties, more in number, shine,

  I am not angry, when a casual line

  (That with some trivial faults unequal flows)

  A careless hand or human frailty shows.

                                       MR. FRANCIS



  For, as Martial says, Aliter non fit, Avite, liber. No book can be

otherwise composed. All beauty of character, as well as of

countenance, and indeed of everything human, is to be tried in this

manner. Cruel indeed would it be if such a work as this history, which

hath employed some thousands of hours in the composing, should be

liable to be condemned, because some particular chapter, or perhaps

chapters, may be obnoxious to very just and sensible objections. And

yet nothing is more common than the most rigorous sentence upon

books supported by such objections, which, if they were rightly

taken (and that they are not always), do by no means go to the merit

of the whole. In the theatre especially, a single expression which

doth not coincide with the taste of the audience, or with any

individual critic of that audience, is sure to be hissed; and one

scene which should be disapproved would hazard the whole piece. To

write within such severe rules as these is as impossible as to live up

to some splenetic opinions: and if we judge according to the

sentiments of some critics, and of some Christians, no author will

be saved in this world, and no man in the next.





                                Chapter 2



  The adventures which Sophia met with after her leaving Upton



  Our history, just before it was obliged to turn about and travel

backwards, had mentioned the departure of Sophia and her maid from the

inn; we shall now therefore pursue the steps of that lovely

creature, and leave her unworthy lover a little longer to bemoan his

ill-luck, or rather his ill-conduct.

  Sophia having directed her guide to travel through bye-roads, across

the country, they now passed the Severn, and had scarce got a mile

from the inn, when the young lady, looking behind her, saw several

horses coming after on full speed. This greatly alarmed her fears, and

she called to the guide to put on as fast as possible.

  He immediately obeyed her, and away they rode a full gallop. But the

faster they went, the faster were they followed; and as the horses

behind were somewhat swifter than those before, so the former were

at length overtaken. A happy circumstance for poor Sophia; whose

fears, joined to her fatigue, had almost overpowered her spirits;

but she was now instantly relieved by a female voice, that greeted her

in the softest manner, and with the utmost civility. This greeting

Sophia, as soon as she could recover her breath, with like civility,

and with the highest satisfaction to herself, returned.

  The travellers who joined Sophia, and who had given her such terror,

consisted, like her own company, of two females and a guide. The two

parties proceeded three full miles together before any one offered

again to open their mouths; when our heroine, having pretty well got

the better of her fear (but yet being somewhat surprized that the

other still continued to attend her, as she pursued no great road, and

had already passed through several turnings), accosted the strange

lady in a most obliging tone, and said, "She was very happy to find

they were both travelling the same way." The other, who, like a ghost,

only wanted to be spoke to, readily answered, "That the happiness

was entirely hers; that she was a perfect stranger in that country,

and was so overjoyed at meeting a companion of her own sex, that she

had perhaps been guilty of an impertinence, which required great

apology, in keeping pace with her." More civilities passed between

these two ladies; for Mrs. Honour had now given place to the fine

habit of the stranger, and had fallen into the rear. But, though

Sophia had great curiosity to know why the other lady continued to

travel on through the same bye-roads with herself, nay, though this

gave her some uneasiness, yet fear, or modesty, or some other

consideration, restrained her from asking the question.

  The strange lady now laboured under a difficulty which appears

almost below the dignity of history to mention. Her bonnet had been

blown from her head not less than five times within the last mile; nor

could she come at any ribbon or handkerchief to tie it under her chin.

When Sophia was informed of this, she immediately supplied her with

a handkerchief for this purpose; which while she was pulling from

her pocket, she perhaps too much neglected the management of her

horse, for the beast, now unluckily making a false step, fell upon his

fore-legs, and threw his fair rider from his back.

  Though Sophia came head foremost to the ground, she happily received

not the least damage: and the same circumstances which had perhaps

contributed to her fall now preserved her from confusion; for the lane

which they were then passing was narrow, and very much overgrown

with trees, so that the moon could here afford very little light,

and was moreover, at present, so obscured in a cloud, that it was

almost perfectly dark. By these means the young lady's modesty,

which was extremely delicate, escaped as free from injury as her

limbs, and she was once more reinstated in her saddle, having received

no other harm than a little fright by her fall.

  Daylight at length appeared in its full lustre; and now the two

ladies, who were riding over a common side by side, looking stedfastly

at each other, at the same moment both their eyes became fixed; both

their horses stopt, and, both speaking together, with equal joy

pronounced, the one the name of Sophia, the other that of Harriet.

  This unexpected encounter surprized the ladies much more than I

believe it will the sagacious reader, who must have imagined that

the strange lady could be no other than Mrs. Fitzpatrick, the cousin

of Miss Western, whom we before mentioned to have sallied from the inn

a few minutes after her.

  So great was the surprize and joy which these two cousins

conceived at this meeting (for they had formerly been most intimate

acquaintance and friends, and had long lived together with their

aunt Western), that it is impossible to recount half the

congratulations which passed between them, before either asked a

very natural question of the other, namely, whither she was going?

  This at last, however, came first from Mrs. Fitzpatrick; but, easy

and natural as the question may seem, Sophia found it difficult to

give it a very ready and certain answer. She begged her cousin

therefore to suspend all curiosity till they arrived at some inn,

"which I suppose," says she, "can hardly be far distant; and,

believe me, Harriet, I suspend as much curiosity on my side; for,

indeed, I believe our astonishment is pretty equal."

  The conversation which passed between these ladies on the road

was, I apprehend, little worth relating; and less certainly was that

between the two waiting-women; for they likewise began to pay their

compliments to each other. As for the guides, they were debarred

from the pleasure of discourse, the one being placed in the van, and

the other obliged to bring up the rear.

  In this posture they travelled many hours, till they came into a

wide and well-beaten road, which, as they turned to the right, soon

brought them to a very fair promising inn, where they all alighted:

but so fatigued was Sophia, that as she had sat her horse during the

last five or six miles with great difficulty, so was she now incapable

of dismounting from him without assistance. This the landlord, who had

hold of her horse, presently perceiving, offered to lift her in his

arms from her saddle; and she too readily accepted the tender of his

service. Indeed fortune seems to have resolved to put Sophia to the

blush that day, and the second malicious attempt succeeded better than

the first; for my landlord had no sooner received the young lady in

his arms, than his feet, which the gout had lately very severely

handled, gave way, and down he tumbled; but, at the same time, with no

less dexterity than gallantry, contrived to throw himself under his

charming burden, so that he alone received any bruise from the fall;

for the great injury which happened to Sophia was a violent shock

given to her modesty by an immoderate grin, which, at her rising

from the ground, she observed in the countenances of most of the

bye-standers. This made her suspect what had really happened, and what

we shall not here relate, for the indulgence of those readers who

are capable of laughing at the offence given to a young lady's

delicacy. Accidents of this kind we have never regarded in a comical

light; nor will we scruple to say, that he must have a very inadequate

idea of the modesty of a beautiful young woman, who would wish to

sacrifice it to so paltry a satisfaction as can arise from laughter.

  This fright and shock, joined to the violent fatigue which both

her mind and body had undergone, almost overcame the excellent

constitution of Sophia, and she had scarce strength sufficient to

totter into the inn, leaning on the arm of her maid. Here she was no

sooner seated than she called for a glass of water; but Mrs. Honour,

very judiciously, in my opinion, changed it into a glass of wine.

  Mrs. Fitzpatrick, hearing from Mrs. Honour that Sophia had not

been in bed during the two last nights, and observing her to look very

pale and wan with her fatigue, earnestly entreated her to refresh

herself with some sleep. She was yet a stranger to her history, or her

apprehensions; but, had she known both, she would have given the

same advice; for rest was visibly necessary for her; and their long

journey through bye-roads so entirely removed all danger of pursuit,

that she was herself perfectly easy on that account.

  Sophia was easily prevailed on to follow the counsel of her

friend, which was heartily seconded by her maid. Mrs. Fitzpatrick

likewise offered to bear her cousin company, which Sophia, with much

complacence, accepted.

  The mistress was no sooner in bed than the maid prepared to follow

her example. She began to make many apologies to her sister Abigail

for leaving her alone in so horrid a place as an inn; but the other

stopt her short, being as well inclined to a nap as herself, and

desired the honour of being her bedfellow. Sophia's maid agreed to

give her a share of her bed, but put in her claim to all the honour.

So, after many courtsies and compliments, to bed together went the

waiting-women, as their mistresses had done before them.

  It was usual with my landlord (as indeed it is with the whole

fraternity) to enquire particularly of all coachmen, footmen,

post-boys, and others, into the names of all his guests; what their

estate was, and where it lay. It cannot therefore be wondered at, that

the many particular circumstances which attended our travellers, and

especially their retiring all to sleep at so extraordinary and unusual

an hour as ten in the morning, should excite his curiosity. As soon,

therefore, as the guides entered the kitchen, he began to examine who

the ladies were, and whence they came; but the guides, though they

faithfully related all they knew, gave him very little satisfaction.

On the contrary, they rather enflamed his curiosity than extinguished

it.

  This landlord had the character, among all his neighbours, of

being a very sagacious fellow. He was thought to see farther and

deeper into things than any man in the parish, the parson himself

not excepted. Perhaps his look had contributed not a little to procure

him this reputation; for there was in this something wonderfully

wise and significant, especially when he had a pipe in his mouth;

which, indeed, he seldom was without. His behaviour, likewise, greatly

assisted in promoting the opinion of his wisdom. In his deportment

he was solemn, if not sullen; and when he spoke, which was seldom,

he always delivered himself in a slow voice; and, though sentences

were short, they were still interrupted with many hums and ha's, ay

ays, and other expletives: so that, though he accompanied his words

with certain explanatory gestures, such as shaking or nodding the

head, or pointing with his fore-finger, he generally left his

hearers to understand more than he expressed; nay, he commonly gave

them a hint that he knew much more than he thought proper to disclose.

This last circumstance alone may, indeed, very well account for his

character of wisdom; since men are strangely inclined to worship

what they do not understand. A grand secret, upon which several

imposers on mankind have totally relied for the success of their

frauds.

  This polite person, now taking his wife aside, asked her "what she

thought of the ladies lately arrived?" "Think of them?" said the wife,

why, what should I think of them?" "I know," answered he, "what I

think. The guides tell strange stories. One pretends to be come from

Gloucester, and the other from Upton; and neither of them, for what

I can find, can tell whither they are going. But what people ever

travel across the country from Upton hither, especially to London? And

one of the maidservants, before she alighted from her horse, asked

if this was not the London road? Now I have put all these

circumstances together, and whom do you think I have found them out to

be?" "Nay," answered she, "you know I never pretend to guess at your

discoveries."-- "It is a good girl," replied he, chucking her under

the chin; "I must own you have always submitted to my knowledge of

these matters. Why, then, depend upon it; mind what I say- depend

upon it, they are certainly some of the rebel ladies, who, they say,

travel with the young Chevalier; and have taken a round-about way to

escape the duke's army."

  "Husband," quoth the wife," you have certainly hit it; for one of

them is dressed as fine as any princess; and, to be sure, she looks

for all the world like one.-- But yet, when I consider one thing"--

"When you consider," cries the landlord contemptuously-- "Come, pray

let's hear what you consider."-- "Why, it is," answered the wife,

"that she is too humble to be any very great lady: for, while our

Betty was warming the bed, she called her nothing but child, and my

dear, and sweetheart; and, when Betty offered to pull off her shoes

and stockings, she would not suffer her, saying, she would not give

her the trouble."

  "Pugh!" answered the husband, "that is nothing. Dost think,

because you have seen some great ladies rude and uncivil to persons

below them, that none of them know how to behave themselves when

they come before their inferiors? I think I know people of fashion

when I see them- I think I do. Did not she call for a glass of water

when she came in? Another sort of women would have called for a

dram; you know they would. If she be not a woman of very great

quality, sell me for a fool; and, I believe, those who buy me will

have a bad bargain. Now, would a woman of her quality travel without a

footman, unless upon some such extraordinary occasion?" "Nay, to be

sure, husband," cries she, "you know these matters better than I, or

most folk." "I think I do know something," said he. "To be sure,"

answered the wife, "the poor little heart looked so piteous, when

she sat down in the chair, I protest I could not help having a

compassion for her almost as much as if she had been a poor body.

But what's to be done, husband? If an she be a rebel, I suppose you

intend to betray her up to the court. Well, she's a sweet-tempered,

good-humoured lady, be she what she will, and I shall hardly refrain

from crying when I hear she is hanged or beheaded." "Pooh!" answered

the husband.-- "But, as to what's to be done, it is not so easy a

matter to determine. I hope, before she goes away, we shall have the

news of a battle; for, if the Chevalier should get the better, she may

gain us interest at court, and make our fortunes without betraying

her." "Why, that's true," replied the wife; "and I heartily hope she

will have it in her power. Certainly she's a sweet good lady; it would

go horribly against me to have her come to any harm." "Pooh!" cries

the landlord, "women are always so tenderhearted. Why, you would not

harbour rebels, would you?" "No, certainly," answered the wife; "and

as for betraying her, come what will on't, nobody can blame us. It

is what anybody would do in our case."

  While our politic landlord, who had not, we see, undeservedly the

reputation of great wisdom among his neighbours, was engaged in

debating this matter with himself (for he paid little attention to the

opinion of his wife), news arrived that the rebels had given the

duke the slip, and had got a day's march towards London; and soon

after arrived a famous Jacobite squire, who, with great joy in his

countenance, shook the landlord by the hand, saying, "All's our own,

boy, ten thousand honest Frenchmen are landed in Suffolk. Old

England for ever! ten thousand French, my brave lad! I am going to tap

away directly."

  This news determined the opinion of the wise man, and he resolved to

make his court to the young lady when she arose; for he had now (he

said) discovered that she was no other than Madam Jenny Cameron

herself.





                                Chapter 3



  A very short chapter, in which however is a Sun, a Moon, a Star, and

an Angel



  The sun (for he keeps very good hours at this time of the year)

had been some time retired to rest, when Sophia arose greatly

refreshed by her sleep; which, short as it was, nothing but her

extreme fatigue could have occasioned; for, though she had told her

maid, and perhaps herself too, that she was perfectly easy when she

left Upton, yet it is certain her mind was a little affected with that

malady which is attended with all the restless symptoms of a fever,

and is perhaps the very distemper which physicians mean (if they

mean anything) by the fever on the spirits.

  Mrs. Fitzpatrick likewise left her bed at the same time; and, having

summoned her maid, immediately dressed herself. She was really a

very pretty woman, and, had she been in any other company but that

Sophia, might have been thought beautiful; but when Mrs. Honour of her

own accord attended (for her mistress would not suffer her to be

waked), and had equipped our heroine, the charms of Mrs.

Fitzpatrick, who had performed the office of the morning-star, and had

preceded greater glories, shared the fate of that star, and were

totally eclipsed the moment those glories shone forth.

  Perhaps Sophia never looked more beautiful than she did at this

instant. We ought not, therefore, to condemn the maid of the inn for

her hyperbole, who, when she descended, after having lighted the fire,

declared, and ratified it with an oath, that if ever there was an

angel upon earth, she was now above-stairs.

  Sophia had acquainted her cousin with her design to go to London;

and Mrs. Fitzpatrick had agreed to accompany her; for the arrival of

her husband at Upton had put an end to her design of going to Bath, or

to her aunt Western. They had therefore no sooner finished their

tea, than Sophia proposed to set out, the moon then shining

extremely bright, and as for the frost she defied it; nor had she

any of those apprehensions which many young ladies would have felt

at travelling by night; for she had, as we have before observed,

some little degree of natural courage; and this, her present

sensations, which bordered somewhat on despair, greatly encreased.

Besides, as she had already travelled twice with safety by the light

of the moon, she was the better emboldened to trust to it a third

time.

  The disposition of Mrs. Fitzpatrick was more timorous; for, though

the greater terrors had conquered the less, and the presence of her

husband had driven her away at so unseasonable an hour from Upton,

yet, being now arrived at a place where she thought herself safe

from his pursuit, these lesser terrors of I know not what operated

so strongly, that she earnestly entreated her cousin to stay till

the next morning, and not expose herself to the dangers of

travelling by night.

  Sophia, who was yielding to an excess, when she could neither

laugh nor reason her cousin out of these apprehensions, at last gave

way to them. Perhaps, indeed, had she known of her father's arrival at

Upton, it might have been more difficult to have persuaded her; for as

to Jones, she had, I am afraid, no great horror at the thoughts of

being overtaken by him; nay, to confess the truth, I believe wished

than feared it; though I might honestly enough have concealed this

wish from the reader, as it was one of those secret spontaneous

emotions of the soul to which the reason is often a stranger.

  When our young ladies had determined to remain all that evening in

their inn, they were attended by the landlady, who desired to know

what their ladyships would be pleased to eat. Such charms were there

in the voice, in the manner, and in the affable deportment of

Sophia, that she ravished the landlady to the highest degree; and that

good woman, concluding that she had attended Jenny Cameron, became

in a moment a stanch Jacobite, and wished heartily well to the young

Pretender's cause, from the great sweetness and affability with

which she had been treated by his supposed mistress.

  The two cousins began now to impart to each other their reciprocal

curiosity; to know what extraordinary accidents on both sides

occasioned this so strange and unexpected meeting. At last Mrs.

Fitzpatrick, having obtained of Sophia a promise of communicating

likewise in her turn, began to relate what the reader, if he is

desirous to know her history, may read in the ensuing chapter.





                                Chapter 4



  The history of Mrs. Fitzpatrick



  Mrs. Fitzpatrick, after a silence of a few moments, fetching a

deep sigh, thus began:

  "It is natural to the unhappy to feel a secret concern in

recollecting those periods of their lives which have been most

delightful to them. The remembrance of past pleasures affects us

with a kind of tender grief, like what we suffer for departed friends;

and the ideas of both may be said to haunt our imaginations.

  "For this reason, I never reflect without sorrow on those days

(the happiest far of my life) which we spent together, when both

were under the care of my aunt Western. Alas! why are Miss Graveairs

and Miss Giddy no more? You remember, I am sure, when we knew each

other by no other names. Indeed, you gave the latter appellation

with too much cause. I have since experienced how much I deserved

it. You, my Sophia, was always my superior in everything, and I

heartily hope you will be so in your fortune. I shall never forget the

wise and matronly advice you once gave me, when I lamented being

disappointed of a ball, though you could not be then fourteen years

old.-O my Sophy, how blest must have been my situation, when I could

think such a disappointment a misfortune; and when indeed it was the

greatest I had ever known!"

  "And yet, my dear Harriet," answered Sophia, "it was then a

serious matter with you. Comfort yourself therefore with thinking,

that whatever you now lament may hereafter appear as trifling and

contemptible as a ball would at this time."

  "Alas, my Sophia," replied the other lady, "you yourself will

think otherwise of my present situation; for greatly must that

tender heart be altered, if my misfortunes do not draw many a sigh,

nay, many a tear, from you. The knowledge of this should perhaps deter

me from relating what I am convinced will so much affect you." Here

Mrs. Fitzpatrick stopt, till, at the repeated entreaties of Sophia,

she thus proceeded:

  "Though you must have heard much of my marriage; yet, as matters may

probably have been misrepresented, I will set out from the very

commencement of my unfortunate acquaintance with my present husband;

which was at Bath, soon after you left my aunt, and returned home to

your father.

  "Among the gay young fellows who were at this season at Bath, Mr.

Fitzpatrick was one. He was handsome, degage, extremely gallant, and

in his dress exceeded most others. In short, my dear, if you was

unluckily to see him now, I could describe him no better than by

telling you he was the very reverse of everything which he is: for

he hath rusticated himself so long, that he is become an absolute wild

Irishman. But to proceed in my story: the qualifications which he then

possessed so well recommended him, that, though the people of

quality at that time lived separate from the rest of the company,

and excluded them from all their parties, Mr. Fitzpatrick found

means to gain admittance. It was perhaps no easy matter to avoid

him; for he required very little or no invitation; and as, being

handsome and genteel, he found it no very difficult matter to

ingratiate himself with the ladies, so, he having frequently drawn his

sword, the men did not care publickly to affront him. Had it not

been for some such reason, I believe he would have been soon

expelled by his own sex; for surely he had no strict title to be

preferred to the English gentry; nor did they seem inclined to show

him any extraordinary favour. They all abused him behind his back,

which might probably proceed from envy; for the women he was well

received, and very particularly distinguished by them.

  "My aunt, though no person of quality herself, as she had always

lived about the court, was enrolled in that party; for, by whatever

means you get into the polite circle, when you are once there, it is

sufficient merit for you that you are there. This observation, young

as you was, you could scarce avoid making from my aunt, who was

free, or reserved, with all people, just as they had more or less of

this merit.

  "And this merit, I believe, it was, which principally recommended

Mr. Fitzpatrick to her favour. In which he so well succeeded, that

he was always one of her private parties. Nor was he backward in

returning such distinction; for he soon grew so very particular in his

behaviour to her, that the scandal club first began to take notice

of it, and the better-disposed persons made a match between them.

For my own part, I confess, I made no doubt that his designs were

strictly honourable, as the phrase is; that is, to rob a lady of her

fortune by way of marriage. My aunt was, I conceived, neither young

enough nor handsome enough to attract much wicked inclination; but she

had matrimonial charms in great abundance.

  "I was the more confirmed in this opinion from the extraordinary

respect which he showed to myself from the first moment of our

acquaintance. This I understood as an attempt to lessen, if

possible, that disinclination which my interest might be supposed to

give me towards the match; and I know not but in some measure it had

that effect; for, as I was well contented with my own fortune, and

of all people the least a slave to interested views, so I could not be

violently the enemy of a man with whose behaviour to me I was

greatly pleased; and the more so, as I was the only object of such

respect; for he behaved at the same time to many women of quality

without any respect at all.

  "Agreeable as this was to me, he soon changed it into another kind

of behaviour, which was perhaps more so. He now put on much softness

and tenderness, and languished and sighed abundantly. At times,

indeed, whether from art or nature I will not determine, he gave his

usual loose to gaiety and mirth; but this was always in general

company, and with other women; for even in a country dance, when he

was not my partner, he became grave, and put on the softest look

imaginable the moment he approached me. Indeed he was in all things so

very particular towards me, that I must have been blind not to have

discovered it. And, and, and--" "And you was more pleased still, my

dear Harriet," cries Sophia; "you need not be ashamed," she,

sighing; "for sure there are irresistible charms in tenderness,

which too many men are able to affect." "True," answered her cousin;

"men, who in all other instances want common sense, are very

Machiavels in the art of loving. I wish I did not know an instance.

Well, scandal now began to be as busy with me as it had before been

with my aunt; and some good ladies did not scruple to affirm that

Mr. Fitzpatrick had an intrigue with us both.

  "But, what may seem astonishing, my aunt never saw, nor in the least

seemed to suspect, that which was visible enough, I believe, from both

our behaviours. One would indeed think that love quite puts out the

eyes of an old woman. In fact, they so greedily swallow the

addresses which are made to them, that, like an outrageous glutton,

they are not at leisure to observe what passes amongst others at the

same table. This I have observed in more cases than my own; and this

was so strongly verified by my aunt, that, though she often found us

together at her return from the pump, the least chanting word of

his, pretending impatience at her absence, effectually smothered all

suspicion. One artifice succeeded with her to admiration. This was his

treating me like a little child, and never calling me by any other

name in her presence but that of pretty miss. This indeed did him some

disservice with your humble servant; but I soon saw through it,

especially as in her absence he behaved to me, as I have said, in a

different manner. However, if I was not greatly disobliged by a

conduct of which I had discovered the design, I smarted very

severely for it; for my aunt really conceived me to be what her

lover (as she thought him) called me, and treated me in all respects

as a perfect infant. To say the truth, I wonder she had not insisted

on my again wearing leading-strings.

  "At last, my lover (for so he was) thought proper, in a most

solemn manner, to disclose a secret which I had known long before.

He now placed all the love which he had pretended to my aunt to my

account. He lamented, in very pathetic terms, the encouragement she

had given him, and made a high merit of the tedious hours in which

he had undergone her conversation.- What shall I tell you, my dear

Sophia?- Then I will confess the truth. I was pleased with my man. I

was pleased with my conquest. To rival my aunt delighted me; to

rival so many other women charmed me. In short, I am afraid I did

not behave as I should do, even upon the very first declaration- I

wish I did not almost give him positive encouragement before we

parted.

  "The Bath now talked loudly- I might almost say, roared against me.

Several young women affected to shun my acquaintance, not so much,

perhaps, from any real suspicion, as from a desire of banishing me

from a company in which I too much engrossed their favourite man.

And here I cannot omit expressing my gratitude to the kindness

intended me by Mr. Nash, who took me one day aside, and gave me

advice, which if I had followed, I had been a happy woman. 'Child,'

says he, 'I am sorry to see the familiarity which subsists between you

and a fellow who is altogether unworthy of you, and I am afraid will

prove your ruin. As for your old stinking aunt, if it was to be no

injury to you and my pretty Sophy Western (I assure you I repeat his

words), I should be heartily glad that the fellow was in possession of

all that belongs to her. I never advise old women: for, if they take

it into their head to go to the devil, it is no more possible than

worth while to keep them from him. Innocence and youth and beauty

are worthy a better fate, and I would save them from his clutches. Let

me advise you therefore, dear child, never suffer this fellow to be

particular with you again.' Many more things he said to me, which I

have now forgotten, and indeed I attended very little to them at

that time; for inclination contradicted all he said; and, besides, I

could not be persuaded that women of quality would condescend to

familiarity with such a person as he described.

  "But I am afraid, my dear, I shall tire you with a detail of so many

minute circumstances. To be concise, therefore, imagine me married;

imagine me with my husband, at the feet of my aunt; and then imagine

the maddest woman in Bedlam, in a raving fit, and your imagination

will suggest to you no more than what really happened.

  "The very next day my aunt left the place, partly to avoid seeing

Mr. Fitzpatrick or myself, and as much perhaps to avoid seeing any one

else; for, though I am told she hath since denied everything

stoutly, I believe she was then a little confounded at her

disappointment. Since that time, I have written to her many letters,

but never could obtain an answer, which I must own sits somewhat the

heavier, as she herself was, though undesignedly, the occasion of

all my sufferings: for, had it not been under the colour of paying his

addresses to her, Mr. Fitzpatrick would never have found sufficient

opportunities to have engaged my heart, which, in other circumstances,

I still flatter myself would not have been an easy conquest to such

a person. Indeed, I believe I should not have erred so grossly in my

choice if I had relied on my own judgment; but I trusted totally to

the opinion of others, and very foolishly took the merit of a man

for granted, whom I saw so universally well received by the women.

What is the reason, My dear, that we, who have understandings equal to

the wisest and greatest of the other sex, so often make choice of

the silliest fellows for companions and favourites? It raises my

indignation to the highest pitch, to reflect on the numbers of women

of sense who have been undone by fools." Here she paused a moment;

but, Sophia making no answer, she proceeded as in the next chapter.





                                Chapter 5



  In which the history of Mrs. Fitzpatrick is continued



  "We remained at Bath no longer than a fortnight after our wedding;

for as to any reconciliation with my aunt, there were no hopes; and of

my fortune, not one farthing could be touched till I was of age, of

which I now wanted more than two years. My husband, therefore, was

resolved to set out for Ireland; against which I remonstrated very

earnestly, and insisted on a promise which he had made me before our

marriage, that I should never take this journey against my consent;

and indeed I never intended to consent to it; nor will anybody, I

believe, blame me for that resolution; but this, however, I never

mentioned to my husband, and petitioned only for the reprieve of a

month; but he had fixed the day, and to that day he obstinately

adhered.

  "The evening before our departure, as we were disputing this point

with great eagerness on both sides, he started suddenly from his

chair, and left me abruptly, saying he was going to the rooms. He

was hardly out of the house, when I saw a paper lying on the floor,

which, I suppose, he had carelessly pulled from his pocket, together

with his handkerchief. This paper I took up, and, finding it to be a

letter, I made no scruple to open and read it; and indeed I read it so

often, that I can repeat it to you almost word for word. This then was

the letter:



  To Mr. Brian Fitzpatrick

  SIR,- Yours received, and am surprized you should use me in this

manner, as have never seen any of your cash, unless for one

linsey-woolsey coat, and your bill now is upwards of L150. Consider,

sir, how often you have fobbed me off with your being shortly to be

married to this lady and t' other lady; but I can neither live on

hopes or promises, nor will my woollen-draper take any such in

payment. You tell me you are secure of having either the aunt or the

niece, and that you might have married the aunt before this, whose

jointure you say is immense, but that you prefer the niece on

account of her ready money. Pray, sir, take a fool's advice for

once, and marry the first you can get. You will pardon my offering

my advice, as you know I sincerely wish you well. Shall draw on you

per next post, in favour of Messieurs John Drugget and company, at

fourteen days, which doubt not your honouring, and am,

                            Sir, your humble servant,

                                                SAM COSGRAVE.



  "This was the letter, word for word. Guess, my dear girl- guess how

this letter affected me. You prefer the niece on account of her

ready money! If every one of these words had been a dagger, I could

with pleasure have stabbed them into his heart; but I will not recount

my frantic behaviour on the occasion. I had pretty well spent my tears

before his return home; but sufficient remains of them appeared in

my swollen eyes. He threw himself sullenly into his chair, and for a

long time we were both silent. At length, in a haughty tone, he

said, 'I hope, madam, your servants have packed up all your things;

for the coach will be ready by six in the morning.' My patience was

totally subdued by this provocation, and I answered, 'No, sir, there

is a letter still remains unpacked;' and then throwing it on the

table, I fell to upbraiding him with the most bitter language I

could invent.

  "Whether guilt, or shame, or prudence, restrained him, I cannot say;

but, though he is the most passionate of men, he exerted no rage on

this occasion. He endeavoured, on the contrary, to pacify me by the

most gentle means. He swore the phrase in the letter to which I

principally objected was not his, nor had he ever written any such. He

owned, indeed, the having mentioned his marriage, and that

preference which he had given to myself, but denied with many oaths

the having assigned any such reason. And he excused the having

mentioned any such matter at all, on account of the straits he was

in for money, arising, he said, from his having too long neglected his

estate in Ireland. And this, he said, which he could not bear to

discover to me, was the only reason of his having so strenuously

insisted on our journey. He then used several very endearing

expressions, and concluded by a very fond caress, and many violent

protestations of love.

  "There was one circumstance which, though he did not appeal to it,

had much weight with me in his favour, and that was the word

jointure in the taylor's letter, whereas my aunt never had been

married, and this Mr. Fitzpatrick well knew.-- As I imagined,

therefore, that the fellow must have inserted this of his own head,

or from hearsay, I persuaded myself he might have ventured likewise on

that odius line on no better authority. What reasoning was this, my

dear? was I not an advocate rather than a judge?- But why do I mention

such a circumstance as this, or appeal to it for the justification of

my forgiveness?- In short, had he been guilty of twenty times as much,

half the tenderness and fondness which he used would have prevailed on

me to have forgiven him. I now made no farther objections to our

setting out, which we did the next morning, and in a little more

than a week arrived at the seat of Mr. Fitzpatrick.

  "Your curiosity will excuse me from relating any occurrences which

past during our journey; for it would indeed be highly disagreeable to

travel it over again, and no less so to you to travel it over with me.

  "This seat, then, is an ancient mansion-house: if I was in one of

those merry humours in which you have so often seen me, I could

describe it to you ridiculously enough. It looked as if it had been

formerly inhabited by a gentleman. Here was room enough, and not the

less room on account of the furniture; for indeed there was very

little in it. An old woman, who seemed coeval with the building, and

greatly resembled her whom Chamont mentions in the Orphan, received us

at the gate, and in a howl scarce human, and to me unintelligible,

welcomed her master home. In short, the whole scene was so gloomy

and melancholy, that it threw my spirits into the lowest dejection;

which my husband discerning, instead of relieving, encreased by two or

three malicious observations. 'There are good houses, madam,' says he,

'as you find, in other places besides England; but perhaps you had

rather be in a dirty lodgings at Bath.'

  "Happy, my dear, is the woman who, in any state of life, hath a

cheerful good-natured companion to support and comfort her! But why do

I reflect on happy situations only to aggravate my own misery? my

companion, far from clearing up the gloom of solitude, soon

convinced me that I must have been wretched with him in any place, and

in any condition. In a word, he was a surly fellow, a character

perhaps you have never seen; for, indeed, no woman ever sees it

exemplified but in a father, a brother, or a husband; and, though

you have a father, he is not of that character. This surly fellow

had formerly appeared to me the very reverse, and so he did still to

every other person. Good heaven! how is it possible for a man to

maintain a constant lie in his appearance abroad and in company, and

to content himself with shewing disagreeable truth only at home? Here,

my dear, they make themselves amends for the uneasy restraint which

they put on their tempers in the world; for I have observed, the

more merry and gay and good-humoured my husband hath at any time

been in company, the more sullen and morose he was sure to become at

our next private meeting. How shall I describe his barbarity? To my

fondness he was cold and insensible. My little comical ways, which

you, my Sophy, and which others, have called so agreeable, he

treated with contempt. In my most serious moments he sung and

whistled; and whenever I was thoroughly dejected and miserable, he was

angry, and abused me; for, though he was never pleased with my

good-humour, nor ascribed it to my satisfaction in him, yet my low

spirits always offended him, and those he imputed to my repentance

of having (as he said) married an Irishman.

  "You will easily conceive, my dear Graveairs (I ask your pardon, I

really forgot myself), that, when a woman makes an imprudent match

in the sense of the world, that is, when she not an arrant

prostitute to pecuniary interest, she must necessarily have some

inclination and affection for her man. You will as easily believe that

this affection may possibly be lessened; nay, I do assure you,

contempt will wholly eradicate it. This contempt I now began to

entertain for my husband, whom I now discovered to be- I must use the

expression- an arrant blockhead. Perhaps you will wonder I did not

make this discovery long before; but women will suggest a thousand

excuses to themselves for the folly of those they like: besides,

give me leave to tell you, it requires a most penetrating eye to

discern a fool through the disguises of gaiety and good breeding.

  "It will be easily imagined that, when I once despised my husband,

as I confess to you I soon did, I must consequently dislike his

company; and indeed I had the happiness of being very little

troubled with it; for our house was now most elegantly furnished,

our cellars well stocked, and dogs and horses provided in great

abundance. As my gentleman therefore entertained his neighbours with

great hospitality, so his neighbours resorted to him with great

alacrity; and sports and drinking consumed so much of his time, that a

small part of his conversation, that is to say, of his ill-humours,

fell to my share.

  "Happy would it have been for me if I could as easily have avoided

all other disagreeable company; but, alas! I was confined to some

which constantly tormented me; and the more, as I saw no prospect of

being relieved from them. These companions were my own racking

thoughts, which plagued and in a manner haunted me night and day. In

this situation I past through a scene, the horrors of which can

neither be painted nor imagined. Think, my dear, figure, if you can,

to yourself, what I must have undergone. I became a mother by the

man I scorned, hated, and detested. I went through all the agonies and

miseries of a lying-in (ten times more painful in such a

circumstance than the worst labour can be when one endures it for a

man one loves) in a desert, or rather, indeed, a scene of riot and

revel, without a friend, without a companion, or without any of

those agreeable circumstances which often alleviate, and perhaps

sometimes more than compensate, the sufferings of our sex at that

season."





                                Chapter 6



  In which the mistake of the landlord throws Sophia into a dreadful

consternation



  Mrs. Fitzpatrick was proceeding in her narrative, when she was

interrupted by the entrance of dinner, greatly to the concern of

Sophia; for the misfortunes of her friend had raised her anxiety,

and left her no appetite but what Mrs. Fitzpatrick was to satisfy by

her relation.

  The landlord now attended with a plate under his arm, and with the

same respect in his countenance and address which he would have put on

had the ladies arrived in a coach and six.

  The married lady seemed less affected with own misfortunes than

was her cousin; for the former eat very heartily, whereas the latter

could hardly swallow a morsel. Sophia likewise showed more concern and

sorrow in her countenance than appeared in the other lady; who, having

observed these symptoms in her friend, begged her to be comforted,

saying, "Perhaps all may yet end better than either you or I expect."

  Our landlord thought he had now an opportunity to open his mouth,

and was resolved not to omit it. "I am sorry, madam," cries he,

"that your ladyship can't eat; for to be sure you must be hungry after

so long fasting. I hope your ladyship is not uneasy at anything,

for, as madam there says, all may end better than anybody expects. A

gentleman who was here just now brought excellent news; and perhaps

some folks who have given other folks the slip may get to London

before they are overtaken; and if they do, I make no doubt but they

will find people who will be very ready to receive them."

  All persons under the apprehension of danger convert whatever they

see and hear into the objects of that apprehension. Sophia therefore

immediately concluded, from the foregoing speech, that she was

known, and pursued by her father. She was now struck with the utmost

consternation, and for a few minutes deprived of the power of

speech; which she no sooner recovered, than she desired the landlord

to send his servants out of the room, and then, addressing herself

to him, said, "I perceive, sir, you know who we are; but I beseech

you-nay, I am convinced, if you have any compassion or goodness, you

will not betray us."

  "I betray your ladyship!" quoth the landlord; "no (and then he swore

several very hearty oaths); I would sooner be cut into ten thousand

pieces. I hate all treachery. I! I never betrayed any one in my life

yet, and I am sure I shall not begin with so sweet a lady as your

ladyship. All the world would very much blame me if I should, since it

will be in your ladyship's power so shortly to reward me. My wife

can witness for me, I knew your ladyship the moment you came into

the house: I said it was your honour, before I lifted you from your

horse, and I shall carry the bruises I got in your ladyship's

service to the grave; but what signified that, as long as I saved your

ladyship? To be sure some people this morning would have thought of

getting a reward; but no such thought ever entered into my head. I

would sooner starve than take any reward for betraying your ladyship."

  "I promise you, sir," says Sophia, "if it be ever in my power to

reward you, you shall not lose by your generosity."

  "Alack-a-day, madam!" answered the landlord; "in your ladyship's

power! Heaven put it as much into your will! I am only afraid your

honour will forget such a poor man as an innkeeper; but, if your

ladyship should not, I hope you will remember what reward I

refused- refused! that is, I would have refused, and to be sure it

may be called refusing, for I might have had it certainly; and to be

sure you might have been in some houses;-but, for my part, I would

not, methinks, for the world have your ladyship wrong me so much as to

imagine I ever thought of betraying you, even before I heard the

good news."

  "What news, pray?" says Sophia, something eagerly.

  "Hath not your ladyship heard it, then?" cries the landlord; "nay,

like enough, for I heard it only a few minutes ago; and if I had never

heard it, may the devil fly away with me this instant if I would

have betrayed your honour! no, if I would, may I-" Here he subjoined

several dreadful imprecations, which Sophia at last interrupted, and

begged to know what he meant by the news.- He was going to answer,

when Mrs. Honour came running into the room, all pale and breathless,

and cried out, "Madam, we are all undone, all ruined, they are come,

they are come!" These words almost froze up the blood of Sophia; but

Mrs. Fitzpatrick asked Honour who were come? "Who?" answered she,

"why, the French; several hundred thousands of them are landed, and we

shall be all murdered and ravished."

  As a miser, who hath, in some well-built city, a cottage, value

twenty shillings, when at a distance he is alarmed with the news of

a fire, turns pale and trembles at his loss; but when he finds the

beautiful palaces only are burnt, and his own cottage remains safe, he

comes instantly to himself, and smiles at his good fortunes: or as

(for we dislike something in the former simile) the tender mother,

when terrified with the apprehension that her darling boy is

drowned, is struck senseless and almost dead with consternation; but

when she is told that little master is safe, and the Victory only,

with twelve hundred brave men, gone to the bottom, life and sense

again return, maternal fondness enjoys the sudden relief from all

its fears, and the general benevolence which at another time would

have deeply felt the dreadful catastrophe, lies fast asleep in her

mind; so Sophia, than whom none was more capable of tenderly feeling

the general calamity of her country, found such immediate satisfaction

from the relief of those terrors she had of being overtaken by her

father, that the arrival of the French scarce made any impression on

her. She gently chid her maid for the fright into which she had thrown

her, and said "she was glad it was no worse; for that she had feared

somebody else was come."

  "Ay, ay," quoth the landlord, smiling, "her ladyship knows better

things; she knows the French are our very best friends, and come

over hither only for our good. They are the people who are to make Old

England flourish again. I warrant her honour thought the duke was

coming; and that was enough to put her into a fright. I was going to

tell your ladyship the news.- His honour's majesty, Heaven bless him,

hath given the duke the slip, and is marching as fast as he can to

London, and ten thousand French are landed to join him on the road."

  Sophia was not greatly pleased with this news, nor with the

gentleman who related it; but, as she still imagined he knew her

(for she could not possibly have any suspicion of the real truth), she

durst not show any dislike. And now the landlord, having removed the

cloth from the table, withdrew; but at his departure frequently

repeated his hopes of being remembered hereafter.

  The mind of Sophia was not at all easy under the supposition of

being known at this house; for she still applied to herself many

things which the landlord had addressed to Jenny Cameron; she

therefore ordered her maid to pump out of him by what means he had

become acquainted with her person, and who had offered him the

reward for betraying her; she likewise ordered the horses to be in

readiness by four in the morning, at which hour Mrs. Fitzpatrick

promised to bear her company; and then, composing herself as well as

she could, she desired that lady to continue her story.





                                Chapter 7



  In which Mrs. Fitzpatrick concludes her history



  While Mrs. Honour, in pursuance of commands of her mistress, ordered

a bowl of punch, and invited my landlord and landlady to partake of

it, Mrs. Fitzpatrick thus went on with her relation.

  "Most of the officers who were quartered at a town in our

neighbourhood were of my husband's acquaintance. Among these there was

a lieutenant, a very pretty sort of man, and who was married to a

woman, so agreeable both in her temper and conversation, that from our

first knowing each other, which was soon after my lying-in, we were

almost inseparable companions; for I had the good fortune to make

myself equally agreeable to her.

  "The lieutenant, who was neither a sot nor a sportsman, was

frequently of our parties; indeed he was very little with my

husband, and no more than good breeding constrained him to be, as he

lived almost constantly at our house. My husband often expressed

much dissatisfaction at the lieutenant's preferring my company to his;

he was very angry with me on that account, and gave me many a hearty

curse for drawing away his companions; saying, 'I ought to be d--n'd

for having spoiled one of the prettiest fellows in the world, by

making a milksop of him.'

  "You will be mistaken, my dear Sophia, if you imagine that the anger

of my husband arose from my depriving him of a companion; for the

lieutenant was not a person with whose society a fool could be

pleased; and, if I should admit the possibility of this, so little

right had my husband to place the loss of his companion to me, that

I am convinced it was my conversation alone which induced him ever

to come to the house. No, child, it was envy, the worst and most

rancorous kind of envy, the envy of superiority of understanding.

The wretch could not bear to see my conversation preferred to his,

by a man of whom he could not entertain the least jealousy. O my

dear Sophy, you are a woman of sense; if you marry a man, as is most

probable you will, of less capacity than yourself, make frequent

trials of his temper before marriage, and see whether he can bear to

submit to such a superiority.- Promise me, Sophy, you will take this

advice; for you will hereafter find its importance." "It is very

likely I shall never marry at all," answered Sophia; "I think, at

least, I shall never marry a man in whose understanding I see any

defects before marriage; and I promise you I would rather give up my

own than see any such afterwards." "Give up your understanding!"

replied Mrs. Fitzpatrick; "oh, fie, child! I will not believe so

meanly of you. Everything else I might myself be brought to give up;

but never this. Nature would not have allotted this superiority to the

wife in so many instances, if she had intended we should all of us

have surrendered it to the husband. This, indeed, men of sense never

expect of us; of which the lieutenant I have just mentioned was one

notable example; for though he had a very good understanding, he

always acknowledged (as was really true) that his wife had a better.

And this, perhaps, was one reason of the hatred my tyrant bore her.

  "Before he would be so governed by a wife, he said, especially

such an ugly b-- (for, indeed, she was not a regular beauty, but very

agreeable and extremely genteel), he would see all the women upon

earth at the devil, which was a very usual phrase with him. He said,

he wondered what I could see in her to be so charmed with her company:

since this woman, says he, hath come among us, there is an end of your

beloved reading, which you pretended to like so much, that you could

not afford time to return the visits of the ladies in this country;

and I must confess I had been guilty of a little rudeness this way;

for the ladies there are at least no better than the mere country

ladies here; and I think I need make no other excuse to you for

declining any intimacy with them.

  "This correspondence, however, continued a whole year, even all

the while the lieutenant was quartered in that town; for which I was

contented to pay the tax of being constantly abused in the manner

above mentioned by my husband; I mean when he was at home; for he

was frequently absent a month at a time at Dublin, and once made a

journey of two months to London: in all which journeys I thought it

a very singular happiness that he never once desired my company;

nay, by his frequent censures on men who could not travel, as he

phrased it, without a wife tied up to their tail, he sufficiently

intimated that, had I been never so desirous of accompanying him, my

wishes would have been in vain; but, Heaven knows, such wishes were

very far from my thoughts.

  "At length my friend was removed from me, and I was again left to my

solitude, to the tormenting conversation with my own reflections,

and to apply to books for my only comfort. I now read almost all day

long.- How many books you think I read in three months?" "I can't

guess, indeed, cousin," answered Sophia. "Perhaps half a score." "Half

a score! half a thousand, child!" answered the other. "I read a good

deal in Daniel's English History of France; a great deal in Plutarch's

Lives, the Atalantis, Pope's Homer, Dryden's Plays, Chillingworth, the

Countess D'Aulnois, and Locke's Human Understanding.

  "During this interval I wrote three very supplicating, and, I

thought, moving letters to my aunt; but, as I received no answer to

any of them, my disdain would not suffer me to continue my

application." Here she stopt, and, looking earnestly at Sophia,

said, "Methinks, my dear, I read something in your eyes which

reproaches me of a neglect in another place, where I should have met

with a kinder return." "Indeed, dear Harriet," answered Sophia,

"your story is an apology for any neglect; but, indeed, I feel that

I have been guilty of a remissness, without so good an excuse.-Yet

pray proceed; for I long, though I tremble, to hear the end."

  Thus, then, Mrs. Fitzpatrick resumed her narrative:- "My husband

now took a second journey to England, where he continued upwards of

three months; during the greater part of this time I led a life

which nothing but having led a worse could make me think tolerable;

for perfect solitude can never be reconciled to a social mind, like

mine, but when it relieves you from the company of those you hate.

What added to my wretchedness was the loss of my little infant: not

that I pretend to have had for it that extravagant tenderness of which

I believe I might have been capable under other circumstances; but I

resolved, in every instance, to discharge the duty of the tenderest

mother; and this care prevented me from feeling the weight of that

heaviest of all things, when it can be at all said to lie heavy on our

hands.

  "I had spent full ten weeks almost entirely by myself, having seen

nobody all that time, except my servants and a very few visitors, when

a young lady, a relation to my husband, came from a distant part of

Ireland to visit me. She had staid once before a week at my house, and

then I gave her a pressing invitation to return; for she was a very

agreeable woman, and had improved good natural parts by a proper

education. indeed, she was to me a welcome guest.

  "A few days after her arrival, perceiving me in very low spirits,

without enquiring the cause, which, indeed, she very well knew, the

young lady fell to compassionating my case. She said, 'Though

politeness had prevented me from complaining to my husband's relations

of his behaviour, yet they all were very sensible of it, and felt

great concern upon that account; but none more than herself.' And

after some more general discourse on this head, which I own I could

not forbear countenancing, at last, after much previous precaution and

enjoined concealment, she communicated to me, as a profound

secret- that my husband kept a mistress.

  "You will certainly imagine I heard this news with the utmost

insensibility- Upon my word, if you do, your imagination will mislead

you. Contempt had not so kept down my anger to my husband, but that

hatred rose again on this occasion. What can be the reason of this?

Are we so abominably selfish, that we can be concerned at others

having possession even of what we despise? or are we not rather

abominably vain, and is not this the greatest injury done to our

vanity? What think you, Sophia?"

  "I don't know, indeed," answered Sophia; "I have never troubled

myself with any of these deep contemplations; but I think the lady did

very ill in communicating to you such a secret."

  "And yet, my dear, this conduct is natural," replied Mrs.

Fitzpatrick; "and, when you have seen and read as much as myself,

you will acknowledge it to be so."

  "I am sorry to hear it is natural," returned Sophia; "for I want

neither reading nor experience to convince me that it is very

dishonourable and very ill-natured: nay, it is surely as ill-bred to

tell a husband or wife of the faults of each other as to tell them

of their own."

  "Well," continued Mrs. Fitzpatrick, "my husband at last returned;

and, if I am thoroughly acquainted with my own thoughts, I hated him

now more than ever; but I despised him rather less: for certainly

nothing so much weakens our contempt, as an injury done to our pride

or our vanity.

  "He now assumed a carriage to me so very different from what he

had lately worn, and so nearly resembling his behaviour the first week

of our marriage, that, had I now had any spark of love remaining, he

might, possibly, have rekindled my fondness for him. But, though

hatred may succeed to contempt, and may perhaps get the better of

it, love, I believe, cannot. The truth is, the passion of love is

too restless to remain contented, without the gratification which it

receives from its object; and one can no more be inclined to love

without loving, than we can have eyes without seeing. When a

husband, therefore, ceases to be the object of this passion, it is

most probable some other man- I say, my dear, if your husband grows

indifferent to you- if you once come to despise him- I say- that is-

if you have the passion of love in you- Lud! I have bewildered myself

so- but one is apt, in these abstracted considerations, to lose the

concatenation of ideas, as Mr. Locke says:- in short, the truth is- in

short, I scarce know what it is; but, as I was saying, my husband

returned, and his behaviour, at first, greatly surprized me; but he

soon acquainted me with the motive, and taught me to account for it.

In a word, then, he had spent and lost all the ready money of my

fortune; and, as he could mortgage his own estate no deeper, he was

now desirous to supply himself with cash for his extravagance, by

selling a little estate of mine, which he could not do without my

assistance; and to obtain this favour, was the whole and sole motive

of all the fondness which he now put on.

  "With this I peremptorily refused to comply. I told him, and I

told him truly, that, had I been possessed of the Indies at our

first marriage, he might have commanded it all; for it had been a

constant maxim with me, that where a woman disposes of her heart,

she should always deposit her fortune; but, as he had been so kind,

long ago, to restore the former into my possession, I was resolved

likewise to retain what little remained of the latter.

  "I will not describe to you the passion into which these words,

and the resolute air in which they were spoken, threw him: nor will

I trouble you with the whole scene which succeeded between us. Out

came, you may be well assured, the story of the mistress; and out it

did come, with all the embellishments which anger and disdain could

bestow upon it.

  "Mr. Fitzpatrick seemed a little thunderstruck with this, and more

confused than I had seen him, though his ideas are always confused

enough, heaven knows. He did not, however, endeavour to exculpate

himself; but took a method which almost equally confounded me. What

was this but recrimination? He affected to be jealous:-- he may, for

aught I know, be inclined enough to jealousy in his natural temper:

nay, he must have had it from nature, or the devil must have put it

into his head; for I defy all the world to cast a just aspersion on my

character: nay, the most scandalous tongues have never dared censure

my reputation. My fame, I thank heaven, hath been always as spotless

as my life; and let falsehood itself accuse that, if it dare. No, my

dear Graveairs, however provoked, however ill-treated, however injured

in my love, I have firmly resolved never to give the least room for

censure on this account.- And yet, my dear, there are some people so

malicious, some tongues so venomous, that no innocence can escape

them. The most undesigned word, the most accidental look, the least

familiarity, the most innocent freedom, will be misconstrued, and

magnified into I know not what, by some people. But I despise, my dear

Graveairs, I despise all such slander. No such malice, I assure you,

ever gave me an uneasy moment. No, no, I promise you I am above all

that.- But where was I? O let me see, I told you my husband was

jealous- And of whom, I pray?- Why, of whom but the lieutenant I

mentioned to you before! He was obliged to resort above a year and

more back, to find any object for this unaccountable passion, if,

indeed, he really felt any such, and was not an arrant counterfeit, in

order to abuse me.

  "But I have tired you already with too many particulars. I will

now bring my story to a very speedy conclusion. In short, then,

after many scenes very unworthy to be repeated, in which my cousin

engaged so heartily on my side, that Mr. Fitzpatrick at last turned

her out of doors; when he found I was neither to be soothed nor

bullied into compliance, he took a very violent method indeed. Perhaps

you will conclude he beat me; but this, though he hath approached very

near to it, he never actually did. He confined me to my room,

without suffering me to have either pen, ink, paper, or book: and a

servant every day made my bed, and brought me my food.

  "When I had remained a week under this imprisonment, he made me a

visit, and, with the voice of a schoolmaster, or, what is often much

the same, of a tyrant, asked me, 'If I would yet comply?' I

answered, very stoutly, 'That I would die first.' 'Then so you

shall, and be d--n'd!' cries he; 'for you shall never go alive out of

this room.'

  "Here I remained a fortnight longer; and, to say the truth, my

constancy was almost subdued, and I began to think of submission;

when, one day, in the absence of my husband, who was gone abroad for

some short time, by the greatest good fortune in the world, an

accident happened.- I- at a time when I began to give way to the

utmost despair-- everything would be excusable at such a time- at that

very time I received-- But it would take up an hour to tell you all

particulars.- In one word, then (for I will not tire you with

circumstances), gold, the common key to all padlocks, opened my

door, and set me at liberty.

  "I now made haste to Dublin, where I immediately procurred a passage

to England; and was proceeding to Bath, in order to throw myself

into the protection of my aunt, or of your father, or of any

relation who would afford it me. My husband overtook me last night

at the inn where I lay, and which you left a few minutes before me;

but I had the good luck to escape him, and to follow you.

  "And thus, my dear, ends my history: a tragical one, I am sure, it

is to myself; but, perhaps, I ought rather to apologise to you for its

dulness."

  Sophia heaved a deep sigh, and answered, "Indeed, Harriet, I pity

you from my soul!-- But what could you expect? Why, why, would you

marry an Irishman?"

  "Upon my word," replied her cousin, "your censure is unjust. There

are, among the Irish, men of as much worth and honour as any among the

English: nay, to speak the truth, generosity of spirit is rather

more common among them. I have known some examples there, too, of good

husbands; and I believe these are not very plenty in England. Ask

me, rather, what I could expect when I married a fool; and I will tell

you a solemn truth; I did not know him to be so."- "Can no man," said

Sophia, in a very low and altered voice, "do you think, make a bad

husband, who is not a fool?" "That," answered the other, "is too

general a negative; but none, I believe, is so likely as a fool to

prove so. Among my acquaintance, the silliest fellows are the worst

husbands; and I will venture to assert, as a fact, that a man of sense

rarely behaves very ill to a wife who deserves very well."





                                Chapter 8



  A dreadful alarm in the inn, with the arrival of an unexpected

friend of Mrs. Fitzpatrick



  Sophia now, at the desire of her cousin, related- not what follows,

but what hath gone before in this history: for which reason the reader

will, I suppose, excuse me for not repeating it over again.

  One remark, however, I cannot forbear making on her narrative,

namely, that she made no more mention of Jones, from the beginning

to the end, than if there had been no such person alive. This I will

neither endeavour to account for nor to excuse. Indeed, if this may be

called a kind of dishonesty, it seems the more inexcusable, from the

apparent openness and explicit sincerity of the other lady.- But so

it was.

  Just as Sophia arrived at the conclusion of her story, there arrived

in the room where the two ladies were sitting a noise, not unlike,

in loudness, to that of a pack of hounds just let out from their

kennel; nor, in shrillness, to cats, when caterwauling; or to

screech owls; or, indeed, more like (for what animal can resemble a

human voice?) to those sounds which, in the pleasant mansions of

that gate which seems to derive its name from a duplicity of

tongues, issue from the mouths, and sometimes from the nostrils, of

those fair river nymphs, ycleped of old the Naiades; in the vulgar

tongue translated oyster-wenches; for when, instead of the antient

libations of milk and honey and oil, the rich distillation from the

juniper-berry, or, perhaps, from malt, hath, by the early devotion

of their votaries, been poured forth in great abundance, should any

daring tongue with unhallowed license prophane, i.e., depreciate,

the delicate fat Milton oyster, the plaice sound and firm, the

flounder as much alive as when in the water, the shrimp as big as a

prawn, the fine cod alive but a few hours ago, or any other of the

various treasures which those water-deities who fish the sea and

rivers have committed to the care of the nymphs, the angry Naiades

lift up their immortal voices, and the prophane wretch is struck

deaf for his impiety.

  Such was the noise which now burst from one of the rooms below;

and soon the thunder, which long had rattled at a distance, began to

approach nearer and nearer, till, having ascended by degrees upstairs,

it at last entered the apartment where the ladies were. In short, to

drop all metaphor and figure, Mrs. Honour, having scolded violently

below-stairs, and continued the same all the way up, came in to her

mistress in a most outrageous passion, crying out, "What doth your

ladyship think? Would you imagine that this impudent villain, the

master of this house, hath had the impudence to tell me, nay, to stand

it out to my face, that your ladyship is that nasty, stinking wh-re

(Jenny Cameron they call her), that runs about the country with the

Pretender? Nay, the lying, saucy villain had the assurance to tell me,

that your ladyship had owned yourself to be so; but I have clawed

the rascal; I have left the marks of my nails in his impudent face. My

lady! says I, you saucy scoundrel; my lady is meat for no

pretenders. She is a young lady of as good fashion, and family, and

fortune, as any in Somersetshire. Did you never hear of the great

Squire Western, sirrah? She is his only daughter; she is--, and

heiress to all his great estate. My lady to be called a nasty Scotch

wh-re by such a varlet!- To be sure I wish I had knocked his brains

out with the punchbowl."

  The principal uneasiness with which Sophia was affected on this

occasion, Honour had herself caused, by having in her passion

discovered who she was. However, as this mistake of the landlord

sufficiently accounted for those passages which Sophia had before

mistaken, she acquired some ease on that account; nor could she,

upon the whole, forbear smiling. This enraged Honour, and she cries,

"Indeed, madam, I did not think your ladyship would have made a

laughing matter of it. To be called whore by such an impudent low

rascal. Your ladyship may be angry with me, for aught I know, for

taking your part, since proffered service, they say, stinks; but to be

sure I could never bear to hear a lady mine called whore.- Nor will I

bear it. I am sure your ladyship is as virtuous a lady as ever sat

foot on English ground, and I will claw any villain's eyes out who

dares for to offer to presume for to say the least word to the

contrary. Nobody ever could say the least ill of the character of

any lady that ever I waited upon."

  Hinc illae, lachrymae: in plain truth, Honour had as much love for

her mistress as most servants have, that is to say- But besides this,

her pride obliged her to support the character of the lady she

waited on; for she thought her own was in a very close manner

connected with it. In proportion as the character of her mistress

was raised, hers likewise, as she conceived, was raised with it;

and, on the contrary, she thought the one could not be lowered without

the other.

  On this subject, reader, I must stop a moment, to tell thee a story.

"The famous Nell Gwynn, stepping one day, from a house where she had

made a short visit, into her coach, saw a great mob assembled, and her

footman all bloody and dirty; the fellow, being asked by his

mistress the reason of his being in that condition, answered, 'I

have been fighting, madam, with an impudent rascal who called your

ladyship a wh-re.' 'You blockhead,' replied Mrs. Gwynn, 'at this

rate you must fight every day of your life; why, you fool, all the

world knows it.' 'Do they?' cries the fellow, in a muttering voice,

after he had shut the coachdoor, 'they shan't call me a whore's

footman for all that.'

  Thus the passion of Mrs. Honour appears natural enough, even if it

were to be no otherwise accounted for; but, in reality, there was

another cause of her anger; for which we must beg leave to remind

our reader of a circumstance mentioned in the above simile. There

are indeed certain liquors, which, being applied to our passions, or

to fire, produce effects the very reverse of those produced by

water, as they serve to kindle and inflame, rather than to extinguish.

Among these, the generous liquor called punch is one. It was not,

therefore, without reason, that the learned Dr. Cheney used to call

drinking punch pouring liquid fire down your throat.

  Now, Mrs. Honour had unluckily poured so much of this liquid fire

down her throat, that the smoke of it began to ascend into her

pericranium, and blinded the eyes of Reason, which is there supposed

to keep her residence, while the fire itself from the stomach easily

reached the heart, and there inflamed the noble passion of pride. So

that, upon the whole, we shall cease to wonder at the violent rage

of the waiting-woman; though at first sight we must confess the

cause seems inadequate to the effect.

  Sophia, and her cousin both, did all in their power to extinguish

these flames, which had roared so loudly all over the house. They at

length prevailed; or, to carry the metaphor one step farther, the

fire, having consumed all the fuel which the language affords, to wit,

every reproachful term in it, at last went out of its own accord.

  But, though tranquillity was restored abovestairs, it was not so

below; where my landlady, highly resenting the injury done to the

beauty of her husband by the flesh-spades of Mrs. Honour, called aloud

for revenge and justice. As to the poor man, who had principally

suffered in the engagement, he was perfectly quiet. Perhaps the

blood which he lost might have cooled his anger: for the enemy had not

only applied her nails to his cheeks, but likewise her fist to his

nostrils, which lamented the blow with tears of blood in great

abundance. To this we may add reflections on his mistake; but indeed

nothing so effectually silenced his resentment as the manner in

which he now discovered his error; for as to the behaviour of Mrs.

Honour, it had the more confirmed him in his opinion; but he was now

assured by a person of great figure, and who was attended by a great

equipage, that one of the ladies was a woman of fashion, and his

intimate acquaintance.

  By the orders of this person, the landlord now ascended, and

acquainted our fair travellers that a great gentleman below desired to

do them the honour of waiting on them. Sophia turned pale and trembled

at this message, though the reader will conclude it was too civil,

notwithstanding the landlord's blunder, to have come from her

father; but fear hath the common fault of a justice of peace, and is

apt to conclude hastily from every slight circumstance, without

examining the evidence on both sides.

  To ease the reader's curiosity, therefore, rather than his

apprehensions, we proceed to inform him that an Irish peer had arrived

very late that evening at the inn, in his way to London. This

nobleman, having sallied from his supper at the hurricane before

commemorated, had seen the attendant of Mrs. Fitzpatrick, and upon a

short enquiry, was informed that her lady, with whom he was very

particularly acquainted, was above. This information he had no

sooner received, than he addressed himself to the landlord, pacified

him, and sent him upstairs with compliments rather civiller than those

which were delivered.

  It may perhaps be wondered at, that the waiting-woman herself was

not the messenger employed on this occasion; but we are sorry to say

she was not at present qualified for that, or indeed for any other

office. The rum (for so the landlord chose to call the distillation

from malt) had basely taken the advantage of the fatigue which the

poor woman had undergone, and had made terrible depredations on her

noble faculties, at a time when they were very unable to resist the

attack.

  We shall not describe this tragical scene too fully; but we

thought ourselves obliged, by that historic integrity which we

profess, shortly to hint a matter which we would otherwise have been

glad to have spared. Many historians, indeed, for want of this

integrity, or of diligence, to say no worse, often leave the reader to

find out these little circumstances in the dark, and sometimes to

his great confusion and perplexity.

  Sophia was very soon eased of her causeless fright by the entry of

the noble peer, who was not only an intimate acquaintance of Mrs.

Fitzpatrick, but in reality a very particular friend of that lady.

To say truth, it was by his assistance that she had been enabled to

escape from her husband; for this nobleman had the same gallant

disposition with those renowned knights of whom we read in heroic

story, and had delivered many an imprisoned nymph from durance. He was

indeed as bitter an enemy to the savage authority too often

exercised by husbands and fathers, over the young and lovely of the

other sex, as ever knighterrant was to the barbarous power of

enchanters; nay, to say truth, I have often suspected that those

very enchanters with which romance everywhere abounds, were in reality

no other than the husbands of those days; and matrimony itself was,

perhaps, the enchanted castle in which the nymphs were said to be

confined.

  This nobleman had an estate in the neighbourhood of Fitzpatrick, and

had been for sometime acquainted with the lady. No sooner,

therefore, did he hear of her confinement, than he earnestly applied

himself to procure her liberty; which he presently effected, not by

storming the castle, according to the example of antient heroes, but

by corrupting the governor, in conformity with the modern art of

war, in which craft is held to be preferable to valour, and gold is

found to be more irresistible than either lead or steel.

  This circumstance, however, as the lady did not think it material

enough to relate to her friend, we would not at that time impart it to

the reader. We rather chose to leave him a while under a supposition

that she had found, or coined, or by some very extraordinary,

perhaps supernatural means, had possessed herself of the money with

which she had bribed her keeper, than to interrupt her narrative by

giving a hint of what seemed to her of too little importance to be

mentioned.

  The peer, after a short conversation, could not forbear expressing

some surprize at meeting the lady in that place; nor could he

refrain from telling her he imagined she had been gone to Bath. Mrs.

Fitzpatrick very freely answered, "That she had been prevented in

her purpose by the arrival of a person she need not mention. In

short," says she, "I was overtaken by my husband (for I need not

affect to conceal what the world knows too well already). I had the

good fortune to escape in a most surprizing manner, and am now going

to London with this young lady, who is a near relation of mine, and

who hath escaped from as great a tyrant as my own."

  His lordship, concluding that this tyrant was likewise a husband,

made a speech full of compliments to both the ladies, and as full of

invectives against his own sex; nor indeed did he avoid some oblique

glances at the matrimonial institution itself, and at the unjust

powers given by it to man over the more sensible and more

meritorious part of the species. He ended his oration with an offer of

his protection, and of his coach and six, which was instantly accepted

by Mrs. Fitzpatrick, and at last, upon her persuasions, by Sophia.

  Matters being thus adjusted, his lordship took his leave, and the

ladies retired to rest, where Mrs. Fitzpatrick entertained her

cousin with many high encomiums on the character of the noble peer,

and enlarged very particularly on his great fondness for his wife;

saying, she believed he was almost the only person of high rank who

was entirely constant to the marriage bed. "Indeed," added she, "my

dear Sophy, that is a very rare virtue amongst men of condition. Never

expect it when you marry; for, believe me, if you do, you will

certainly be deceived."

  A gentle sigh stole from Sophia at these words, which perhaps

contributed to form a dream of no very pleasant kind; but, as she

never revealed this dream to any one, so the reader cannot expect to

see it related here.





                                Chapter 9



  The morning introduced in some pretty writing. A stage-coach. The

civility of chambermaids. The heroic temper of Sophia. Her generosity.

The return to it. The departure of the company, and their arrival at

London; with some remarks for the use of travellers



  Those members of society, who are born to furnish the blessings of

life, now began to light their candles, in order to pursue their daily

labours, for the use of those who are born to enjoy these blessings.

The sturdy hind now attends the levee of his fellow-labourer the ox;

the cunning artificer, the diligent mechanic, spring from their hard

mattress; and now the bonny housemaid begins to repair the

disordered drum-room, while the riotous authors of that disorder, in

broken interrupted slumbers, tumble and toss, as if the hardness of

down disquieted their repose.

  In simple phrase, the clock had no sooner struck seven, than the

ladies were ready for their journey; and, at their desire, his

lordship and his equipage were prepared to attend them.

  And now a matter of some difficulty arose; and this was how his

lordship himself should be conveyed; for though in stage-coaches,

where passengers are properly considered as so much luggage, the

ingenious coachman stows half a dozen with perfect ease into the place

of four; for well he contrives that the fat hostess, or well-fed

alderman, may take up no more room than the slim miss, or taper

master; it being the nature of guts, when well squeezed, to give

way, and to lie in a narrow compass; yet in these vehicles, which

are called, for distinction's sake, gentlemen's coaches, though they

are often larger than the others, this method of packing is never

attempted.

  His lordship would have put a short end to the difficulty, by very

gallantly desiring to mount his horse; but Mrs. Fitzpatrick would by

no means consent to it. It was therefore concluded that the Abigails

should, by turns, relieve each other on one of his lordship's

horses, which was presently equipped with a side-saddle for that

purpose.

  Everything being settled at the inn, the ladies discharged their

former guides, and Sophia made a present to the landlord, partly to

repair the bruise which he had received under herself, and partly on

account of what he had suffered under the hands of her enraged

waiting-woman. And now Sophia first discovered a loss which gave her

some uneasiness; and this was of the hundred-pound bank-bill which her

father had given her at their last meeting; and which, within a very

inconsiderable trifle, was all the treasure she was at present

worth. She searched everywhere, and shook and tumbled all her things

to no purpose, the bill was not to be found: and she was at last fully

persuaded that she had lost it from her pocket when she had the

misfortune of tumbling from her horse in the dark lane, as before

recorded: a fact that seemed the more probable, as she now recollected

some discomposure in her pockets which had happened at that time,

and the great difficulty with which she had drawn forth her

handkerchief the very instant before her fall, in order to relieve the

distress of Mrs. Fitzpatrick.

  Misfortunes of this kind, whatever inconveniencies they may be

attended with, are incapable of subduing a mind in which there is

any strength, without the assistance of avarice. Sophia, therefore,

though nothing could be worse timed than this accident at such a

season, immediately got the better of her concern, and, with her

wonted serenity and cheerfulness of countenance, returned to her

company. His lordship conducted the ladies into the vehicle, as he did

likewise Mrs. Honour, who, after many civilities, and more dear

madams, at last yielded to the well-bred importunities of her sister

Abigail, and submitted to be complimented with the first ride in the

coach; in which indeed she would afterwards have been contented to

have pursued her whole journey, had not her mistress, after several

fruitless intimations, at length forced her to take her turn on

horseback.

  The coach, now having received its company, began to move

forwards, attended by many servants, and led by two captains, who

had before rode with his lordship, and who would have been dismissed

from the vehicle upon a much less worthy occasion than was this of

accommodating two ladies. In this they acted only as gentlemen; but

they were ready at any time to have performed the office of a footman,

or indeed would have condescended lower, for the honour of his

lordship's company, and for the convenience of his table.

  My landlord was so pleased with the present he had received from

Sophia, that he rather rejoiced in than regretted his bruise or his

scratches. The reader will perhaps be curious to know the quantum of

this present; but we cannot satisfy his curiosity. Whatever it was, it

satisfied the landlord for his bodily hurt; but he lamented he had not

known before how little the lady valued her money; "For to be sure,"

says he, "one might have charged every article double, and she would

have made no cavil at the reckoning."

  His wife, however, was far from drawing this conclusion; whether she

really felt any injury done to her husband more than he did himself, I

will not say: certain it is, she was much less satisfied with the

generosity of Sophia. "Indeed," cries she, "my dear, the lady knows

better how to dispose of her money than you imagine. She might very

well think we should not put up such a business without some

satisfaction, and the law would have cost her an infinite deal more

than this poor little matter, which I wonder you would take." "You are

always so bloodily wise," quoth the husband: "it would have cost her

more, would it? dost fancy I don't know that as well as thee? but

would any of that more, or so much, have come into our pockets?

Indeed, if son Tom the lawyer had been alive, I could have been glad

to have put such a pretty business into his hands. He would have got a

good picking out of it; but I have no relation now who is a lawyer,

and why should I go to law for the benefit of strangers?" "Nay, to

be sure," answered she, "you must know best." "I believe do,"

replied he. "I fancy, when money is to be got, I can smell it out as

well as another. Everybody, let me tell you, would not have talked

people out of this. Mind that, I say; everybody would not have cajoled

this out of her, mind that." The wife then joined in the applause of

her husband's sagacity; and thus ended the short dialogue between them

on this occasion.

  We will therefore take our leave of these good people, and attend

his lordship and his fair companions, who made such good expedition

that they performed a journey of ninety miles in two days, and on

the second evening arrived in London, without having encountered any

one adventure on the road worthy the dignity of this history to

relate. Our pen, therefore, shall imitate the expedition which it

describes, and our history shall keep pace with the travellers who are

its subject. Good writers will, indeed, do well to imitate the

ingenious traveller in this instance, who always proportions his

stay at any place to the beauties, elegancies, and curiosities which

it affords. At Eshur, at Stowe, at Wilton, at Eastbury, and at Prior's

Park, days are too short for the ravished imagination; while we admire

the wondrous power of art in improving nature. In some of these, art

chiefly engages our admiration; in others, nature and art contend

for our applause; but, in the last, the former seems to triumph.

Here Nature appears in her richest attire, and Art, dressed with the

modestest simplicity, attends her benignant mistress. Here Nature

indeed pours forth the choicest treasures which she hath lavished on

this world; and here human nature presents you with an object which

can be exceeded only in the other.

  The same taste, the same imagination, which luxuriously riots in

these elegant scenes, can be amused with objects of far inferior note.

The woods, the rivers, the lawns of Devon and of Dorset, attract the

eye of the ingenious traveller, and retard his pace, which delay he

afterwards compensates by swiftly scouring over the gloomy heath of

Bagshot, or that pleasant plain which extends itself westward from

Stockbridge, where no other object than one single tree only in

sixteen miles presents itself to the view, unless the clouds, in

compassion to our tired spirits, kindly open their variegated mansions

to our prospect.

  Not so travels the money-meditating tradesman, the sagacious

justice, the dignified doctor, the warm-clad grazier, with all the

numerous offspring of wealth and dulness. On they jog, with equal

pace, through the verdant meadows or over the barren heath, their

horses measuring four miles and a half per hour with the utmost

exactness; the eyes of the beast and of his master being alike

directed forwards, and employed in contemplating the same objects in

the same manner. With equal rapture the good rider surveys the

proudest boasts of the architect, and those fair buildings with

which some unknown name hath adorned the rich cloathing town; where

heaps of bricks are piled up as a kind of monument to show that

heaps of money have been piled there before.

  And now, reader, as we are in haste to attend our heroine, we will

leave to thy sagacity to apply all this to the Boeotian writers, and

to those authors who are their opposites. This thou wilt be abundantly

able to perform without our aid. Bestir thyself therefore on this

occasion; for, though we will always lend thee proper assistance in

difficult places, as we do not, like some others, expect thee to use

the arts of divination to discover our meaning, yet we shall not

indulge thy laziness where nothing but thy own attention is

required; for thou art highly mistaken if thou dost imagine that we

intended, when we began this great work, to leave thy sagacity nothing

to do; or that, without sometimes exercising this talent, thou wilt be

able to travel through our pages with any pleasure or profit to

thyself.





                                Chapter 10



  Containing a hint or two concerning virtue, and a few more

concerning suspicion



  Our company, being arrived at London, were set down at his

lordship's house, where, while they refreshed themselves after the

fatigue of their journey, servants were despatched to provide a

lodging for the two ladies; for, as her ladyship was not then in town,

Mrs. Fitzpatrick would by no means consent to accept a bed in the

mansion of the peer.

  Some readers will, perhaps, condemn this extraordinary delicacy,

as I may call it, of virtue, as too nice and scrupulous; but we must

make allowances for her situation, which must be owned to have been

very ticklish; and, when we consider the malice of censorious tongues,

we must allow, if it was a fault, the fault was an excess on the right

side, and which every woman who is in the self-same situation will

do well to imitate. The most formal appearance of virtue, when it is

only an appearance, may, perhaps, in very abstracted considerations,

seem to be rather less commendable than virtue itself without this

formality; but it will, however, be always more commended; and this, I

believe, will be granted by all, that it is necessary, unless in

some very particular cases, for every woman to support either the

one or the other.

  A lodging being prepared, Sophia accompanied her cousin for that

evening; but resolved early in the morning to enquire after the lady

into whose protection, as we have formerly mentioned, she had

determined to throw herself when she quitted her father's house. And

this she was the more eager in doing, from some observations she had

made during her journey in the coach.

  Now, as we would by no means fix the odious character of suspicion

on Sophia, we are almost afraid to open to our reader the conceits

which filled her mind concerning Mrs. Fitzpatrick; of whom she

certainly entertained at present some doubts; which, as they are

very apt to enter into the bosoms of the worst of people, we think

proper not to mention more plainly, till we have first suggested a

word or two to our reader touching suspicion in general.

  Of this there have always appeared to me to be two degrees. The

first of these I chuse to derive from the heart, as the extreme

velocity of its discernment seems to denote some previous inward

impulse, and the rather as this superlative degree often forms its own

objects; sees what is not, and always more than really exists. This is

that quick-sighted penetration whose hawk's eyes no symptom of evil

can escape; which observes not only upon the actions, but upon the

words and looks, of men; and, as it proceeds from the heart of the

observer, so it dives into the heart of the observed, and there espies

evil, as it were, in the first embryo; nay, sometimes before it can be

said to be conceived. An admirable faculty, if it were infallible;

but, as this degree of perfection is not even claimed by more than one

mortal being; so from the fallibility of such acute discernment have

arisen many sad mischiefs and most grievous heart-aches to innocence

and virtue. I cannot help, therefore, regarding this vast

quick-sightedness into evil as a vicious excess, and as a very

pernicious evil in itself. And I am the more inclined to this opinion,

as I am afraid it always proceeds from a bad heart, for the reasons

I have above mentioned, and for one more, namely, because I never knew

it the property of a good one. Now, from this degree of suspicion I

entirely and absolutely acquit Sophia.

  A second degree of this quality seems to arise from the head. This

is, indeed, no other than the faculty of seeing what is before your

eyes, and of drawing conclusions from what you see. The former of

these is unavoidable by those who have any eyes, and the latter is

perhaps no less certain and necessary a consequence of our having

any brains. This is altogether as bitter an enemy to guilt as the

former is to innocence: nor can I see it in an unamiable light, even

though, through human fallibility, it should be sometimes mistaken.

For instance, if a husband should accidentally surprize his wife in

the lap or in the embraces of some of those pretty young gentlemen who

profess the art of cuckold-making, I should not highly, I think, blame

him for concluding something more than what he saw, from the

familiarities which he really had seen, and which we are at least

favourable enough to, when we call them innocent freedoms. The

reader will easily suggest great plenty of instances to himself; I

shall add but one more, which, however unchristian it may be thought

by some, I cannot help esteeming to be strictly justifiable; and

this is a suspicion that a man is capable of doing what he hath done

already, and that it is possible for one who hath been a villain

once to act the same part again. And, to confess the truth, of this

degree of suspicion I believe Sophia was guilty. From this degree of

suspicion she had, in fact, conceived an opinion that her cousin was

really not better than she should be.

  The case, it seems, was this: Mrs. Fitzpatrick 'wisely considered

that the virtue of a young lady is, in the world, in the same

situation with a poor hare, which is certain, whenever it ventures

abroad, to meet its enemies; for it can hardly meet any other. No

sooner therefore was she determined to take the first opportunity of

quitting the protection of her husband, than she resolved to cast

herself under the protection of some other man; and whom could she

so properly chuse to be her guardian as a person of quality, of

fortune, of honour; and who, besides a gallant disposition which

inclines men to knighterrantry, that is, to be the champions of ladies

in distress, had often declared a violent attachment to herself, and

had already given her all the instances of it in his power?

  But, as the law hath foolishly omitted this office of

vice-husband, or guardian to an eloped lady, and as malice is apt to

denominate him by a more disagreeable appellation, it was concluded

that his lordship should perform all such kind offices to the lady

in secret, and without publickly assuming the character of her

protector. Nay, to prevent any other person from seeing him in this

light, it was agreed that the lady should proceed directly to Bath,

and that his lordship should first go to London, and thence should

go down to that place by the advice of his physicians.

  Now all this Sophia very plainly understood, not from the lips or

behaviour of Mrs. Fitzpatrick, but from the peer, who was infinitely

less expert at retaining a secret than was the good lady; and

perhaps the exact secrecy which Mrs. Fitzpatrick had observed on

this head in her narrative, served not a little to heighten those

suspicions which were now risen in the mind of her cousin.

  Sophia very easily found out the lady she sought; for indeed there

was not a chairman in town to whom her house was not perfectly well

known; and, as she received, in return of her first message, a most

pressing invitation, she immediately accepted it. Mrs. Fitzpatrick,

indeed, did not desire her cousin to stay with her with more

earnestness than civility required. Whether she had discerned and

resented the suspicion above-mentioned, or from what other motive it

arose, I cannot say; but certain it is, she was full as desirous of

parting with Sophia as Sophia herself could be of going.

  The young lady, when she came to take leave of her cousin, could not

avoid giving her a short hint of advice. She begged her, for

heaven's sake, to care of herself, and to consider in how dangerous

a situation she stood; adding, she hoped some method would be found of

reconciling her to her husband. "You must remember, my dear," says

she, "the maxim which my aunt Western hath so often repeated to us

both; that whenever the matrimonial alliance is broke, and war

declared between husband and wife, she can hardly make a

disadvantageous peace for herself on any conditions. These are my

aunt's very words, and she hath had a great deal of experience in

the world." Mrs. Fitzpatrick answered, with a contemptuous smile,

"Never fear me, child, take care of yourself; for you are younger than

I. I will come and visit you in a few days; but, dear Sophy, let me

give you one piece of advice; leave the character of Graveairs in

the country, for, believe me, it will sit very awkwardly upon you in

this town."

  Thus the two cousins parted, and Sophia repaired directly to Lady

Bellaston, where she found a most hearty, as well as a most polite,

welcome. The lady had taken a great fancy to her when she had seen her

formerly with her aunt Western. She was indeed extremely glad to see

her, and was no sooner acquainted with the reasons which induced her

to leave the squire and to fly to London, than she highly applauded

her sense and resolution; and after expressing the highest

satisfaction in the opinion which Sophia had declared she

entertained of her ladyship, by chusing her house for an asylum, she

promised her all the protection which it was in her power to give.

  As we have now brought Sophia into safe hands, the reader will, I

apprehend, be contented to deposit her there a while, and to look a

little after other personages, and particularly poor Jones, whom we

have left long enough to do penance for his past offences, which, as

is the nature of vice, brought sufficient punishment upon him

themselves.
