




                                     BOOK V

         CONTAINING A PORTION OF TIME SOMEWHAT LONGER THAN HALF A YEAR




                                Chapter 1



  Of the serious in writing, and for what purpose it is introduced



  Peradventure there may be no parts in this prodigious work which

will give the reader less pleasure in the perusing, than those which

have given the author the greatest pains in composing. Among these

probably may be reckoned those initial essays which we have prefixed

to the historical matter contained in every book; and which we have

determined to be essentially necessary to this kind of writing, of

which we have set ourselves at the head.

  For this our determination we do not hold ourselves strictly bound

to assign any reason; it, being abundantly sufficient that we have

laid it down as a rule necessary to be observed in all

prosai-comi-epic writing. Who ever demanded the reasons of that nice

unity of time or place which is now established to be so essential

to dramatic poetry? What critic hath been ever asked, why a play may

not contain two days as well as one? Or why the audience (provided

they travel, like electors, without any expense) may not be wafted

fifty miles as well as five? Hath any commentator well accounted for

the limitation which an antient critic hath set to the drama, which he

will have contain neither more nor less than five acts? Or hath any

one living attempted to explain what the modern judges of our theatres

mean by that word low; by which they have happily succeeded in

banishing all humour from the stage, and have made the theatre as dull

as a drawing-room! Upon all these occasions the world seems to have

embraced a maxim of our law, viz., cuicunque in arte sua perito

credendum est*: for it seems perhaps difficult to conceive that any

one should have had enough of impudence to lay down dogmatical rules

in any art or science without the least foundation. In such cases,

therefore, we are apt to conclude there are sound and good reasons

at the bottom, though we are unfortunately not able to see so far.



  *Every man is to be trusted in his own art.



  Now, in reality, the world have paid too great a compliment to

critics, and have imagined them men of much greater profundity than

they really are. From this complacence, the critics have been

emboldened to assume a dictatorial power, and have so far succeeded,

that they are now become the masters, and have the assurance to give

laws to those authors from whose predecessors they originally received

them.

  The critic, rightly considered, is no more than the clerk, whose

office it is to transcribe the rules and laws laid down by those great

judges whose vast strength of genius hath placed them in the light

of legislators, in the several sciences over which they presided. This

office was all which the critics of old aspired to; nor did they

ever dare to advance a sentence, without supporting it by the

authority of the judge from whence it was borrowed.

  But in process of time, and in ages of ignorance, the clerk began to

invade the power and assume the dignity of his master. The laws of

writing were no longer founded on the practice of the author, but on

the dictates of the critic. The clerk became the legislator, and those

very peremptorily gave laws whose business it was, at first, only to

transcribe them.

  Hence arose an obvious, and perhaps an unavoidable error; for

these critics being men of shallow capacities, very easily mistook

mere form for substance. They acted as a judge would, who should

adhere to the lifeless letter of law, and reject the spirit. Little

circumstances, which were perhaps accidental in a great author, were

by these critics considered to constitute his chief merit, and

transmitted as essentials to be observed by his successors. To these

encroachments, time and ignorance, the two great supporters of

imposture, gave authority; and thus many rules for good writing have

been established, which have not the least foundation in truth or

nature; and which commonly serve for no other purpose than to curb and

restrain genius, in the same manner as it would have restrained the

dancing-master, had the many excellent treatises on that art laid it

down as an essential rule that every man must dance in chains.

  To avoid, therefore, all imputation of laying down a rule for

posterity, founded only on the authority of ipse dixit*- for which,

to say the truth, we have not the profoundest veneration- we shall

here waive the privilege above contended for, and proceed to lay

before the reader the reasons which have induced us to intersperse

these several digressive essays in the course of this work.



  *An assertion without proof.



  And here we shall of necessity be led to open a new vein of

knowledge, which if it hath been discovered, hath not, to our

remembrance, been wrought on by any antient or modern writer. This

vein is no other than that of contrast, which runs through all the

works of the creation, and may probably have a large share in

constituting in us the idea of all beauty, as well natural as

artificial: for what demonstrates the beauty and excellence of

anything but its reverse? Thus the beauty of day, and that of

summer, is set off by the horrors of night and winter. And, I believe,

if it was possible for a man to have seen only the two former, he

would have a very imperfect idea of their beauty.

  But to avoid too serious an air; can it be doubted, but that the

finest woman in the world would lose all benefit of her charms in

the eye of a man who had never seen one of another cast? The ladies

themselves seem so sensible of this, that they are all industrious

to procure foils: nay, they will become foils to themselves; for I

have observed (at Bath particularly) that they endeavour to appear

as ugly as possible in the morning, in order to set off that beauty

which they intend to show you in the evening.

  Most artists have this secret in practice, though some, perhaps,

have not much studied the theory. The jeweller knows that the finest

brilliant requires a foil; and the painter, by the contrast of his

figures, often acquires great applause.

  A great genius among us will illustrate this matter fully. I cannot,

indeed, range him under any general head of common artists, as he hath

a title to be placed among those



     Inventas qui vitam excoluere per artes.



     Who by invented arts have life improved.



I mean here the inventor of that most exquisite entertainment,

called the English Pantomime.

  This entertainment consisted of two parts, which the inventor

distinguished by the names of the serious and the comic. The serious

exhibited a certain number of heathen gods and heroes, who were

certainly the worst and dullest company into which an audience was

ever introduced; and (which was a secret known to few) were actually

intended so to be, in order to contrast the comic part of the

entertainment, and to display the tricks of harlequin to the better

advantage.

  This was, perhaps, no very civil use of such personages: but the

contrivance was, nevertheless, ingenious enough, and had its effect.

And this will now plainly appear, if, instead of serious and comic, we

supply the words duller and dullest; for the comic was certainly

duller than anything before shown on the stage, and could be set off

only by that superlative degree of dulness which composed the serious.

So intolerably serious, indeed, were these gods and heroes, that

harlequin (though the English gentleman of that name is not at all

related to the French family, for he is of a much more serious

disposition) was always welcome on the stage, as he relieved the

audience from worse company.

  Judicious writers have always practised this art of contrast with

great success. I have been surprized that Horace should cavil at

this art in Homer; but indeed he contradicts himself in the very

next line:




     Indignor quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus;

     Verum opere in longo fas est obrepere somnum.



     I grieve if e'er great Homer chance to sleep,

     Yet slumbers on long works have right to creep.



For we are not here to understand, as perhaps some have, that an

author actually falls asleep while he is writing. It is true, that

readers are too apt to be so overtaken; but if the work was as long as

any of Oldmixon, the author himself is too well entertained to be

subject to the least drowsiness. He is, as Mr. Pope observes,



     Sleepless himself to give his readers sleep.



  To say the truth, these soporific parts are so many scenes of

serious artfully interwoven, in order to contrast and set off the

rest; and this is the true meaning of a late facetious writer, who

told the public that whenever he was dull they might be assured

there was a design in it.

  In this light, then, or rather in this darkness, I would have the

reader to consider these initial essays. And after this warning, if he

shall be of opinion that he can find enough of serious in other

parts of this history, he may pass over these, in which we profess

to be laboriously dull, and begin the following books at the second

chapter.






                                Chapter 2



  In which Mr. Jones receives many friendly visits during his

confinement; with some fine touches of the passion of love, scarce

visible to the naked eye



  Tom Jones had many visitors during his confinement, though some,

perhaps, were not very agreeable to him. Mr. Allworthy saw him

almost every day; but though he pitied Tom's sufferings, and greatly

approved the gallant behaviour which had occasioned them; yet he

thought this was a favourable opportunity to bring him to a sober

sense of his indiscreet conduct; and that wholesome advice for that

purpose could never be applied at a more proper season than at the

present, when the mind was softened by pain and sickness, and

alarmed by danger; and when its attention was unembarrassed with those

turbulent passions which engage us in the pursuit of pleasure.

  At all seasons, therefore, when the good man was alone with the

youth, especially when the latter was totally at ease, he took

occasion to remind him of his former miscarriages, but in the

mildest and tenderest manner, and only in order to introduce the

caution which he prescribed for his future behaviour; "on which

alone," he assured him, "would depend his own felicity, and the

kindness which he might yet promise himself to receive at the hands of

his father by adoption, unless he should hereafter forfeit his good

opinion: for as to what had past," he said, "it should be all forgiven

and forgotten. He therefore advised him to make a good use of this

accident, that so in the end it might prove a visitation for his own

good."

  Thwackum was likewise pretty assiduous in his visits; and he too

considered a sick-bed to be a convenient scene for lectures. His

stile, however, was more severe than Mr. Allworthy's: he told his

pupil, "That he ought to look on his broken limb as a judgment from

heaven on his sins. That it would become him to be daily on his knees,

pouring forth thanksgivings that he had broken his arm only, and not

his neck; which latter," he said, "was very probably reserved for some

future occasion, and that, perhaps, not very remote. For his part," he

said, "he had often wondered some judgment had not overtaken him

before; but it might be perceived by this, that Divine punishments,

though slow, are always sure." Hence likewise he advised him, "to

foresee, with equal certainty, the greater evils which were yet

behind, and which were as sure as this of overtaking him in his

state of reprobacy. These are," said he, "to be averted only by such a

thorough and sincere repentance as is not to be expected or hoped

for from one so abandoned in his youth, and whose mind, I am afraid,

is totally corrupted. It is my duty, however, to exhort you to this

repentance, though I too well know all exhortations will be vain and

fruitless. But liberavi animam meam. I can accuse my own conscience of

no neglect; though it is at the same time with the utmost concern I

see you travelling on to certain misery in this world, and to as

certain damnation in the next."

  Square talked in a very different strain; he said, "Such accidents

as a broken bone were below the consideration of a wise man. That it

was abundantly sufficient to reconcile the mind to any of these

mischances, to reflect that they are liable to befal the wisest of

mankind, and are undoubtedly for the good of the whole." He said,

"It was a mere abuse of words to call those things evils, in which

there was no moral unfitness: that pain, which was the worst

consequence of such accidents, was the most contemptible thing in

the world"; with more of the like sentences, extracted out of the

second book of Tully's Tusculan questions, and from the great Lord

Shaftesbury. In pronouncing these he was one day so eager, that he

unfortunately bit his tongue; and in such a manner, that it not only

put an end to his discourse, but created much emotion in him, and

caused him to mutter an oath or two: but what was worst of all, this

accident gave Thwackum, who was present, and who held all such

doctrine to be heathenish and atheistical, an opportunity to clap a

judgment on his back. Now this was done with so malicious a sneer,

that it totally unhinged (if I may so say) the temper of the

philosopher, which the bite of his tongue had somewhat ruffled; and as

he was disabled from venting his wrath at his lips, he had possibly

found a more violent method of revenging himself, had not the surgeon,

who was then luckily in the room, contrary to his own interest,

interposed and preserved the peace.

  Mr. Blifil visited his friend Jones but seldom, and never alone.

This worthy young man, however, professed much regard for him, and

as great concern at his misfortune; but cautiously avoided any

intimacy, lest, as he frequently hinted, it might contaminate the

sobriety of his own character: for which purpose he had constantly

in his mouth that proverb in which Solomon speaks against evil

communication. Not that he was so bitter as Thwackum; for he always

expressed some hopes of Tom's reformation; "which," he said, "the

unparalleled goodness shown by his uncle on this occasion, must

certainly effect in one not absolutely abandoned": but concluded, if

Mr. Jones ever offends hereafter, I shall not be able to say a

syllable in his favour."

  As to Squire Western, he was seldom out of the sick-room, unless

when he was engaged either in the field or over his bottle. Nay, he

would sometimes retire hither to take his beer, and it was not without

difficulty that he was prevented from forcing Jones to take his beer

too: for no quack ever held his nostrum to be a more general panacea

than he did this; which, he said, had more virtue in it than was in

all the physic in an apothecary's shop. He was, however, by much

entreaty, prevailed on to forbear the application of this medicine;

but from serenading his patient every hunting morning with the horn

under his window, it was impossible to withhold him; nor did he ever

lay aside that hallow, with which he entered into all companies,

when he visited Jones, without any regard to the sick person's being

at that time either awake or asleep.

  This boisterous behaviour, as it meant no harm, so happily it

effected none, and was abundantly compensated to Jones, as soon as

he was able to sit up, by the company of Sophia, whom the squire

then brought to visit him; nor was it, indeed, long before Jones was

able to attend her to the harpsichord, where she would kindly

condescend, for hours together, to charm him with the most delicious

music, unless when the squire thought proper to interrupt her, by

insisting on Old Sir Simon, or some other of his favourite pieces.

  Notwithstanding the nicest guard which Sophia endeavoured to set

on her behaviour, she could not avoid letting some appearances now and

then slip forth: for love may again be likened to a disease in this,

that when it is denied a vent in one part, it will certainly break out

in another. What her lips, therefore, concealed, her eyes, her

blushes, and many little involuntary actions, betrayed.

  One day, when Sophia was playing on the harpsichord, and Jones was

attending, the squire came into the room, crying, "There, Tom, I

have had a battle for thee below-stairs with thick parson Thwackum. He

hath been a telling Allworthy, before my face, that the broken bone

was a judgment upon thee. D--n it, says I, how can that be? Did he

not come by it in defence of a young woman? A judgment indeed! Pox, if

he never doth anything worse, he will go to heaven sooner than all the

parsons in the country. He hath more reason to glory in it than to

be ashamed of it."- "Indeed, sir," says Jones, "I have no reason for

either; but if it preserved Miss Western, I shall always think it

the happiest accident of my life."- "And to gu," said the squire, "to

zet Allworthy against thee vor it! D--n un, if the parson had unt his

petticuoats on, I should have lent un o flick; for I love thee dearly,

my boy, and d--n me if there is anything in my power which I won't do

for thee. Sha't take thy choice of all the horses in my stable

to-morrow morning, except only the Chevalier and Miss Slouch." Jones

thanked him, but declined accepting the offer. "Nay," added the

squire, "sha't ha the sorrel mare that Sophy rode. She cost me fifty

guineas, and comes six years old this grass." "If she had cost me a

thousand," cries Jones passionately, "I would have given her to the

dogs." "Pooh! pooh!" answered Western; "what! because she broke thy

arm? Shouldst forget and forgive. I thought hadst been more a man than

to bear malice against a dumb creature."- Here Sophia interposed, and

put an end to the conversation, by desiring her father's leave to play

to him; a request which he never refused.

  The countenance of Sophia had undergone more than one change

during the foregoing speeches; and probably she imputed the passionate

resentment which Jones had expressed against the mare, to a

different motive from that from which her father had derived it. Her

spirits were at this time in a visible flutter; and she played so

intolerably ill, that had not Western soon fallen asleep, he must have

remarked it. Jones, however, who was sufficiently awake, and was not

without an ear any more than without eyes, made some observations;

which being joined to all which the reader may remember to have passed

formerly, gave him pretty strong assurances, when he came to reflect

on the whole, that all was not well in the tender bosom of Sophia;

an opinion which many young gentlemen will, I doubt not, extremely

wonder at his not having been well confirmed in long ago. To confess

the truth, he had rather too much diffidence in himself, and was not

forward enough in seeing the advances of a young lady; a misfortune

which can be cured only by that early town education, which is at

present so generally in fashion.

  When these thoughts had fully taken possession of Jones, they

occasioned a perturbation in his mind, which, in a constitution less

pure and firm than his, might have been, at such a season, attended

with very dangerous consequences. He was truly sensible of the great

worth of Sophia. He extremely liked her person, no less admired her

accomplishments, and tenderly loved her goodness. In reality, as he

had never once entertained any thought of possessing her, nor had ever

given the least voluntary indulgence to his inclinations, he had a

much stronger passion for her than he himself was acquainted with. His

heart now brought forth the full secret, at the same time that it

assured him the adorable object returned his affection.





                                Chapter 3



  Which all who have no heart will think to contain much ado about

nothing



  The reader will perhaps imagine the sensations which now arose in

Jones to have been so sweet and delicious, that they would rather tend

to produce a chearful serenity in the mind, than any of those

dangerous effects which we have mentioned; but in fact, sensations

of this kind, however delicious, are, at their first recognition, of a

very tumultuous nature, and have very little of the opiate in them.

They were, moreover, in the present case, embittered with certain

circumstances, which being mixed with sweeter ingredients, tended

altogether to compose a draught that might be termed bitter-sweet;

than which, as nothing can be more disagreeable to the palate, so

nothing, in the metaphorical sense, can be so injurious to the mind.

  For first, though he had sufficient foundation to flatter himself in

what he had observed in Sophia, he was not yet free from doubt of

misconstruing compassion, or at best, esteem, into a warmer regard. He

was far from a sanguine assurance that Sophia had any such affection

towards him, as might promise his inclinations that harvest, which, if

they were encouraged and nursed, they would finally grow up to

require. Besides, if he could hope to find no bar to his happiness

from the daughter, he thought himself certain of meeting an

effectual bar in the father; who, though he was a country squire in

his diversions, was perfectly a man of the world in whatever

regarded his fortune; had the most violent affection for his only

daughter, and had often signified, in his cups, the pleasure he

proposed in seeing her married to one of the richest men in the

county. Jones was not so vain and senseless a coxcomb as to expect,

from any regard which Western had professed for him, that he would

ever be induced to lay aside these views of advancing his daughter. He

well knew that fortune is generally the principal, if not the sole,

consideration, which operates on the best of parents in these matters:

for friendship makes us warmly espouse the interest of others; but

it is very cold to the gratification of their passions. Indeed, to

feel the happiness which may result from this, it is necessary we

should possess the passion ourselves. As he had therefore no hopes

of obtaining her father's consent; so he thought to endeavour to

succeed without it, and by such means to frustrate the great point

of Mr. Western's life, was to make a very ill use of his

hospitality, and a very ungrateful return to the many little favours

received (however roughly) at his hands. If he saw such a

consequence with horror and disdain, how much more was he shocked with

what regarded Mr. Allworthy; to whom, as he had more than filial

obligations, so had he for him more than filial piety! He knew the

nature of that good man to be so averse to any baseness or

treachery, that the least attempt of such a kind would make the

sight of the guilty person for ever odious to his eyes, and his name a

detestable sound in his ears. The appearance of such unsurmountable

difficulties was sufficient to have inspired him with despair, however

ardent his wishes had been; but even these were controuled by

compassion for another woman. The idea of lovely Molly now intruded

itself before him. He had sworn eternal constancy in her arms, and she

bad as often vowed never to out-live his deserting her. He now saw her

in all the most shocking postures of death; nay, he considered all the

miseries of prostitution to which she would be liable, and of which he

would be doubly the occasion; first by seducing, and then by deserting

her; for he well knew the hatred which all her neighbours, and even

her own sisters, bore her, and how ready they would all be to tear her

to pieces. Indeed, he had exposed her to more envy than shame, or

rather to the latter by means of the former: for many women abused her

for being a whore, while they envied her her lover and her finery, and

would have been themselves glad to have purchased these at the same

rate. The ruin, therefore, of the poor girl must, he foresaw,

unavoidably attend his deserting her; and this thought stung him to

the soul. Poverty and distress seemed to him to give none a right of

aggravating those misfortunes. The meanness of her condition did not

represent her misery as of little consequence in his eyes, nor did

it appear to justify, or even to palliate, his guilt, in bringing that

misery upon her. But why do I mention justification? His own heart

would not suffer him to destroy a human creature who, he thought,

loved him, and had to that love sacrificed her innocence. His own good

heart pleaded her cause; not as a cold venal advocate, but as one

interested in the event, and which must itself deeply share in all the

agonies its owner brought on another.

  When this powerful advocate had sufficiently raised the pity of

Jones, by painting poor Molly in all the circumstances of

wretchedness; it artfully called in the assistance of another passion,

and represented the girl in all the amiable colours of youth,

health, and beauty; as one greatly the object of desire, and much more

so, at least to a good mind, from being, at the same time, the

object of compassion.

  Amidst these thoughts, poor Jones passed a long sleepless night, and

in the morning the result of the whole was to abide by Molly, and to

think no more of Sophia.

  In this virtuous resolution he continued all the next day till the

evening, cherishing the idea of Molly, and driving Sophia from his

thoughts; but in the fatal evening, a very trifling accident set all

his passions again on float, and worked so total a change in his mind,

that we think it decent to communicate it in a fresh chapter.






                                Chapter 4



  A little chapter, in which is contained a little incident



  Among other visitants, who paid their compliments to the young

gentleman in his confinement, Mrs. Honour was one. The reader,

perhaps, when he reflects on some expressions which have formerly

dropt from her, may conceive that she herself had a very particular

affection for Mr. Jones; but, in reality, it was no such thing. Tom

was a handsome young fellow; and for that species of men Mrs. Honour

had some regard; but this was perfectly indiscriminate; for having

being crossed in the love which she bore a certain nobleman's footman,

who had basely deserted her after a promise of marriage, she had so

securely kept together the broken remains of her heart, that no man

had ever since been able to possess himself of any single fragment.

She viewed all handsome men with that equal regard and benevolence

which a sober and virtuous mind bears to all the good. She might

indeed be called a lover of men, as Socrates was a lover of mankind,

preferring one to another for corporeal, as he for mental

qualifications; but never carrying this preference so far as to

cause any perturbation in the philosophical serenity of her temper.

  The day after Mr. Jones had that conflict with himself which we have

seen in the preceding chapter, Mrs. Honour came into his room, and

finding him alone, began in the following manner:- "La, sir, where do

you think I have been? I warrants you, you would not guess in fifty

years; but if you did guess, to be sure I must not tell you

neither."- "Nay, if it be something which you must not tell me," said

Jones, "I shall have the curiosity to enquire, and I know you will not

be so barbarous to refuse me."- "I don't know," cries she, "why I

should refuse you neither, for that matter; for to be sure you won't

mention it any more. And for that matter, if you knew where I have

been, unless you knew what I have been about, it would not signify

much. Nay, I don't see why it should be kept a secret for my part; for

to be sure she is the best lady in the world." Upon this, Jones

began to beg earnestly to be let into this secret, and faithfully

promised not to divulge it. She then proceeded thus:- "Why, you must

know, sir, my young lady sent me to enquire after Molly Seagrim, and

to see whether the wench wanted anything; to be sure, I did not care

to go, methinks; but servants must do what they are ordered.- How

could you undervalue yourself so, Mr. Jones?- So my lady bid me go and

carry her some linen, and other things. She is too good. If such

forward sluts were sent to Bridewell, it would be better for them. I

told my lady, says I, madam, your la'ship is encouraging idleness."-

"And was my Sophia so good?" says Jones. "My Sophia! I assure you,

marry come up," answered Honour. "And yet if you knew all- indeed, if

I was as Mr. Jones, I should look a little higher than such trumpery

as Molly Seagrim." "What do you mean by these words," replied Jones,

"if I knew all?" "I mean what I mean," says Honour. "Don't you

remember putting your hands in my lady's muff once? I vow I could

almost find in my heart to tell, if I was certain my lady would never

come to the hearing on't." Jones then made several solemn

protestations. And Honour proceeded- "Then to be sure, my lady gave me

that muff; and afterwards, upon hearing what you had done"-- "Then you

told her what I had done?" interrupted Jones. "If I did, sir,"

answered she, "you need not be angry with me. Many's the man would

have given his head to have had my lady told, if they had known,- for,

to be sure, the biggest lord in the land might be proud- but, I

protest, I have a great mind not to tell you." Jones fell to

entreaties, and soon prevailed on her to go on thus. "You must know

then, sir, that my lady had given this muff to me; but about a day or

two after I had told her the story, she quarrels with her new muff,

and to be sure it is the prettiest that ever was seen. Honour, says

she, this is an odious muff; it is too big for me, I can't wear it:

till I can get another, you must let me have my old one again, and you

may have this in the room on't- for she's a good lady, and scorns to

give a thing and take a thing, I promise you that. So to be sure I

fetched it her back again, and, I believe, she hath worn it upon her

arm almost ever since, and I warrants hath given it many a kiss when

nobody hath seen her."

  Here the conversation was interrupted by Mr. Western himself, who

came to summon Jones to the harpsichord; whither the poor young fellow

went all pale and trembling. This Western observed, but, on seeing

Mrs. Honour, imputed it to a wrong cause; and having given Jones a

hearty curse between jest and earnest, he bid him beat abroad, and not

poach up the game in his warren.

  Sophia looked this evening with more than usual beauty, and we may

believe it was no small addition to her charms, in the eye of Mr.

Jones, that she now happened to have on her right arm this very muff.

  She was playing one of her father's favourite tunes, and he was

leaning on her chair, when the muff fell over her fingers, and put her

out. This so disconcerted the squire, that he snatched the muff from

her, and with a hearty curse threw it into the fire. Sophia

instantly started up, and with the utmost eagerness recovered it

from the flames.

  Though this incident will probably appear of little consequence to

many of our readers; yet, trifling as it was, it had so violent an

effect on poor Jones, that we thought it our duty to relate it. In

reality, there are many little circumstances too often omitted by

injudicious historians, from which events of the utmost importance

arise. The world may indeed be considered as a vast machine, in

which the great wheels are originally set in motion by those which are

very minute, and almost imperceptible to any but the strongest eyes.

  Thus, not all the charms of the incomparable Sophia; not all the

dazzling brightness, and languishing softness of her eyes; the harmony

of her voice, and of her person; not all her wit, good-humour,

greatness of mind, or sweetness of disposition, had been able so

absolutely to conquer and enslave the heart of poor Jones, as this

little incident of the muff. Thus the poet sweetly sings of Troy-



     --Captique dolis lachrymisque coacti

     Quos neque Tydides, nec Larissaeus Achilles,

     Non anni domuere decem, non mille Carinoe.



     What Diomede or Thetis' greater son,

     A thousand ships, nor ten years' siege had done,

     False tears and fawning words the city won.



  The citadel of Jones was now taken by surprise. All those

considerations of honour and prudence which our heroe had lately

with so much military wisdom placed as guards over the avenues of

his heart, ran away from their posts, and the god of love marched

in, in triumph.





                                Chapter 5



  A very long chapter, containing a very great incident



  But though this victorious deity easily expelled his avowed

enemies from the heart of Jones, he found it more difficult to

supplant the garrison which he himself had placed there. To lay

aside all allegory, the concern for what must become of poor Molly

greatly disturbed and perplexed the mind of the worthy youth. The

superior merit of Sophia totally eclipsed, or rather extinguished, all

the beauties of the poor girl; but compassion instead of contempt

succeeded to love. He was convinced the girl had placed all her

affections, and all her prospect of future happiness, in him only. For

this he had, he knew, given sufficient occasion, by the utmost

profusion of tenderness towards her: a tenderness which he had taken

every means to persuade her he would always maintain. She, on her

side, had assured him of her firm belief in his promise, and had

with the most solemn vows declared, that on his fulfilling or breaking

these promises, it depended, whether she should be the happiest or

most miserable of womankind. And to be the author of this highest

degree of misery to a human being, was a thought on which he could not

bear to ruminate a single moment. He considered this poor girl as

having sacrificed to him everything in her little power; as having

been at her own expense the object of his pleasure; as sighing and

languishing for him even at that very instant. Shall then, says he, my

recovery, for which she hath so ardently wished; shall my presence,

which she hath so eagerly expected, instead of giving her that joy

with which she hath flattered herself, cast her at once down into

misery and despair? Can I be such a villain? Here, when the genius

of poor Molly seemed triumphant, the love of Sophia towards him, which

now appeared no longer dubious, rushed upon his mind, and bore away

every obstacle before it.

  At length it occurred to him, that he might possibly be able to make

Molly amends another way; namely, by giving her a sum of money.

This, nevertheless, he almost despaired of her accepting, when he

recollected the frequent and vehement assurances he had received

from her, that the world put in balance with him would make her no

amends for his loss. However, her extreme poverty, and chiefly her

egregious vanity (somewhat of which hath been already hinted to the

reader), gave him some little hope, that, notwithstanding all her

avowed tenderness, she might in time be brought to content herself

with a fortune superior to her expectation, and which might indulge

her vanity, by setting her above all her equals. He resolved therefore

to take the first opportunity of making a proposal of this kind.

  One day, accordingly, when his arm was so well recovered that he

could walk easily with it slung in a sash, he stole forth, at a season

when the squire was engaged in his field exercises, and visited his

fair one. Her mother and sisters, whom he found taking their tea,

informed him first that Molly was not at home; but afterwards the

eldest sister acquainted him, with a malicious smile, that she was

above stairs a-bed. Tom had no objection to this situation of his

mistress, and immediately ascended the ladder which let towards her

bed-chamber; but when he came to the top, he, to his great surprise,

found the door fast; nor could he for some time obtain any answer from

within; for Molly, as she herself afterwards informed him, was fast

asleep.

  The extremes of grief and joy have been remarked to produce very

similar effects; and when either of these rushes on us by surprize, it

is apt to create such a total perturbation and confusion, that we

are often thereby deprived of the use of all our faculties. It

cannot therefore be wondered at, that the unexpected sight of Mr.

Jones should so strongly operate on the mind of Molly, and should

overwhelm her with such confusion, that for some minutes she was

unable to express the great raptures, with which the reader will

suppose she was affected on this occasion. As for Jones, he was so

entirely possessed, and as it were enchanted, by the presence of his

beloved object, that he for a while forgot Sophia, and consequently

the principal purpose of his visit.

  This, however, soon recurred to his memory; and after the first

transports of their meeting were over, he found means by degrees to

introduce a discourse on the fatal consequences which must attend

their amour, if Mr. Allworthy, who had strictly forbidden him ever

seeing her more, should discover that he still carried on this

commerce. Such a discovery, which his enemies gave him reason to think

would be unavoidable, must, he said, end in his ruin, and consequently

in hers. Since therefore their hard fates had determined that they

must separate, he advised her to bear it with resolution, and swore he

would never omit any opportunity, through the course of his life, of

showing her the sincerity of his affection, by providing for her in

a manner beyond her utmost expectation, or even beyond her wishes,

if ever that should be in his power; concluding at last, that she

might soon find some man who would marry her, and who would make hei

much happier than she could be by leading a disreputable life with

him.

  Molly remained a few moments in silence, and then bursting into a

flood of tears, she began to upbraid him in the following words:

"And this is your love for me, to forsake me in this manner, now you

have ruined me! How often, when I have told you that all men are false

and perjury alike, and grow tired of us as soon as ever they have

had their wicked wills of us, how often have you sworn you would never

forsake me! And can you be such a perjury man after all? What

signifies all the riches in the world to me without you, now you

have gained my heart, so you have- you have-? Why do you mention

another man to me? I can never love any other man as long as I live.

All other men are nothing to me. if the greatest squire in all the

country would come a suiting to me to-morrow, I would not give my

company to him. No, I shall always hate and despise the whole sex

for your sake."-

  She was proceeding thus, when an accident put a stop to her

tongue, before it had run out half its career. The room, or rather

garret, in which Molly lay, being up one pair of stairs, that is to

say, at the top of the house, was of a sloping figure, resembling

the great Delta of the Greeks. The English reader may perhaps form a

better idea of it, by being told that it was impossible to stand

upright anywhere but in the middle. Now, as this room wanted the

conveniency of a closet, Molly had, to supply that defect, nailed up

an old rug against the rafters of the house, which enclosed a little

hole where her best apparel, such as the remains of that sack which we

have formerly mentioned, some caps, and other things with which she

had lately provided herself, were hung up and secured from the dust.

  This enclosed place exactly fronted the foot of the bed, to which,

indeed, the rug hung so near, that it served in a manner to supply the

want of curtains. Now, whether Molly, in the agonies of her rage,

pushed this rug with her feet; or Jones might touch it; or whether the

pin or nail gave way of its own accord, I am not certain; but as Molly

pronounced those last words, which are recorded above, the wicked

rug got loose from its fastening, and discovered everything hid behind

it; where among other female utensils appeared- (with shame I write

it, and with sorrow will it be read)- the philosopher Square, in a

posture (for the place would not near admit his standing upright) as

ridiculous as can possibly be conceived.

  The posture, indeed, in which he stood, was not greatly unlike

that of a soldier who is tied neck and heels; or rather resembling the

attitude in which we often see fellows in the public streets of

London, who are not suffering but deserving punishment by so standing.

He had a nightcap belonging to Molly on his head, and his two large

eyes, the moment the rug fell, stared directly at Jones; so that

when the idea of philosophy was added to the figure now discovered, it

would have been very difficult for any spectator to have refrained

from immoderate laughter.

  I question not but the surprize of the reader will be here equal

to that of Jones; as the suspicions which must arise from the

appearance of this wise and grave man in such a place, may seem so

inconsistent with that character which he hath, doubtless,

maintained hitherto, in the opinion of every one.

  But to confess the truth, this inconsistency is rather imaginary

than real. Philosophers are composed of flesh and blood as well as

other human creatures; and however sublimated and refined the theory

of these may be, a little practical frailty is as incident to them

as to other mortals. It is, indeed, in theory only, and not in

practice, as we have before hinted, that consists the difference:

for though such great beings think much better and more wisely, they

always act exactly like other men. They know very well how to subdue

all appetites and passions, and to despise both pain and pleasure; and

this knowledge affords much delightful contemplation, and is easily

acquired; but the practice would be vexatious and troublesome; and,

therefore, the same wisdom which teaches them to know this, teaches

them to avoid carrying it into execution.

  Mr. Square happened to be at church on that Sunday, when, as the

reader may be pleased to remember, the appearance of Molly in her sack

had caused all that disturbance. Here he first observed her, and was

so pleased with her beauty, that he prevailed with the young gentlemen

to change their intended ride that evening, that he might pass by

the habitation of Molly, and by that means might obtain a second

chance of seeing her. This reason, however, as he did not at that time

mention to any, so neither did we think proper to communicate it

then to the reader.

  Among other particulars which constituted the unfitness of things in

Mr. Square's opinion, danger and difficulty were two. The difficulty

therefore which he apprehended there might be in corrupting this young

wench, and the danger which would accrue to his character on the

discovery, were such strong dissuasives, that it is probable he at

first intended to have contented himself with the pleasing ideas which

the sight of beauty furnishes us with. These the gravest men, after

a full meal of serious meditation, often allow themselves by way of

dessert: for which purpose, certain books and pictures find their

way into the most private recesses of their study, and a certain

liquorish part of natural philosophy is often the principal subject of

their conversation.

  But when the philosopher heard, a day or two afterwards, that the

fortress of virtue had already been subdued, he began to give a larger

scope to his desires. His appetite was not of that squeamish kind

which cannot feed on a dainty because another hath tasted it. In

short, he liked the girl the better for the want of that chastity,

which, if she had possessed it, must have been a bar to his pleasures;

he pursued and obtained her.

  The reader will be mistaken, if he thinks Molly gave Square the

preference to her younger lover: on the contrary, had she been

confined to the choice of one only, Tom Jones would undoubtedly have

been, of the two, the victorious person. Nor was it solely the

consideration that two are better than one (though this had its proper

weight) to which Mr. Square owed his success: the absence of Jones

during his, confinement was an unlucky circumstance; and in that

interval some well-chosen presents from the philosopher so softened

and unguarded the girl's heart, that a favourable opportunity became

irresistible, and Square triumphed over the poor remains of virtue

which subsisted in the bosom of Molly.

  It was now about a fortnight since this conquest, when Jones paid

the above-mentioned visit to his mistress, at a time when she and

Square were in bed together. This was the true reason why the mother

denied her as we have seen; for as the old woman shared in the profits

arising from the iniquity of her daughter, she encouraged and

protected her in it to the utmost of her power; but such was the

envy and hatred which the elder sister bore towards Molly, that,

notwithstanding she had some part of the booty, she would willingly

have parted with this to ruin her sister and spoil her trade. Hence

she had acquainted Jones with her being above-stairs in bed, in

hopes that he might have caught her in Square's arms. This, however,

Molly found means to prevent, as the door was fastened; which gave her

an opportunity of conveying her lover behind that rug or blanket where

he now was unhappily discovered.

  Square no sooner made his appearance than Molly flung herself back

in her bed, cried out she was undone, and abandoned herself to

despair. This poor girl, who was yet but a novice in her business, had

not arrived to that perfection of assurance which helps off a town

lady in any extremity; and either prompts her with an excuse, or

else inspires her to brazen out the matter with her husband, who, from

love of quiet, or out of fear of his reputation- and sometimes,

perhaps, from fear of the gallant, who, like Mr. Constant in the play,

wears a sword- is glad to shut his eyes, and content to put his horns

in his pocket. Molly, on the contrary, was silenced by this

evidence, and very fairly gave up a cause which she had hitherto

maintained with so many tears, and with such solemn and vehement

protestations of the purest love and constancy.

  As to the gentleman behind the arras, he was not in much less

consternation. He stood for a while motionless, and seemed equally

at a loss what to say, or whither to direct his eyes. Jones, though

perhaps the most astonished of the three, first found his tongue;

and being immediately recovered from those uneasy sensations which

Molly by her upbraidings had occasioned he burst into a loud laughter,

and then saluting Mr. Square, advanced to take him by the hand, and to

relieve him from his place of confinement.

  Square being now arrived in the middle of the room, in which part

only he could stand upright, looked at Jones with a very grave

countenance, and said to him, "Well, sir, I see you enjoy this

mighty discovery, and, I dare swear, take great delight in the

thoughts of exposing me; but if you will consider the matter fairly,

you will find you are yourself only to blame. I am not guilty of

corrupting innocence. I have done nothing for which that part of the

world which judges of matters by the rule of right, will condemn me.

Fitness is governed by the nature of things, and not by customs,

forms, or municipal laws. Nothing is indeed unfit which is not

unnatural."- "Well reasoned, old boy," answered Jones; "but why dost

thou think that I should desire to expose thee? I promise thee, I

was never better pleased with thee in my life; and unless thou hast

a mind to discover it thyself, this affair may remain a profound

secret for me."- "Nay, Mr. Jones," replied Square, "I would not be

thought to undervalue reputation. Good fame is a species of the Kalon,

and it is by no means fitting to neglect it. Besides, to murder

one's own reputation is a kind of suicide, a detestable and odious

vice. If you think proper, therefore, to conceal any infirmity of mine

(for such I may have, since no man is perfectly perfect), I promise

you I will not betray myself. Things may be fitting to be done,

which are not fitting to be boasted of; for by the perverse judgment

of the world, that often becomes the subject of censure, which is,

in truth, not only innocent but laudable."- "Right!" cries Jones:

"what can be more innocent than the indulgence of a natural appetite?

or what more laudable than the propagation of our species?"- "To be

serious with you," answered Square, "I profess they always appeared so

to me."- "And yet," said Jones, "you was of a different opinion when

my affair with this girl was first discovered."- "Why, I must

confess," says Square, "as the matter was misrepresented to me, by

that parson Thwackum, I might condemn the corruption of innocence: it

was that, sir, it was that- and that-: for you must know, Mr. Jones,

in the consideration of fitness, very minute circumstances, sir, very

minute circumstances cause great alteration."- "Well," cries Jones,

"be that as it will, it shall be your own fault, as I have promised

you, if you ever hear any more of this adventure. Behave kindly to the

girl, and I will never open my lips concerning the matter to any

one. And, Molly, do you be faithful to your friend, and I will not

only forgive your infidelity to me, but will do you all the service

I can." So saying, he took a hasty leave, and, slipping down the

ladder, retired with much expedition.

  Square was rejoiced to find this adventure was likely to have no

worse conclusion; and as for Molly, being recovered from her

confusion, she began at first to upbraid Square with having been the

occasion of her loss of Jones; but that gentleman soon found the means

of mitigating her anger, partly by caresses, and partly by a small

nostrum from his purse, of wonderful and approved efficacy in

purging off the ill humours of the mind, and in restoring it to a good

temper.

  She then poured forth a vast profusion of tenderness towards her new

lover; turned all she had said to Jones, and Jones himself, into

ridicule; and vowed, though he once had the possession of her

person, that none but Square had ever been master of her heart.





                                Chapter 6



  By comparing which with the former, the reader may possibly

correct some abuse which he hath formerly been guilty of in the

application of the word love



  The infidelity of Molly, which Jones had now discovered, would,

perhaps, have vindicated a much greater degree of resentment than he

expressed on the occasion; and if he had abandoned her directly from

that moment, very few, I believe, would have blamed him.

  Certain, however, it is, that he saw her in the light of compassion;

and though his love to her was not of that kind which could give him

any great uneasiness at her inconstancy, yet was he not a little

shocked on reflecting that he had himself originally corrupted her

innocence; for to this corruption he imputed all the vice into which

she appeared now likely to plunge herself.

  This consideration gave him no little uneasiness, till Betty, the

elder sister, was so kind, some time afterwards, entirely to cure

him by a hint, that one Will Barnes, and not himself, had been the

first seducer of Molly; and that the little child, which he had

hitherto so certainly concluded to be his own, might very probably

have an equal title, at least, to claim Barnes for its father.

  Jones eagerly pursued this scent when he had first received it;

and in a very short time was sufficiently assured that the girl had

told him truth, not only by the confession of the fellow, but at

last by that of Molly herself.

  This Will Barnes was a country gallant, and had acquired as many

trophies of this kind as any ensign or attorney's clerk in the

kingdom. He had, indeed, reduced several women to a state of utter

profligacy, had broke the hearts of some, and had the honour of

occasioning the violent death of one poor girl, who had either drowned

herself, or, what was rather more probable, had been drowned by him.

  Among other of his conquests, this fellow had triumphed over the

heart of Betty Seagrim. He had made love to her long before Molly

was grown to be a fit object of that pastime; but had afterwards

deserted her, and applied to her sister, with whom he had almost

immediate success. Now Will had, in reality, the sole possession of

Molly's affection, while Jones and Square were almost equally

sacrifices to her interest and to her pride.

  Hence had grown that implacable hatred which we have before seen

raging in the mind of Betty; though we did not think it necessary to

assign this cause sooner, as envy itself alone was adequate to all the

effects we have mentioned.

  Jones was become perfectly easy by possession of this secret with

regard to Molly; but as to Sophia, he was far from being in a state of

tranquillity; nay, indeed, he was under the most violent perturbation;

his heart was now, if I may use the metaphor, entirely evacuated,

and Sophia took absolute possession of it. He loved her with an

unbounded passion, and plainly saw the tender sentiments she had for

him; yet could not this assurance lessen his despair of obtaining

the consent of her father, nor the horrors which attended his

pursuit of her by any base or treacherous method.

  The injury which he must thus do to Mr. Western, and the concern

which would accrue to Mr. Allworthy, were circumstances that tormented

him all day, and haunted him on his pillow at night. His life was a

constant struggle between honour and inclination, which alternately

triumphed over each other in his mind. He often resolved, in the

absence of Sophia, to leave her father's house, and to see her no

more; and as often, in her presence, forgot all those resolutions, and

determined to pursue her at the hazard of his life, and at the

forfeiture of what was much dearer to him.

  This conflict began soon to produce very strong and visible effects:

for he lost all his usual sprightliness and gaiety of temper, and

became not only melancholy when alone, but dejected and absent in

company; nay, if ever he put on a forced mirth, to comply with Mr.

Western's humour, the constraint appeared so plain, that he seemed

to have been giving the strongest evidence of what he endeavoured to

conceal by such ostentation.

  It may, perhaps, be a question, whether the art which he used to

conceal his passion, or the means which honest nature employed to

reveal it, betrayed him most: for while art made him more than ever

reserved to Sophia, and forbad him to address any of his discourse

to her, nay, to avoid meeting her eyes, with the utmost caution;

nature was no less busy in counter-plotting him. Hence, at the

approach of the young lady, he grew pale; and if this was sudden,

started. If his eyes accidentally met hers, the blood rushed into

his cheeks, and his countenance became all over scarlet. If common

civility ever obliged him to speak to her, as to drink her health at

table, his tongue was sure to falter. If he touched her, his hand, nay

his whole frame, trembled. And if any discourse tended, however

remotely, to raise the idea of love, an involuntary sigh seldom failed

to steal from his bosom. Most of which accidents nature was

wonderfully industrious to throw daily in his way.

  All these symptoms escaped the notice of the squire: but not so of

Sophia. She soon perceived these agitations of mind in Jones, and

was at no loss to discover the cause; for indeed she recognized it

in her own breast. And this recognition is, I suppose, that sympathy

which hath been so often noted in lovers, and which will

sufficiently account for her being so much quicker-sighted than her

father.

  But, to say the truth, there is a more simple and plain method of

accounting for that prodigious superiority of penetration which we

must observe in some men over the rest of the human species, and one

which will serve not only in the case of lovers, but of all others.

From whence is it that the knave is generally so quick-sighted to

those symptoms and operations of knavery, which often dupe an honest

man of a much better understanding? There surely is no general

sympathy among knaves; nor have they, like freemasons, any common sign

of communication. In reality, it is only because they have the same

thing in their heads, and their thoughts are turned the same way.

Thus, that Sophia saw, and that Western did not see, the plain

symptoms of love in Jones can be no wonder, when we consider that

the idea of love never entered into the head of the father, whereas

the daughter, at present, thought of nothing else.

  When Sophia was well satisfied of the violent passion which

tormented poor Jones, and no less certain that she herself was its

object, she had not the least difficulty in discovering the true cause

of his present behaviour. This highly endeared him to her, and

raised in her mind two the best affections which any lover can wish to

raise in a mistress- these were, esteem and pity- for sure the most

outrageously rigid among her sex will excuse her pitying a man whom

she saw miserable on her own account; nor can they blame her for

esteeming one who visibly, from the most honourable motives,

endeavoured to smother a flame in his own bosom, which, like the

famous Spartan theft, was preying upon and consuming his very

vitals. Thus his backwardness, his shunning her, his coldness, and his

silence, were the forwardest, the most diligent, the warmest, and most

eloquent advocates; and wrought so violently on her sensible and

tender heart, that she soon felt for him all those gentle sensations

which are consistent with a virtuous and elevated female mind. In

short, all which esteem, gratitude, and pity, can inspire in such

towards an agreeable man- indeed, all which the nicest delicacy can

allow. In a word, she was in love with him to distraction.

  One day this young couple accidentally met in the garden, at the end

of the two walks which were both bounded by that canal in which

Jones had formerly risqued drowning to retrieve the little bird that

Sophia had there lost.

  This place had been of late much frequented by Sophia. Here she used

to ruminate, with a mixture of pain and pleasure, on an incident

which, however trifling in itself, had possibly sown the first seeds

of that affection which was now arrived to such maturity in her heart.

  Here then this young couple met. They were almost close together

before either of them knew anything of the other's approach. A

bystander would have discovered sufficient marks of confusion in the

countenance of each; but they felt too much themselves to make any

observation. As soon as Jones had a little recovered his first

surprize, he accosted the young lady with some of the ordinary forms

of salutation, which she in the same manner returned; and their

conversation began, as usual, on the delicious beauty of the

morning. Hence they past to the beauty of the place, on which Jones

launched forth very high encomiums. When they came to the tree

whence he had formerly tumbled into the canal, Sophia could not help

reminding him of that accident, and said, "I fancy, Mr. Jones, you

have some little shuddering when you see that water."- "I assure you,

madam," answered Jones, "the concern you felt at the loss of your

little bird will always appear to me the highest circumstance in

that adventure. Poor little Tommy! there is the branch he stood

upon. How could the little wretch have the folly to fly away from that

state of happiness in which I had the honour to place him? His fate

was a just punishment for his ingratitude."- "Upon my word, Mr.

Jones," said she, "your gallantry very narrowly escaped as severe a

fate. Sure the remembrance must affect you."- "Indeed, madam,"

answered he, "if I have any reason to reflect with sorrow on it, it

is, perhaps, that the water had not been a little deeper, by which I

might have escaped many bitter heart-aches that Fortune seems to have

in store for me."- "Fie, Mr. Jones!" replied Sophia; "I am sure you

cannot be in earnest now. This affected contempt of life is only an

excess of your complacence to me. You would endeavour to lessen the

obligation of having twice ventured it for my sake. Beware the third

time." She spoke these last words with a smile, and a softness

inexpressible. Jones answered with a sigh, "He feared it was already

too late for caution:" and then looking tenderly and stedfastly on

her, he cried, "Oh, Miss Western! can you desire me to live? Can you

wish me so ill?" Sophia, looking down on the ground, answered with

some hesitation, "Indeed, Mr. Jones, I do not wish you ill."- "Oh, I

know too well that heavenly temper," cries Jones, "that divine

goodness, which is beyond every other charm."- "Nay, now," answered

she, "I understand you not. I can stay no longer."- "I- I would not be

understood!" cries he; "nay, I can't be understood. I know not what I

say. Meeting you here so unexpectedly, I have been unguarded: for

Heaven's sake pardon me, if I have said anything to offend you. I did

not mean it. Indeed, I would rather have died- nay, the very thought

would kill me."- "You surprize me," answered she. "How can you

possibly think you have offended me?"- "Fear, madam," says he, "easily

runs into madness; and there is no degree of fear like that which I

feel of offending you. How can I speak then? Nay, don't look angrily

at me; one frown will destroy me. I mean nothing. Blame my eyes, or

blame those beauties. What am I saying? Pardon me if I have said too

much. My heart overflowed. I have struggled with my love to the

utmost, and have endeavoured to conceal a fever which preys on my

vitals, and will, I hope, soon make it impossible for me ever to

offend you more."

  Mr. Jones now fell a trembling as if he had been shaken with the fit

of an ague. Sophia, who was in a situation not very different from

his, answered in these words: "Mr. Jones, I will not affect to

misunderstand you; indeed, I understand you too well; but, for

Heaven's sake, if you have any affection for me, let me make the

best of my way into the house. I wish I may be able to support

myself thither."

  Jones, who was hardly able to support himself, offered her his

arm, which she condescended to accept, but begged he would not mention

a word more to her of this nature at present. He promised he would

not; insisting only on her forgiveness of what love, without the leave

of his will, had forced from him: this, she told him, he knew how to

obtain by his future behaviour; and thus this young pair tottered

and trembled along, the lover not once daring to squeeze the hand of

his mistress, though it was locked in his.

  Sophia immediately retired to her chamber, where Mrs. Honour and the

hartshorn were summoned to her assistance. As to poor Jones, the

only relief to his distempered mind was an unwelcome piece of news,

which, as it opens a scene of different nature from those in which the

reader hath lately been conversant, will be communicated to him in the

next chapter.





                                Chapter 7



  In which Mr. Allworthy appears on a sick-bed



  Mr. Western was become so fond of Jones that he was unwilling to

part with him, though his arm had been long since cured; and Jones,

either from the love of sport, or from some other reason, was easily

persuaded to continue at his house, which he did sometimes for a

fortnight together without paying a single visit at Mr. Allworthy's;

nay, without ever hearing from thence.

  Mr. Allworthy had been for some days indisposed with a cold, which

had been attended with a little fever. This he had, however,

neglected; as it was usual with him to do all manner of disorders

which did not confine him to his bed, or prevent his several faculties

from performing their ordinary functions;- a conduct which we would

by no means be thought to approve or recommend to imitation; for

surely the gentlemen of the Esculapian art are in the right in

advising, that the moment the disease has entered at one door, the

physician should be introduced at the other: what else is meant by

that old adage, Venienti occurrite morbo? "Oppose a distemper at its

first approach." Thus the doctor and the disease meet in fair and

equal conflict; whereas, by giving time to the latter, we often suffer

him to fortify and entrench himself, like a French army; so that the

learned gentleman finds it very difficult, and sometimes impossible,

to come at the enemy. Nay, sometimes by gaining time the disease

applies to the French military politics, and corrupts nature over to

his side, and then all the powers of physic must arrive too late.

Agreeable to these observations was, I remember, the complaint of

the great Doctor Misaubin, who used very pathetically to lament the

late applications which were made to his skill, saying, "Bygar, me

believe my pation take me for de undertaker, for dey never send for me

till de physicion have kill dem."

  Mr. Allworthy's distemper, by means of this neglect, gained such

ground, that, when the increase of his fever obliged him to send for

assistance, the doctor at his first arrival shook his head, wished

he had been sent for sooner, and intimated that he thought him in very

imminent danger. Mr. Allworthy, who had settled all his affairs in

this world, and was as well prepared as it is possible for human

nature to be for the other, received this information with the

utmost calmness and unconcern. He could, indeed, whenever he laid

himself down to rest, say with Cato in the tragical poem-



     Let guilt or fear

     Disturb man's rest: Cato knows neither of them;

     Indifferent in his choice to sleep or die.



In reality, he could say this with ten times more reason and

confidence than Cato, or any other proud fellow among the antient or

modern heroes; for he was not only devoid of fear, but might be

considered as a faithful labourer, when at the end of harvest he is

summoned to receive his reward at the hands of a bountiful master.

  The good man gave immediate orders for all his family to be summoned

round him. None of these were then abroad, but Mrs. Blifil, who had

been some time in London, and Mr. Jones, whom the reader hath just

parted from at Mr. Western's, and who received this summons just as

Sophia had left him.

  The news of Mr. Allworthy's danger (for the servant told him he

was dying) drove all thoughts of love out of his head. He hurried

instantly into the chariot which was sent for him, and ordered the

coachman to drive with all imaginable haste; nor did the idea of

Sophia, I believe, once occur to him on the way.

  And now the whole family, namely, Mr. Blifil, Mr. Jones, Mr.

Thwackum, Mr. Square, and some of the servants (for such were Mr.

Allworthy's orders), being all assembled round his bed, the good man

sat up in it, and was beginning to speak, when Blifil fell to

blubbering, and began to express very loud and bitter lamentations.

Upon this Mr. Allworthy shook him by the hand, and said, "Do not

sorrow thus, my dear nephew, at the most ordinary of all human

occurrences. When misfortunes befal our friends we are justly grieved;

for those are accidents which might often have been avoided, and which

may seem to render the lot of one man more peculiarly unhappy than

that of others; but death is certainly unavoidable, and is that common

lot in which alone the fortunes of all men agree: nor is the time when

this happens to us very material. If the wisest of men hath compared

life to a span, surely we may be allowed to consider it as a day. It

is my fate to leave it in the evening; but those who are taken away

earlier have only lost a few hours, at the best little worth

lamenting, and much oftener hours of labour and fatigue, of pain and

sorrow. One of the Roman poets, I remember, likens our leaving life to

our departure from a feast;- a thought which hath often occurred to

me when I have seen men struggling to protract an entertainment, and

to enjoy the company of their friends a few moments longer. Alas!

how short is the most protracted of such enjoyments! how immaterial

the difference between him who retires the soonest, and him who

stays the latest! This is seeing life in the best view, and this

unwillingness to quit our friends is the most amiable motive from

which we can derive the fear of death; and yet the longest enjoyment

which we can hope for of this kind is of so trivial a duration, that

it is to a wise man truly contemptible. Few men, I own, think in

this manner; for, indeed, few men think of death till they are in

its jaws. However gigantic and terrible in object this may appear when

it approaches them, they are nevertheless incapable of seeing it at

any distance; nay, though they have been ever so much alarmed and

frightened when they have apprehended themselves in danger of dying,

they are no sooner cleared from this apprehension than even the

fears of it are erased from their minds. But, alas! he who escapes

from death is not pardoned; he is, only reprieved, and reprieved to

a short day.

  "Grieve, therefore, no more, my dear child, on this occasion: an

event which may happen every hour; which every element, nay, almost

every particle of matter that surrounds us is capable of producing,

and which must and will most unavoidably reach us all at last, ought

neither to occasion our surprize nor our lamentation.

  "My physician having acquainted me (which I take very kindly of him)

that I am in danger of leaving you all very shortly, I have determined

to say a few words to you at this our parting, before my distemper,

which I find grows very fast upon me, puts it out of my power.

  "But I shall waste my strength too much. I intended to speak

concerning my will, which, though I have settled long ago, I think

proper to mention such heads of it as concern any of you, that I may

have the comfort of perceiving you are all satisfied with the

provision I have there made for you.

  "Nephew Blifil, I leave you the heir to my whole estate, except only

L500 a-year, which is to revert to you after the death of your mother,

and except one other estate of L500 a-year, and the sum of L6000,

which I have bestowed in the following manner:

  "The estate of L500 a-year I have given to you, Mr. Jones: and as

I know the inconvenience which attends the want of ready money, I have

added L1000 in specie. In this I know not whether I have exceeded or

fallen short of your expectation. Perhaps you will think I have

given you too little, and the world will be as ready to condemn me for

giving you too much; but the latter censure I despise; and as to the

former, unless you should entertain that common error which I have

often heard in my life pleaded as an excuse for a total want of

charity, namely, that instead of raising gratitude by voluntary acts

of bounty, we are apt to raise demands, which of all others are the

most boundless and most difficult to satisfy.- Pardon me the bare

mention of this; I will not suspect any such thing."

  Jones flung himself at his benefactor's feet, and taking eagerly

hold of his hand, assured him his goodness to him, both now and all

other times, had so infinitely exceeded not only his merit but his

hopes, that no words could express his sense of it. "And I assure you,

sir," said he, "your present generosity hath left me no other

concern than for the present melancholy occasion. Oh, my friend, my

father!" Here his words choaked him, and he turned away to hide a tear

which was starting from his eyes.

  Allworthy then gently squeezed his hand, and proceeded thus: "I am

convinced, my child, that you have much goodness, generosity, and

honour, in your temper: if you will add prudence and religion to

these, you must be happy; for the three former qualities, I admit,

make you worthy of happiness, but they are the latter only which

will put you in possession of it.

  "One thousand pound I have given to you, Mr. Thwackum; a sum I am

convinced which greatly exceeds your desires, as well as your wants.

However you will receive it as a memorial of my friendship; and

whatever superfluities may redound to you, that piety which you so

rigidly maintain will instruct you how to dispose of them.

  "A like sum, Mr. Square, I have bequeathed to you. This. I hope,

will enable you to pursue your profession with better success than

hitherto. I have often observed with concern, that distress is more

apt to excite contempt than commiseration, especially among men of

business, with whom poverty is understood to indicate want of ability.

But the little I have been able to leave you will extricate you from

those difficulties with which you have formerly struggled; and then

I doubt not but you will meet with sufficient prosperity to supply

what a man of your philosophical temper will require.

  "I find myself growing faint, so I shall refer you to my will for my

disposition of the residue. My servants will there find some tokens to

remember me by; and there are a few charities which, I trust, my

executors will see faithfully performed. Bless you all. I am setting

out a little before you.-

  "Here a footman came hastily into the room, and said there was an

attorney from Salisbury who had a particular message, which he said he

must communicate to Mr. Allworthy himself: that he seemed in a violent

hurry, and protested he had so much business to do, that, if he

could cut himself into four quarters, all would not be sufficient.

  "Go, child," said Allworthy to Blifil, "see what the gentleman

wants. I am not able to do any business now, nor can he have any

with me, in which you are not at present more concerned than myself.

Besides, I really am- I am incapable of seeing any one at present, or

of any longer attention." He then saluted them all, saying, perhaps he

should be able to see them again, but he should be now glad to compose

himself a little, finding that he had too much exhausted his spirits

in discourse.

  Some of the company shed tears at their parting; and even the

philosopher Square wiped his eyes, albeit unused to the melting

mood. As to Mrs. Wilkins, she dropt her pearls as fast as the

Arabian trees their medicinal gums; for this was a ceremonial which

that gentlewoman never omitted on a proper occasion.

  After this Mr. Allworthy again laid himself down on his pillow,

and endeavoured to compose himself to rest.





                                Chapter 8



  Containing matter rather natural than pleasing



  Besides grief for her master, there was another source for that

briny stream which so plentifully rose above the two mountainous

cheek-bones of the housekeeper. She was no sooner retired, than she

began to mutter to herself in the following pleasant strain: "Sure

master might have made some difference, methinks, between me and the

other servants. I suppose he hath left me mourning; but, i'fackins! if

that be all, the devil shall wear it for him, for me. I'd have his

worship know I am no beggar. I have saved five hundred pound in his

service, and after all to be used in this manner.- It is a fine

encouragement to servants to be honest; and to be sure, if I have

taken a little something now and then, others have taken ten times

as much; and now we are all put in a lump together. If so be that it

be so, the legacy may go to the devil with him that gave it. No, I

won't give it up neither, because that will please some folks. No,

I'll buy the gayest gown I can get, and dance over the old

curmudgeon's grave in it. This is my reward for taking his part so

often, when all the country have cried shame of him, for breeding up

his bastard in that manner; but he is going now where he must pay

for all. It would have become him better to have repented of his

sins on his deathbed, than to glory in them, and give away his

estate out of his own family to a misbegotten child. Found in his bed,

forsooth! a pretty story! ay, ay, that hide know where to find. Lord

forgive him! I warrant he hath many more bastards to answer for, if

the truth was known. One comfort is, they will all be known where he

is a going now.- 'The servants will find some token to remember me

by.' Those were the very words; I shall never forget them, if I was to

live a thousand years. Ay, ay, I shall remember you for huddling me

among the servants. One would have thought he might have mentioned my

name as well as that of Square; but he is a gentleman forsooth, though

he had not clothes on his back when he came hither first. Marry come

up with such gentlemen! though he hath lived here this many years, I

don't believe there is arrow a servant in the house ever saw the

colour of his money. The devil shall wait upon such a gentleman for

me." Much more of the like kind she muttered to herself; but this

taste shall suffice to the reader.

  Neither Thwackum nor Square were much better satisfied with their

legacies. Though they breathed not their resentment so loud, yet

from the discontent which appeared in their countenances, as well as

from the following dialogue, we collect that no great pleasure reigned

in their minds.

  About an hour after they had left the sickroom, Square met

Thwackum in the hall and accosted him thus: "Well, sir, have you heard

any news of your friend since we parted from him?"- "If you mean Mr.

Allworthy," answered Thwackum, "I think you might rather give him

the appellation of your friend; for he seems to me to have deserved

that title."- "The title is as good on your side," replied Square,

"for his bounty, such as it is, hath been equal to both."- "I should

not have mentioned it first," cries Thwackum, "but since you begin, I

must inform you I am of a different opinion. There is a wide

distinction between voluntary favours and rewards. The duty I have

done in this family, and the care I have taken in the education of his

two boys, are services for which some men might have expected a

greater return. I would not have you imagine I am therefore

dissatisfied; for St. Paul hath taught me to be content with the

little I have. Had the modicum been less, I should have known my duty.

But though the Scriptures obliges me to remain contented, it doth not

enjoin me to shut my eyes to my own merit, nor restrain me from seeing

when I am injured by an unjust comparison."- "Since you provoke me,"

returned Square, "that injury is done to me; nor did I ever imagine

Mr. Allworthy had held my friendship so light, as to put me in balance

with one who received his wages. I know to what it is owing; it

proceeds from those narrow principles which you have been so long

endeavouring to infuse into him, in contempt of everything which is

great and noble. The beauty and loveliness of friendship is too strong

for dim eyes, nor can it be perceived by any other medium than that

unerring rule of right, which you have so often endeavoured to

ridicule, that you have perverted your friend's understanding."- "I

wish," cries Thwackum, in a rage, "I wish, for the sake of his soul,

your damnable doctrines have not perverted his faith. It is to this

I impute his present behaviour, so unbecoming a Christian. Who but

an atheist could think of leaving the world without having first

made up his account? without confessing his sins, and receiving that

absolution which he knew he had one in the house duly authorized to

give him? He will feel the want of these necessaries when it is too

late, when he is arrived at that place where there is wailing and

gnashing of teeth. It is then he will find in what mighty stead that

heathen goddess, that virtue, which you and all other deists of the

age adore, will stand him. He will then summon his priest, when

there is none to be found, and will lament the want of that

absolution, without which no sinner can be safe."- "If it be so

material," says Square, "why don't you present it him of your own

accord?" "It hath no virtue," cries Thwackum, "but to those who have

sufficient grace to require it. But why do I talk thus to a heathen

and an unbeliever? It is you that taught him this lesson, for which

you have been well rewarded in this world, as I doubt not your

disciple will soon be in the other."- "I know not what you mean by

reward," said Square; "but if you hint at that pitiful memorial of our

friendship, which he hath thought fit to bequeath me, I despise it;

and nothing but the unfortunate situation of my circumstances should

prevail on me to accept it."

  The physician now arrived, and began to inquire of the two

disputants, how we all did above-stairs? "In a miserable way,"

answered Thwackum. "It is no more than I expected," cries the

doctor: "but pray what symptoms have appeared since I left you?"- "No

good ones, I am afraid," replied Thwackum: "after what past at our

departure, I think there were little hopes." The bodily physician,

perhaps, misunderstood the curer of souls; and before they came to

an explanation, Mr. Blifil came to them with a most melancholy

countenance, and acquainted them that he brought sad news, that his

mother was dead at Salisbury; that she had been seized on the road

home with the gout in her head and stomach, which had carried her

off in a few hours. "Good-lack-a-day!" says the doctor. "One cannot

answer for events; but I wish I had been at hand, to have been

called in. The gout is a distemper which it is difficult to treat; yet

I have been remarkably successful in it." Thwackum and Square both

condoled with Mr. Blifil for the loss of his mother, which the one

advised him to bear like a man, and the other like a Christian. The

young gentleman said he knew very well we were all mortal, and he

would endeavour to submit to his loss as well as he could. That he

could not, however, help complaining a little against the peculiar

severity of his fate, which brought the news of so great a calamity to

him by surprize, and that at a time when he hourly expected the

severest blow he was capable of feeling from the malice of fortune. He

said, the present occasion would put to the test those excellent

rudiments which he had learnt from Mr. Thwackum and Mr. Square; and it

would be entirely owing to them, if he was enabled to survive such

misfortunes.

  It was now debated whether Mr. Allworthy should be informed of the

death of his sister. This the doctor violently opposed; in s sister. n

which, I believe, the whole college would agree with him: but Mr.

Blifil said, he had received such positive and repeated orders from

his uncle, never to keep any secret from him for fear of the

disquietude which it might give him, that he durst not think of

disobedience, whatever might be the consequence. He said, for his

part, considering the religious and philosophic temper of his uncle,

he could not agree with the doctor in his apprehensions. He was

therefore resolved to communicate it to him: for if his uncle

recovered (as he heartily prayed he might) he knew he would never

forgive an endeavour to keep a secret of this kind from him.

  The physician was forced to submit to these resolutions, which the

two other learned gentlemen very highly commended. So together moved

Mr. Blifil and the doctor toward the sickroom; where the physician

first entered, and approached the bed, in order to feel his

patient's pulse, which he had no sooner done, than he declared he

was much better; that the last application had succeeded to a miracle,

and had brought the fever to intermit: so that, he said, there

appeared now to be as little danger as he had before apprehended there

were hopes.

  To say the truth, Mr. Allworthy's situation had never been so bad as

the great caution of the doctor had represented it: but as a wise

general never despises his enemy, however inferior that enemy's

force may be, so neither doth a wise physician ever despise a

distemper, however inconsiderable. As the former preserves the same

strict discipline, places the same guards, and employs the same

scouts, though the enemy be never so weak; so the latter maintains the

same gravity of countenance, and shakes his head with the same

significant air, let the distemper be never so trifling. And both,

among many other good ones, may assign this solid reason for their

conduct, that by these means the greater glory redounds to them if

they gain the victory, and the less disgrace if by any unlucky

accident they should happen to be conquered.

  Mr. Allworthy had no sooner lifted up his eyes, and thanked Heaven

for these hopes of his recovery, than Mr. Blifil drew near, with a

very dejected aspect, and having applied his handkerchief to his

eye, either to wipe away his tears, or to do as Ovid somewhere

expresses himself on another occasion,



     Si nullus erit, tamen excute nullum,



     If there be none, then wipe away that none,



he communicated to his uncle what the reader hath been just before

acquainted with.

  Allworthy received the news with concern, with patience, and with

resignation. He dropt a tender tear, then composed his countenance,

and at last cried, "The Lord's will be done in everything."

  He now enquired for the messenger; but Blifil told him it had been

impossible to detain him a moment; for he appeared by the great

hurry he was in to have some business of importance on his hands; that

he complained of being hurried and driven and torn out of his life,

and repeated many times, that if he could divide himself into four

quarters, he knew how to dispose of every one.

  Allworthy then desired Blifil to take care of the funeral. He

said, he would have his sister deposited in his own chapel; and as

to the particulars, he left them to his own discretion, only

mentioning the person whom he would have employed on this occasion.





                                Chapter 9



  Which, among other things, may serve as a comment on that saying

of AEschines, that "drunkenness shows the mind of a man, as a

mirrour reflects his person"



  The reader may perhaps wonder at hearing nothing of Mr. Jones in.

the last chapter. In fact, his behaviour was so different from that of

the persons there mentioned, that we chose not to confound his name

with theirs.

  When the good man had ended his speech, Jones was the last who

deserted the room. Thence he retired to his own apartment, to give

vent to his concern; but the restlessness of his mind would not suffer

him to remain long there; he slipped softly therefore to Allworthy's

chamber-door, where he listened a considerable time without hearing

any kind of motion within, unless a violent snoring, which at last his

fears misrepresented as groans. This so alarmed him, that he could not

forbear entering the room; where he found the good man in the bed,

in a sweet composed sleep, and his nurse snoring in the

above-mentioned hearty manner, at the bed's feet. He immediately

took the only method of silencing this thorough bass, whose music he

feared might disturb Mr. Allworthy; and then sitting down by the

nurse, he remained motionless till Blifil and the doctor came in

together and waked the sick man, in order that the doctor might feel

his pulse, and that the other might communicate to him that piece of

news, which, had Jones been apprized of it, would have had great

difficulty of finding its way to Mr. Allworthy's ear at such a season.

  When he first heard Blifil tell his uncle this story, Jones could

hardly contain the wrath which kindled in him at the other's

indiscretion, especially as the doctor shook his head, and declared

his unwillingness to have the matter mentioned to his patient. But

as his passion did not so far deprive him of all use of his

understanding, as to hide from him the consequences which any

violent expression towards Blifil might have on the sick, this

apprehension stilled his rage at the present; and he grew afterwards

so satisfied with finding that this news had, in fact, produced no

mischief, that he suffered his anger to die in his own bosom,

without ever mentioning it to Blifil.

  The physician dined that day at Mr. Allworthy's; and having after

dinner visited his patient, he returned to the company, and told them,

that he had now the satisfaction to say, with assurance, that his

patient was out of all danger: that he had brought his fever to a

perfect intermission, and doubted not by throwing in the bark to

prevent its return.

  This account so pleased Jones, and threw him into such immoderate

excess of rapture, that he might be truly said to be drunk with joy-

an intoxication which greatly forwards the effects of wine; and as he

was very free too with the bottle on this occasion (for he drank many

bumpers to the doctor's health, as well as to other toast% he became

very soon literally drunk.

  Jones had naturally violent animal spirits: these being set on float

and augmented by the spirit of wine, produced most extravagant

effects. He kissed the doctor, and embraced him with the most

passionate endearments; swearing that next to Mr. Allworthy himself,

he loved him of all men living. "Doctor," added he, "you deserve a

statue to be erected to you at the public expense, for having

preserved a man, who is not only the darling of all good men who

know him, but a blessing to society, the glory of his country, and

an honour to human nature. D--n me if I don't love him better than my

own soul."

  "More shame for you," cries Thwackum. "Though I think you have

reason to love him, for he hath provided very well for you. And

perhaps it might have been better for some folks that he had not lived

to see just reason of revoking his gift."

  Jones now looking on Thwackum with inconceivable disdain,

answered, "And doth thy mean soul imagine that any such considerations

could weigh with me? No, let the earth open and swallow her own dirt

(if I had millions of acres I would say it) rather than swallow up

my dear glorious friend."



     Quis desiderio sit pudor aut modus

     Tam chari capitis?*



  *"What modesty or measure can set bounds to our desire of so dear a

friend?" The word desiderium here cannot be easily translated. It

includes our desire of enjoying our friend again, and the grief

which attends that desire.



  The doctor now interposed, and prevented the effects of a wrath

which was kindling between Jones and Thwackum; after which the

former gave a loose to mirth, sang two or three amorous songs, and

fell into every frantic disorder which unbridled joy is apt to

inspire; but so far was he from any disposition to quarrel, that he

was ten times better humoured, if possible, than when he was sober.

  To say truth, nothing is more erroneous than the common observation,

that men who are ill-natured and quarrelsome when they are drunk,

are very worthy persons when they are sober: for drink, in reality,

doth not reverse nature, or create passions in men which did not exist

in them before. It takes away the guard of reason, and consequently

forces us to produce those symptoms, which many, when sober, have

art enough to conceal. It heightens and inflames our passions

(generally indeed that passion which is uppermost in our mind), so

that the angry temper, the amorous, the generous, the good-humoured,

the avaricious, and all other dispositions of men, are in their cups

heightened and exposed.

  And yet as no nation produces so many drunken quarrels, especially

among the lower people, as England (for indeed, with them, to drink

and to fight together are almost synonymous terms), I would not,

methinks, have it thence concluded, that the English are the

worst-natured people alive. Perhaps the love of glory only is at the

bottom of this; so that the fair conclusion seems to be, that our

countrymen have more of that love, and more of bravery, than any other

plebeians. And this the rather, as there is seldom anything

ungenerous, unfair, or ill-natured, exercised on these occasions: nay,

it is common for the combatants to express good-will for each other

even at the time of the conflict; and as their drunken mirth generally

ends in a battle, so do most of their battles end in friendship.

  But to return to our history. Though Jones had shown no design of

giving offence, yet Mr. Blifil was highly offended at a behaviour

which was so inconsistent with the sober and prudent reserve of his

own temper. He bore it too with the greater impatience, as it appeared

to him very indecent at this season; "When," as he said, "the house

was a house of mourning, on the account of his dear mother; and if

it had pleased Heaven to give him some prospect of Mr. Allworthy's

recovery, it would become them better to express the exultations of

their hearts in thanksgiving, than in drunkenness and riots; which

were properer methods to encrease the Divine wrath, than to avert it."

Thwackum, who had swallowed more liquor than Jones, but without any

ill effect on his brain, seconded the pious harangue of Blifil; but

Square, for reasons which the reader may probably guess, was totally

silent.

  Wine had not so totally overpowered Jones, as to prevent his

recollecting Mr. Blifil's loss, the moment it was mentioned. As no

person, therefore, was more ready to confess and condemn his own

errors, he offered to shake Mr. Blifil by the hand, and begged his

pardon, saying, "His excessive joy for Mr. Allworthy's recovery had

driven every other thought out of his mind."

  Blifil scornfully rejected his hand; and with much indignation

answered, "It was little to be wondered at, if tragical spectacles

made no impression on the blind; but, for his part, he had the

misfortune to know who his parents were, and consequently must be

affected with their loss."

  Jones, who, notwithstanding his good humour, had some mixture of the

irascible in his constitution, leaped hastily from his chair, and

catching hold of Blifil's collar, cried out, "D--n you for a rascal,

do you insult me with the misfortune of my birth?" He accompanied

these words with such rough actions, that they soon got the better of

Mr. Blifil's peaceful temper; and a scuffle immediately ensued, which

might have produced mischief, had it not been prevented by the

interposition of Thwackum and the physician; for the philosophy of

Square rendered him superior to all emotions, and he very calmly

smoaked his pipe, as was his custom in all broils, unless when he

apprehended some danger of having it broke in his mouth.

  The combatants being now prevented from executing present

vengeance on each other, betook themselves to the common resources

of disappointed rage, and vented their wrath in threats and

defiance. In this kind of conflict, Fortune, which, in the personal

attack, seemed to incline to Jones, was now altogether as favourable

to his enemy.

  A truce, nevertheless, was at length agreed on, by the mediation

of the neutral parties, and the whole company again sat down at the

table; where Jones being prevailed on to ask pardon, and Blifil to

give it, peace was restored, and everything seemed in statu quo.

  But though the quarrel was, in all appearance, perfectly reconciled,

the good humour which had been interrupted by it, was by no means

restored. All merriment was now at an end, and the subsequent

discourse consisted only of grave relations of matters of fact, and of

as grave observations upon them; a species of conversation, in

which, though there is much of dignity and instruction, there is but

little entertainment. As we presume therefore to convey only this last

to the reader, we shall pass by whatever was said, till the rest of

the company having by degrees dropped off, left only Square and the

physician together; at which time the conversation was a little

heightened by some comments on what had happened between the two young

gentlemen; both of whom the doctor declared to be no better than

scoundrels; to which appellation the philosopher, very sagaciously

shaking his head, agreed.





                                Chapter 10



  Showing the truth of many observations of Ovid, and of other more

grave writers, who have proved beyond contradiction, that wine is

often the forerunner of incontinency



  Jones retired from the company, in which we have seen him engaged,

into the fields, where he intended to cool himself by a walk in the

open air before he attended Mr. Allworthy. There, whilst he renewed

those meditations on his dear Sophia, which the dangerous illness of

his friend and benefactor had for some time interrupted, an accident

happened, which with sorrow we relate, and with sorrow doubtless

will it be read; however, that historic truth to which we profess so

inviolable an attachment, obliges us to communicate it to posterity.

  It was now a pleasant evening in the latter end of June, when our

heroe was walking in a most delicious grove, where the gentle

breezes fanning the leaves, together with the sweet trilling of a

murmuring stream, and the melodious notes of nightingales, formed

altogether the most enchanting harmony. In this scene, so sweetly

accommodated to love, he meditated on his dear Sophia. While his

wanton fancy roamed unbounded over all her beauties, and his lively

imagination painted the charming maid in various ravishing forms,

his warm heart melted with tenderness; and at length, throwing himself

on the ground, by the side of a gently murmuring brook, he broke forth

into the following ejaculation:

  "O Sophia, would Heaven give thee to my arms, how blest would be

my condition! Curst be that fortune which sets a distance between

us. Was I but possessed of thee, one only suit of rags thy whole

estate, is there a man on earth whom I would envy! How contemptible

would the brightest Circassian beauty, drest in all the jewels of

the Indies, appear to my eyes! But why do I mention another woman?

Could I think my eyes capable of looking at any other with tenderness,

these hands should tear them from my head. No, my Sophia, if cruel

fortune separates us for ever, my soul shall doat on thee alone. The

chastest constancy will I ever preserve to thy image. Though I

should never have possession of thy charming person, still shalt

thou alone have possession of my thoughts, my love, my soul. Oh! my

fond heart is so wrapt in that tender bosom, that the brightest

beauties would for me have no charms, nor would a hermit be colder

in their embraces. Sophia, Sophia alone shall be mine. What raptures

are in that name! I will engrave it on every tree."

  At these words he started up, and beheld- not his Sophia- no, nor a

Circassian maid richly and elegantly attired for the grand Signior's

seraglio. No; without a gown, in a shift that was somewhat of the

coarsest, and none of the cleanest, bedewed likewise with some

odoriferous effluvia, the produce of the day's labour, with a

pitchfork in her hand, Molly Seagrim approached. Our hero had his

penknife in his hand, which he had drawn for the before-mentioned

purpose of carving on the bark; when the girl coming near him, cryed

out with a smile, "You don't intend to kill me, squire, I

hope!"- "Why should you think I would kill you?" answered Jones.

"Nay," replied she, "after your cruel usage of me when I saw you last,

killing me would, perhaps, be too great kindness for me to expect."

  Here ensued a parley, which, as I do not think myself obliged to

relate it, I shall omit. It is sufficient that it lasted a full

quarter of an hour, at the conclusion of which they retired into the

thickest part of the grove.

  Some of my readers may be inclined to think this event unnatural.

However, the fact is true; and perhaps may be sufficiently accounted

for by suggesting, that Jones probably thought one woman better than

none, and Molly as probably imagined two men to be better than one.

Besides the before-mentioned motive assigned to the present

behaviour of Jones, the reader will be likewise pleased to recollect

in his favour, that he was not at this time perfect master of that

wonderful power of reason, which so well enables grave and wise men to

subdue their unruly passions, and to decline any of these prohibited

amusements. Wine now had totally subdued this power in Jones. He

was, indeed, in a condition, in which, if reason had interposed,

though only to advise, she might have received the answer which one

Cleostratus gave many years ago to a silly fellow, who asked him, if

he was not ashamed to be drunk? "Are not you," said Cleostratus,

"ashamed to admonish a drunken man?"- To say the truth, in a court of

justice drunkenness must not be an excuse, yet in a court of

conscience it is greatly so; and therefore Aristotle, who commends the

laws of Pittacus, by which drunken men received double punishment

for their crimes, allows there is more of policy than justice in

that law. Now, if there are any transgressions pardonable from

drunkenness, they are certainly such as Mr. Jones was at present

guilty of; on which head I could pour forth a vast profusion of

learning, if I imagined it would either entertain my reader, or

teach him anything more than he knows already. For his sake

therefore I shall keep my learning to myself, and return to my

history.

  It hath been observed, that Fortune seldom doth things by halves. To

say truth, there is no end to her freaks whenever she is disposed to

gratify or displease. No sooner had our heroe retired with his Dido,

but



     Speluncam Blifil dux et divinus eandem

     Deveniunt-*



the parson and the young squire, who were taking a serious walk,

arrived at the stile which leads into the grove, and the latter caught

a view of the lovers just as they were sinking out of sight.



  *A play on The Aeneid, IV, 124: "Dido and the Trojan prince to the

same cave shall come."



  Blifil knew Jones very well, though he was at above a hundred yards'

distance, and he was as positive to the sex of his companion, though

not to the individual person. He started, blessed himself, and uttered

a very solemn ejaculation.

  Thwackum expressed some surprize at these sudden emotions, and asked

the reason of them. To which Blifil answered, "He was certain he had

seen a fellow and wench retire together among the bushes, which he

doubted not was with some wicked purpose." As to the name of Jones, he

thought proper to conceal it, and why he did so must be left to the

judgment of the sagacious reader; for we never chuse to assign motives

to the actions of men, when there is any possibility of our being

mistaken.

  The parson, who was not only strictly chaste in his own person,

but a great enemy to the opposite vice in all others, fired at this

information. He desired Mr. Blifil to conduct him immediately to the

place, which as he approached he breathed forth vengeance mixed with

lamentations; nor did he refrain from casting some oblique reflections

on Mr. Allworthy; insinuating that the wickedness of the country was

principally owing to the encouragement he had given to vice, by having

exerted such kindness to a bastard, and by having mitigated that

just and wholesome rigour of the law which allots a very severe

punishment to loose wenches.

  The way through which our hunters were to pass in pursuit of their

game was so beset with briars, that it greatly obstructed their

walk, and caused besides such a rustling, that Jones had sufficient

warning of their arrival before they could surprize him; nay,

indeed, so incapable was Thwackum of concealing his indignation, and

such vengeance did he utter forth every step he took, that this

alone must have abundantly satisfied Jones that he was (to use the

language of sportsmen) found sitting.





                                Chapter 11



  In which a simile in Mr. Pope's period of a mile introduces as

bloody a battle as can possibly be fought without the assistance of

steel or cold iron



  As in the season of rutting (an uncouth phrase, by which the

vulgar denote that gentle dalliance, which in the well-wooded*

forest of Hampshire, passes between lovers of the ferine kind), if,

while the lofty-crested stag meditates the amorous sport, a couple

of puppies, or any other beasts of hostile note, should wander so near

the temple of Venus Ferina that the fair hind should shrink from the

place, touched with that somewhat, either of fear or frolic, of nicety

or skittishness, with which nature hath bedecked all females, or

hath at least instructed them how to put it on; lest, through the

indelicacy of males, the Samean mysteries should be pryed into by

unhallowed eyes: for, at the celebration of these rites, the female

priestess cries out with her in Virgil (who was then, probably, hard

at work on such celebration),



     --Procul, o procul este, profani;

     Proclamat vates, totoque absistite luco.



     --Far hence be souls profane,

     The sibyl cry'd, and from the grove abstain.

                                       DRYDEN



If, I say, while these sacred rites, which are in common to genus omne

animantium, are in agitation between the stag and his mistress, any

hostile beasts should venture too near, on the first hint given by the

frighted hind, fierce and tremendous rushes forth the stag to the

entrance of the thicket; there stands he sentinel over his love,

stamps the ground with his foot, and with his horns brandished aloft

in air, proudly provokes the apprehended foe to combat.



  *This is an ambiguous phrase, and may mean either a forest well

cloathed with wood, or well stript of it.



  Thus, and more terrible, when he perceived the enemy's approach,

leaped forth our heroe. Many a step advanced he forwards, in order

to conceal the trembling hind, and, if possible, to secure her

retreat. And now Thwackum, having first darted some livid lightning

from his fiery eyes, began to thunder forth, "Fie upon it! Fie upon

it! Mr. Jones. Is it possible you should be the person?"- "You see,"

answered Jones, "it is possible I should be here."- "And who," said

Thwackum, "is that wicked slut with you?"- "If I have any wicked slut

with me," cries Jones, "it is possible I shall not let you know who

she is."- "I command you to tell me immediately," says Thwackum: "and

I would not have you imagine, young man, that your age, though it hath

somewhat abridged the purpose of tuition, hath totally taken away

the authority of the master. The relation of the master and scholar is

indelible; as, indeed, all other relations are; for they all derive

their original from heaven. I would have you think yourself,

therefore, as much obliged to obey me now, as when I taught you your

first rudiments."- "I believe you would," cries Jones; "but that will

not happen, unless you had the same birchen argument to convince

me."- "Then I must tell you plainly," said Thwackum, "I am resolved

to discover the wicked wretch."- "And I must tell you plainly,"

returned Jones, "I am resolved you shall not." Thwackum then offered

to advance, and Jones laid hold of his arms; which Mr. Blifil

endeavoured to rescue, declaring, "he would not see his old master

insulted."

  Jones now finding himself engaged with two, thought it necessary

to rid himself of one of his antagonists as soon as possible. He

therefore applied to the weakest first; and, letting the parson go, he

directed a blow at the young squire's breast, which luckily taking

place, reduced him to measure his length on the ground.

  Thwackum was so intent on the discovery, that, the moment he found

himself at liberty, he stept forward directly into the fern, without

any great consideration of what might in the meantime befal his

friend; but he had advanced a very few paces into the thicket,

before Jones, having defeated Blifil, overtook the parson, and dragged

him backward by the skirt of his coat.

  This parson had been a champion in his youth, and had won much

honour by his fist, both at school and at the university. He had now

indeed, for a great number of years, declined the practice of that

noble art; yet was his courage full as strong as his faith, and his

body no less strong than either. He was moreover, as the reader may

perhaps have conceived, somewhat irascible in his nature. When he

looked back, therefore, and saw his friend stretched out on the

ground, and found himself at the same time so roughly handled by one

who had formerly been only passive in all conflicts between them (a

circumstance which highly aggravated the whole), his patience at

length gave way; he threw himself into a posture of offence; and

collecting all his force, attacked Jones in the front with as much

impetuosity as he had formerly attacked him in the rear.

  Our heroe received the enemy's attack with the most undaunted

intrepidity, and his bosom resounded with the blow. This he

presently returned with no less violence, aiming likewise at the

parson's breast; but he dexterously drove down the fist of Jones, so

that it reached only his belly, where two pounds of beef and as many

of pudding were then deposited, and whence consequently no hollow

sound could proceed. Many lusty blows, much more pleasant as well as

easy to have seen, than to read or describe, were given on both sides:

at last a violent fall, in which Jones had thrown his knees into

Thwackum's breast, so weakened the latter, that victory had been no

longer dubious, had not Blifil, who had now recovered his strength,

again renewed the fight, and by engaging with Jones, given the

parson a moment's time to shake his ears, and to regain his breath.

  And now both together attacked our heroe, whose blows did not retain

that force with which they had fallen at first, so weakened was he

by his combat with Thwackum; for though the pedagogue chose rather

to play solos on the human instrument, and had been lately used to

those only, yet he still retained enough of his antient knowledge to

perform his part very well in a duet.

  The victory, according to modern custom, was like to be decided by

numbers, when, on a sudden, a fourth pair of fists appeared in the

battle, and immediately paid their compliments to the parson; and

the owner of them at the same time crying out, "Are not you ashamed,

and be d--n'd to you, to fall two of you upon one?"

  The battle, which was of the kind that for distinction's sake is

called royal, now raged with the utmost violence during a few minutes;

till Blifil being a second time laid sprawling by Jones, Thwackum

condescended to apply for quarter to his new antagonist, who was now

found to be Mr. Western himself; for in the heat of the action none of

the combatants had recognized him.

  In fact, that honest squire, happening, in his afternoon's walk with

some company, to pass through the field where the bloody battle was

fought, and having concluded, from seeing three men engaged, that

two of them must be on a side, he hastened from his companions, and

with more gallantry than policy, espoused the cause of the weaker

party. By which generous proceeding he very probably prevented Mr.

Jones from becoming a victim to the wrath of Thwackum, and to the

pious friendship which Blifil bore his old master; for, besides the

disadvantage of such odds, Jones had not yet sufficiently recovered

the former strength of his broken arm. This reinforcement, however,

soon put an end to the action, and Jones with his ally obtained the

victory.





                                Chapter 12



  In which is seen a more moving spectacle than all the blood in the

bodies of Thwackum and Blifil, and of twenty other such, is capable of

producing



  The rest of Mr. Western's company were now come up, being just at

the instant when the action was over. These were the honest clergyman,

whom we have formerly seen at Mr. Western's table; Mrs. Western, the

aunt of Sophia; and lastly, the lovely Sophia herself.

  At this time, the following was the aspect of the bloody field. In

one place lay on the ground, all pale, and almost breathless, the

vanquished Blifil. Near him stood the conqueror Jones, almost

covered with blood, part of which was naturally his own, and part

had been lately the property of the Reverend Mr. Thwackum. In a

third place stood the said Thwackum, like King Porus, sullenly

submitting to the conqueror. The last figure in the piece was

Western the Great, most gloriously forbearing the vanquished foe.

  Blifil, in whom there was little sign of life, was at first the

principal object of the concern of every one, and particularly of Mrs.

Western, who had drawn from her pocket a bottle of hartshorn, and

was herself about to apply it to his nostrils, when on a sudden the

attention of the whole company was diverted from poor Blifil, whose

spirit, if it had any such design, might have now taken an opportunity

of stealing off to the other world, without any ceremony.

  For now a more melancholy and a more lovely object lay motionless

before them. This was no other than the charming Sophia herself,

who, from the sight of blood, or from fear for her father, or from

some other reason, had fallen down in a swoon, before any one could

get to her assistance.

  Mrs. Western first saw her and screamed. Immediately two or three

voices cried out, "Miss Western is dead." Hartshorn, water, every

remedy was called for, almost at one and the same instant.

  The reader may remember, that in our description of this grove we

mentioned a murmuring brook, which brook did not come there, as such

gentle streams flow through vulgar romances, with no other purpose

than to murmur. No! Fortune had decreed to ennoble this little brook

with a higher honour than any of those which wash the plains of

Arcadia ever deserved.

  Jones was rubbing Blifil's temples, for he began to fear he had

given him a blow too much, when the words, Miss Western and Dead,

rushed at once on his ear. He started up, left Blifil to his fate, and

flew to Sophia, whom, while all the rest were running against each

other, backward and forward, looking for water in the dry paths, he

caught up in his arms, and then ran away with her over the field to

the rivulet above mentioned; where, plunging himself into the water,

he contrived to besprinkle her face, head, and neck very plentifully.

  Happy was it for Sophia that the same confusion which prevented

her other friends from serving her, prevented them likewise from

obstructing Jones. He had carried her half ways before they knew

what he was doing, and he had actually restored her to life before

they reached the waterside. She stretched our her arms, opened her

eyes, and cried, "Oh! heavens!" just as her father, aunt, and the

parson came up.

  Jones, who had hitherto held this lovely burthen in his arms, now

relinquished his hold; but gave her at the same instant a tender

caress, which, had her senses been then perfectly restored, could

not have escaped her observation. As she expressed, therefore, no

displeasure at this freedom, we suppose she was not sufficiently

recovered from her swoon at the time.

  This tragical scene was now converted into a sudden scene of joy. In

this our heroe was certainly the principal character; for as he

probably felt more ecstatic delight in having saved Sophia than she

herself received from being saved, so neither were the congratulations

paid to her equal to what were conferred on Jones, especially by Mr.

Western himself, who, after having once or twice embraced his

daughter, fell to hugging and kissing Jones. He called him the

preserver of Sophia, and declared there was nothing, except her, or

his estate, which he would not give him; but upon recollection, he

afterwards excepied his fox-hounds, the Chevalier, and Miss Slouch

(for so he called his favourite mare).

  All fears for Sophia being now removed, Jones became the object of

the squire's consideration.- "Come, my lad," says Western, "d'off thy

quoat and wash thy feace; for att in a devilish pickle, I promise

thee. Come, come, wash thyself, and shat go huome with me; and we'l

zee to vind thee another quoat."

  Jones immediately complied, threw off his coat, went down to the

water, and washed both his face and bosom; for the latter was as

much exposed and as bloody as the former. But though the water could

clear off the blood, it could not remove the black and blue marks

which Thwackum had imprinted on both his face and breast, and which,

being discerned by Sophia, drew from her a sigh and a look full of

inexpressible tenderness.

  Jones received this full in his eyes, and it had infinitely a

stronger effect on him than all the contusions which he had received

before. An effect, however, widely different; for so soft and balmy

was it, that, had all his former blows been stabs, it would for some

minutes have prevented his feeling their smart.

  The company now moved backwards, and soon arrived where Thwackum had

got Mr. Blifil again on his legs. Here we cannot suppress a pious

wish, that all quarrels were to be decided by those weapons only

with which Nature, knowing what is proper for us, hath supplied us;

and that cold iron was to be used in digging no bowels but those of

the earth. Then would war, the pastime of monarchs, be almost

inoffensive, and battles between great armies might be fought at the

particular desire of several ladies of quality; who, together with the

kings themselves, might be actual spectators of the conflict. Then

might the field be this moment well strewed with human carcasses,

and the next, the dead men, or infinitely the greatest part of them,

might get up, like Mr. Bayes's troops, and march off either at the

sound of a drum or fiddle, as should be previously agreed on.

  I would avoid, if possible, treating this matter ludicrously, lest

grave men and politicians, whom I know to be offended at a jest, may

cry pish at it; but, in reality, might not a battle be as well decided

by the greater number of broken heads, bloody noses, and black eyes,

as by the greater heaps of mangled and murdered human bodies? Might

not towns be contended for in the same manner? Indeed, this may be

thought too detrimental a scheme to the French interest, since they

would thus lose the advantage they have over other nations in the

superiority of their engineers; but when I consider the gallantry

and generosity of that people, I am persuaded they would never decline

putting themselves upon a par with their adversary; or, as the

phrase is, making themselves his match.

  But such reformations are rather to be wished than hoped for: I

shall content myself, therefore, with this short hint, and return to

my narrative.

  Western began now to inquire into the original rise of this quarrel.

To which neither Blifil nor Jones gave any answer; but Thwackum said

surlily, "I believe the cause is not far off; if you beat the bushes

well you may find her."- "Find her?" replied Western: "what! have you

been fighting for a wench?"- "Ask the gentleman in his waistcoat

there," said Thwackum: "he best knows." "Nay then," cries Western, "it

is a wench certainly.- Ah, Tom, Tom, thou art a liquorish dog. But

come, gentlemen, be all friends, and go home with me, and make final

peace over a bottle." "I ask your pardon, sir," says Thwackum: "it

is no such slight matter for a man of my character to be thus

injuriously treated, and buffeted by a boy, only because I would

have done my duty, in endeavouring to detect and bring to justice a

wanton harlot; but, indeed, the principal fault lies in Mr.

Allworthy and yourself; for if you put the laws in execution, as you

ought to do, you will soon rid the country of these vermin."

  "I would as soon rid the country of foxes," cries Western. "I

think we ought to encourage the recruiting those numbers which we

are every day losing in the war.- But where is she? Prithee, Tom,

show me." He then began to beat about, in the same language and in the

same manner as if he had been beating for a hare; and at last cried

out, "Soho! Puss is not far off. Here's her form, upon my soul; I

believe I may cry stole away." And indeed so he might; for he had

now discovered the place whence the poor girl had, at the beginning of

the fray, stolen away, upon as many feet as a hare generally uses in

travelling.

  Sophia now desired her father to return home; saying she found

herself very faint, and apprehended a relapse. The squire

immediately complied with his daughter's request (for he was the

fondest of parents). He earnestly endeavoured to prevail with the

whole company to go and sup with him: but Blifil and Thwackum

absolutely refused; the former saying, there were more reasons than he

could then mention, why he must decline this honour; and the latter

declaring (perhaps rightly) that it was not proper for a person of his

function to be seen at any place in his present condition.

  Jones was incapable of refusing the pleasure of being with his

Sophia; so on he marched with Squire Western and his ladies, the

parson bringing up the rear. This had, indeed, offered to tarry with

his brother Thwackum, professing his regard for the cloth would not

permit him to depart; but Thwackum would not accept the favour, and,

with no great civility, pushed him after Mr. Western.

  Thus ended this bloody fray; and thus shall end the fifth book of

this history.
