



                                    BOOK VI

                          CONTAINING ABOUT THREE WEEKS

                                Chapter 1



  Of love



  In our last book we have been obliged to deal pretty much with the

passion of love; and in our succeeding book shall be forced to

handle this subject still more largely. It may not therefore in this

place be improper to apply ourselves to the examination of that modern

doctrine, by which certain philosophers, among many other wonderful

discoveries, pretend to have found out, that there is no such

passion in the human breast.

  Whether these philosophers be the same with that surprising sect,

who are honourably mentioned by the late Dr. Swift, as having, by

the mere force of genius alone, without the least assistance of any

kind of learning, or even reading, discovered that profound and

invaluable secret that there is no God; or whether they are not rather

the same with those who some years since very much alarmed the

world, by showing that there were no such things as virtue or goodness

really existing in human nature, and who deduced our best actions from

pride, I will not here presume to determine. In reality, I am inclined

to suspect, that all these several finders of truth, are the very

identical men who are by others called the finders of gold. The method

used in both these searches after truth and after gold, being indeed

one and the same, viz., the searching, rummaging, and examining into a

nasty place; indeed, in the former instances, into the nastiest of all

places, A BAD MIND.

  But though in this particular, and perhaps in their success, the

truth-finder and the gold-finder may very properly be compared

together; yet in modesty, surely, there can be no comparison between

the two; for who ever heard of a gold-finder that had the impudence or

folly to assert, from the ill success of his search, that there was no

such thing as gold in the world? whereas the truth-finder, having

raked out that jakes, his own mind, and being there capable of tracing

no ray of divinity, nor anything virtuous or good, or lovely, or

loving, very fairly, honestly, and logically concludes that no such

things exist in the whole creation.

  To avoid, however, all contention, if possible, with these

philosophers, if they will be called so; and to show our own

disposition to accommodate matters peaceably between us, we shall here

make them some concessions, which may possibly put an end to the

dispute.

  First, we will grant that many minds, and perhaps those of the

philosophers, are entirely free from the least traces of such a

passion.

  Secondly, that what is commonly called love, namely, the desire of

satisfying a voracious appetite with a certain quantity of delicate

white human flesh, is by no means that passion for which I here

contend. This is indeed more properly hunger; and as no glutton is

ashamed to apply the word love to his appetite, and to say he LOVES

such and such dishes; so may the lover of this kind, with equal

propriety, say, he HUNGERS after such and such women.

  Thirdly, I will grant, which I believe will be a most acceptable

concession, that this love for which I am an advocate, though it

satisfies itself in a much more delicate manner, doth nevertheless

seek its own satisfaction as much as the grossest of all our

appetites.

  And, lastly, that this love, when it operates towards one of a

different sex, is very apt, towards its complete gratification, to

call in the aid of that hunger which I have mentioned above; and which

it is so far from abating, that it heightens all its delights to a

degree scarce imaginable by those who have never been susceptible of

any other emotions than what have proceeded from appetite alone.

  In return to all these concessions, I desire of the philosophers

to grant, that there is in some (I believe in many) human breasts a

kind and benevolent disposition, which is gratified by contributing to


the happiness of others. That in this gratification alone, as in

friendship, in parental and filial affection, as indeed in general

philanthropy, there is a great and exquisite delight. That if we

will not call such disposition love, we have no name for it. That

though the pleasures arising from such pure love may be heightened and

sweetened by the assistance of amorous desires, yet the former can

subsist alone, nor are they destroyed by the intervention of the

latter. Lastly, that esteem and gratitude are the proper motives to

love, as youth and beauty are to desire, and, therefore, though such

desire may naturally cease, when age or sickness overtakes its object;

yet these can have no effect on love, nor ever shake or remove, from a

good mind, that sensation or passion which hath gratitude and esteem

for its basis.

  To deny the existence of a passion of which we often see manifest

instances, seems to be very strange and absurd; and can indeed proceed

only from that self-admonition which we have mentioned above: but

how unfair is this! Doth the man who recognizes in his own heart no

traces of avarice or ambition, conclude, therefore, that there are

no such passions in human nature? Why will we not modestly observe the

same rule in judging of the good, as well as the evil of others? Or

why, in any case, will we, as Shakespear phrases it, "put the world in

our own person?"

  Predominant vanity is, I am afraid, too much concerned here. This is

one instance of that adulation which we bestow on our own minds, and

this almost universally. For there is scarce any man, how much

soever he may despise the character of a flatterer, but will

condescend in the meanest manner to flatter himself.

  To those therefore I apply for the truth of the above

observations, whose own minds can bear testimony to what I have

advanced.

  Examine your heart, my good reader, and resolve whether you do

believe these matters with me. If you do, you may now proceed to their

exemplification in the following pages: if you do not, you have, I

assure you, already read more than you have understood; and it would

be wiser to pursue your business, or your pleasures (such as they

are), than to throw away any more of your time in reading what you can

neither taste nor comprehend. To treat of the effects of love to

you, must be as absurd as to discourse on colours to a man born blind;

since possibly your idea of love may be as absurd as that which we are

told such blind man once entertained of the colour scarlet; that

colour seemed to him to be very much like the sound of a trumpet:

and love probably may, in your opinion, very greatly resemble a dish

of soup, or a surloin of roast-beef.




                                Chapter 2



  The character of Mrs. Western. Her great learning and knowledge of

the world, and an instance of the deep penetration which she derived

from those advantages



  The reader hath seen Mr. Western, his sister, and daughter, with

young Jones, and the parson, going together to Mr. Western's house,

where the greater part of the company spent the evening with much

joy and festivity. Sophia was indeed the only grave person; for as

to Jones, though love had now gotten entire possession of his heart,

yet the pleasing reflection on Mr. Allworthy's recovery, and the

presence of his mistress, joined to some tender looks which she now

and then could not refrain from giving him, so elevated our heroe,

that he joined the mirth of the other three, who were perhaps as

good-humoured people as any in the world.

  Sophia retained the same gravity of countenance the next morning

at breakfast; whence she retired likewise earlier than usual,

leaving her father and aunt together. The squire took no notice of

this change in his daughter's disposition. To say the truth, though he

was somewhat of a politician, and had been twice a candidate in the

country interest at an election, he was a man of no great observation.

His sister was a lady of a different turn. She had lived about the

court, and had seen the world. Hence she had acquired all that

knowledge which the said world usually communicates; and was a perfect

mistress of manners, customs, ceremonies, and fashions. Nor did her

erudition stop here. She had considerably improved her mind by

study; she had not only read all the modern plays, operas,

oratorios, poems, and romances- in all which she was a critic; but

had gone through Rapin's History of England, Eachard's Roman

History, and many French Memoires pour servir a l'Histoire: to these

she had added most of the political pamphlets and journals published

within the last twenty years. From which she had attained a very

competent skill in politics, and could discourse very learnedly on the

affairs of Europe. She was, moreover, excellently well skilled in

the doctrine of amour, and knew better than anybody who and who were

together; a knowledge which she the more easily attained, as her

pursuit of it was never diverted by any affairs of her own; for either

she had no inclinations, or they had never been solicited; which

last is indeed very probable; for her masculine person, which was near

six foot high, added to her manner and learning, possibly prevented

the other sex from regarding her, notwithstanding her petticoats, in

the light of a woman. However, as she had considered the matter

scientifically, she perfectly well knew, though she had never

practised them, all the arts which fine ladies use when they desire to

give encouragement, or to conceal liking, with all the long

appendage of smiles, ogles, glances, &c., as they are at present

practised in the beau-monde. To sum the whole, no species of

disguise or affectation had escaped her notice; but as to the plain

simple workings of honest nature, as she had never seen any such,

she could know but little of them.

  By means of this wonderful sagacity, Mrs. Western had now, as she

thought, made a discovery of something in the mind of Sophia. The

first hint of this she took from the behaviour of the young lady in

the field of battle; and the suspicion which she then conceived, was

greatly corroborated by some observations which she had made that

evening and the next morning. However, being greatly cautious to avoid

being found in a mistake, she carried the secret a whole fortnight

in her bosom, giving only some oblique hints, by simpering, winks,

nods, and now and then dropping an obscure word, which indeed

sufficiently alarmed Sophia, but did not at all affect her brother.

  Being at length, however, thoroughly satisfied of the truth of her

observation, she took an opportunity, one morning, when she was

alone with her brother, to interrupt one of his whistles in the

following manner:-

  "Pray, brother, have you not observed something very extraordinary

in my niece lately?"- "No, not I," answered Western; "is anything the

matter with the girl?"- "I think there is," replied she; "and

something of much consequence too."- "Why, she doth not complain of

anything," cries Western; "and she hath had the small-pox."-

"Brother," returned she, "girls are liable to other distempers besides

the small-pox, and sometimes possibly to much worse." Here Western

interrupted her with much earnestness, and begged her, if anything

ailed his daughter, to acquaint him immediately; adding, "she knew he

loved her more than his own soul, and that he would send to the

world's end for the best physician to her." "Nay, nay," answered she,

smiling, "the distemper is not so terrible; but I believe, brother,

you are convinced I know the world, and I promise you I was never more

deceived in my life, if my niece be not most desperately in love."-

"How! in love!" cries Western, in a passion; "in love, without

acquainting me! I'll disinherit her; I'll turn her out of doors, stark

naked, without a farthing. Is all my kindness vor 'ur, and vondness

o'ur come to this, to fall in love without asking me leave?"- "But you

will not," answered Mrs. Western, "turn this daughter, whom you love

better than your own soul, out of doors, before you know whether you

shall approve her choice. Suppose she should have fixed on the very

person whom you yourself would wish, I hope you would not be angry

then?"- "No, no," cries Western, "that would make a difference. If she

marries the man I would ha' her, she may love whom she pleases, I

shan't trouble my head about that." "That is spoken," answered the

sister, "like a sensible man; but I believe the very person she hath

chosen would be the very person you would choose for her. I will

disclaim all knowledge of the world, if it is not so; and I believe,

brother, you will allow I have some."- "Why, lookee, sister," said

Western, "I do believe you have as much as any woman; and to be sure

those are women's matters. You know I don't love to hear you talk

about politics; they belong to us, and petticoats should not meddle:

but come, who is the man?"- "Marry!" said she, "you may find him out

yourself if you please. You, who are so great a politician, can be at

no great loss. The judgment which can penetrate into the cabinets of

princes, and discover the secret springs which move the great state

wheels in all the political machines of Europe, must surely, with very

little difficulty, find out what passes in the rude uninformed mind of

a girl."- "Sister," cries the squire, "I have often warn'd you not to

talk the court gibberish to me. I tell you, I don't understand the

lingo: but I can read a journal, or the London Evening Post. Perhaps,

indeed, there may be now and tan a verse which I can't make much of,

because half the letters are left out; yet I know very well what is

meant by that, and that our affairs don't go so well as they should

do, because of bribery and corruption."- "I pity your country

ignorance from my heart," cries the lady.- "Do you?" answered Western;

"and I pity your town learning; I had rather be anything than a

courtier, and a Presbyterian, and a Hanoverian too, as some people, I

believe, are."- "If you mean me," answered she, "you know I am a

woman, brother; and it signifies nothing what I am. Besides-" - "I do

know you are a woman," cries the squire, "and it's well for thee that

art one; if hadst been a man, I promise thee I had lent thee a flick

long ago."- "Ay, there," said she, "in that flick lies all your

fancied superiority. Your bodies, and not your brains, are stronger

than ours. Believe me, it is well for you that you are able to beat

us; or, such is the superiority of our understanding, we should make

all of you what the brave, and wise, and witty, and polite are

already- our slaves."- "I am glad I know your mind," answered the

squire. "But we'll talk more of this matter another time. At present,

do tell me what man is it you mean about my daughter?"- "Hold a

moment," said she, "while I digest that sovereign contempt I have for

your sex; or else I ought to be angry too with you. There-- I have

made a shift to gulp it down. And now, good politic sir, what think

you of Mr. Blifil? Did she not faint away on seeing him lie breathless

on the ground? Did she not, after he was recovered, turn pale again

the moment we came up to that part of the field where he stood? And

pray what else should be the occasion of all her melancholy that night

at supper, the next morning, and indeed ever since?"- "Fore George!"

cries the squire, "now you mind me on't, I remember it all. It is

certainly so, and I am glad on't with all my heart. I knew Sophy was a

good girl, and would not fall in love to make me angry. I was never

more rejoiced in my life; for nothing can lie so handy together as our

two estates. I had this matter in my head some time ago: for certainly

the two estates are in a manner joined together in matrimony already,

and it would be a thousand pities to part them. It is true, indeed,

there be larger estates in the kingdom, but not in this county, and I

had rather bate something, than marry my daughter among strangers and

foreigners. Besides, most o' zuch great estates be in the hands of

lords, and I heate the very name of themmun. Well but, sister, what

would you advise me to do; for I tell you women know these matters

better than we do?"- "Oh, your humble servant, sir," answered the

lady: "we are obliged to you for allowing us a capacity in anything.

Since you are pleased, then, most politic sir, to ask my advice, I

think you may propose the match to Allworthy yourself. There is no

indecorum in the proposal's coming from the parent of either side.

King Alcinous, in Mr. Pope's Odyssey, offers his daughter to Ulysses.

I need not caution so politic a person not to say that your daughter

is in love; that would indeed be against all rules." "Well," said the

squire, "I will propose it; but I shall certainly lend un a flick,

if he should refuse me." "Fear not," cries Mrs. Western; "the match is

too advantageous to be refused." "I don't know that," answered the

squire: "Allworthy is a queer b--ch, and money hath no effect o'un."

"Brother," said the lady, "your politics astonish me. Are you really

to be imposed on by professions? Do you think Mr. Allworthy hath

more contempt for money than other men because he professes more? Such

credulity would better become one of us weak women, than that wise sex

which heaven hath formed for politicians. Indeed, brother, you would

make a fine plenipo to negotiate with the French. They would soon

persuade you, that they take towns out of mere defensive

principles." "Sister," answered the squire, with much scorn, "let your

friends at court answer for the towns taken; as you are a woman, I

shall lay ho blame upon you; for I suppose they are wiser than to

trust women with secrets." He accompanied this with so sarcastical a

laugh, that Mrs. Western could bear no longer. She had been all this

time fretted in a tender part (for she was indeed very deeply

skilled in these matters, and very violent in them), and therefore,

burst forth in a rage, declared her brother to be both a clown and a

blockhead, and that she would stay no longer in his house.

  The squire, though perhaps he had never read Machiavel, was,

however, in many points, a perfect politician. He strongly held all

those wise tenets, which are so well inculcated in that

Politico-Peripatetic school of Exchange-alley. He knew the just

value and only use of money, viz., to lay it up. He was likewise

well skilled in the exact value of reversions, expectations, &c.,

and had often considered the amount of his sister's fortune, and the

chance which he or his posterity had of inheriting it. This he was

infinitely too wise to sacrifice to a trifling resentment. When he

found, therefore, he had carried matters too far, he began to think of

reconciling them; which was no very difficult task, as the lady had

great affection for her brother, and still greater for her niece;

and though too susceptible of an affront offered to her skill in

politics, on which she much valued herself, was a woman of a very

extraordinary good and sweet disposition.

  Having first, therefore, laid violent hands on the horses, for whose

escape from the stable no place but the window was left open, he

next applied himself to his sister; softened and soothed her, by

unsaying all he had said, and by assertions directly contrary to those

which had incensed her. Lastly, he summoned the eloquence of Sophia to

his assistance, who, besides a most graceful and winning address,

had the advantage of being heard with great favour and partiality by

her aunt.

  The result of the whole was a kind smile from Mrs. Western, who

said, "Brother, you are absolutely a perfect Croat; but as those

have their use in the army of the empress queen, so you likewise

have some good in you. I will therefore once more sign a treaty of

peace with you, and see that you do not infringe it on your side; at

least, as you are so excellent a politician, I may expect you will

keep your leagues, like the French, till your interest calls upon

you to break them."




                                Chapter 3



  Containing two defiances to the critics



  The squire having settled matters with his sister, as we have seen

in the last chapter, was so greatly impatient to communicate the

proposal to Allworthy, that Mrs. Western had the utmost difficulty

to prevent him from visiting that gentleman in his sickness, for

this purpose.

  Mr. Allworthy had been engaged to dine with Mr. Western at the

time when he was taken ill. He was therefore no sooner discharged

out of the custody of physic, but he thought (as was usual with him on

all occasions, both the highest and the lowest) of fulfilling his

engagement.

  In the interval between the time of the dialogue in the last

chapter, and this day of public entertainment, Sophia had, from

certain obscure hints thrown out by her aunt, collected some

apprehension that the sagacious lady suspected her passion for

Jones. She now resolved to take this opportunity of wiping out all

such suspicions, and for that purpose to put an entire constraint on

her behaviour.

  First, she endeavoured to conceal a throbbing melancholy heart

with the utmost sprightliness in her countenance, and the highest

gaiety in her manner. Secondly, she addressed her whole discourse to

Mr. Blifil, and took not the least notice of poor Jones the whole day.

  The squire was so delighted with this conduct of his daughter,

that he scarce eat any dinner, and spent almost his whole time in

watching opportunities of conveying signs of his approbation by

winks and nods to his sister; who was not at first altogether so

pleased with what she saw as was her brother.

  In short, Sophia so greatly overacted her part, that her aunt was at

first staggered, and began to suspect some affectation in her niece;

but as she was herself a woman of great art, so she soon attributed

this to extreme art in Sophia. She remembered the many hints she had

given her niece concerning her being in love, and imagined the young

lady had taken this way to rally her out of her opinion, by an

overacted civility: a notion that was greatly corroborated by the

excessive gaiety with which the whole was accompanied. We cannot

here avoid remarking, that this conjecture would have been better

founded had Sophia lived ten years in the air of Grosvenor Square,

where young ladies do learn a wonderful knack of rallying and

playing with that passion, which is a mighty serious thing in woods

and groves an hundred miles distant from London.

  To say the truth, in discovering the deceit of others, it matters

much that our own art be wound up, if I may use the expression, in the

same key with theirs: for very artful men sometimes miscarry by

fancying others wiser, or, in other words, greater knaves, than they

really are. As this observation is pretty deep, I will illustrate it

by the following short story. Three countrymen were pursuing a

Wiltshire thief through Brentford. The simplest of them seeing "The

Wiltshire House," written under a sign, advised his companions to

enter it, for there most probably they would find their countryman.

The second, who was wiser, laughed at this simplicity; but the

third, who was wiser still, answered, "Let us go in, however, for he

may think we should not suspect him of going amongst his own

countrymen." They accordingly went in and searched the house, and by

that means missed overtaking the thief, who was at that time but a

little way before them; and who, as they all knew, but had never

once reflected, could not read.

  The reader will pardon a digression in which so invaluable a

secret is communicated, since every gamester will agree how

necessary it is to know exactly the play of another, in order to

countermine him. This will, moreover, afford a reason why the wiser

man, as is often seen, is the bubble of the weaker, and why many

simple and innocent characters are so generally misunderstood and

misrepresented; but what is most material, this will account for the

deceit which Sophia put on her politic aunt.

  Dinner being ended, and the company retired into the garden, Mr.

Western, who was thoroughly convinced of the certainty of what his

sister had told him, took Mr. Allworthy aside, and very bluntly

proposed a match between Sophia and young Mr. Blifil.

  Mr. Allworthy was not one of those men whose hearts flutter at any

unexpected and sudden tidings of worldly profit. His mind was, indeed,

tempered with that philosophy which becomes a man and a Christian.

He affected no absolute superiority to all pleasure and pain, to all

joy and grief; but was not at the same time to be discomposed and

ruffled by every accidental blast, by every smile or frown of fortune.

He received, therefore, Mr. Western's proposal without any visible

emotion, or without any alteration of countenance. He said the

alliance was such as he sincerely wished; then launched forth into a

very just encomium on the young lady's merit; acknowledged the offer

to be advantageous in point of fortune; and after thanking Mr. Western

for the good opinion he had professed of his nephew, concluded, that

if the young people liked each other, he should be very desirous to

complete the affair.

  Western was a little disappointed at Mr. Allworthy's answer, which

was not so warm as he expected. He treated the doubt whether the young

people might like one another with great contempt, saying, "That

parents were the best judges of proper matches for their children:

that for his part he should insist on the most resigned obedience from

his daughter: and if any young fellow could refuse such a

bed-fellow, he was his humble servant, and hoped there was no harm

done."

  Allworthy endeavoured to soften this resentment by many eulogiums on

Sophia, declaring he had no doubt but that Mr. Blifil would very

gladly receive the offer; but all was ineffectual; he could obtain

no other answer from the squire but- "I say no more- I humbly hope

there's no harm done- that's all." Which words he repeated at least a

hundred times before they parted.

  Allworthy was too well acquainted with his neighbour to be

offended at this behaviour; and though he was so averse to the

rigour which some parents exercise on their children in the article of

marriage, that he had resolved never to force his nephew's

inclinations, he was nevertheless much pleased with the prospect of

this union; for the whole country resounded the praises of Sophia, and

he had himself greatly admired the uncommon endowments of both her

mind and person. To which I believe we may add, the consideration of

her vast fortune, which, though he was too sober to be intoxicated

with it, he was too sensible to despise.

  And here, in defiance of all the barking critics in the world, I

must and will introduce a digression concerning true wisdom, of

which Mr. Allworthy was in reality as great a pattern as he was of

goodness.

  True wisdom then, notwithstanding all which Mr. Hogarth's poor

poet may have writ against riches, and in spite of all which any

rich well-fed divine may have preached against pleasure, consists

not in the contempt of either of these. A man may have as much

wisdom in the possession of an affluent fortune, as any beggar in

the streets; or may enjoy a handsome wife or a hearty friend, and

still remain as wise as any sour popish recluse, who buries all his

social faculties, and starves his belly while he well lashes his back.

  To say truth, the wisest man is the likeliest to possess all worldly

blessings in an eminent degree; for as that moderation which wisdom

prescribes is the surest way to useful wealth, so can it alone qualify

us to taste many pleasures. The wise man gratifies every appetite

and every passion, while the fool sacrifices all the rest to pall

and satiate one.

  It may be objected, that very wise men have been notoriously

avaricious. I answer, Not wise in that instance. It may likewise be

said, That the wisest men have been in their youth immoderately fond

of pleasure. I answer, They were not wise then.

  Wisdom, in short, whose lessons have been represented as so hard

to learn by those who never were at her school, only teaches us to

extend a simple maxim universally known and followed even in the

lowest life, a little farther than that life carries it. And this

is, not to buy at too dear a price.

  Now, whoever takes this maxim abroad with him into the grand

market of the world, and constantly applies it to honours, to

riches, to pleasures, and to every other commodity which that market

affords, is, I will venture to affirm, a wise man, and must be so

acknowledged in the worldly sense of the word; for he makes the best

of bargains, since in reality he purchases everything at the price

only of a little trouble, and carries home all the good things I

have mentioned, while he keeps his health, his innocence, and his

reputation, the common prices which are paid for them by others,

entire and to himself.

  From this moderation, likewise, he learns two other lessons, which

complete his character. First, never to be intoxicated when he hath

made the best bargain, nor dejected when the market is empty, or

when its commodities are too dear for his purchase.

  But I must remember on what subject I am writing, and not trespass

too far on the patience of a good-natured critic. Here, therefore, I

put an end to the chapter.





                                Chapter 4



  Containing sundry curious matters



  As soon as Mr. Allworthy returned home, he took Mr. Blifil apart,

and after some preface, communicated to him the proposal which had

been made by Mr. Western, and at the same time informed him how

agreeable this match would be to himself.

  The charms of Sophia had not made the least impression on Blifil;

not that his heart was pre-engaged; neither was he totally

insensible of beauty, or had any aversion to women; but his

appetites were by nature so moderate, that he was able, by philosophy,

or by study, or by some other method, easily to subdue them: and as to

that passion which we have treated of in the first chapter of this

book, he had not the least tincture of it in his whole composition.

  But though he was so entirely free from that mixed passion, of which

we there treated, and of which the virtues and beauty of Sophia formed

so notable an object; yet was he altogether as well furnished with

some other passions, that promised themselves very full

gratification in the young lady's fortune. Such were avarice and

ambition, which divided the dominion of his mind between them. He

had more than once considered the possession of this fortune as a very

desirable thing, and had entertained some distant views concerning it;

but his own youth, and that of the young lady, and indeed

principally a reflection that Mr. Western might marry again, and

have more children, had restrained him from too hasty or eager a

pursuit.

  This last and most material objection was now in great measure

removed, as the proposal came from Mr. Western himself. Blifil,

therefore, after a very short hesitation, answered Mr. Allworthy, that

matrimony was a subject on which he had not yet thought; but that he

was so sensible of his friendly and fatherly care, that he should in

all things submit himself to his pleasure.

  Allworthy was naturally a man of spirit, and his present gravity

arose from true wisdom and philosophy, not from any original phlegm in

his disposition; for he had possessed much fire in his youth, and

had married a beautiful woman for love. He was not therefore greatly

pleased with this cold answer of his nephew; nor could he help

launching forth into the praises of Sophia, and expressing some wonder

that the heart of a young man could be impregnable to the force of

such charms, unless it was guarded by some prior affection.

  Blifil assured him he had no such guard; and then proceeded to

discourse so wisely and religiously on love and marriage, that he

would have stopt the mouth of a parent much less devoutly inclined

than was his uncle. In the end, the good man was satisfied that his

nephew, far from having any objections to Sophia, had that esteem

for her, which in sober and virtuous minds is the sure foundation of

friendship and love. And as he doubted not but the lover would, in a

little time, become altogether as agreeable to his mistress, he

foresaw great happiness arising to all parties by so proper and

desirable an union. With Mr. Blifil's consent therefore he wrote the

next morning to Mr. Western, acquainting him that his nephew had

very thankfully and gladly received the proposal, and would be ready

to wait on the young lady, whenever she should be pleased to accept

his visit.

  Western was much pleased with this letter, and immediately

returned answer; in which, without having mentioned a word to his

daughter, he appointed that very afternoon for opening the scene of

courtship.

  As soon as he had dispatched this messenger, he went in quest of his

sister, whom he found reading and expounding the Gazette to parson

Supple. To this exposition he was obliged to attend near a quarter

of an hour, though with great violence to his natural impetuosity,

before he was suffered to speak. At length, however, he found an

opportunity of acquainting the lady, that he had business of great

consequence to impart to her; to which she answered, "Brother, I am

entirely at your service. Things look so well in the north, that I was

never in a better humour."

  The parson then withdrawing, Western acquainted her with all which

had passed, and desired her to communicate the affair to Sophia, which

she readily and chearfully undertook; though perhaps her brother was a

little obliged to that agreeable northern aspect which had so

delighted her, that he heard no comment on his proceedings; for they

were certainly somewhat too hasty and violent.




                                Chapter 5



  In which is related what passed between Sophia and her aunt



  Sophia was in her chamber, reading, when her aunt came in. The

moment she saw Mrs. Western, she shut the book with so much eagerness,

that the good lady could not forbear asking her, What book that was

which she seemed so much afraid of showing? "Upon my word, madam,"

answered Sophia, "it is a book which I am neither ashamed nor afraid

to own I have read. It is the production of a young lady of fashion,

whose good understanding, I think, doth honour to her sex, and whose

good heart is an honour to human nature." Mrs. Western then took up

the book, and immediately after threw it down, saying- "Yes, the

author is of a very good family; but she is not much among people one

knows. I have never read it; for the best judges say, there is not

much in it."- "I dare not, madam, set up my own opinion," says

Sophia, "against the best judges, but there appears to me a great deal

of human nature in it; and in many parts so much true tenderness and

delicacy, that it hath cost me many a tear."- "Ay, and do you love to

cry then?" says the aunt. "I love a tender sensation," answered the

niece, "and would pay the price of a tear for it at any

time."- "Well, but show me," said the aunt, "what was you reading

when I came in; there was something very tender in that, I believe,

and very loving too. You blush, my dear Sophia. Ah! child, you

should read books which would teach you a little hypocrisy, which

would instruct you how to hide your thoughts a little better."- I

hope, madam," answered Sophia, "I have no thoughts which I ought to be

ashamed of discovering."- "Ashamed! no," cries the aunt, "I don't

think you have any thoughts which you ought to be ashamed of; and yet,

child, you blushed just now when I mentioned the word loving. Dear

Sophy, be assured you have not one thought which I am not well

acquainted with; as well, child, as the French are with our motions,

long before we put them in execution. Did you think, child, because

you have been able to impose upon your father, that you could impose

upon me? Do you imagine I did not know the reason of your overacting

all that friendship for Mr. Blifil yesterday? I have seen a little too

much of the world, to be so deceived. Nay, nay, do not blush again.

I tell you it is a passion you need not be ashamed of. It is a passion

I myself approve, and have already brought your father into the

approbation of it. Indeed, I solely consider your inclination; for I

would always have that gratified, if possible, though one may

sacrifice higher prospects. Come, I have news which will delight

your very soul. Make me your confident, and I will undertake you shall

be happy to the very extent of your wishes." "La, madam," says Sophia,

looking more foolishly than ever she did in her life, "I know not what

to say- why, madam, should you suspect?"- "Nay, no dishonesty,"

returned Mrs. Western. "Consider, you are speaking to one of your own

sex, to an aunt, and I hope you are convinced you speak to a friend.

Consider, you are only revealing to me what I know already, and what I

plainly saw yesterday, through that most artful of all disguises,

which you had put on, and which must have deceived any one who had not

perfectly known the world. Lastly, consider it is a passion which I

highly approve." "La, madam," says Sophia, "you come upon one so

unawares, and on a sudden. To be sure, madam, I am not blind- and

certainly, if it be a fault to see all human perfections assembled

together- but is it possible my father and you, madam, can see with my

eyes?" "I tell you," answered the aunt, "we do entirely approve; and

this very afternoon your father hath appointed for you to receive your

lover." "My father, this afternoon!" cries Sophia, with the blood

starting from her face.- "Yes, child," said the aunt, "this afternoon.

You know the impetuosity of my brother's temper. I acquainted him with

the passion which I first discovered in you that evening when you

fainted away in the field. I saw it in your fainting. I saw it

immediately upon your recovery. I saw it that evening at supper, and

the next morning at breakfast (you know, child, I have seen the

world). Well, I no sooner acquainted my brother, but he immediately

wanted to propose it to Allworthy. He proposed it yesterday, Allworthy

consented (as to be sure he must with joy), and this afternoon, I tell

you, you are to put on all your best airs." "This afternoon!" cries

Sophia. "Dear aunt, you frighten me out of my senses." "O, my dear,"

said the aunt, "you will soon come to yourself again; for he is a

charming young fellow, that's the truth on't." "Nay, I will own," says

Sophia, "I know none with such perfections. So brave, and yet so

gentle; so witty, yet so inoffensive; so humane, so civil, so genteel,

so handsome! What signifies his being base born, when compared with

such qualifications as these?" "Base born? What do you mean?" said the

aunt, "Mr. Blifil base born!" Sophia turned instantly pale at this

name, and faintly repeated it. Upon which the aunt cried, "Mr.

Blifil- ay, Mr. Blifil, of whom else have we been talking?" "Good

heavens," answered Sophia, ready to sink, "of Mr. Jones, I thought;

I am sure I know no other who deserves-" "I protest," cries the

aunt, "you frighten me in your turn. Is it Mr. Jones, and not Mr.

Blifil, who is the object of your affection?" "Mr. Blifil!" repeated

Sophia. "Sure it is impossible you can be in earnest; if you are, I am

the most miserable woman alive." Mrs. Western now stood a few

moments silent, while sparks of fiery rage flashed from her eyes. At

length, collecting all her force of voice, she thundered forth in

the following articulate sounds:

  "And is it possible you can think of disgracing your family by

allying yourself to a bastard? Can the blood of the Westerns submit to

such contamination? If you have not sense sufficient to restrain

such monstrous inclinations, I thought the pride of our family would

have prevented you from giving the least encouragement to so base an

affection; much less did I imagine you would ever have had the

assurance to own it to my face."

 "Madam," answered Sophia, trembling, "what I have said you have

extorted from me. I do not remember to have ever mentioned the name of

Mr. Jones with approbation to any one before; nor should I now had I

not conceived he had your approbation. Whatever were my thoughts of

that poor, unhappy young man, I intended to have carried them with

me to my grave- to that grave where only now, I find, I am to seek

repose." Here she sunk down in her chair, drowned in her tears, and,

in all the moving silence of unutterable grief, presented a

spectacle which must have affected almost the hardest heart.

  All this tender sorrow, however, raised no compassion in her aunt.

On the contrary, she now fell into the most violent rage.- "And I

would rather," she cried, in a most vehement voice, "follow you to

your grave, than I would see you disgrace yourself and your family by

such a match. O Heavens! could I have ever suspected that I should

live to hear a niece of mine declare a passion for such a fellow?

You are the first- yes, Miss Western, you are the first of your name

who ever entertained so grovelling a thought. A family so noted for

the prudence of its women"- here she ran on a full quarter of an

hour, till, having exhausted her breath rather than her rage, she

concluded with threatening to go immediately and acquaint her brother.

  Sophia then threw herself at her feet, and laying hold of her hands,

begged her with tears to conceal what she had drawn from her; urging

the violence of her father's temper, and protesting that no

inclinations of hers should ever prevail with her to do anything which

might offend him.

  Mrs. Western stood a moment looking at her, and then, having

recollected herself, said, "That on one consideration only she would

keep the secret from her brother; and this was, that Sophia should

promise to entertain Mr. Blifil that very afternoon as her lover,

and to regard him as the person who was to be her husband."

  Poor Sophia was too much in her aunt's power to deny her anything

positively; she was obliged to promise that she would see Mr.

Blifil, and be as civil to him as possible; but begged her aunt that

the match might not be hurried on. She said, "Mr. Blifil was by no

means agreeable to her, and she hoped her father would be prevailed on

not to make her the most wretched of women."

  Mrs. Western assured her, "That the match was entirely agreed

upon, and that nothing could or should prevent it. I must own," said

she, "I looked on it as on a matter of indifference; nay, perhaps, had

some scruples about it before, which were actually got over by my

thinking it highly agreeable to your own inclinations; but now I

regard it as the most eligible thing in the world: nor shall there be,

if I can prevent it, a moment of time lost on the occasion."

  Sophia replied, "Delay at least, madam, I may expect from both

your goodness and my father's. Surely you will give me time to

endeavour to get the better of so strong a disinclination as I have at

present to this person."

  The aunt answered, "She knew too much of the world to be so

deceived; that as she was sensible another man had her affections, she

should persuade Mr. Western to hasten the match as much as possible.

It would be bad politics, indeed," added she, "to protract a siege

when the enemy's army is at hand, and in danger of relieving it. No,

no, Sophy," said she, "as I am convinced you have a violent passion

which you can never satisfy with honour, I will do all I can to put

your honour out of the care of your family: for when you are married

those matters will belong only to the consideration of your husband. I

hope, child, you will always have prudence enough to act as becomes

you; but if you should not, marriage hath saved many a woman from

ruin."

  Sophia well understood what her aunt meant; but did not think proper

to make her an answer. However, she took a resolution to see Mr.

Blifil, and to behave to him as civilly as she could, for on that

condition only she obtained a promise from her aunt to keep secret the

liking which her ill fortune, rather than any scheme of Mrs.

Western, had unhappily drawn from her.





                                Chapter 6



  Containing a dialogue between Sophia and Mrs. Honour, which may a

little relieve those tender affections which the foregoing scene may

have raised in the mind of a good-natured reader



  Mrs. Western having obtained that promise from her niece which we

have seen in the last chapter, withdrew; and presently after arrived

Mrs. Honour. She was at work in a neighbouring apartment, and had been

summoned to the keyhole by some vociferation in the preceding

dialogue, where she had continued during the remaining part of it.

At her entry into the room, she found Sophia standing motionless, with

the tears trickling from her eyes. Upon which she immediately

ordered a proper quantity of tears into her own eyes, and then

began, "O Gemini, my dear lady, what is the matter?"- "Nothing,"

cries Sophia. "Nothing! O dear madam!" answers Honour, "you must not

tell me that, when your ladyship is in this taking, and when there

hath been such a preamble between your ladyship and Madam Western."-

"Don't teaze me," cries Sophia; "I tell you nothing is the matter.

Good heavens! why was I born?"- "Nay, madam," says Mrs. Honour, "you

shall never persuade me that your la'ship can lament yourself so for

nothing. To be sure I am but a servant; but to be sure I have been

always faithful to your la'ship, and to be sure I would serve your

la'ship with my life."- "My dear Honour," says Sophia, "'tis not in

thy power to be of any service to me. I am irretrievably undone."-

"Heaven forbid!" answered the waiting-woman; "but if I can't be of any

service to you, pray tell me, madam- it will be some comfort to me to

know- pray, dear ma'am, tell me what's the matter."- "My father,"

cries Sophia, "is going to marry me to a man I both despise and

hate."- "O dear, ma'am," answered the other, "who is this wicked man?

for to be sure he is very bad, or your la'ship would not despise

him."- "His name is poison to my tongue," replied Sophia: "thou wilt

know it too soon." Indeed, to confess the truth, she knew it already,

and therefore was not very inquisitive as to that point. She then

proceeded thus: "I don't pretend to give your la'ship advice, whereof

your la'ship knows much better than I can pretend to, being but a

servant; but, ifackins! no father in England should marry me against

my consent. And, to be sure, the 'squire is so good, that if he did

but know your la'ship despises and hates the young man, to be sure he

would not desire you to marry him. And if your la'ship would but give

me leave to tell my master so. To be sure, it would be more properer

to come from your own mouth; but as your la'ship doth not care to foul

your tongue with his nasty name-" - "You are mistaken, Honour," says

Sophia; "my father was determined before he ever thought fit to

mention it to me."- "More shame for him," cries Honour: "you are to go

to bed to him, and not master: and thof a man may be a very proper

man, yet every woman mayn't think him handsome alike. I am sure my

master would never act in this manner of his own head. I wish some

people would trouble themselves only with what belongs to them; they

would not, I believe, like to be served so, if it was their own case;

for though I am a maid, I can easily believe as how all men are not

equally agreeable. And what signifies your la'ship having so great a

fortune, if you can't please yourself with the man you think most

handsomest? Well, I say nothing; but to be sure it is a pity some

folks had not been better born; nay, as for that matter, I should not

mind it myself; but then there is not so much money; and what of that?

your la'ship hath money enough for both; and where can your la'ship

bestow your fortune better? for to be sure every one must allow that

he is the most handsomest, charmingest, finest, tallest, properest man

in the world."- "What do you mean by running on in this manner to me?"

cries Sophia, with a very grave countenance. "Have I ever given any

encouragement for these liberties?"- "Nay, ma'am, I ask pardon; I

meant no harm," answered she; "but to be sure the poor gentleman hath

run in my head ever since I saw him this morning. To be sure, if your

la'ship had but seen him just now, you must have pitied him. Poor

gentleman! I wishes some misfortune hath not happened to him; for he

hath been walking about with his arms across, and looking so

melancholy, all this morning: I vow and protest it made me almost cry

to see him."- "To see whom?" says Sophia. "Poor Mr. Jones," answered

Honour. "See him! why, where did you see him?" cries Sophia, "By the

canal, ma'am," says Honour. "There he hath been walking all this

morning, and at last there he laid himself down: I believe he lies

there still. To be sure, if it had not been for my modesty, being a

maid, as I am, I should have gone and spoke to him. Do, ma'am, let me

go and see, only for a fancy, whether he is there still."- "Pugh!"

says Sophia. "There! no, no: what should he do there? He is gone

before this time, to be sure. Besides, why- what- why should you go to

see? besides, I want you for something else. Go, fetch me my hat and

gloves. I shall walk with my aunt in the grove before dinner." Honour

did immediately as she was bid, and Sophia put her hat on; when,

looking in the glass, she fancied the ribbon with which her hat was

tied did not become her, and so sent her maid back again for a ribbon

of a different colour; and then giving Mrs. Honour repeated charges

not to leave her work on any account, as she said it was in violent

haste, and must be finished that very day, she muttered something more

about going to the grove, and then sallied out the contrary way, and

walked, as fast as her tender trembling limbs could carry her,

directly towards the canal.

  Jones had been there as Mrs. Honour had told her; he had indeed

spent two hours there that morning in melancholy contemplation on

his Sophia, and had gone out from the garden at one door the moment

she entered it at another. So that those unlucky minutes which had

been spent in changing the ribbons, had prevented the lovers from

meeting at this time;- a most unfortunate accident, from which my

fair readers will not fail to draw a very wholesome lesson. And here I

strictly forbid all male critics to intermeddle with a circumstance

which I have recounted only for the sake of the ladies, and upon which

they only are at liberty to comment.





                                Chapter 7



  A picture of formal courtship in miniature, as it always ought to be

drawn, and a scene of a tenderer kind painted at full length



  It was well remarked by one (and perhaps by more), that

misfortunes do not come single. This wise maxim was now verified by

Sophia, who was not only disappointed of seeing the man she loved, but

had the vexation of being obliged to dress herself out, in order to

receive a visit from the man she hated.

  That afternoon Mr. Western, for the first time, acquainted his

daughter with his intention; telling her, he knew very well that she

had heard it before from her aunt. Sophia looked very grave upon this,

nor could she prevent a few pearls from stealing into her eyes. "Come,

come," says Western, "none of your maidenish airs; I know all; I

assure you sister hath told me all."

  "Is it possible," says Sophia, "that my aunt can have betrayed me

already?"- "Ay, ay," says Western; "betrayed you! ay. Why, you

betrayed yourself yesterday at dinner. You showed your fancy very

plainly, I think. But you young girls never know what you would be at.

So you cry because I am going to marry you to the man you are in love

with! Your mother, I remember, whimpered and whined just in the same

manner; but it was all over within twenty-four hours after we were

married: Mr. Blifil is a brisk young man, and will soon put an end to

your squeamishness. Come, chear up, chear up; I expect un every

minute."

  Sophia was now convinced that her aunt had behaved honourably to

her: and she determined to go through that disagreeable afternoon with

as much resolution as possible, and without giving the least suspicion

in the world to her father.

  Mr. Blifil soon arrived; and Mr. Western soon after withdrawing,

left the young couple together.

  Here a long silence of near a quarter of an hour ensued; for the

gentleman who was to begin the conversation had all the unbecoming

modesty which consists in bashfulness. He often attempted to speak,

and as often suppressed his words just at the very point of utterance.

At last out they broke in a torrent of far-fetched and high-strained

compliments, which were answered on her side by downcast looks, half

bows, and civil monosyllables. Blifil, from his inexperience in the

ways of women, and from his conceit of himself, took this behaviour

for a modest assent to his courtship; and when, to shorten a scene

which she could no longer support, Sophia rose up and left the room,

he imputed that, too, merely to bashfulness, and comforted himself

that he should soon have enough of her company.

  He was indeed perfectly well satisfied with his prospect of success;

for as to that entire and absolute possession of the heart of his

mistress which romantic lovers require, the very idea of it never

entered his head. Her fortune and her person were the sole objects

of his wishes, of which he made no doubt soon to obtain the absolute

property; as Mr. Western's mind was so earnestly bent on the match;

and as he well knew the strict obedience which Sophia was always ready

to pay to her father's will, and the greater still which her father

would exact, if there was occasion. This authority, therefore,

together with the charms which he fancied in his own person and

conversation, could not fail, he thought, of succeeding with a young

lady, whose inclinations were, he doubted not, entirely disengaged.

  Of Jones he certainly had not even the least jealousy; and I have

often thought it wonderful that he had not. Perhaps he imagined the

character which Jones bore all over the country (how justly, let the

reader determine), of being one of the wildest fellows in England,

might render him odious to a lady of the most exemplary modesty.

Perhaps his suspicions might be laid asleep by the behaviour of

Sophia, and of Jones himself, when they were all in company

together. Lastly, and indeed principally, he was well assured there

was not another self in the case. He fancied that he knew Jones to the

bottom, and had in reality a great contempt for his understanding, for

not being more attached to his own interest. He had no apprehension

that Jones was in love with Sophia; and as for any lucrative

motives, he imagined they would sway very little with so silly a

fellow. Blifil, moreover, thought the affair of Molly Seagrim still

went on, and indeed believed it would end in marriage; for Jones

really loved him from his childhood, and had kept no secret from

him, till his behaviour on the sickness of Mr. Allworthy had

entirely alienated his heart; and it was by means of the quarrel which

had ensued on this occasion, and which was not yet reconciled, that

Mr. Blifil knew nothing of the alteration which had happened in the

affection which Jones had formerly borne towards Molly.

  From these reasons, therefore, Mr. Blifil saw no bar to his

success with Sophia. He concluded her behaviour was like that of all

other young ladies on a first visit from a lover, and it had indeed

entirely answered his expectations.

  Mr. Western took care to way-lay the lover at his exit from his

mistress. He found him so elevated with his success, so enamoured with

his daughter, and so satisfied with her reception of him, that the old

gentleman began to caper and dance about his hall, and by many other

antic actions to express the extravagance of his joy; for he had not

the least command over any of his passions; and that which had at

any time the ascendant in his mind hurried him to the wildest

excesses.

  As soon as Blifil was departed, which was not till after many hearty

kisses and embraces bestowed on him by Western, the good squire went

instantly in quest of his daughter, whom he no sooner found than he

poured forth the most extravagant raptures, bidding her chuse what

clothes and jewels she pleased; and declaring that he had no other use

for fortune but to make her happy. He then caressed her again and

again with the utmost profusion of fondness, called her by the most

endearing names, and protested she was his only joy on earth.

  Sophia perceiving her father in this fit of affection, which she did

not absolutely know the reason of (for fits of fondness were not

unusual to him, though this was rather more violent than ordinary),

thought she should never have a better opportunity of disclosing

herself than at present, as far at least as regarded Mr. Blifil; and

she too well foresaw the necessity which she should soon be under of

coming to a full explanation. After having thanked the squire,

therefore, for all his professions of kindness, she added, with a look

full of inexpressible softness, "And is it possible my papa can be

so good to place all his joy in his Sophy's happiness?" which

Western having confirmed by a great oath, and a kiss; she then laid

hold of his hand, and, falling on her knees, after many warm and

passionate declarations of affection and duty, she begged him "not

to make her the most miserable creature on earth by forcing her to

marry a man whom she detested. This I entreat of you, dear sir,"

said she, "for your sake, as well as my own, since you are so very

kind to tell me your happiness depends on mine."- "How! what!" says

Western, staring wildly. "Oh! sir," continued she, "not only your poor

Sophy's happiness; her very life, her being, depends upon your

granting her request. I cannot live with Mr. Blifil. To force me

into this marriage would be killing me."- "You can't live with Mr.

Blifil?" says Western. "No, upon my soul I can't," answered Sophia.

"Then die and be d--d," cries he, spurning her from him. "Oh! sir,"

cries Sophia, catching hold of the skirt of his coat, "take pity on

me, I beseech you. Don't look and say such cruel-- Can you be unmoved

while you see your Sophy in this dreadful condition? Can the best of

fathers break my heart? Will he kill me by the most painful, cruel,

lingering death?"- "Pooh! pooh!" cries the squire; "all stuff and

nonsense; all maidenish tricks. Kill you, indeed! Will marriage kill

you?"- "Oh! sir," answered Sophia, "such a marriage is worse than

death. He is not even indifferent; I hate and detest him."- "If you

detest un never so much," cries Western, "you shall ha'un." This he

bound by an oath too shocking to repeat; and after many violent

asseverations, concluded in these words: "I am resolved upon the

match, and unless you consent to it I will not give you a groat, not a

single farthing; no, though I saw you expiring with famine in the

street, I would not relieve you with a morsel of bread. This is my

fixed resolution, and so I leave you to consider on it." He then broke

from her with such violence, that her face dashed against the floor;

and he burst directly out of the room, leaving poor Sophia prostrate

on the ground.

  When Western came into the hall, he there found Jones; who seeing

his friend looking wild, pale, and almost breathless, could not

forbear enquiring the reason of all these melancholy appearances. Upon

which the squire immediately acquainted him with the whole matter,

concluding with bitter denunciations against Sophia, and very pathetic

lamentations of the misery of all fathers who are so unfortunate to

have daughters.

  Jones, to whom all the resolutions which had been taken in favour of

Blifil were yet a secret, was at first almost struck dead with this

relation; but recovering his spirits a little, mere despair, as he

afterwards said, inspired him to mention a matter to Mr. Western,

which seemed to require more impudence than a human forehead was

ever gifted with. He desired leave to go to Sophia, that he might

endeavour to obtain her concurrence with her father's inclinations.

  If the squire had been as quicksighted as he was remarkable for

the contrary, passion might at present very well have blinded him.

He thanked Jones for offering to undertake the office, and said,

"Go, go, prithee, try what canst do;" and then swore many execrable

oaths that he would turn her out of doors unless she consented to

the match.





                                Chapter 8



  The meeting between Jones and Sophia



  Jones departed instantly in quest of Sophia, whom he found just

risen from the ground, where her father had left her, with the tears

trickling from her eyes, and the blood running from her lips. He

presently ran to her, and with a voice full at once of tenderness

and terrour, cried, "O my Sophia, what means this dreadful sight?" She

looked softly at him for a moment before she spoke, and then said,

"Mr. Jones, for Heaven's sake how came you here?- Leave me, I beseech

you, this moment."- "Do not," says he, "impose so harsh a command

upon me- my heart bleeds faster than those lips. O Sophia, how easily

could I drain my veins to preserve one drop of that dear blood."- "I

have too many obligations to you already," answered she, "for sure you

meant them such." Here she looked at him tenderly almost a minute, and

then bursting into an agony, cried, "Oh, Mr. Jones, why did you save

my life? my death would have been happier for us both."- "Happier for

us both!" cried he. "Could racks or wheels kill me so painfully as

Sophia's- I cannot bear the dreadful sound. Do I live but for her?"

Both his voice and looks were full of inexpressible tenderness when he

spoke these words; and at the same time he laid gently hold on her

hand, which she did not withdraw from him; to say the truth, she

hardly knew what she did or suffered. A few moments now passed in

silence between these lovers, while his eyes were eagerly fixed on

Sophia, and hers declining towards the ground: at last she recovered

strength enough to desire him again to leave her, for that her certain

ruin would be the consequence of their being found together; adding,

"Oh, Mr. Jones, you know not, you know not what hath passed this cruel

afternoon." "I know all, my Sophia," answered he; "your cruel father

hath told me all, and he himself hath sent me hither to you."- "My

father sent you to me!" replied she: "sure you dream."- "Would to

Heaven," cries he, "it was but a dream! Oh, Sophia, your father hath

sent me to you, to be an advocate for my odious rival, to solicit

you in his favour. I took any means to get access to you. O speak to

me, Sophia! comfort my bleeding heart. Sure no one ever loved, ever

doated like me. Do not unkindly withhold this dear, this soft, this

gentle hand- one moment, perhaps, tears you for ever from me- nothing

less than this cruel occasion could, I believe, have ever conquered

the respect and awe with which you have inspired me." She stood a

moment silent, and covered with confusion; then lifting up her eyes

gently towards him, she cried, "What would Mr. Jones have me

say?"- "O do but promise," cries he, "that you never will give

yourself to Blifil."- "Name not," answered she, "the detested sound.

Be assured I never will give him what is in my power to withhold from

him."- "Now then," cries he, "while you are so perfectly kind, go a

little farther, and add that I may hope."- "Alas!" says she, "Mr.

Jones, whither will you drive me? What hope have I to bestow? You know

my father's intentions."- "But I know," answered he, "your compliance

with them cannot be compelled."- "What," says she, "must be the

dreadful consequence of my disobedience? My own ruin is my least

concern. I cannot bear the thoughts of being the cause of my

father's misery."- "He is himself the cause," cries Jones, "by

exacting a power over you which Nature hath not given him. Think on

the misery which I am to suffer if I am to lose you, and see on which

side pity will turn the balance."- "Think of it!" replied she: "can

you imagine I do not feel the ruin which I must bring on you, should I

comply with your desire? It is that thought which gives me

resolution to bid you fly from me for ever, and avoid your own

destruction."- "I fear no destruction," cries he, "but the loss of

Sophia. If you would save me from the most bitter agonies, recall that

cruel sentence. Indeed, I can never part with you, indeed I cannot."

  The lovers now stood both silent and trembling, Sophia being

unable to withdraw her hand from Jones, and he almost as unable to

hold it; when the scene, which I believe some of my readers will think

had lasted long enough, was interrupted by one of so different a

nature, that we shall reserve the relation of it for a different

chapter.





                                Chapter 9



  Being of a much more tempestuous kind than the former



  Before we proceed with what now happened to our lovers, it may be

proper to recount what had past in the hall during their tender

interview.

  Soon after Jones had left Mr. Western in the manner above mentioned,

his sister came to him, and was presently informed of all that had

passed between her brother and Sophia relating to Blifil.

  This behaviour in her niece the good lady construed to be an

absolute breach of the condition on which she had engaged to keep

her love for Mr. Jones a secret. She considered herself, therefore, at

full liberty to reveal all she knew to the squire, which she

immediately did in the most explicit terms, and without any ceremony

or preface.

  The idea of a marriage between Jones and his daughter, had never

once entered into the squire's head, either in the warmest minutes

of his affection towards that young man, or from suspicion, or on

any other occasion. He did indeed consider a parity of fortune and

circumstances to be physically as necessary an ingredient in marriage,

as difference of sexes, or any other essential; and had no more

apprehension of his daughter's falling in love with a poor man, than

with any animal of a different species.

  He became, therefore, like one thunderstruck at his sister's

relation. He was, at first, incapable of making any answer, having

been almost deprived of his breath by the violence of the surprize.

This, however, soon returned, and, as is usual in other cases after an

intermission, with redoubled force and fury.

  The first use he made of the power of speech, after his recovery

from the sudden effects of his astonishment, was to discharge a

round volley of oaths and imprecations. After which he proceeded

hastily to the apartment where he expected to find the lovers, and

murmured, or rather indeed roared forth, intentions of revenge every

step he went.

  As when two doves, or two wood-pigeons, or as when Strephon and

Phyllis (for that comes nearest to the mark) are retired into some

pleasant solitary grove, to enjoy the delightful conversation of Love,

that bashful boy, who cannot speak in public, and is never a good

companion to more than two at a time; here, while every object is

serene, should hoarse thunder burst suddenly through the shattered

clouds, and rumbling roll along the sky, the frightened maid starts

from the mossy bank or verdant turf, the pale livery of death succeeds

the red regimentals in which Love had before drest her cheeks, fear

shakes her whole frame, and her lover scarce supports her trembling

tottering limbs.

  Or as when two gentlemen, strangers to the wondrous wit of the

place, are cracking a bottle together at some inn or tavern at

Salisbury, if the great Dowdy, who acts the part of a madman as well

as some of his setters-on do that of a fool, should rattle his chains,

and dreadfully hum forth the grumbling catch along the gallery; the

frighted strangers stand aghast; scared at the horrid sound, they seek

some place of shelter from the approaching danger; and if the

well-barred windows did admit their exit, would venture their necks to

escape the threatening fury now coming upon them.

  So trembled poor Sophia, so turned she pale at the noise of her

father, who, in a voice most dreadful to hear, came on swearing,

cursing, and vowing the destruction of Jones. To say the truth, I

believe the youth himself would, from some prudent considerations,

have preferred another place of abode at this time, had his terror

on Sophia's account given him liberty to reflect a moment on what

any other ways concerned himself, than as his love made him partake

whatever affected her.

  And now the squire, having burst open the door, beheld an object

which instantly suspended all his fury against Jones; this was the

ghastly appearance of Sophia, who had fainted away in her lover's

arms. This tragical sight Mr. Western no sooner beheld, than all his

rage forsook him; he roared for help with his utmost violence; ran

first to his daughter, then back to the door calling for water, and

then back again to Sophia, never considering in whose arms she then

was, nor perhaps once recollecting that there was such a person in the

world as Jones; for indeed I believe the present circumstances of

his daughter were now the sole consideration which employed his

thoughts.

  Mrs. Western and a great number of servants soon came to the

assistance of Sophia with water, cordials, and everything necessary on

those occasions. These were applied with such success, that Sophia

in a very few minutes began to recover, and all the symptoms of life

to return. Upon which she was presently led off by her own maid and

Mrs. Western: nor did that good lady depart without leaving some

wholesome admonitions with her brother, on the dreadful effects of his

passion, or, as she pleased to call it, madness.

  The squire, perhaps, did not understand this good advice, as it

was delivered in obscure hints, shrugs, and notes of admiration: at

least, if he did understand it, he profited very little by it; for

no sooner was he cured of his immediate fears for his daughter, than

he relapsed into his former frenzy, which must have produced an

immediate battle with Jones, had not parson Supple, who was a very

strong man, been present, and by mere force restrained the squire from

acts of hostility.

  The moment Sophia was departed, Jones advanced in a very suppliant

manner to Mr. Western, whom the parson held in his arms, and begged

him to be pacified; for that, while he continued in such a passion, it

would be impossible to give him any satisfaction.

  "I wull have satisfaction o' thee," answered the squire: "so doff

thy clothes. At unt half a man, and I'll lick thee as well as wast

ever licked in thy life." He then bespattered the youth with abundance

of that language which passes between country gentlemen who embrace

opposite sides of the question; with frequent applications to him to

salute that part which is generally introduced into all

controversies that arise among the lower orders of the English

gentry at horse-races, cock-matches, and other public places.

Allusions to this part are likewise often made for the sake of the

jest. And here, I believe, the wit is generally misunderstood. In

reality, it lies in desiring another to kiss your a-- for having just

before threatened to kick his; for I have observed very accurately,

that no one ever desires you to kick that which belongs to himself,

nor offers to kiss this part in another.

  It may likewise seem surprizing that in the many thousand kind

invitations of this sort, which every one who hath conversed with

country gentlemen must have heard, no one, I believe, hath ever seen a

single instance where the desire hath been complied with;- a great

instance of their want of politeness; for in town nothing can be

more common than for the finest gentlemen to perform this ceremony

every day to their superiors, without having that favour once

requested of them.

  To all such wit, Jones very calmly answered, "Sir, this usage may

perhaps cancel every other obligation you have conferred on me; but

there is one you can never cancel; nor will I be provoked by your

abuse to lift my hand against the father of Sophia."

  At these words the squire grew still more outrageous than before; so

that the parson begged Jones to retire; saying, "You behold, sir,

how he waxeth wrath at your abode here; therefore let me pray you

not to tarry any longer. His anger is too much kindled for you to

commune with him at present. You had better, therefore, conclude

your visit, and refer what matters you have to urge in your behalf

to some other opportunity."

  Jones accepted this advice with thanks, and immediately departed.

The squire now regained the liberty of his hands, and so much temper

as to express some satisfaction in the restraint which had been laid

upon him; declaring that he should certainly have beat his brains out;

and adding, "It would have vexed one confoundedly to have been

hanged for such a rascal."

  The parson now began to triumph in the success of his peacemaking

endeavours, and proceeded to read a lecture against anger, which might

perhaps rather have tended to raise than to quiet that passion in some

hasty minds. This lecture he enriched with many valuable quotations

from the antients, particularly from Seneca; who hath indeed so well

handled this passion, that none but a very angry man can read him

without great pleasure and profit. The doctor concluded this

harangue with the famous story of Alexander and Clitus; but as I

find that entered in my common-place under title Drunkenness, I

shall not insert it here.

  The squire took no notice of this story, nor perhaps of anything

he said; for he interrupted him before he had finished, by calling for

a tankard of beer; observing (which is perhaps as true as any

observation on this fever of the mind) that anger makes a man dry.

  No sooner had the squire swallowed a large draught than he renewed

the discourse on Jones, and declared a resolution of going the next

morning early to acquaint Mr. Allworthy. His friend would have

dissuaded him from this, from the mere motive of good-nature; but

his dissuasion had no other effect than to produce a large volley of

oaths and curses, which greatly shocked the pious ears of Supple;

but he did not dare to remonstrate against a privilege which the

squire claimed as a freeborn Englishman. To say truth, the parson

submitted to please his palate at the squire's table, at the expense

of suffering now and then this violence to his ears. He contented

himself with thinking he did not promote this evil practise, and

that the squire would not swear an oath the less, if he never

entered within his gates. However, though he was not guilty of ill

manners by rebuking a gentleman in his own house, he paid him off

obliquely in the pulpit: which had not, indeed, the good effect of

working a reformation in the squire himself; yet it so far operated on

his conscience, that he put the laws very severely in execution

against others, and the magistrate was the only person in the parish

who could swear with impunity.





                                Chapter 10



  In which Mr. Western visits Mr. Allworthy



  Mr. Allworthy was now retired from breakfast with his nephew, well

satisfied with the report of the young gentleman's successful visit to

Sophia (for he greatly desired the match, more on account of the young

lady's character than of her riches), when Mr. Western broke

abruptly in upon them, and without any ceremony began as follows:-

  "There, you have done a fine piece of work truly! You have brought

up your bastard to a fine purpose; not that I believe you have had any

hand in it neither, that is, as a man may say, designedly: but there

is a fine kettle-of-fish made on't up at our house." "What can be

the matter, Mr. Western?" said Allworthy. "O, matter enow of all

conscience: my daughter hath fallen in love with your bastard,

that's all; but I won't ge her a hapeny, not the twentieth part of a

brass varden. I always thought what would come o' breeding up a

bastard like a gentleman, and letting un come about to vok's houses.

It's well vor un I could not get at un: I'd a lick'd un; I'd a spoil'd

his caterwauling; I'd a taught the son of a whore to meddle with

meat for his master. He shan't ever have a morsel of meat of mine,

or a varden to buy it: if she will ha un, one smock shall be her

portion. I'd sooner ge my esteate to the zinking fund, that it may

be sent to Hanover to corrupt our nation with." "I am heartily sorry,"

cries Allworthy. "Pox o' your sorrow, says Western; "it will do me

abundance of good when I have lost my only child, my poor Sophy,

that was the joy of my heart, and all the hope and comfort of my

age; but I am resolved I will turn her out o' doors; she shall beg,

and starve, and rot in the streets. Not one hapeny, not a hapeny shall

she ever hae o' mine. The son of a bitch was always good at finding

a hare sitting, an be rotted to'n: I little thought what puss he was

looking after; but it shall be the worst he ever vound in his life.

She shall be no better than carrion: the skin o'er is all he shall ha,

and zu you may tell un." "I am in amazement," cries Allworthy, "at

what you tell me, after what passed between my nephew and the young

lady no longer ago than yesterday." "Yes, sir," answered Western,

"it was after what passed between your nephew and she that the whole

matter came out. Mr. Blifil there was no sooner gone than the son of a

whore came lurching about the house. Little did I think when I used to

love him for a sportsman that he was all the while a-poaching after my

daughter." "Why truly," says Allworthy, "I could wish you had not

given him so many opportunities with her; and you will do me the

justice to acknowledge that I have always been averse to his staying

so much at your house, though I own I had no suspicion of this

kind." "Why, zounds," cries Western, "who could have thought it?

What the devil had she to do wi'n? He did not come there a courting to

her; he came there a hunting with me." "But was it possible," says

Allworthy, "that you should never discern any symptoms of love between

them, when you have seen them so often together?" "Never in my life,

as I hope to be saved," cries Western: "I never so much as zeed him

kiss her in all my life; and so far from courting her, he used

rather to be more silent when she was in company than at any other

time; and as for the girl, she was always less civil to'n than to

any young man that came to the house. As to that matter, I am not more

easy to be deceived than another; I would not have you think I am,

neighbour." Allworthy could scarce refrain laughter at this; but he

resolved to do a violence to himself; for he perfectly well knew

mankind, and had too much good-breeding and good-nature to offend

the squire in his present circumstances. He then asked Western what he

would have him do upon this occasion. To which the other answered,

"That he would have him keep the rascal away from his house, and

that he would go and lock up the wench; for he was resolved to make

her marry Mr. Blifil in spite of her teeth." He then shook Blifil by

the hand, Blifil by the hand, and swore he would have no other

son-in-law. Presently after which he took his leave; saying his

house was in such disorder that it was necessary for him to make haste

home, to take care his daughter did not give him the slip; and as

for Jones, he swore if he caught him at his house, he would qualify

him to run for the geldings' plate.

  When Allworthy and Blifil were again left together, a long silence

ensued between them; all which interval the young gentleman filled

up with sighs, which proceeded partly from disappointment, but more

from hatred; for the success of Jones was much more grievous to him

than the loss of Sophia.

  At length his uncle asked him what he was determined to do, and he

answered in the following words:- "Alas! sir, can it be a question

what step a lover will take, when reason and passion point different

ways? I am afraid it is too certain he will, in that dilemma, always

follow the latter. Reason dictates to me, to quit all thoughts of a

woman who places her affections on another; my passion bids me hope

she may in time change her inclinations in my favour. Here, however, I

conceive an objection may be raised, which, if it could not fully be

answered, would totally deter me from any further pursuit. I mean

the injustice of endeavouring to supplant another in a heart of

which he seems already in possession; but the determined resolution of

Mr. Western shows that, in this case, I shall, by so doing, promote

the happiness of every party; not only that of the parent, who will

thus be preserved from the highest degree of misery, but of both the

others, who must be undone by this match. The lady, I am sure, will be

undone in every sense; for, besides the loss of most part of her own

fortune, she will be not only married to a beggar, but the little

fortune which her father cannot withhold from her will be squandered

on that wench with whom I know he yet converses. Nay, that is a

trifle; for I know him to be one of the worst men in the world; for

had my dear uncle known what I have hitherto endeavoured to conceal,

he must have long since abandoned so profligate a wretch." "How!" said

Allworthy; "hath he done anything worse than I already know? Tell

me, I beseech you?" "No," replied Blifil; "it is now past, and perhaps

he may have repented of it." "I command you, on your duty," said

Allworthy, "to tell me what you mean." "You know, sir," says Blifil,

"I never disobeyed you; but I am sorry I mentioned it, since it may

now look like revenge, whereas, I thank Heaven, no such motive ever

entered my heart; and if you oblige me to discover it, I must be his

petitioner to you for your forgiveness." "I will have no

conditions," answered Allworthy; "I think I have shown tenderness

enough towards him, and more perhaps than you ought to thank me

for." "More, indeed, I fear, than he deserved," cries Blifil; "for

in the very day of your utmost danger, when myself and all the

family were in tears, he filled the house with riot and debauchery. He

drank, and sung, and roared; and when I gave him a gentle hint of

the indecency of his actions, he fell into a violent passion, swore

many oaths, called me rascal, and struck me." "How!" cries

Allworthy; "did he dare to strike you?" "I am sure," cries Blifil,

"I have forgiven him that long ago. I wish I could so easily forget

his ingratitude to the best of benefactors; and yet even that I hope

you will forgive him, since he must have certainly been possessed with

the devil: for that very evening, as Mr. Thwackum and myself were

taking the air in the fields, and exulting in the good symptoms then

first began to discover themselves, we unluckily saw him engaged

with a wench in a manner not fit to be mentioned. Mr. Thwackum, with

more boldness than prudence, advanced to rebuke him, when (I am

sorry to say it) he fell upon the worthy man, and beat him so

outrageously that I wish he may have yet recovered the bruises. Nor

was I without my share of the effects of his malice, while I

endeavoured t6 protect my tutor; but that I have long forgiven; nay, I

prevailed with Mr. Thwackum to forgive him too, and not to inform

you of a secret which I feared might be fatal to him. And now, sir,

since I have unadvisedly dropped a hint of this matter, and your

commands have obliged me to discover the whole, let me intercede

with you for him." "O child!" said Allworthy, "I know not whether I

should blame or applaud your goodness, in concealing such villany a

moment: but where is Mr. Thwackum? Not that I want any confirmation of

what you say; but I will examine all the evidence of this matter, to

justify to the world the example I am resolved to make of such a

monster."

  Thwackum was now sent for, and presently appeared. He corroborated

every circumstance which the other had deposed; nay, he produced the

record upon his breast, where the handwriting of Mr. Jones remained

very legible in black and blue. He concluded with declaring to Mr.

Allworthy, that he should have long since informed him of this matter,

had not Mr. Blifil, by the most earnest interpositions, prevented him.

"He is," says he, "an excellent youth: though such forgiveness of

enemies is carrying the matter too far."

  In reality, Blifil had taken some pains to prevail with the

parson, and to prevent the discovery at that time; for which he had

many reasons. He knew that the minds of men are apt to be softened and

relaxed from their usual severity by sickness. Besides, he imagined

that if the story was told when the fact was so recent, and the

physician about the house, who might have unravelled the real truth,

he should never be able to give it the malicious turn which he

intended. Again, he resolved to hoard up this business, till the

indiscretion of Jones should afford some additional complaints; for he

thought the joint weight of many facts falling upon him together,

would be the most likely to crush him; and he watched, therefore, some

such opportunity as that with which fortune had now kindly presented

him. Lastly, by prevailing with Thwackum to conceal the matter for a

time, he knew he should confirm an opinion of his friendship to Jones,

which he had greatly laboured to establish in Mr. Allworthy.





                                Chapter 11



  A short chapter; but which contains sufficient matter to affect

the good-natured reader



  It was Mr. Allworthy's custom never to punish any one, not even to

turn away a servant, in a passion. He resolved therefore to delay

passing sentence on Jones till the afternoon.

  The poor young man attended at dinner, as usual; but his heart was

too much loaded to suffer him to eat. His grief too was a good deal

aggravated by the unkind looks of Mr. Allworthy; whence he concluded

that Western had discovered the whole affair between him and Sophia;

but as to Mr. Blifil's story, he had not the least apprehension; for

of much the greater part he was entirely innocent; and for the

residue, as he had forgiven and forgotten it himself, so he

suspected no remembrance on the other side. When dinner was over,

and the servants departed, Mr. Allworthy began to harangue. He set

forth, in a long speech, the many iniquities of which Jones had been

guilty, particularly those which this day had brought to light; and

concluded by telling him, "That unless he could clear himself of the

charge, he was resolved to banish him his sight for ever."

  Many disadvantages attended poor Jones in making his defence; nay,

indeed, he hardly knew his accusation; for as Mr. Allworthy, in

recounting the drunkenness, &c., while he lay ill, out of modesty sunk

everything that related particularly to himself, which indeed

principally constituted the crime; Jones could not deny the charge.

His heart was, besides, almost broken already; and his spirits were so

sunk, that he could say nothing for himself; but acknowledge the

whole, and, like a criminal in despair, threw himself upon mercy;

concluding, "That though he must own himself guilty of many follies

and inadvertencies, he hoped he had done nothing to deserve what would

be to him the greatest punishment in the world."

  Allworthy answered, "That he had forgiven him too often already,

in compassion to his youth, and in hopes of his amendment: that he now

found he was an abandoned reprobate, and such as it would be

criminal in any one to support and encourage. Nay," said Mr. Allworthy

to him, "your audacious attempt to steal away the young lady, calls

upon me to justify my own character in punishing you. The world who

have already censured the regard I have shown for you may think,

with some colour at least of justice, that I connive at so base and

barbarous an action- an action of which you must have known my

abhorrence: and which, had you had any concern for my ease and honour,

as well as for my friendship, you would never have thought of

undertaking. Fie upon it, young man! indeed there is scarce any

punishment equal to your crimes, and I can scarce think myself

justifiable in what I am now going to bestow on you. However, as I

have educated you like a child of my own, I will not turn you naked

into the world. When you open this paper, therefore, you will find

something which may enable you, with industry, to get an honest

livelihood; but if you employ it to worse purposes, I shall not

think myself obliged to supply you farther, being resolved, from

this day forward, to converse no more with you on any account. I

cannot avoid saying, there is no part of your conduct which I resent

more than your ill-treatment of that good young man (meaning Blifil)

who hath behaved with so much tenderness and honour towards you."

  These last words were a dose almost too bitter to be swallowed. A

flood of tears now gushed from the eyes of Jones, and every faculty of

speech and motion seemed to have deserted him. It was some time before

he was able to obey Allworthy's peremptory commands of departing;

which he at length did, having first kissed his hands with a passion

difficult to be affected, and as difficult to be described.

  The reader must be very weak, if, when he considers the light in

which Jones then appeared to Mr. Allworthy, he should blame the rigour

of his sentence. And yet all the neighbourhood, either from this

weakness, or from some worse motive, condemned this justice and

severity as the highest cruelty. Nay, the very persons who had

before censured the good man for the kindness and tenderness shown

to a bastard (his own, according to the general opinion), now cried

out as loudly against turning his own child out of doors. The women

especially were unanimous in taking the part of Jones, and raised more

stories on the occasion than I have room, in this chapter, to set

down.

  One thing must not be omitted, that, in their censures on this

occasion, none ever mentioned the sum contained in the paper which

Allworthy gave Jones, which was no less than five hundred pounds;

but all agreed that he was sent away penniless, and some said naked,

from the house of his inhuman father.





                                Chapter 12



  Containing love-letters, etc.



  Jones was commanded to leave the house immediately, and told, that

his clothes and everything else should be sent to him whithersoever he

should order them.

  He accordingly set out, and walked above a mile, not regarding,

and indeed scarce knowing, whither he went. At length a little brook

obstructing his passage, he threw himself down by the side of it;

nor could he help muttering with some little indignation, "Sure my

father will not deny me this place to rest in!"

  Here he presently fell into the most violent agonies, tearing his

hair from his head, and using most other actions which generally

accompany fits of madness, rage, and despair.

  When he had in this manner vented the first emotions of passion,

he began to come a little to himself. His grief now took another turn,

and discharged itself in a gentler way, till he became at last cool

enough to reason with his passion, and to consider what steps were

proper to be taken in his deplorable condition.

  And now the great doubt was, how to act with regard to Sophia. The

thoughts of leaving her almost rent his heart asunder; but the

consideration of reducing her to ruin and beggary still racked him, if

possible, more; and if the violent desire of possessing her person

could have induced him to listen one moment to this alternative, still

he was by no means certain of her resolution to indulge his wishes

at so high an expense. The resentment of Mr. Allworthy, and the injury

he must do to his quiet, argued strongly against this latter; and

lastly, the apparent impossibility of his success, even if he would

sacrifice all these considerations to it, came to his assistance;

and thus honour at last backed with despair, with gratitude to his

benefactors, and with real love to his mistress, got the better of

burning desire, and he resolved rather to quit Sophia, than pursue her

to her ruin.

  It is difficult for any who have not felt it, to conceive the

glowing warmth which filled his breast on the first contemplation of

this victory over his passion. Pride flattered him so agreeably,

that his mind perhaps enjoyed perfect happiness; but this was only

momentary: Sophia soon returned to his imagination, and allayed the

joy of his triumph with no less bitter pangs than a good-natured

general must feel, when he surveys the bleeding heaps, at the price of

whose blood he hath purchased his laurels; for thousands of tender

ideas lay murdered before our conqueror.

  Being resolved, however, to pursue the paths of this giant honour,

as the gigantic poet Lee calls it, he determined to write a farewell

letter to Sophia; and accordingly proceeded to a house not far off,

where, being furnished with proper materials, he wrote as follows:-



  MADAM,-

  When you reflect on the situation in which I write, I am sure your

good-nature will pardon any inconsistency or absurdity which my letter

contains; for everything here flows from a heart so full, that no

language can express its dictates.

  I have resolved, madam, to obey your commands, in flying for ever

from your dear, your lovely sight. Cruel indeed those commands are;

but it is a cruelty which proceeds from fortune, not from my Sophia.

Fortune hath made it necessary, necessary to your preservation, to

forget there ever was such a wretch as I am.

  Believe me, I would not hint all my sufferings to you, if I imagined

they could possibly escape your ears. I know the goodness and

tenderness of your heart, and would avoid giving you any of those

pains which you always feel for the miserable. O let nothing, which

you shall hear of my hard fortune, cause a moment's concern; for,

after the loss of you, everything is to me a trifle.

  O Sophia! it is hard to leave you; it is harder still to desire

you to forget me; yet the sincerest love obliges me to both. Pardon my

conceiving that any remembrance of me can give you disquiet; but if

I am so gloriously wretched, sacrifice me every way to your relief.

Think I never loved you; or think truly how little I deserve you;

and learn to scorn me for a presumption which can never be too

severely punished.- I am unable to say more.- May guardian angels

protect you for ever!



  He was now searching his pockets for his wax, but found none, nor

indeed anything else, therein; for in truth he had, in his frantic

disposition, tossed everything from him, and amongst the rest, his

pocket-book, which he had received from Mr. Allworthy, which he had

never opened, and which now first occurred to his memory.

  The house supplied him with a wafer for his present purpose, with

which, having sealed his letter, he returned hastily towards the brook

side, in order to search for the things which he had there lost. In

his way he met his old friend Black George, who heartily condoled with

him on his misfortune; for this had already reached his ears, and

indeed those of all the neighbourhood.

  Jones acquainted the gamekeeper with his loss, and he as readily

went back with him to the brook, where they searched every tuft of

grass in the meadow, as well where Jones had not been as where he

had been; but all to no purpose, for they found nothing; for,

indeed, though the things were then in the meadow, they omitted to

search the only place where they were deposited; to wit, in the

pockets of the said George; for he had just before found them, and

being luckily apprized of their value. had very carefully put them

up for his own use.

  The gamekeeper having exerted as much diligence in quest of the lost

goods, as if he had hoped to find them, desired Mr. Jones to recollect

if he had been in no other place: "For sure," said he, "if you had

lost them here so lately, the things must have been here still; for

this is a very unlikely place for any one to pass by." And indeed it

was by great accident that he himself had passed through that field,

in order to lay wires for hares, with which he was to supply a

poulterer at Bath the next morning.

  Jones now gave over all hopes of recovering his loss, and almost all

thoughts concerning it, and turning to Black George, asked him

earnestly if he would do him the greatest favour in the world?

  George answered with some hesitation, "Sir, you know you may command

me whatever is in my power, and I heartily wish it was in my power

to do you any service." In fact, the question staggered him; for he

had, by selling game, amassed a pretty good sum of money in Mr.

Western's service, and was afraid that Jones wanted to borrow some

small matter of him; but he was presently relieved from his anxiety,

by being desired to convey a letter to Sophia, which with great

pleasure he promised to do. And indeed I believe there are few favours

which he would not have gladly conferred on Mr. Jones; for he bore

as much gratitude towards him as he could, and was as honest as men

who love money better than any other thing in the universe,

generally are.

  Mrs. Honour was agreed by both to be the proper means by which

this letter should pass to Sophia. They then separated; the gamekeeper

returned home to Mr. Western's, and Jones walked to an alehouse at

half a mile's distance, to wait for his messenger's return.

  George no sooner came home to his master's house than he met with

Mrs. Honour; to whom, having first sounded her with a few previous

questions, he delivered the letter for her mistress, and received at

the same time another from her, for Mr. Jones; which Honour told him

she had carried all that day in her bosom, and began to despair of

finding any means of delivering it.

  The gamekeeper returned hastily and joyfully to Jones, who, having

received Sophia's letter from him, instantly withdrew, and eagerly

breaking it open, read as follows:-



  SIR,-

  It is impossible to express what I have felt since I saw you. Your

submitting, on my account, to such cruel insults from my father,

lays me under an obligation I shall ever own. As you know his

temper, I beg you will, for my sake, avoid him. I wish I had any

comfort to send you; but believe this, that nothing but the last

violence shall ever give my hand or heart where you would be sorry

to see them bestowed.



  Jones read this letter a hundred times over, and kissed it a hundred

times as often. His passion now brought all tender desires back into

his mind. He repented that he had writ to Sophia in the manner we have

seen above; but he repented more that he had made use of the

interval of his messenger's absence to write and dispatch a letter

to Mr. Allworthy, in which he had faithfully promised and bound

himself to quit all thoughts of his love. However, when his cool

reflections returned, he plainly perceived that his case was neither

mended nor altered by Sophia's billet, unless to give him some

little glimpse of hope, from her constancy, of some favourable

accident hereafter. He therefore resumed his resolution, and taking

leave of Black George, set forward to a town about five miles distant,

whither he had desired Mr. Allworthy, unless he pleased to revoke

his sentence, to send his things after him.





                                Chapter 13



  The behaviour of Sophia on the present occasion; which none of her

sex will blame, who are capable of behaving in the same manner. And

the discussion of a knotty point in the court of conscience



  Sophia had passed the last twenty-four hours in no very desirable

manner. During a large part of them she had been entertained by her

aunt with lectures of prudence, recommending to her the example of the

polite world, where love (so the good lady said) is at present

entirely laughed at, and where women consider matrimony, as men do

offices of public trust, only as the means of making their fortunes,

and of advancing themselves in the world. In commenting on which

text Mrs. Western had displayed her eloquence during several hours.

  These sagacious lectures, though little suited either to the taste

or inclination of Sophia, were, however, less irksome to her than

her own thoughts, that formed the entertainment of the night, during

which she never once closed her eyes.

  But though she could neither sleep nor rest in her bed, yet,

having no avocation from it, she was found there by her father at

his return from Allworthy's, which was not till past ten o'clock in

the morning. He went directly up to her apartment, opened the door,

and seeing she was not up, cried, "Oh! you are safe then, and I am

resolved to keep you so." He then locked the door, and delivered the

key to Honour, having first given her the strictest charge, with great

promises of rewards for her fidelity, and most dreadful menaces of

punishment in case should betray her trust.

  Honour's orders were, not to suffer her mistress to come out of

her room without the authority of the squire himself, and to admit

none to her but him and her aunt; but she was herself to attend her

with whatever Sophia pleased, except only pen, ink, and paper, of

which she was forbidden the use.

  The squire ordered his daughter to dress herself and attend him at

dinner; which she obeyed; and having sat the usual time, was again

conducted to her prison.

  In the evening the gaoler Honour brought her the letter which she

received from the gamekeeper. Sophia read it very attentively twice or

thrice over, and then threw herself upon the bed, and burst into a

flood of tears. Mrs. Honour expressed great astonishment at this

behaviour in her mistress; nor could she forbear very eagerly

begging to know the cause of this passion. Sophia made her no answer

for some time, and then, starting suddenly up, caught her maid by

the hand, and cried, "O Honour! I am undone." "Marry forbid," cries

Honour: "I wish the letter had been burnt before I had brought it to

your la'ship. I'm sure I thought it would have comforted your la'ship,

or I would have seen it at the devil before I would have touched

it." "Honour," says Sophia, "you are a good girl, and it is vain to

attempt concealing longer my weakness from you; I have thrown away

my heart on a man who hath forsaken me." "And is Mr. Jones,"

answered the maid, "such a perfidy man?" "He hath taken his leave of

me," says Sophia, "for ever in that letter. Nay, he hath desired me to

forget him. Could he have desired that if he had loved me? Could he

have borne such a thought? Could he have written such a word?" "No,

certainly, ma'am," cries Honour; "and to be sure, if the best man in

England was to desire me to forget him, I'd take him at his word.

Marry, come up! I am sure your la'ship hath done him too much honour

ever to think on him;- a young lady who may take her choice of all

the young men in the country. And to be sure, if I may be so

presumptuous as to offer my poor opinion, there is young Mr. Blifil,

who, besides that he is come of honest parents, and will be one of the

greatest squires all hereabouts, he is to be sure, in my poor opinion,

a more handsomer and a more politer man by half; and besides, he is

a young gentleman of a sober character, and who may defy any of the

neighbours to say black is his eye; he follows no dirty trollops,

nor can any bastards be laid at his door. Forget him, indeed! I

thank Heaven I myself am not so much at my last prayers as to suffer

any man to bid me forget him twice. If the best he that wears a head

was for to go for to offer to say such an affronting word to me, I

would never give him my company afterwards, if there was another young

man in the kingdom. And as I was a saying, to be sure, there is

young Mr. Blifil." "Name not his detested name," cries Sophia. "Nay,

ma'am," says Honour, "if your la'ship doth not like him, there be more

jolly handsome young men that would court your la'ship, if they had

but the least encouragement. I don't believe there is arrow young

gentleman in this county, or in the next to it, that if your la'ship

was but to look as if you had a mind to him, would not come about to

make his offers directly." "What a wretch dost thou imagine me," cries

Sophia, "by affronting my ears with such stuff! I all detest all

mankind." "Nay, to be sure, ma'am," answered Honour, "your la'ship

hath had enough to give you a surfeit of them. To be used ill by

such a poor, beggarly, bastardly fellow."- "Hold your blasphemous

tongue," cries Sophia: "how dare you mention his name with

disrespect before me? He use me ill? No, his poor bleeding heart

suffered more when he writ the cruel words than mine from reading

them. O! he is all heroic virtue and angelic goodness. I am ashamed of

the weakness of my own passion, for blaming what I ought to admire.

O Honour! it is my good only which he consults. To my interest he

sacrifices both himself and me. The apprehension of ruining me hath

driven him to despair." "I am very glad," says Honour, to hear your

la'ship takes that into your consideration; for to be sure, it must be

nothing less than ruin to give your mind to one that is turned out

of doors, and is not worth a farthing in the world." "Turned out of

doors! " cries Sophia hastily: "how! what dost thou mean?" "Why, to be

sure, ma'am, my master no sooner told Squire Allworthy about Mr. Jones

having offered to make love to your la'ship than the squire stripped

him stark naked, and turned him out of doors!" "Ha!" says Sophia, "I

have been the cursed, wretched cause of his destruction! Turned

naked out of doors! Here, Honour, take all the money I have; take

the rings from my fingers. Here, my watch: carry him all. Go find

him immediately." "For Heaven's sake, ma'am," answered Mrs. Honour,

"do but consider, if my master should miss any of these things, I

should be made to answer for them. Therefore let me beg your la'ship

not to part with your watch and jewels. Besides, the money, I think,

is enough of all conscience; and as for that, my master can never know

anything of the matter." "Here, then," cries Sophia, "take every

farthing I am worth, find him out immediately, and give it him. Go,

go, lose not a moment."

  Mrs. Honour departed according to orders, and finding Black George

below-stairs, delivered him the purse, which contained sixteen

guineas, being, indeed, the whole stock of Sophia; for though her

father was very liberal to her, she was much too generous to be rich.

  Black George having received the purse, set forward towards the

alehouse; but in the way a thought occurred to him, whether he

should not detain this money likewise. His conscience, however,

immediately started at this suggestion, and began to upbraid him

with ingratitude to his benefactor. To this his avarice answered, That

his conscience should have considered the matter before, when he

deprived poor Jones of his L500. That having quietly acquiesced in

what was of so much greater importance, it was absurd, if not

downright hypocrisy, to affect any qualms at this trifle. In return to

which, Conscience, like a good lawyer, attempted to distinguish

between an absolute breach of trust, as here, where the goods were

delivered, and a bare concealment of what was found, as in the

former case. Avarice presently treated this with ridicule, called it a

distinction without a difference, and absolutely insisted that when

once all pretensions of honour and virtue were given up in any one

instance, that there was no precedent for resorting to them upon a

second occasion. In short, poor Conscience had certainly been defeated

in the argument, had not Fear stept in to her assistance, and very

strenuously urged that the real distinction between the two actions,

did not lie in the different degrees of honour but of safety: for that

the secreting the L500 was a matter of very little hazard; whereas the

detaining the sixteen guineas was liable to the utmost danger of

discovery.

  By this friendly aid of Fear, Conscience obtained a compleat victory

in the mind of Black George, and, after making him a few compliments

on his honesty, forced him to deliver the money to Jones.





                                Chapter 14



  A short chapter, containing a short dialogue between Squire

Western and his sister



  Mrs. Western had been engaged abroad all that day. The squire met

her at her return home; and when she enquired after Sophia, he

acquainted her that he had secured her safe enough. "She is locked

up in chamber," cries he, "and Honour keeps the key." As his looks

were full of prodigious wisdom and sagacity when he gave his sister

this information, it is probable he expected much applause from her

for what he had done; but how was he disappointed when, with a most

disdainful aspect, she cried, "Sure, brother, you are the weakest of

all men. Why will you not confide in me for the management of my

niece? Why will you interpose? You have now undone all that I have

been spending my breath in order to bring about. While I have been

endeavouring to fill her mind with maxims of prudence, you have been

provoking her to reject them. English women, brother, I thank

heaven, are no slaves. We are not to be locked up like the Spanish and

Italian wives. We have as good a right to liberty as yourselves. We

are to be convinced by reason and persuasion only, and not governed by

force. I have seen the world, brother, and know what arguments to make

use of; and if your folly had not prevented me, should have

prevailed with her to form her conduct by those rules of prudence

and discretion which I formerly taught her." "To be sure," said the

squire, "I am always in the wrong." "Brother," answered the lady, "you

are not in the wrong, unless when you meddle with matters beyond

your knowledge. You must agree that I have seen most of the world; and

happy had it been for my niece if she had not been taken from under my

care. It is by living at home with you that she hath learnt romantic

notions of love and nonsense." "You don't imagine, I hope," cries

the squire, "that I have taught her any such things." "Your ignorance,

brother," returned she, "as the great Milton says, almost subdues my

patience."* "D--n Milton!" answered the squire: "if he had the

impudence to say so to my face, I'd lend him a douse, thof he was

never so great a man. Patience! An you come to that, sister, I have

more occasion of patience, to be used like an overgrown schoolboy,

as I am by you. Do you think no one hath any understanding, unless

he hath been about at court? Pox! the world is come to a fine pass

indeed, if we are all fools, except a parcel of roundheads and Hanover

rats. Pox! I hope the times are a coming when we shall make fools of

them, and every man shall enjoy his own. That's all, sister; and every

man shall enjoy his own. I hope to zee it, sister, before the

Hanover rats have eat up all our corn, and left us nothing but turneps

to feed upon."- "I protest, brother," cries she, "you are now got

beyond my understanding. Your jargon of turneps and Hanover rats is to

me perfectly unintelligible."- "I believe"' cries he, "you don't care

to hear o'em; but the country interest may succeed one day or other

for all that."- "I wish," answered the lady, "you would think a

little of your daughter's interest; for, believe me, she is in greater

danger than the nation."- "Just now," said he, "you chid me for

thinking on her, and would ha' her left to you."- "And if you will

promise to interpose no more," answered she, "I will, out of my regard

to my niece, undertake the charge."- "Well, do then," said the

squire, "for you know I always agreed, that women are the properest to

manage women."



  *The reader may, perhaps, subdue his own patience, if he searches

for this in Milton.



  Mrs. Western then departed, muttering something with an air of

disdain, concerning women and management of the nation. She

immediately repaired to Sophia's apartment, who was now, after a day's

confinement, released again from her captivity.

