



                                    BOOK VII

                             CONTAINING THREE DAYS




                                Chapter 1



  A comparison between the world and the stage



  The world hath often compared to the theatre; and many grave

writers, as well as the poets, have considered human life as a great

drama, resembling, in almost every particular, those scenical

representations which Thespis is first reported to have invented,

and which have been since received with so much approbation and

delight in all polite countries.

  This thought hath been carried so far, and is become so general,

that some words proper to the theatre, and which were at first

metaphorically applied to the world, are now indiscriminately and

literally spoken of both; thus stage and scene are by common use grown

as familiar to us, when we speak of life in general as, when we

confine ourselves to dramatic performances: and when transactions

behind the curtain are mentioned, St. James's is more likely to

occur to our thoughts than Drurylane.

  It may seem easy enough to account for all this, by reflecting

that the theatrical stage is nothing more than a representation, or,

as Aristotle calls it, an imitation of what really exists; and

hence, perhaps, we might fairly pay a very high compliment to those

who by their writings or actions have been so capable of imitating

life, as to have their pictures in a manner confounded with, or

mistaken for, the originals.

  But, in reality, we are not so fond of paying compliments to these

people, whom we use as children frequently do the instruments of their

amusement; and have much more pleasure in hissing and buffeting

them, than in admiring their excellence. There are many other

reasons which have induced us to see this analogy between the world

and the stage.

  Some have considered the larger part of mankind in the light of

actors, as personating characters no more their own, and to which in

fact they have no better title, than the player hath to be in

earnest thought the king or emperor whom he represents. Thus the

hypocrite may be said to be a player; and indeed the Greeks called

them both by one and the same name.

  The brevity of life hath likewise given occasion to this comparison.

So the immortal Shakespear-



     ----Life's a poor player,

     That struts and frets his hour upon the stage,

     And then is heard no more.



For which hackneyed quotation I will make the reader amends by a

very noble one, which few, I believe, have read. It is taken from a

poem called the Deity, published about nine years ago, and long

since buried in oblivion; a proof that good books, no more than good

men, do always survive the bad.



     From Thee* all human actions take their springs,

     The rise of empires and the fall of kings!

     See the vast Theatre of Time display'd,

     While o'er the scene succeeding heroes tread!

     With pomp the shining images succeed,

     What leaders triumph, and what monarchs bleed!

     Perform the party thy providence assign'd,

     Their pride, their passions, to thy ends inclin'd:

     Awhile they glitter in the face of day,

     Then at thy nod the phantoms pass away;

     No traces left of all the busy scene,

     But that remembrance says- The things have been!



  *The Deity.



  In all these, however, and in every other similitude of life to

the theatre, the resemblance hath been always taken from the stage

only. None, as I remember, Have at all considered the audience at this

great drama.

  But as Nature often exhibits some of her best performances to a very

full house, so will the behaviour of her spectators no less admit

the above-mentioned comparison than that of her actors. In this vast

theatre of time are seated the friend and the critic; here are claps

and shouts, hisses and groans; in short, everything which was ever

seen or heard at the Theatre-Royal.

  Let us examine this in one example; for instance, in the behaviour

of the great audience on that scene which Nature was pleased to

exhibit in the twelfth chapter of the preceding book, where she

introduced Black George running away with the L500 from his friend and

benefactor.

  Those who sat in the world's upper gallery treated that incident,

I am well convinced, with their usual vociferation; and every term

of scurrilous reproach was most probably vented on that occasion.

  If we had descended to the next order of spectators, we should

have found an equal degree of abhorrence, though less of noise and

scurrility; yet here the good women gave Black George to the devil,

and many of them expected every minute that the cloven-footed

gentleman would fetch his own.

  The pit, as usual, was no doubt divided; those who delight in heroic

virtue and perfect character objected to the producing such

instances of villany, without punishing them very severely for the

sake of example. Some of the author's friends cryed, "Look'e,

gentlemen, the man is a villain, but it is nature for all that." And

all the young critics of the age, the clerks, apprentices, &c., called

it low, and fell a groaning.

  As for the boxes, they behaved with their accustomed politeness.

Most of them were attending to something else. Some of those few who

regarded the scene at all, declared he was a bad kind of man; while

others refused to give their opinion, till they had heard that of

the best judges.

  Now we, who are admitted behind the scenes of this great theatre

of Nature (and no author ought to write anything besides

dictionaries and spelling-books who hath not this privilege), can

censure the action, without conceiving any absolute detestation of the

person, whom perhaps Nature may not have designed to act an ill part

in all her dramas; for in this instance life most exactly resembles

the stage, since it is often the same person who represents the

villain and the heroe; and he who engages your admiration to-day

will probably attract your contempt tomorrow. As Garrick, whom I

regard in tragedy to be the greatest genius the world hath ever

produced, sometimes condescends to play the fool; so did Scipio the

Great, and Laelius the Wise, according to Horace, many years ago; nay,

Cicero reports them to have been "incredibly childish." These, it is

true, played the fool, like my friend Garrick, in jest only; but

several eminent characters have, in numberless instances of their

lives, played the fool egregiously in earnest; so far as to render

it a matter of some doubt whether their wisdom or folly was

predominant; or whether they were better intitled to the applause or

censure, the admiration or contempt, the love or hatred, of mankind.

  Those persons, indeed, who have passed any time behind the scenes of

this great theatre, and are thoroughly acquainted not only with the

several disguises which are there put on, but also with the

fantastic and capricious behaviour of the Passions, who are the

managers and directors of this theatre (for as to Reason, the

patentee, he is known to be a very idle fellow and seldom to exert

himself), may most probably have learned to understand the famous

nil admirari of Horace, or in the English phrase, to stare at nothing.

  A single bad act no more constitutes a villain in life, than a

single bad part on the stage. The passions, like the managers of a

playhouse, often force men upon parts without consulting their

judgment, and sometimes without any regard to their talents. Thus

the man, as well as the player, may condemn what he himself acts; nay,

it is common to see vice sit as awkwardly on some men, as the

character of Iago would on the honest face of Mr. William Mills.

  Upon the whole, then, the man of candour and of true understanding

is never hasty to condemn. He can censure an imperfection, or even a

vice, without rage against the guilty party. In a word, they are the

same folly, the same childishness, the same ill-breeding, and the same

ill-nature, which raise all the clamours and uproars both in life

and on the stage. The worst of men generally have the words rogue

and villain most in their mouths, as the lowest of all wretches are

the aptest to cry out low in the pit.





                                Chapter 2



  Containing a conversation which Mr. Jones had with himself



  Jones received his effects from Mr. Allworthy's early in the

morning, with the following answer to his letter:-



  SIR,-

  I am commanded by my uncle to acquaint you, that as he did not

proceed to those measures he had taken with you, without the

greatest deliberation, and after the fullest evidence of your

unworthiness, so will it be always out of your power to cause the

least alteration in his resolution. He expresses great surprize at

your presumption in saying you have resigned all pretensions to a

young lady, to whom it is impossible you should ever have had any, her

birth and fortune having made her so infinitely your superior. Lastly,

I am commanded to tell you, that the only instance of your

compliance with my uncle's inclinations which he requires, is, your

immediately quitting this country. I cannot conclude this without

offering you my advice, as a Christian, that you would seriously think

of amending your life. That you may be assisted with grace so to do,

will be always the prayer of

                                        Your humble servant,

                                                        W. BLIFIL



  Many contending passions were raised in our heroe's mind by this

letter; but the tender prevailed at last over the indignant and

irascible, and a flood of tears came seasonably to his assistance, and

possibly prevented his misfortunes from either turning his head, or

bursting his heart.

  He grew, however, soon ashamed of indulging this remedy; and

starting up, he cried, "Well, then, I will give Mr. Allworthy the only

instance he requires of my obedience. I will go this moment- but

whither?- why, let Fortune direct; since there is no other who thinks

it of any consequence what becomes of this wretched person, it shall

be a matter of equal indifference to myself. Shall I alone regard what

no other- Ha! have I not reason to think there is another?- one whose

value is above that of the whole world!- I may, I must imagine my

Sophia is not indifferent to what becomes of me. Shall I then leave

this only friend- and such a friend? Shall I not stay with her?-

Where- how can I stay with her? Have I any hopes of ever seeing her,

though she was as desirous as myself, without exposing her to the

wrath of her father, and to what purpose? Can I think of soliciting

such a creature to consent to her own ruin? Shall I indulge any

passion of mine at such a price? Shall I lurk about this country

like a thief, with such intentions?- No, I disdain, I detest the

thought. Farewel, Sophia; farewel, most lovely, most beloved-" Here

passion stopped his mouth, and found a vent at his eyes.

  And now having taken a resolution to leave the country, he began

to debate with himself whither he should go. The world, as Milton

phrases it, lay all before him; and Jones, no more than Adam, had

any man to whom he might resort for comfort or assistance. All his

acquaintance were the acquaintance of Mr. Allworthy; and he had no

reason to expect any countenance from them, as that gentleman had

withdrawn his favour from him. Men of great and good characters should

indeed be very cautious how they discard their dependents; for the

consequence to the unhappy sufferer is being discarded by all others.

  What course of life to pursue, or to what business to apply himself,

was a second consideration: and here the prospect was all a melancholy

void. Every profession, and every trade, required length of time,

and what was worse, money; for matters are so constituted, that

"nothing out of nothing" is not a truer maxim in physics than in

politics; and every man who is greatly destitute of money, is on

that account entirely excluded from all means of acquiring it.

  At last the Ocean, that hospitable friend to the wretched, opened

her capacious arms to receive him; and he instantly resolved to accept

her kind invitation. To express myself less figuratively, he

determined to go to sea.

  This thought indeed no sooner suggested itself, than he eagerly

embraced it; and having presently hired horses, he set out for Bristol

to put it in execution.

  But before we attend him on this expedition, we shall resort

awhile to Mr. Western's, and see what further happened to the charming

Sophia.





                                Chapter 3



  Containing several dialogues



  The morning in which Mr. Jones departed, Mrs. Western summoned

Sophia into her apartment; and having first acquainted her that she

had obtained her liberty of her father, she proceeded to read her a

long lecture on the subject of matrimony; which she treated not as a

romantic scheme of happiness arising from love, as it hath been

described by the poets; nor did she mention any of those purposes

for which we are taught by divines to regard it as instituted by

sacred authority; she considered it rather as a fund in which

prudent women deposit their fortunes to the best advantage, in order

to receive a larger interest for them than they could have elsewhere.

  When Mrs. Western had finished, Sophia answered, "That she was

very incapable of arguing with a lady of her aunt's superior knowledge

and experience, especially on a subject which she had so very little

considered, as this of matrimony."

  "Argue with me, child!" replied the other; "I do not indeed expect

it. I should have seen the world to very little purpose truly, if I am

to argue with one of your years. I have taken this trouble, in order

to instruct you. The antient philosophers, such as Socrates,

Alcibiades, and others, did not use to argue with their scholars.

You are to consider me, child, as Socrates, not asking your opinion,

but only informing you of mine." From which last words the reader

may possibly imagine, that this lady had read no more of the

philosophy of Socrates, than she had of that of Alcibiades; and indeed

we cannot resolve his curiosity as to this point.

  "Madam," cries Sophia, "I have never presumed to controvert any

opinion of yours; and this subject, as I said, I have never yet

thought of, and perhaps never may."

  "Indeed, Sophy," replied the aunt, "this dissimulation with me is

very foolish. The French shall as soon persuade me that they take

foreign towns in defence only of their own country, as you can

impose on me to believe you have never yet thought seriously of

matrimony. How can you, child, affect to deny that you have considered

of contracting an alliance, when you so well know I am acquainted with

the party with whom you desire to contract it?- an alliance as

unnatural, and contrary to your interest, as a separate league with

the French would be to the interest of the Dutch! But however, if

you have not hitherto considered of this matter, I promise you it is

now high time, for my brother is resolved immediately to conclude

the treaty with Mr. Blifil; and indeed I am a sort of guarantee in the

affair, and have promised your concurrence."

  "Indeed, madam," cries Sophia, "this is the only instance in which I

must disobey both yourself and my father. For this is a match which

requires very little consideration in me to refuse."

  "If I was not as great philosopher as Socrates himself," returned

Mrs. Western, "you would overcome my patience. What objection can

you have to the young gentleman?"

  "A very solid objection, in my opinion," says Sophia- "I hate him."

  "Will you never learn a proper use of words?" answered the aunt.

"Indeed, child, you should consult Bailey's Dictionary. It is

impossible you should hate a man from whom you have received no

injury. By hatred, therefore, you mean no more than dislike, which

is no sufficient objection against your marrying of him. I have

known many couples, who have entirely disliked each other, lead very

comfortable genteel lives. Believe me, child, I know these things

better than you. You will allow me, I think, to have seen the world,

in which I have not an acquaintance who would not rather be thought to

dislike her husband than to like him. The contrary is such

out-of-fashion romantic nonsense, that the very imagination of it is

shocking."

  "Indeed, madam," replied Sophia, "I shall never marry a man I

dislike. If I promise my father never to consent to any marriage

contrary to his inclinations, I think I may hope he will never force

me into that state contrary to my own."

  "Inclinations!" cries the aunt, with some warmth. "Inclinations! I

am astonished at your assurance. A young woman of your age, and

unmarried, to talk of inclinations! But whatever your inclinations may

be, brother is resolved; nay, since you talk of inclinations, I

shall advise him to hasten the treaty. Inclinations!"

  Sophia then flung herself upon her knees, and tears began to trickle

from her shining eyes. She entreated her aunt, "to have mercy upon

her, and not to resent so cruelly her unwillingness to make herself

miserable;" often urging, "that she alone was concerned, and that

her happiness only was at stake."

  As a bailiff, when well authorized by his writ, having possessed

himself of the person of some unhappy debtor, views all his tears

without concern; in vain the wretched captive attempts to raise

compassion; in vain the tender wife bereft of her companion, the

little prattling boy, or frighted girl, are mentioned as inducements

to reluctance. The noble bumtrap, blind and deaf to every circumstance

of distress, greatly rises above all the motives to humanity, and into

the hands of the gaoler resolves to deliver his miserable prey.

  Not less blind to the tears, or less deaf to every entreaty of

Sophia was the politic aunt, nor less determined was she to deliver

over the trembling maid into the arms of the gaoler Blifil. She

answered with great impetuosity, "So far, madam, from your being

concerned alone, your concern is the least, or surely the least

important. It is the honour of your family which is concerned in

this alliance; you are only the instrument. Do you conceive, mistress,

that in an intermarriage between kingdoms, as when a daughter of

France is married into Spain, the princess herself is alone considered

in the match? No! it is a match between two kingdoms, rather than

between two persons. The same happens in great families such as

ours. The alliance between the families is the principal matter. You

ought to have a greater regard for the honour of your family than

for your own person; and if the example of a princess cannot inspire

you with these noble thoughts, you cannot surely complain at being

used no worse than all princesses are used."

  "I hope, madam," cries Sophia, with a little elevation of voice,

"I shall never do anything to dishonour my family; but as for Mr.

Blifil, whatever may be the consequence, I am resolved against him,

and no force shall prevail in his favour."

  Western, who had been within hearing during the greater part of

the preceding dialogue, had now exhausted all his patience; he

therefore entered the room in a violent passion, crying, "D--n me

then if shatunt ha'un, d--n me if shatunt, that's all- that's all;

d--n me if shatunt."

  Mrs. Western had collected a sufficient quantity of wrath for the

use of Sophia; but she now transferred it all to the squire.

"Brother," said she, "it is astonishing that you will interfere in a

matter which you had totally left to my negotiation. Regard to my

family hath made me take upon myself to be the mediating power, in

order to rectify those mistakes in policy which you have committed

in your daughter's education. For, brother, it is you- it is your

preposterous conduct which hath eradicated all the seeds that I had

formerly sown in her tender mind. It is you yourself who have taught

her disobedience."- "Blood!" cries the squire, foaming at the mouth,

"you are enough to conquer the patience of the devil! Have I ever

taught my daughter disobedience?- Here she stands; speak honestly,

girl, did ever I bid you be disobedient to me? Have not I done

everything to humour and to gratify you, and to make you obedient to

me? And very obedient to me she was when a little child, before you

took her in hand and spoiled her, by filling her head with a pack of

court notions. Why- why- why- did I not overhear you telling her she

must behave like a princess? You have made a Whig of the girl; and how

should her father, or anybody else, expect any obedience from

her?"- "Brother," answered Mrs. Western, with an air of great

disdain, "I cannot express the contempt I have for your politics of

all kinds; but I will appeal likewise to the young lady herself,

whether I have ever taught her any principles of disobedience. On

the contrary, niece, have I not endeavoured to inspire you with a true

idea of the several relations in which a human creature stands in

society? Have I not taken infinite pains to show you, that the law

of nature hath enjoined a duty on children to their parents? Have I

not told you what Plato says on that subject?- a subject on which you

was so notoriously ignorant when you came first under my care, that

I verily believe you did not know the relation between a daughter

and a father."- "'Tis a lie," answered Western. "The girl is no such

fool, as to live to eleven years old without knowing that she was

her father's relation."- "O! more than Gothic ignorance," answered

the lady. "And as for your manners, brother, I must tell you, they

deserve a cane."- "Why then you may gi' it me, if you think you are

able," cries the squire; "nay, I suppose your niece there will be

ready enough to help you."- "Brother," said Mrs. Western, "though I

despise you beyond expression, yet I shall endure your insolence no

longer; so I desire my coach may be got ready immediately, for I am

resolved to leave your house this very morning."- "And a good

riddance too," answered he; "I can bear your insolence no longer, an

you come to that. Blood! it is almost enough of itself to make my

daughter undervalue my sense, when she hears you telling me every

minute you despise me."- "It is impossible, it is impossible," cries

the aunt; "no one can undervalue such a boor."- "Boar," answered the

squire, "I am no boar; no, nor ass; no, nor rat neither, madam.

Remember that- I am no rat. I am a true Englishman, and not of your

Hanover breed, that have eat up the nation."- "Thou art one of those

wise men," cries she, "whose nonsensical principles have undone the

nation; by weakening the hands of our government at home, and by

discouraging our friends and encouraging our enemies abroad."- "Ho!

are you come back to your politics?" cries the squire: "as for those I

despise them as much as I do a f--t." Which last words he accompanied

and graced with the very action, which, of all others, was the most

proper to it. And whether it was this word or the contempt exprest for

her politics, which most affected Mrs. Western, I will not

determine; but she flew into the most violent rage, uttered phrases

improper to be here related, and instantly burst out of the house. Nor

did her brother or her niece think proper either to stop or to

follow her; for the one was so much possessed by concern, and the

other by anger, that they were rendered almost motionless.

  The squire, however, sent after his sister the same holloa which

attends the departure of a hare, when she is first started before

the hounds. He was indeed a great master of this kind of vociferation,

and had a holla proper for most occasions in life.

  Women who, like Mrs. Western, know the world, and have applied

themselves to philosophy and politics, would have immediately

availed themselves of the present disposition of Mr. Western's mind,

by throwing in a few artful compliments to his understanding at the

expense of his absent adversary; but poor Sophia was all simplicity.

By which word we do not intend to insinuate to the reader, that she

was silly, which is generally understood as a synonymous term with

simple; for she was indeed a most sensible girl, and her understanding

was of the first rate; but she wanted all that useful art which

females convert to so many good purposes in life, and which, as it

rather arises from the heart than from the head, is often the property

of the silliest of women.





                                Chapter 4



  A picture of a country gentlewoman taken from the life



  Mr. Western having finished his holla, and taken a little breath,

began to lament, in very pathetic terms, the unfortunate condition

of men, who are, says he, "always whipt in by the humours of some

d--n'd b- or other. I think I was hard run enough by your mother for

one man; but after giving her a dodge, here's another b- follows me

upon the foil; but curse my jacket if I will be run down in this

manner by any o'um."

  Sophia never had a single dispute with her father, till this unlucky

affair of Blifil, on any account, except in defence of her mother,

whom she had loved most tenderly, though she lost her in the

eleventh year of her age. The squire, to whom that poor woman had been

a faithful upper-servant all the time of their marriage, had

returned that behaviour by making what the world calls a good husband.

He very seldom swore at her (perhaps not above once a week) and

never beat her: she had not the least occasion for jealousy, and was

perfect mistress of her time; for she was never interrupted by her

husband, who was engaged all the morning in his field exercises, and

all the evening with bottle companions. She scarce indeed ever saw him

but at meals; where she had the pleasure of carving those dishes which

she had before attended at the dressing. From these meals she

retired about five minutes after the other servants, having only

stayed to drink "the king over the water." Such were, it seems, Mr.

Western's orders; for it was a maxim with him, that women should

come in with the first dish, and go out after the first glass.

Obedience to these orders was perhaps no difficult task; for the

conversation (if it may be called so) was seldom such as could

entertain a lady. It consisted chiefly of hallowing, singing,

relations of sporting adventures, b-d-y, and abuse of women, and of

the government.

  These, however, were the only seasons when Mr. Western saw his wife;

for when he repaired to her bed, he was generally so drunk that he

could not see; and in the sporting season he always rose from her

before it was light. Thus was she perfect mistress of her time, and

had besides a coach and four usually at her command; though unhappily,

indeed, the badness of the neighbourhood, and of the roads, made

this of little use; for none who had set much value on their necks

would have passed through the one, or who had set any value on their

hours, would have visited the other. Now to deal honestly with the

reader, she did not make all the return expected to so much

indulgence; for she had been married against her will by a fond

father, the match having been rather advantageous on her side; for the

squire's estate was upward of L3000 a year, and her fortune no more

than a bare L8000. Hence perhaps she had contracted a little

gloominess of temper, for she was rather a good servant than a good

wife; nor had she always the gratitude to return the extraordinary

degree of roaring mirth, with which the squire received her, even with

a good-humoured smile. She would, moreover, sometimes interfere with

matters which did not concern her, as the violent drinking of her

husband, which in the gentlest terms she would take some of the few

opportunities he gave her of remonstrating against. And once in her

life she very earnestly entreated him to carry her for two months to

London, which he peremptorily denied; nay, was angry with his wife for

the request ever after, being well assured that all the husbands in

London are cuckolds.

  For this last, and many other good reasons, Western at length

heartily hated his wife; and as he never concealed this hatred

before her death, so he never forgot it afterwards; but when

anything in the least soured him, as a bad scenting day, or a

distemper among his hounds, or any other such misfortune, he

constantly vented his spleen by invectives against the deceased,

saying, "If my wife was alive now, she would be glad of this."

  These invectives he was especially desirous of throwing forth before

Sophia; for as he loved her more than he did any other, so he was

really jealous that she had loved her mother better than him. And this

jealousy Sophia seldom failed of heightening on these occasions; for

he was not contented with violating her ears with the abuse of her

mother, but endeavoured to force an explicit approbation of all this

abuse; with which desire he never could prevail upon her by any

promise or threats to comply.

  Hence some of my readers will, perhaps, wonder that the squire had

not hated Sophia as much as he had hated her mother; but I must inform

them, that hatred is not the effect of love, even through the medium

of jealousy. It is, indeed, very possible for jealous persons to

kill the objects of their jealousy, but not to hate them. Which

sentiment being a pretty hard morsel, and bearing something of the air

of a paradox, we shall leave the reader to chew the cud upon it to the

end of the chapter.





                                Chapter 5



  The generous behaviour of Sophia towards her aunt



  Sophia kept silence during the foregoing speech of her father, nor

did she once answer otherwise than with a sigh; but as he understood

none of the language, or, as he called it, lingo of the eyes, so he

was not satisfied without some further approbation of his

sentiments, which he now demanded of his daughter; telling her, in the

usual way, "he expected she was ready to take the part of everybody

against him, as she had always done that of the b- her mother."

Sophia remaining still silent, he cryed out, "What, art dumb? why dost

unt speak? Was not thy mother a d--d b- to me? answer me that. What,

I suppose you despise your father too, and don't think him good enough

to speak to?"

  "For Heaven's sake, sir," answered Sophia, "do not give so cruel a

turn to my silence. I am sure I would sooner die than be guilty of any

disrespect towards you; but how can I venture to speak, when every

word must either offend my dear papa, or convict me of the blackest

ingratitude as well as impiety to the memory of the best of mothers;

for such, I am certain, my mamma was always to me?"

 "And your aunt, I suppose, is the best of sisters too!" replied the

squire. "Will you be so kind as to allow that she is a b-? I may

fairly insist upon that, I think?"

  "Indeed, sir," says Sophia, "I have great obligations to my aunt.

She hath been a second mother to me."

  "And a second wife to me too," returned Western; "so you will take

her part too! You won't confess that she hath acted the part of the

vilest sister in the world?"

  "Upon my word, sir," cries Sophia, "I must belie my heart wickedly

if I did. I know my aunt and you differ very much in your ways of

thinking; but I have heard her a thousand times express the greatest

affection for you; and I am convinced, so far from her being the worst

sister in the world, there are very few who love a brother better."

  "The English of all which is," answered the squire, "that I am in

the wrong. Ay, certainly. Ay, to be sure the woman is in the right,

and the man in the wrong always."

  "Pardon me, sir," cries Sophia. "I do not say so."

  "What don't you say?" answered the father: "you have the impudence

to say she's in the right: doth it not follow then of course that I am

in the wrong? And perhaps I am in the wrong to suffer such a

Presbyterian Hanoverian b- to come into my house. She may 'dite me of

a plot for anything I know, and give my estate to the government."

  "So far, sir, from injuring you or your estate," says Sophia, "if my

aunt had died yesterday, I am convinced she would have left you her

whole fortune."

  Whether Sophia intended it or not, I shall not presume to assert;

but certain it is, these last words penetrated very deep into the ears

of her father, and produced a much more sensible effect than all she

had said before. He received the sound with much the same action as

a man receives a bullet in his head. He started, staggered, and turned

pale. After which he remained silent above a minute, and then began in

the following hesitating manner: "Yesterday! she would have left me

her esteate yesterday! would she? Why yesterday, of all the days in

the year? I suppose if she dies to-morrow, she will leave it to

somebody else, and perhaps out of the vamily."- "My aunt, sir," cries

Sophia, "hath very violent passions, and I can't answer what she may

do under their influence."

  "You can't!" returned the father: "and pray who hath been the

occasion of putting her into those violent passions? Nay, who hath

actually put her into them? Was not you and she hard at it before I

came into the room? Besides, was not all our quarrel about you? I have

not quarrelled with sister this many years but upon your account;

and now you would throw the whole blame upon me, as thof I should be

the occasion of her leaving the esteate out o' the vamily. I could

have expected no better indeed; this is like the return you make to

all the rest of my fondness."

  "I beseech you then," cries Sophia, "upon my knees I beseech you, if

I have been the unhappy occasion of this difference, that you will

endeavour to make it up with my aunt, and not suffer her to leave your

house in this violent rage of anger: she is a very good-natured woman,

and a few civil words will satisfy her. Let me entreat you, sir."

  "So I must go and ask pardon for your fault, must I?" answered

Western. "You have lost the hare, and I must draw every way to find

her again? Indeed, if I was certain"- Here he stopt, and Sophia

throwing in more entreaties, at length prevailed upon him; so that

after venting two or three bitter sarcastical expressions against

his daughter, he departed as fast as he could to recover his sister,

before her equipage could be gotten ready.

  Sophia then returned to her chamber of mourning, where she

indulged herself (if the phrase may be allowed me) in all the luxury

of tender grief. She read over more than once the letter which she had

received from Jones; her muff too was used on this occasion; and she

bathed both these, as well as herself, with her tears. In this

situation the friendly Mrs. Honour exerted her utmost abilities to

comfort her afflicted mistress. She ran over the names of many young

gentlemen: and having greatly commended their parts and persons,

assured Sophia that she might take her choice of any. These methods

must have certainly been used with some success in disorders of the

like kind, or so skilful a practitioner as Mrs. Honour would never

have ventured to apply them; nay, I have heard that the college of

chambermaids hold them to be as sovereign remedies as any in the

female dispensary; but whether it was that Sophia's disease differed

inwardly from those cases with which it agreed in external symptoms, I

will not assert; but, in fact, the good waiting-woman did more harm

than good, and at last so incensed her mistress (which was no easy

matter) that with an angry voice she dismissed her from her presence.





                                Chapter 6



  Containing great variety of matter



  The squire overtook his sister just as she was stepping into the

coach, and partly by force, and partly by solicitations, prevailed

upon her to order her horses back into their quarters. He succeeded in

this attempt without much difficulty; for the lady was, as we have

already hinted, of a most placable disposition, and greatly loved

her brother, though she despised his parts, or rather his little

knowledge of the world.

  Poor Sophia, who had first set on foot this reconciliation, was

now made the sacrifice to it. They both concurred in their censures on

her conduct; jointly declared war against her, and directly

proceeded to counsel, how to carry it on in the most vigorous

manner. For this purpose, Mrs. Western proposed not only an

immediate conclusion of the treaty with Allworthy, but as

immediately to carry it into execution; saying, "That there was no

other way to succeed with her niece, but by violent methods, which she

was convinced Sophia had not sufficient resolution to resist. By

violent," says she, "I mean rather, hasty measures; for as to

confinement or absolute force, no such things must or can be

attempted. Our plan must be concerted for a surprize, and not for a

storm."

  These matters were resolved on, when Mr. Blifil came to pay a

visit to his mistress. The squire no sooner heard of his arrival, than

he stept aside, by his sister's advice, to give his daughter orders

for the proper reception of her lover: which he did with the most

bitter execrations and denunciations of judgment on her refusal.

  The impetuosity of the squire bore down all before him; and

Sophia, as her aunt very wisely foresaw, was not able to resist him.

She agreed, therefore, to see Blifil, though she had scarce spirits or

strength sufficient to utter her assent. Indeed, to give a

peremptory denial to a father whom she so tenderly loved, was no

easy task. Had this circumstance been out of the case, much less

resolution than what she was really mistress of, would, perhaps,

have served her; but it is no unusual thing to ascribe those actions

entirely to fear, which are in a great measure produced by love.

  In pursuance, therefore, of her father's peremptory command,

Sophia now admitted Mr. Blifil's visit. Scenes like this, when painted

at large, afford, as we have observed, very little entertainment to

the reader. Here, therefore, we shall strictly adhere to a rule of

Horace; by which writers are directed to pass over all those matters

which they despair of placing in a shining light;- a rule, we

conceive of excellent use as well to the historian as to the poet; and

which, if followed, must at least have this good effect, that many a

great evil (for so all great books are called) would thus be reduced

to a small one.

  It is possible the great art used by Blifil at this interview

would have prevailed on Sophia to have made another man in his

circumstances her confident, and to have revealed the whole secret

of her heart to him; but she had contracted so ill an opinion of

this young gentleman, that she was resolved to place no confidence

in him; for simplicity, when set on its guard, is often a match for

cunning. Her behaviour to him, therefore, was entirely forced, and

indeed such as is generally prescribed to virgins upon the second

formal visit from one who is appointed for their husband.

  But though Blifil declared himself to the squire perfectly satisfied

with his reception; yet that gentleman, who, in company with his

sister, had overheard all, was not so well pleased. He resolved, in

pursuance of the advice of the sage lady, to push matters as forward

as possible; and addressing himself to his intended son-in-law in

the hunting phrase, he cried, after a loud holla, "Follow her, boy,

follow her; run in, run in; that's it, honeys. Dead, dead, dead. Never

be bashful, nor stand shall I, shall I? Allworthy and I can finish all

matters between us this afternoon, and let us ha' the wedding

to-morrow."

  Blifil having conveyed the utmost satisfaction into his countenance,

answered, "As there is nothing, sir, in this world which I so

eagerly desire as an alliance with your family, except my union with

the most amiable and deserving Sophia, you may easily imagine how

impatient I must be to see myself in possession of my two highest

wishes. If I have not therefore importuned you on this head, you

will impute it only to my fear of offending the lady, by

endeavouring to hurry on so blessed an event faster than a strict

compliance with all the rules of decency and decorum will permit.

But if, by your interest, sir, she might be induced to dispense with

any formalities--"

  "Formalities! with a pox!" answered the squire. "Pooh, all stuff and

nonsense! I tell thee, she shall ha' thee to-morrow: you will know the

world better hereafter, when you come to my age. Women never gi' their

consent, man, if they can help it, 'tis not the fashion. If I had

stayed for her mother's consent, I might have been a batchelor to this

day.-- To her, to her, co to her, that's it, you jolly dog. I tell

thee shat ha' her to-morrow morning."

  Blifil suffered himself to be overpowered by the forcible rhetoric

of the squire; and it being agreed that Western should close with

Allworthy that very afternoon, the lover departed home, having first

earnestly begged that no violence might be offered to the lady by this

haste, in the same manner as a popish inquisitor begs the lay power to

do no violence to the heretic delivered over to it, and against whom

the church hath passed sentence.

  And, to say the truth, Blifil had passed sentence against Sophia;

for, however pleased he had declared himself to Western with his

reception, he was by no means satisfied, unless it was that he was

convinced of the hatred and scorn of his mistress: and this had

produced no less reciprocal hatred and scorn in him. It may,

perhaps, be asked, Why then did he not put an immediate end to all

further courtship? I answer, for that very reason, as well as for

several others equally good, which we shall now proceed to open to the

reader.

  Though Mr. Blifil was not of the complexion of Jones, nor ready to

eat every woman he saw; yet he was far from being destitute of that

appetite which is said to be the common property of all animals.

With this, he had likewise that distinguishing taste, which serves

to direct men in their choice of the object or food of their several

appetites; and this taught him to consider Sophia as a most

delicious morsel, indeed to regard her with the same desires which

an ortolan inspires into the soul of an epicure. Now the agonies which

affected the mind of Sophia, rather augmented than impaired her

beauty; for her tears added brightness to her eyes, and her breasts

rose higher with her sighs. Indeed, no one hath seen beauty in its

highest lustre who hath never seen it in distress. Blifil therefore

looked on this human ortolan with greater desire than when he viewed

her last; nor was his desire at all lessened by the aversion which

he discovered in her to himself. On the contrary, this served rather

to heighten the pleasure he proposed in rifling her charms, as it

added triumph to lust; nay, he had some further views, from

obtaining the absolute possession of her person, which we detest too

much even to mention; and revenge itself was not without its share

in the gratifications which he promised himself. The rivalling poor

Jones, and supplanting him in her affections, added another spur to

his pursuit, and promised another additional rapture to his enjoyment.

  Besides all these views, which to some scrupulous persons may seem

to savour too much of malevolence, he had one prospect, which few

readers will regard with any great abhorrence. And this was the estate

of Mr. Western; which was all to be settled on his daughter and her

issue; for so extravagant was the affection of that fond parent, that,

provided his child would but consent to be miserable with the

husband he chose, he cared not at what price he purchased him.

  For these reasons Mr. Blifil was so desirous of the match that he

intended to deceive Sophia, by pretending love to her; and to

deceive her father and his own uncle, by pretending he was beloved

by her. In doing this he availed himself of the piety of Thwackum, who

held, that if the end proposed was religious (as surely matrimony is),

it mattered not how wicked were the means. As to other occasions, he

used to apply the philosophy of Square, which taught, that the end was

immaterial, so that the means were fair and consistent with moral

rectitude. To say truth, there were few occurrences in life on which

he could not draw advantage from the precepts of one or other of those

great masters.

  Little deceit was indeed necessary to be practised on Mr. Western;

who thought the inclinations of his daughter of as little

consequence as Blifil himself conceived them to be; but as the

sentiments of Mr. Allworthy were of a very different kind, so it was

absolutely necessary to impose on him. In this, however, Blifil was so

well assisted by Western, that he succeeded without difficulty; for as

Mr. Allworthy had been assured by her father that Sophia had a

proper affection for Blifil, and that all which he had suspected

concerning Jones was entirely false, Blifil had nothing more to do

than to confirm these assertions; which he did with such

equivocations, that he preserved a salvo for his conscience; and had

the satisfaction of conveying a lie to his uncle, without the guilt of

telling one. When he was examined touching the inclinations of

Sophia by Allworthy, who said, "He would on no account be accessary to

forcing a young lady into a marriage contrary to her own will"; he

answered, "That the real sentiments of young ladies were very

difficult to be understood; that her behaviour to him was full as

forward as he wished it, and that if he could believe her father,

she had all the affection for him which any lover could desire. As for

Jones," said he, "whom I am loth to call villain, though his behaviour

to you, sir, sufficiently justifies the appellation, his own vanity,

or perhaps some wicked views, might make him boast of a falsehood; for

if there had been any reality in Miss Western's love to him, the

greatness of her fortune would never have suffered him to desert

her, as you are well informed he hath. Lastly, sir, I promise you I

would not myself, for any consideration, no, not for the whole

world, consent to marry this young lady, if I was not persuaded she

had all the passion for me which I desire she should have."

  This excellent method of conveying a falsehood with the heart

only, without making the tongue guilty of an untruth, by the means

of equivocation and imposture, hath quieted the conscience of many a

notable deceiver; and yet, when we consider that it is Omniscience

on which these endeavour to impose, it may possibly seem capable of

affording only a very superficial comfort; and that this artful and

refined distinction between communicating a lie, and telling one, is

hardly worth the pains it costs them.

  Allworthy was pretty well satisfied with what Mr. Western and Mr.

Blifil told him: and the treaty was now, at the end of two days,

concluded. Nothing then remained previous to the office of the priest,

but the office of the lawyers, which threatened to take up so much

time, that Western offered to bind himself by all manner of covenants,

rather than defer the happiness of the young couple. Indeed, he was so

very earnest and pressing, that an indifferent person might have

concluded he was more a principal in this match than he really was;

but this eagerness was natural to him on all occasions: and he

conducted every scheme he undertook in such a manner, as if the

success of that alone was sufficient to constitute the whole happiness

of his life.

  The joint importunities of both father and son-in-law would probably

have prevailed on Mr. Allworthy, who brooked but ill any delay of

giving happiness to others, had not Sophia herself prevented it, and

taken measures to put a final end to the whole treaty, and to rob both

church and law of those taxes which these wise bodies have thought

proper to receive from the propagation of the human species in a

lawful manner. Of which in the next chapter.





                                Chapter 7



  A strange resolution of Sophia, and a more strange stratagem of Mrs.

Honour



  Though Mrs. Honour was principally attached to her own interest, she

was not without some little attachment to Sophia. To say truth, it was

very difficult for any one to know that young lady without loving her.

She no sooner therefore heard a piece of news, which she imagined to

be of great importance to her mistress, than, quite forgetting the

anger which she had conceived two days before, at her unpleasant

dismission from Sophia's presence, she ran hastily to inform her of

the news.

 The beginning of her discourse was as abrupt as her entrance into the

room. "O dear ma'am!" says she, "what doth your la'ship think? To be

sure I am frightened out of my wits; and yet I thought it my duty to

tell your la'ship, though perhaps it may make you angry, for we

servants don't always know what will make our ladies angry; for, to be

sure, everything is always laid to the charge of a servant. When our

ladies are out of humour, to be sure we must be scolded; and to be

sure I should not wonder if your la'ship should be out of humour; nay,

it must surprize you certainly, ay, and shock you too."- "Good

Honour, let me know it without any longer preface," says Sophia;

"there are few things, I promise you, which will surprize, and fewer

which will shock me."- "Dear ma'am," answered Honour, "to be sure, I

overheard my master talking to parson Supple about getting a licence

this very afternoon; and to be sure I heard him say, your la'ship

should be married to-morrow morning." Sophia turned pale at these

words, and repeated eagerly, "To-morrow morning!"- "Yes, ma'am,"

replied the trusty waiting-woman, "I will take my oath I heard my

master say so."- "Honour," says Sophia, "you have both surprized and

shocked me to such a degree that I have scarce any breath or spirits

left. What is to be done in my dreadful situation?"- "I wish I was

able to advise your la'ship," says she. "Do advise me," cries Sophia;

"pray, dear Honour, advise me. Think what you would attempt if it

was your own case."- "Indeed, ma'am," cries Honour, "I wish your

la'ship and I could change situations; that is, I mean without hurting

your la'ship; for to be sure I don't wish you so bad as to be a

servant; but because that if so be it was my case, I should find no

manner of difficulty in it; for, in my poor opinion, young Squire

Blifil is a charming, sweet, handsome man."- "Don't mention such

stuff," cries Sophia. "Such stuff!" repeated Honour; "why, there.

Well, to be sure, what's one man's meat is another man's poison, and

the same is altogether as true of women."- "Honour," says Sophia,

"rather than submit to be the wife of that contemptible wretch, I

would plunge a dagger into my heart."- "O lud! ma'am!" answered the

other, "I am sure you frighten me out of my wits now. Let me beseech

your la'ship not to suffer such wicked thoughts to come into your

head. O lud! to be sure I tremble every inch of me. Dear ma'am,

consider, that to be denied Christian burial, and to have your

corpse buried in the highway, and a stake drove through you, as farmer

Halfpenny was served at Ox Cross; and, to be sure, his ghost hath

walked there ever since, for several people have seen him. To be

sure it can be nothing but the devil which can put such wicked

thoughts into the head of anybody; for certainly it is less wicked

to hurt all the world than one's own dear self; and so I have heard

said by more parsons than one. If your la'ship hath such a violent

aversion, and hates the young gentleman so very bad, that you can't

bear to think of going into bed to him; for to be sure there may be

such antipathies in nature, and one had lieverer touch a toad than the

flesh of some people.-

  "Sophia had been too much wrapt in contemplation to pay any great

attention to the foregoing excellent discourse of her maid;

interrupting her therefore, without making any answer to it, she said,

"Honour, I am come to a resolution. I am determined to leave my

father's house this very night; and if you have the friendship for

me which you have often professed, you will keep me company."- "That

I will, ma'am, to the world's end," answered Honour; "but I beg your

la'ship to consider the consequence before you undertake any rash

action. Where can your la'ship possibly go?"- "There is," replied

Sophia, "a lady of quality in London, a relation of mine, who spent

several months with my aunt in the country; during all which time

she treated me with great kindness, and expressed so much pleasure

in my company, that she earnestly desired my aunt to suffer me to go

with her to London. As she is a woman of very great note, I shall

easily find her out, and I make no doubt of being very well and kindly

received by her."- "I would not have your la'ship too confident of

that," cries Honour; "for the first lady I lived with used to invite

people very earnestly to her house; but if she heard afterwards they

were coming, she used to get out of the way. Besides, though this lady

would be very glad to see your la'ship, as to be sure anybody would be

glad to see your la'ship, yet when she hears your la'ship is run away

from my master-" "You are mistaken, Honour," says Sophia: "she looks

upon the authority of a father in a much lower light than I do; for

she pressed me violently to go to London with her, and when I refused

to go without my father's consent, she laughed me to scorn, called me

silly country girl, and said, I should make a pure loving wife, since

I could be so dutiful a daughter. So I have no doubt but she will both

receive me and protect me too, till my father, finding me out of his

power, can be brought to some reason."

  "Well, but, ma'am," answered Honour, "how doth your la'ship think of

making your escape? Where will you get any horses or conveyance? For

as for your own horse, as all the servants know a little how matters

stand between my master and your la'ship, Robin will be hanged

before he will suffer it to go out of the stable without my master's

express orders." "I intend to escape," said Sophia, "by walking out of

the doors when they are open. I thank Heaven my legs are very able

to carry me. They have supported me many a long evening after a

fiddle, with no very agreeable partner; and surely they will assist me

in running from so detestable a partner for life."- "Oh Heaven,

ma'am! doth your la'ship know what you are saying?" cries Honour;

"would you think of walking about the country by night and

alone?"- "Not alone," answered the lady; "you have promised to bear

me company."- "Yes, to be sure," cries Honour, "I will follow your

la'ship through the world; but your la'ship had almost as good be

alone: for I should not be able to defend you, if any robbers, or

other villains, should meet with you, Nay, I should be in as

horrible a fright as your la'ship; for to be certain, they would

ravish us both. Besides, ma'am, consider how cold the nights are

now; we shall be frozen to death."- "A good brisk pace," answered

Sophia, "will preserve us from the cold; and if you cannot defend me

from a villain, Honour, I will defend you; for I will take a pistol

with me. There are two always charged in the hall."- "Dear ma'am, you

frighten me more and more," cries Honour: "sure your la'ship would not

venture to fire it off! I had rather run any chance than your

la'ship should do that."- "Why so?" says Sophia, smiling, "would not

you, Honour, fire a pistol at any one who should attack your

virtue?"- "To be sure, ma'am," cries Honour, "one's virtue is a dear

thing, especially to us poor servants; for it is our livelihood, as

a body may say: yet I mortally hate fire-arms; for so many accidents

happen by them."- "Well, well," says Sophia, "I believe I may ensure

your virtue at a very cheap rate, without carrying any arms with us;

for I intend to take horses at the very first town we come to, and

we shall hardly be attacked in our way thither. Look'ee, Honour, I

am resolved to go; and if you will attend me, I promise you I will

reward you to the very utmost of my power."

  This last argument had a stronger effect on Honour than all the

preceding. And since she saw her mistress so determined, she

desisted from any further dissuasions. They then entered into a debate

on ways and means of executing their project. Here a very stubborn

difficulty occurred, and this was the removal of their effects,

which was much more easily got over by the mistress than by the

maid; for when a lady hath once taken a resolution to run to a

lover, or to run from him, all obstacles are considered as trifles.

But Honour was inspired by no such motive; she had no raptures to

expect, nor any terrors to shun; and besides the real value of her

clothes, in which consisted a great part of her fortune, she had a

capricious fondness for several gowns, and other things; either

because they became her, or because they were given her by such a

particular person; because she had bought them lately, or because

she had had long; or for some other reasons equally good; so that

she could not endure the thoughts of leaving the poor things behind

her exposed to the mercy of Western, who, she doubted not, would in

his rage make them suffer martyrdom.

  The ingenious Mrs. Honour having applied all her oratory to dissuade

her mistress from her purpose, when she found her positively

determined, at last started the following expedient to remove her

clothes, viz., to get herself turned out of doors that very evening.

Sophia highly approved this method, but doubted how it might be

brought about. "O, ma'am," cries Honour, "your la'ship may trust

that to me; we servants very well know how to obtain this favour of

our masters and mistresses; though sometimes, indeed, where they owe

us more wages than they can readily pay, they will put up with all our

affronts, and will hardly take any warning we can give them; but the

squire is none of those; and since your la'ship is resolved upon

setting out to-night, I warrant I get discharged this afternoon." It

was then resolved that she should pack up some linen and a

night-gown for Sophia, with her own things, and as for all her other

clothes, the young lady abandoned them with no more remorse than the

sailor feels when he throws over the goods of others, in order to save

his own life.





                                Chapter 8



  Containing scenes of altercation, of no very uncommon kind



  Mrs. Honour had scarce sooner parted from her young lady, than

something (for I would not, like the old woman in Quevedo, injure

the devil by any false accusation, and possibly he might have no

hand in it)- but something, I say, suggested itself to her, that by

sacrificing Sophia and all her secrets to Mr. Western, she might

probably make her fortune. Many considerations urged this discovery.

The fair prospect of a handsome reward for so great and acceptable a

service to the squire, tempted her avarice; and again, the danger of

the enterprize she had undertaken; the uncertainty of its success;

night, cold, robbers, ravishers, all alarmed her fears. So forcibly

did all these operate upon her, that she was almost determined to go

directly to the squire, and to lay open the whole affair. She was,

however, too upright a judge to decree on one side, before she had

heard the other. And here, first, a journey to London appeared very

strongly in support of Sophia. She eagerly longed to see a place in

which she fancied charms short only of those which a raptured saint

imagines in heaven. In the next place, as she knew Sophia to have much

more generosity than her master, so her fidelity promised her a

greater reward than she could gain by treachery. She then

cross-examined all the articles which had raised her fears on the

other side, and found, on fairly sifting the matter, that there was

very little in them. And now both scales being reduced to a pretty

even balance, her love to her mistress being thrown into the scale

of her integrity, made that rather preponderate, when a circumstance

struck upon her imagination which might have had a dangerous effect,

had its whole weight been fairly put into the other scale. This was

the length of time which must intervene before Sophia would be able to

fulfil her promises; for though she was intitled to her mother's

fortune at the death of her father, and to the sum of L3000 left her

by an uncle when she came of age; yet these were distant days, and

many accidents might prevent the intended generosity of the young

lady; whereas the rewards she might expect from Mr. Western were

immediate. But while she was pursuing this thought the good genius

of Sophia, or that which presided over the integrity of Mrs. Honour,

or perhaps mere chance, sent an accident in her way, which at once

preserved her fidelity, and even facilitated the intended business.

  Mrs. Western's maid claimed great superiority over Mrs. Honour on

several accounts. First, her birth was higher; for her

great-grandmother by the mother's side was a cousin, not far

removed, to an Irish peer. Secondly, her wages were greater. And

lastly, she had been at London, and had of consequence seen more of

the world. She had always behaved, therefore, to Mrs. Honour with that

reserve, and had always exacted of her those marks of distinction,

which every order of females preserves and requires in conversation

with those of an inferior order. Now as Honour did not at all times

agree with this doctrine, but would frequently break in upon the

respect which the other demanded, Mrs. Western's maid was not at all

pleased with her company; indeed, she earnestly longed to return

home to the house of her mistress, where she domineered at will over

all the other servants. She had been greatly, therefore,

disappointed in the morning, when Mrs. Western had changed her mind on

the very point of departure; and had been in what is vulgarly called a

glouting humour ever since.

  In this humour, which was none of the sweetest, she came into the

room where Honour was debating with herself in the manner we have

above related. Honour no sooner saw her, than she addressed her in the

following obliging phrase: "Soh, madam, I find we are to have the

pleasure of your company longer, which I was afraid the quarrel

between my master and your lady would have robbed us of."- "I don't

know, madam," answered the other, "what you mean by we and us. I

assure you I do not look on any of the servants in this house to be

proper company for me. I am company, I hope, for their betters every

day in the week. I do not speak on your account, Mrs. Honour; for

you are a civilized young woman; and when you have seen a little

more of the world, I should not be ashamed to walk with you in St.

James's Park."- "Hoity toity!" cries Honour, "madam is in her airs, I

protest. Mrs. Honour, forsooth! sure, madam, you might call me by my

sir-name; for though my lady calls me Honour, I have a sir-name as

well as other folks. Ashamed to walk with me, quotha! marry, as good

as yourself, I hope."- "Since you make such a return to my civility,"

said the other, "I must acquaint you, Mrs. Honour, that you are not so

good as me. In the country, indeed, one is obliged to take up with all

kind of trumpery; but in town I visit none but the women of women of

quality. Indeed, Mrs. Honour, there is some difference, I hope,

between you and me."- "I hope so too," answered Honour: "there is

some difference in our ages, and- I think in our persons." Upon

speaking which last words, she strutted by Mrs. Western's maid with

the most provoking air of contempt; turning up her nose, tossing her

head, and violently brushing the hoop of her competitor with her

own. The other lady put on one of her most malicious sneers, and said,

"Creature! you are below my anger; and it is beneath me to give ill

words to such an audacious saucy trollop; but, hussy, I must tell you,

your breeding shows the meanness of your birth as well as of your

education; and both very properly qualify you to be the mean

serving-woman of a country-girl."- "Don't abuse my lady," cries

Honour: "I won't take that of you; she's as much better than yours as

she is younger, and ten thousand times more handsomer."

  Here ill luck, or rather good luck, sent Mrs. Western to see her

maid in tears, which began to flow plentifully at her approach; and of

which being asked the reason by her mistress, she presently acquainted

her that her tears were occasioned by the rude treatment of that

creature there- meaning Honour. "And, madam," continued she, "I could

have despised all she said to me; but she hath had the audacity to

affront your ladyship, and to call you ugly- Yes, madam, she called

you ugly old cat to my face. I could not bear to hear your ladyship

called ugly."- "Why do you repeat her impudence so often?" said Mrs.

Western. And then turning to Mrs. Honour, she asked her "How she had

the assurance to mention her name with disrespect?"- "Disrespect,

madam!" answered Honour; "I never mentioned your name at all: I said

somebody was not as handsome as my mistress, and to be sure you know

that as well as I."- "Hussy," replied the lady, I will make such a

saucy trollop as yourself know that I am not a proper subject of

your discourse. And if my brother doth not discharge you this

moment, I will never sleep in his house again. I will find him out,

and have you discharged this moment."- "Discharged!" cries Honour;

"and suppose I am: there are more places in the world than one. Thank

Heaven, good servants need not want places; and if you turn away all

who do not think you handsome, you will want servants very soon; let

me tell you that."

  Mrs. Western spoke, or rather thundered, in answer; but as she was

hardly articulate, we cannot be very certain of the identical words;

we shall therefore omit inserting a speech which at best would not

greatly redound to her honour. She then departed in search of her

brother, with a countenance so full of rage, that she resembled one of

the furies rather than a human creature.

  The two chambermaids being again left alone, began a second bout

at altercation, which soon produced a combat of a more active kind. In

this the victory belonged to the lady of inferior rank, but not

without some loss of blood, of hair, and of lawn and muslin.





                                Chapter 9



  The wise demeanour of Mr. Western in the character of a

magistrate. A hint to justices of peace, concerning the necessary

qualifications of a clerk; with extraordinary instances of paternal

madness and filial affection



  Logicians sometimes prove too much by an argument, and politicians

often overreach themselves in a scheme. Thus had it like to have

happened to Mrs. Honour, who, instead of recovering the rest of her

clothes, had like to have stopped even those she had on her back

from escaping; for the squire no sooner heard of her having abused his

sister, than he swore twenty oaths he would send her to Bridewell.

  Mrs. Western was a very good-natured woman, and ordinarily of a

forgiving temper. She had lately remitted the trespass of a

stage-coachman, who had overturned her post-chaise into a ditch;

nay, she had even broken the law, in refusing to prosecute a

highwayman who had robbed her, not only of a sum of money, but of

her ear-rings; at the same time d--ning her, and saying, "Such

handsome b-s as you don't want jewels to set them off, and be d--n'd

to you." But now, so uncertain are our tempers, and so much do we at

different times differ from ourselves, she would hear of no

mitigations; nor could all the affected penitence of Honour, nor all

the entreaties of Sophia for her own servant, prevail with her to

desist from earnestly desiring her brother to execute justiceship (for

it was indeed a syllable more than justice) on the wench.

  But luckily the clerk had a qualification, which no clerk to a

justice of peace ought ever to be without, namely, some

understanding in the law of this realm. He therefore whispered in

the ear of the justice that he would exceed his authority by

committing the girl to Bridewell, as there had been no attempt to

break the peace; "for I am afraid, sir," says he, "you cannot

legally commit any one to Bridewell only for ill-breeding."

  In matters of high importance, particularly in cases relating to the

game, the justice was not always attentive to these admonitions of his

clerk; for, indeed, in executing the laws under that head, many

justices of peace suppose they have a large discretionary power, by

virtue of which, under the notion of searching for and taking away

engines for the destruction of the game, they often commit trespasses,

and sometimes felony, at their pleasure.

  But this offence was not of quite so high a nature, nor so dangerous

to the society. Here, therefore, the justice behaved with some

attention to the advice of his clerk; for, in fact, he had already had

two informations exhibited against him in the King's Bench, and had no

curiosity to try a third.

  The squire, therefore, putting on a most wise and significant

countenance, after a preface of several hums and hahs, told his

sister, that upon more mature deliberation, he was of opinion, that

"as there was no breaking up of the peace, such as the law," says

he, "calls breaking open a door, or breaking a hedge, or breaking a

head, or any such sort of breaking, the matter did not amount to a

felonious kind of a thing, nor trespasses, nor damages, and,

therefore, there was no punishment in the law for it."

  Mrs. Western said, "she knew the law much better; that she had known

servants very severely punished for affronting their masters;" and

then named a certain justice of the peace in London, "who," she

said, "would commit a servant to Bridewell at any time when a master

or mistress desired it."

  "Like enough,"cries the squire; "it may be so in London; but the law

is different in the country." Here followed a very learned dispute

between the brother and sister concerning the law, which we would

insert, if we imagined many of our readers could understand it. This

was, however, at length referred by both parties to the clerk, who

decided it in favour of the magistrate; and Mrs. Western was, in the

end, obliged to content herself with the satisfaction of having Honour

turned away; to which Sophia herself very readily and cheerfully

consented.

  Thus Fortune, after having diverted herself, according to custom,

with two or three frolicks, at last disposed all matters to the

advantage of our heroine; who indeed succeeded admirably well in her

deceit, considering it was the first she had ever practised. And, to

say the truth, I have often concluded, that the honest part of mankind

would be much too hard for the knavish, if they could bring themselves

to incur the guilt, or thought it worth their while to take the

trouble.

  Honour acted her part to the utmost perfection. She no sooner saw

herself secure from all danger of Bridewell, a word which had raised

most horrible ideas in her mind, than she resumed those airs which her

terrors before had a little abated; and laid down her place, with as

much affectation of content, and indeed of contempt, as was ever

practised at the resignation of places of much greater importance.

If the reader pleases, therefore, we chuse rather to say she

resigned- which hath, indeed, been always held a synonymous

expression with being turned out, or turned away.

  Mr. Western ordered her to be very expeditious in packing; for his

sister declared she would not sleep another night under the same

roof with so impudent a slut. To work therefore she went, and that

so earnestly, that everything was ready early in the evening; when,

having received her wages, away packed bag and baggage, to the great

satisfaction of every one, but of none more than of Sophia; who,

having appointed her maid to meet her at a certain place not far

from the house, exactly at the dreadful and ghostly hour of twelve,

began to prepare for her own departure.

  But first she was obliged to give two painful audiences, the one

to her aunt, and the other to her father. In these Mrs. Western

herself began to talk to her in a more peremptory stile than before;

but her father treated her in so violent and outrageous a manner, that

he frightened her into an affected compliance with his will; which

so highly pleased the good squire, that he changed his frowns into

smiles, and his menaces into promises: he vowed his whole soul was

wrapt in hers; that her consent (for so he construed the words, "You

know, sir, I must not, nor can, refuse to obey any absolute command of

yours") had made him the happiest of mankind. He then gave her a large

bank-bill to dispose of in any trinkets she pleased, and kissed and

embraced her in the fondest manner, while tears of joy trickled from

those eyes which a few moments before had darted fire and rage against

the dear object of all his affection.

  Instances of this behaviour in parents are so common, that the

reader, I doubt not, will be very little astonished at the whole

conduct of Mr. Western. If he should, I own I am not able to account

for it; since that he loved his daughter most tenderly, is, I think,

beyond dispute. So indeed have many others, who have rendered their

children most completely miserable by the same conduct; which,

though it is almost universal in parents, hath always appeared to me

to be the most unaccountable of all the absurdities which ever entered

into the brain of that strange prodigious creature man.

  The latter part of Mr. Western's behaviour had so strong an effect

on the tender heart of Sophia, that it suggested a thought to her,

which not all the sophistry of her politic aunt, nor all the menaces

of her father, had ever once brought into her head. She reverenced her

father so piously, and loved him so passionately, that she had

scarce ever felt more pleasing sensations, than what arose from the

share she frequently had of contributing to his amusement, and

sometimes, perhaps, to higher gratifications; for he never could

contain the delight of hearing her commended, which he had the

satisfaction of hearing almost every day of her life. The idea,

therefore, of the immense happiness she should convey to her father by

her consent to this match, made a strong impression on her mind.

Again, the extreme piety of such an act of obedience worked very

forcibly, as she had a very deep sense of religion. Lastly, when she

reflected how much she herself was to suffer, being indeed to become

little less than a sacrifice, or a martyr, to filial love and duty,

she felt an agreeable tickling in a certain little passion, which

though it bears no immediate affinity either to religion or virtue, is

often so kind as to lend great assistance in executing the purposes of

both.

  Sophia was charmed with the contemplation of so heroic an action,

and began to compliment herself with much premature flattery, when

Cupid, who lay hid in her muff, suddenly crept out, and like

Punchinello in a puppet-show, kicked all out before him. In truth (for

we scorn to deceive our reader, or to vindicate the character of our

heroine by ascribing her actions to supernatural impulse) the thoughts

of her beloved Jones, and some hopes (however distant) in which he was

very particularly concerned, immediately destroyed all which filial

love, piety, and pride had, with their joint endeavours, been

labouring to bring about.

  But before we proceed any farther with Sophia, we must now look back

to Mr. Jones.





                                Chapter 10



  Containing several matters, natural enough perhaps, but low



  The reader will be pleased to remember, that we left Mr. Jones, in

the beginning of this book, on his road to Bristol; being determined

to seek his fortune at sea, or rather, indeed, to fly away from his

fortune on shore.

  It happened (a thing not very unusual), that the guide who undertook

to conduct him on his way, was unluckily unacquainted with the road;

so that having missed his right track, and being ashamed to ask

information, he rambled about backwards and forwards till night came

on, and it began to grow dark. Jones suspecting what had happened,

acquainted the guide with his apprehensions; but he insisted on it,

that they were in the right road, and added, it would be very

strange if he should not know the road to Bristol; though, in reality,

it would have been much stranger if he had known it, having never past

through it in his life before.

  Jones had not such implicit faith in his guide, but that on their

arrival at a village he inquired of the first fellow he saw, whether

they were in the road to Bristol. "Whence did you come?" cries the

fellow. "No matter," says Jones, a little hastily; "I want to know

if this be the road to Bristol?"- "The road to Bristol!" cries the

fellow, scratching his head: "why, measter, I believe you will

hardly get to Bristol this way to-night."- "Prithee, friend, then,"

answered Jones, "do tell us which is the way."- "Why, measter," cries

the fellow, "you must be come out of your road the Lord knows whither;

for thick way goeth to Glocester."- "Well, and which way goes to

Bristol?" said Jones. "Why, you be going away from Bristol,"

answered the fellow. "Then," said Jones, "we must go back again?"-

"Ay, you must," said the fellow. "Well, and when we come back to the

top of the hill, which way must we take?"- "Why, you must keep the

strait road."- "But I remember there are two roads, one to the right

and the other to the left."- "Why, you must keep the right hand road,

and then gu strait vorwards; only remember to turn vurst to your

right, and then to your left again, and then to your right, and that

brings you to the squire's; and then you must keep strait vorwards,

and turn to the left."

  Another fellow now came up, and asked which way the gentlemen were

going; of which being informed by Jones, he first scratched his

head, and then leaning upon a pole he had in his hand, began to tell

him, "That he must keep the right-hand road for about a mile, or a

mile and a half, or such a matter, and then he must turn short to

the left, which would bring him round by Measter Jin Bearnes's."-

But which is Mr. John Bearnes's?" says Jones. "O Lord!" cries the

fellow, "why, don't you know Measter Jin Bearnes? Whence then did you

come?"

  These two fellows had almost conquered the patience of Jones, when a

plain well-looking man (who was indeed a Quaker) accosted him thus:

"Friend, I perceive thou hast lost thy way; and if thou wilt take my

advice, thou wilt not attempt to find it to-night. It is almost

dark, and the road is difficult to hit; besides, there have been

several robberies committed lately between this and Bristol. Here is a

very creditable good house just by, where thou may'st find good

entertainment for thyself and thy cattle till morning." Jones, after a

little persuasion, agreed to stay in this place till the morning,

and was conducted by his friend to the public-house.

  The landlord, who was a very civil fellow, told Jones, "He hoped

he would excuse the badness of his accommodation; for that his wife

was gone from home, and had locked up almost everything, and carried

the keys along with her." Indeed the fact was, that a favourite

daughter of hers was just married, and gone that morning home with her

husband; and that she and her mother together had almost stript the

poor man of all his goods, as well as money; for though he had several

children, his daughter only, who was the mother's favourite, was the

object of her consideration; and to the humour of this one child she

would with pleasure have sacrificed all the rest, and her husband into

the bargain.

  Though Jones was very unfit for any kind of company, and would

have preferred being alone, yet he could not resist the

importunities of the honest Quaker; who was the more desirous of

sitting with him, from having remarked the melancholy which appeared

both in his countenance and behaviour; and which the poor Quaker

thought his conversation might in some measure relieve.

  After they had past some time together, in such a manner that my

honest friend might have thought himself at one of his silent

meetings, the Quaker began to be moved by some spirit or other,

probably that of curiosity, and said, "Friend, I perceive some sad

disaster hath befallen thee; but pray be of comfort. Perhaps thou hast

lost a friend. If so, thou must consider we are all mortal. And why

shouldest thou grieve, when thou knowest thy grief will do thy

friend no good? We are all born to affliction. I myself have my

sorrows as well as thee, and most probably greater sorrows. Though I

have a clear estate of L100 a year, which is as much as I want, and

I have a conscience, I thank the Lord, void of offence; my

constitution is sound and strong, and there is no man can demand a

debt of me, nor accuse me of an injury; yet, friend, I should be

concerned to think thee as miserable as myself."

  Here the Quaker ended with a deep sigh; and Jones presently

answered, "I am very sorry, sir, for your unhappiness, whatever is the

occasion of it."- "Ah! friend," replied the Quaker, "one only

daughter is the occasion; one who was my greatest delight upon

earth, and who within this week is run away from me, and is married

against my consent. I had provided her a proper match, a sober man and

one of substance; but she, forsooth, would chuse for herself, and away

she is gone with a young fellow not worth a groat. If she had been

dead, as I suppose thy friend is, I should have been happy."- "That

is very strange, sir," said Jones. "Why, would it not be better for

her to be dead, than to be a beggar?" replied the Quaker: "for, as I

told you, the fellow is not worth a groat; and surely she cannot

expect that I shall ever give her a shilling. No, as she hath

married for love, let her live on love if she can; let her carry her

love to market, and see whether any one will change it into silver, or

even into halfpence."- "You know your own concerns best, sir," said

Jones. "It must have been," continued the Quaker, "a long premeditated

scheme to cheat me: for they have known one another from their

infancy; and I always preached to her against love, and told her a

thousand times over it was all folly and wickedness. Nay, the

cunning slut pretended to hearken to me, and to despise all wantonness

of the flesh; and yet at last broke out at a window two pair of

stairs: for I began, indeed, a little to suspect her, and had locked

her up carefully, intending the very next morning to have married

her up to my liking. But she disappointed me within a few hours, and

escaped away to the lover of her own chusing; who lost no time, for

they were married and bedded and all within an hour. But it shall be

the worst hour's work for them both tha? ever they did; for they may

starve, or beg, or steal together, for me. I will never give either of

them a farthing." Here Jones starting up cried, "I really must be

excused: I wish you would leave me."- "come, come, friend," said the

Quaker, "don't give way to concern. You see there are other people

miserable besides yourself."- "I see there are madmen, and fools, and

villains in the world," cries Jones. "But let me give you a piece of

advice: send for your daughter and son-in-law home, and don't be

yourself the only cause of misery to one you pretend to love."- "Send

for her and her husband home!" cries the Quaker loudly; "I would

sooner send for the two greatest enemies I have in the world!"- "Well,

go home yourself, or where you please," said Jones, "for I will sit no

longer in such company."- "Nay, friend," answered the Quaker, "I scorn

to impose my company on any one." He then offered to pull money from

his pocket, but Jones pushed him with some violence out of the room.

  The subject of the Quaker's discourse had so deeply affected

Jones, that he stared very wildly all the time was speaking. This

the Quaker had observed, and this, added to the rest of his behaviour,

inspired honest Broadbrim with a conceit, that his companion was in

reality out of his senses. Instead of resenting the affront,

therefore, the Quaker was moved with compassion for his unhappy

circumstances; and having communicated his opinion to the landlord, he

desired him to take great care of his guest, and to treat him with the

highest civility.

  "Indeed," says the landlord, "I shall use no such civility towards

him; for it seems, for all his laced waistcoat there, he is no more

a gentleman than myself, but a poor parish bastard, bred up at a great

squire's about thirty miles off, and now turned out of doors (not

for any good to be sure). I shall get him out of my house as soon as

possible. If I do lose my reckoning, the first loss is always the

best. It is not above a year ago that I lost a silver spoon."

  "What dost thou talk of a parish bastard, Robin?" answered the

Quaker. "Thou must certainly be mistaken in thy man."

  "Not at all," replied Robin; "the guide, who knows him very well,

told it me." For, indeed, the guide had no sooner taken his place at

the kitchen fire, than he acquainted the whole company with all he

knew or had ever heard concerning Jones.

  The Quaker was no sooner assured by this fellow of the birth and low

fortune of Jones, than all compassion for him vanished; and the honest

plain man went home fired with no less indignation than a duke would

have felt at receiving an affront from such a person.

  The landlord himself conceived an equal disdain for his guest; so

that when Jones rung the bell in order to retire to bed, he was

acquainted that he could have no bed there. Besides disdain of the

mean condition of his guest, Robin entertained violent suspicion of

his intentions, which were, he supposed, to watch some favourable

opportunity of robbing the house. In reality, he might have been

very well eased of these apprehensions, by the prudent precautions

of his wife and daughter, who had already removed everything which was

not fixed to the freehold; but he was by nature suspicious, and had

been more particularly so since the loss of his spoon. In short, the

dread of being robbed totally absorbed the comfortable consideration

that he had nothing to lose.

  Jones being assured that he could have no bed, very contentedly

betook himself to a great chair made with rushes, when sleep, which

had lately shunned his company in much better apartments, generously

paid him a visit in his humble cell.

  As for the landlord, he was prevented by his fears from retiring

to rest. He returned therefore to the kitchen fire, whence he could

survey the only door which opened into the parlour, or rather hole,

where Jones was seated, and as for the window to that room, it was

impossible for any creature larger than a cat to have made his

escape through it.





                                Chapter 11



  The adventure of a company of soldiers



  The landlord having taken his seat directly opposite to the door

of the parlour, determined to keep guard there the whole night. The

guide and another fellow remained long on duty with him, though they

neither knew his suspicions, nor had any of their own. The true

cause of their watching did, indeed, at length, put an end to it;

for this was no other than the strength and goodness of the beer, of

which having tippled a very large quantity, they grew at first very

noisy and vociferous, and afterwards fell both asleep.

  But it was not in the power of liquor to compose the fears of Robin.

He continued still waking in his chair, with his eyes fixed stedfastly

on the door which led into the apartment of Mr. Jones, till a

violent thundering at his outward gate called him from his seat, and

obliged him to open it; which he had no sooner done, than his

kitchen was immediately full of gentlemen in red coats, who all rushed

upon him in as tumultuous a manner as if they intended to take his

little castle by storm.

  The landlord was now forced from his post to furnish his numerous

guests with beer, which they called for with great eagerness; and upon

his second or third return from the cellar, he saw Mr. Jones

standing before the fire in the midst of the soldiers; for it may

easily be believed, that the arrival of so much good company should

put an end to any sleep, unless that from which we are to be

awakened only by the last trumpet.

  The company having now pretty well satisfied their thirst, nothing

remained but to pay the reckoning, a circumstance often productive

of much mischief and discontent among the inferior rank of gentry, who

are apt to find great difficulty in assessing the sum, with exact

regard to distributive justice, which directs that every man shall pay

according to the quantity which he drinks. This difficulty occurred

upon the present occasion; and it was the greater, as some gentlemen

had, in their extreme hurry, marched off, after their first draught,

and had entirely forgot to contribute anything towards the said

reckoning.

  A violent dispute now arose, in which every word may be said to have

been deposed upon oath; for the oaths were at least equal to all the

other words spoken. In this controversy the whole company spoke

together, and every man seemed wholly bent to extenuate the sum

which fell to his share; so that the most probable conclusion which

could be foreseen was, that a large portion of the reckoning would

fall to the landlord's share to pay, or (what is much the same

thing) would remain unpaid.

  All this while Mr. Jones was engaged in conversation with the

serjeant; for that officer was entirely unconcerned in the present

dispute, being privileged by immemorial custom from all contribution.

  The dispute now grew so very warm that it seemed to draw towards a

military decision, when Jones, stepping forward, silenced all their

clamours at once, by declaring that he would pay the whole

reckoning, which indeed amounted to no more than three shillings and

fourpence.

  This declaration procured Jones the thanks and applause of the whole

company. The terms honourable, noble, and worthy gentleman,

resounded through the room; nay, my landlord himself began to have a

better opinion of him, and almost to disbelieve the account which

the guide had given.

  The serjeant had informed Mr. Jones that they were marching

against the rebels, and expected to be commanded by the glorious

Duke of Cumberland. By which the reader may perceive (a circumstance

which we have not thought necessary to communicate before) that this

was the very time when the late rebellion was at the highest; and

indeed the banditti were now marched into England, intending, as it

was thought, to fight the king's forces, and to attempt pushing

forward to the metropolis.

  Jones had some heroic ingredients in his composition, and was a

hearty well-wisher to the glorious cause of liberty, and of the

Protestant religion. It is no wonder, therefore, that in circumstances

which would have warranted a much more romantic and wild

undertaking, it should occur to him to serve as a volunteer in this

expedition.

  Our commanding officer had said all in his power to encourage and

promote this good disposition, from the first moment he had been

acquainted with it. He now proclaimed the noble resolution aloud,

which was received with great pleasure by the whole company, who all

cried out, "God bless King George and your honour"; and then added,

with many oaths, "We will stand by you both to the last drops of our

blood."

  The gentleman who had been all night tippling at the ale-house,

was prevailed on by some arguments which a corporal had put into his

hands, to undertake the same expedition. And now the portmanteau

belonging to Mr. Jones being put up in the baggage-cart, the forces

were about to move forwards; when the guide, stepping up to Jones,

said, "Sir, I hope you will consider that the horses have been kept

out all night, and we have travelled a great ways out of our way."

Jones was surprized at the impudence of this demand, and acquainted

the soldiers with the merits of his cause, who were all unanimous in

condemning the guide for his endeavours to put upon a gentleman.

Some said, he ought to be tied neck and heels; others that he deserved

to run the gantlope; and the serjeant shook his cane at him, and

wished he had him under his command, swearing heartily he would make

an example of him.

  Jones contented himself however with a negative punishment, and

walked off with his new comrades, leaving the guide to the poor

revenge of cursing and reviling him; in which latter the landlord

joined, saying, "Ay, ay, he is a pure one, I warrant you. A pretty

gentleman, indeed, to go for a soldier! He shall wear a laced

waistcoat truly. It is an old proverb and a true one, all is not

gold that glisters. I am glad my house is well rid of him."

  All that day the serjeant and the young soldier marched together;

and the former, who was an arch fellow, told the latter many

entertaining stories of his campaigns, though in reality he had

never made any; for he was but lately come into the service, and

had, by his own dexterity, so well ingratiated himself with his

officers, that he had promoted himself to a halberd; chiefly indeed by

his merit in recruiting, in which he was most excellently well

skilled.

  Much mirth and festivity passed among the soldiers during their

march. In which the many occurrences that had passed at their last

quarters were remembered, and every one, with great freedom, made what

jokes he pleased on his officers, some of which were of the coarser

kind, and very near bordering on scandal. This brought to our

heroe's mind the custom which he had read of among the Greeks and

Romans, of indulging, on certain festivals and solemn occasions, the

liberty to slaves, of using an uncontrouled freedom of speech

towards their masters.

  Our little army, which consisted of two companies of foot, were

now arrived at the place where they were to halt that evening. The

serjeant then acquainted his lieutenant, who was the commanding

officer, that they had picked up two fellows in that day's march,

one of which, he said, was as fine a man as ever he saw (meaning the

tippler), for that he was near six feet, well proportioned, and

strongly limbed; and the other (meaning Jones) would do well enough

for the rear rank.

  The new soldiers were now produced before the officer, who having

examined the six-feet man, he being first produced, came next to

survey Jones: at the first sight of whom, the lieutenant could not

help showing some surprize; for besides that he was very well dressed,

and was naturally genteel, he had a remarkable air of dignity in his

look, which is rarely seen among the vulgar, and is indeed not

inseparably annexed to the features of their superiors.

  "Sir," said the lieutenant, "my serjeant informed me that you are

desirous of enlisting in the company I have at present under my

command; if so, sir, we shall very gladly receive a gentleman who

promises to do much honour to the company by bearing arms in it."

  Jones answered: "That he had not mentioned anything of enlisting

himself; that he was most zealously attached to the glorious cause for

which they were going to fight, and was very desirous of serving as

a volunteer;" concluding with some compliments to the lieutenant,

and expressing the great satisfaction he should have in being under

his command.

  The lieutenant returned his civility, commended his resolution,

shook him by the hand, and invited him to dine with himself and the

rest of the officers.





                                Chapter 12



  The adventure of a company of officers



  The lieutenant, whom we mentioned in the preceding chapter, and

who commanded this party, was now near sixty years of age. He had

entered very young into the army, and had served in the capacity of an

ensign at the battle of Tannieres; here he had received two wounds,

and had so well distinguished himself, that he was by the Duke of

Marlborough advanced to be a lieutenant, immediately after that

battle.

  In this commission he had continued ever since, viz., near forty

years; during which time he had seen vast numbers preferred over his

head, and had now the mortification to be commanded by boys, whose

fathers were at nurse when he first entered into the service.

  Nor was this ill success in his profession solely owing to his

having no friends among the men in power. He had the misfortune to

incur the displeasure of his colonel, who for many years continued

in the command of this regiment. Nor did he owe the implacable

ill-will which this man bore him to any neglect or deficiency as an

officer, nor indeed to any fault in himself; but solely to the

indiscretion of his wife, who was a very beautiful woman, and who,

though she was remarkably fond of her husband, would not purchase

his preferment at the expense of certain favours which the colonel

required of her.

  The poor lieutenant was more peculiarly unhappy in this, that

while he felt the effects of the enmity of his colonel, he neither

knew, nor suspected, that he really bore him any; for he could not

suspect an ill-will for which he was not conscious of giving any

cause; and his wife, fearing what her husband's nice regard to his

honour might have occasioned, contented herself with preserving her

virtue without enjoying the triumphs of her conquest.

  This unfortunate officer (for so I think he may be called) had

many good qualities besides his merit in his profession; for he was

a religious, honest, good-natured man; and had behaved so well in

his command, that he was highly esteemed and beloved not only by the

soldiers of his own company, but by the whole regiment.

  The other officers who marched with him were a French lieutenant,

who had been long enough out of France to forget his own language, but

not long enough in England to learn ours, so that he really spoke no

language at all, and could barely make himself understood on the

most ordinary occasions. There were likewise two ensigns, both very

young fellows; one of whom had been bred under an attorney, and the

other was son to the wife of a nobleman's butler.

  As soon as dinner was ended, Jones informed the company of the

merriment which had passed among the soldiers upon their march; "and

yet," says he, "notwithstanding all their vociferation, I dare swear

they will behave more like Grecians than Trojans when they come to the

enemy."- "Grecians and Trojans!" says one of the ensigns, "who the

devil are they? I have heard of all the troops in Europe, but never of

any such as these."

  "Don't pretend to more ignorance than you have, Mr. Northerton,"

said the worthy lieutenant. "I suppose you have heard of the Greeks

and Trojans, though perhaps you never read Pope's Homer; who, I

remember, now the gentleman mentions it, compares the march of the

Trojans to the cackling of geese, and greatly commends the silence

of the Grecians. And upon my honour there is great justice in the

cadet's observation."

  "Begar, me remember dem ver well," said the French lieutenant: "me

ave read them at school in dans Madam Daciere, des Greek, des

Trojan, dey fight for von woman- ouy, ouy, me ave read all dat."

  "D--n Homo with all my heart," says Northerton; "I have the marks

of him on my a- yet. There's Thomas, of our regiment, always carries

a Homo in his pocket; d--n me, if ever I come at it, if I don't burn

it. And there's Corderius, another d--n'd son of a whore, that hath

got me many a flogging."

  "Then you have been at school, Mr. Northerton?" said the lieutenant.

  "Ay, d--n me, have I," answered he; "the devil take my father for

sending me thither! The old put wanted to make a parson of me, but

d--n me, thinks I to myself, I'll nick you there, old cull; the devil

a smack of your nonsense shall you ever get into me. There's Jemmy

Oliver, of our regiment, he narrowly escaped being a pimp too, and

that would have been a thousand pities; for d--n me if he is not one

of the prettiest fellows in the whole world; but he went farther than

I with the old cull, for Jimmey can neither write nor read."

  "You give your friend a very good character," said the lieutenant,

"and a very deserved one, I dare say. But prithee, Northerton, leave

off that foolish as well as wicked custom of swearing; for you are

deceived, I promise you, if you think there is wit or politeness in

it. I wish, too, you would take my advice, and desist from abusing the

clergy. Scandalous names, and reflections cast on any body of men,

must be always unjustifiable; but especially so, when thrown on so

sacred a function; for to abuse the body is to abuse the function

itself; and I leave to you to judge how inconsistent such behaviour is

in men who are going to fight in defence of the Protestant religion."

  Mr. Adderly, which was the name of the other ensign, had sat

hitherto kicking his heels and humming a tune, without seeming to

listen to the discourse; he now answered, "O, Monsieur, on ne parle

pas de la religion dans la guerre."- "Well said, Jack," cries

Northerton: "if la religion was the only matter, the parsons should

fight their own battles for me."

  "I don't know, gentlemen," said Jones, "what may be your opinion;

but I think no man can engage in a nobler cause than that of his

religion; and I have observed, in the little I have read of history,

that no soldiers have fought so bravely as those who have been

inspired with a religious zeal: for my own part, though I love my king

and country, I hope, as well as any man in it, yet the Protestant

interest is no small motive to my becoming a volunteer in the cause."

  Northerton now winked on Adderly, and whispered to him slily, "Smoke

the prig, Adderly, smoke him." Then turning to Jones, said to him,

"I am very glad, sir, you have chosen our regiment to be a volunteer

in; for if our parson should at any time take a cup too much, I find

you can supply his place. I presume, sir, you have been at the

university; may I crave the favour to know what college?"

  "Sir," answered Jones, "so far from having been at the university, I

have even had the advantage of yourself, for I was never at school."

  "I presumed," cries the ensign, "only upon the information of your

great learning."- "Oh! sir," answered Jones, "it is as possible for a

man to know something without having been at school, as it is to

have been at school and to know nothing."

  "Well said, young volunteer," cries the lieutenant. "Upon my word,

Northerton, you had better let him alone; for he will be too hard

for you."

  Northerton did not very well relish the sarcasm of Jones; but he

thought the provocation was scarce sufficient to justify a blow, or

a rascal, or scoundrel, which were the only repartees that suggested

themselves. He was, therefore, silent at present; but resolved to take

the first opportunity of returning the jest by abuse.

  It now came to the turn of Mr. Jones to give a toast, as it is

called; who could not refrain from mentioning his dear Sophia. This he

did the more readily, as he imagined it utterly impossible that any

one present should guess the person he meant.

  But the lieutenant, who was the toast-master, was not contented with

Sophia only. He said, he must have her sir-name; upon which Jones

hesitated a little, and presently after named Miss Sophia Western.

Ensign Northerton declared he would not drink her health in the same

round with his own toast, unless somebody would vouch for her. "I knew

one Sophy Western," says he, "that was lain with by half the young

fellows at Bath; and perhaps this is the same woman." Jones very

solemnly assured him of the contrary; asserting that the young lady he

named was one of great fashion and fortune. "Ay, ay," says the ensign,

"and so she is: d--n me, it is the same woman; and I'll hold half a

dozen of Burgundy, Tom French of our regiment brings her into

company with us at any tavern in Bridges-street." He then proceeded to

describe her person exactly (for he had seen her with her aunt), and

concluded with saying, "that her father had a great estate in

Somersetshire."

  The tenderness of lovers can ill brook the least jesting with the

names of their mistresses. However, Jones, though he had enough of the

lover and of the heroe too in his disposition, did not resent these

slanders as hastily as, perhaps, he ought to have done. To say the

truth, having seen but little of this kind of wit, he did not

readily understand it, and for a long time imagined Mr. Northerton had

really mistaken his charmer for some other. But now, turning to the

ensign with a stern aspect, he said, "Pray, sir, chuse some other

subject for your wit; for I promise you I will bear no jesting with

this lady's character." "Jesting!" cries the other, "d--n me if ever

I was more in earnest in my life. Tom French of our regiment had

both her and her aunt at Bath." "Then I must tell you in earnest,"

cried Jones, "that you are one of the most impudent rascals upon

earth."

  He had no sooner spoken these words, than the ensign, together

with a volley of curses, discharged a bottle full at the head of

Jones, which hitting him a little above the right temple, brought

him instantly to the ground.

  The conqueror perceiving the enemy to lie motionless before him, and

blood beginning to flow pretty plentifully from his wound, began now

to think of quitting the field of battle, where no more honour was

to be gotten; but the lieutenant interposed, by stepping before the

door, and thus cut off his retreat.

  Northerton was very importunate with the lieutenant for his liberty;

urging the ill consequences of his stay, asking him, what he could

have done less? "Zounds!" says he, "I was but in jest with the fellow.

I never heard any harm of Miss Western in my life." "Have not you?"

said the lieutenant; "then you richly deserve to be hanged, as well

for making such jests, as for using such a weapon: you are my

prisoner, sir; nor shall you stir from hence till a proper guard comes

to secure you."

  Such an ascendant had our lieutenant over this ensign, that all that

fervency of courage which had levelled our poor heroe with the

floor, would scarce have animated the said ensign to have drawn his

sword against the lieutenant, had he then had one dangling at his

side: but all the swords being hung up in the room, were, at the

very beginning of the fray, secured by the French officer. So that Mr.

Northerton was obliged to attend the final issue of this affair.

  The French gentleman and Mr. Adderly, at the desire of their

commanding officer, had raised up the body of Jones, but as they could

perceive but little (if any) sign of life in him, they again let him

fall, Adderly damning him for having blooded his waistcoat; and the

Frenchman declaring, "Begar, me no tush the Engliseman de mort: me

have heard de Englise ley, law, what you call, hang up de man dat tush

him last."

  When the good lieutenant applied himself to the door, he applied

himself likewise to the bell; and the drawer immediately attending, he

dispatched him for a file of musqueteers and a surgeon. These

commands, together with the drawer's report of what he had himself

seen, not only produced the soldiers, but presently drew up the

landlord of the house, his wife, and servants, and, indeed, every

one else who happened at that time to be in the inn.

  To describe every particular, and to relate the whole conversation

of the ensuing scene, is not within my power, unless I had forty pens,

and could, at once, write with them all together, as the company now

spoke. The reader must, therefore, content himself with the most

remarkable incidents, and perhaps he may very well excuse the rest.

  The first thing done was securing the body of Northerton, who

being delivered into the custody of six men with a corporal at their

head, was by them conducted from a place which he was very willing

to leave, but it was unluckily to a place whither he was very

unwilling to go. To say the truth, so whimsical are the desires of

ambition, the very moment this youth had attained the

above-mentioned honour, he would have been well contented to have

retired to some corner of the world, where the fame of it should never

have reached his ears.

  It surprizes us, and so perhaps, it may the reader, that the

lieutenant, a worthy and good man, should have applied his chief care,

rather to secure the offender, than to preserve the life of the

wounded person. We mention this observation, not with any view of

pretending to account for so odd a behaviour, but lest some critic

should hereafter plume himself on discovering it. We would have

these gentlemen know we can see what is odd in characters as well as

themselves, but it is our business to relate facts as they are; which,

when we have done, it is the part of the learned and sagacious

reader to consult that original book of nature, whence every passage

in our work is transcribed, though we quote not always the

particular page for its authority.

  The company which now arrived were of a different disposition.

They suspended their curiosity concerning the person of the ensign,

till they should see him hereafter in a more engaging attitude. At

present, their whole concern and attention were employed about the

bloody object on the floor; which being placed upright in a chair,

soon began to discover some symptoms of life and motion. These were no

sooner perceived by the company (for Jones was at first generally

concluded to be dead) than they all fell at once to prescribing for

him (for as none of the physical order was present, every one there

took that office upon him).

  Bleeding was the unanimous voice of the whole room; but unluckily

there was no operator at hand; every one then cried, "Call the

barber;" but none stirred a step. Several cordials was likewise

prescribed in the same ineffective manner; till the landlord ordered

up a tankard of strong beer, with a toast, which he said was the

best cordial in England.

  The person principally assistant on this occasion, indeed the only

one who did any service, or seemed likely to do any, was the landlady:

she cut off some of her hair, and applied it to the wound to stop

the blood; she fell to chafing the youth's temples with her hand;

and having exprest great contempt for her husband's prescription of

beer, she despatched one of her maids to her own closet for a bottle

of brandy, of which, as soon as it was brought, she prevailed on

Jones, who was just returned to his senses, to drink a very large

and plentiful draught.

  Soon afterwards arrived the surgeon, who having viewed the wound,

having shaken his head, and blamed everything which was done,

ordered his patient instantly to bed; in which place we think proper

to leave him some time to his repose, and shall here, therefore, put

an end to this chapter.





                                Chapter 13



  Containing the great address of the landlady, the great learning

of a surgeon, and the solid skill in casuistry of the worthy

lieutenant



  When the wounded man was carried to his bed, and the house began

again to clear up from the hurry which this accident had occasioned,

the landlady thus addressed the commanding officer: "I am afraid,

sir," said she, "this young man did not behave himself as well as he

should do to your honours; and if he had been killed, I suppose he had

but his desarts: to be sure, when gentlemen admit inferior parsons

into their company, they oft to keep their distance; but, as my

first husband used to say, few of 'em know how to do it. For my own

part, I am sure I should not have suffered any fellows to include

themselves into gentlemen's company; but I thoft he had been an

officer himself, till the serjeant told me he was but a recruit."

  "Landlady," answered the lieutenant, "you mistake the whole

matter. The young man behaved himself extremely well, and is, I

believe, a much better gentleman than the ensign who abused him. If

the young fellow dies, the man who struck him will have most reason to

be sorry for it; for the regiment will get rid of a very troublesome

fellow, who is a scandal to the army; and if he escapes from the hands

of justice, blame me, madam, that's all."

  "Ay! ay! good lack-a-day!" said the landlady; "who could have

thoft it? Ay, ay, ay, I am satisfied your honour will see justice

done; and to be sure it oft to be to every one. Gentlemen oft not to

kill poor folks without answering for it. A poor man hath a soul to be

saved, as well as his betters."

  "Indeed, madam," said the lieutenant, "you do the volunteer wrong: I

dare swear he is more of a gentleman than the officer."

  "Ay!" cries the landlady; "why, look you there, now: well, my

first husband was a wise man; he used to say, you can't always know

the inside by the outside. Nay, that might have been well enough

too; for I never saw'd him till he was all over blood. Who would

have thoft it? mayhap, some young gentleman crossed in love. Good

lack-a-day, if he should die, what a concern it will be to his

parents! why, sure the devil must possess the wicked wretch to do such

an act. To be sure, he is a scandal to the army, as your honour

says; for most of the gentlemen of the army that ever I saw, are quite

different sort of people, and look as if they would scorn to spill any

Christian blood as much as any men: I mean, that is, in a civil way,

as my first husband used to say. To be sure, when they come into the

wars, there must be bloodshed: but that they are not to be blamed for.

The more of our enemies they kill there, the better: and I wish,

with all my heart, they could kill every mother's son of them."

  "O fie, madam!" said the lieutenant, smiling; "all is rather too

bloody-minded a wish."

  "Not at all, sir," answered she; "I am not at all bloody-minded,

only to our enemies; and there is no harm in that. To be sure it is

natural for us to wish our enemies dead, that the wars may be at an

end, and our taxes be lowered; for it is a dreadful thing to pay as we

do. Why now, there is above forty shillings for window-lights, and yet

we have stopt up all we could; we have almost blinded the house, I

am sure. Says I to the exciseman, says I, I think you oft to favour

us; I am sure we are very good friends to the government: and so we

are for sartain, for we pay a mint of money to 'um. And yet I often

think to myself the government doth not imagine itself more obliged to

us, than to those that don't pay 'um a farthing. Ay, ay, it is the way

of the world."

  She was proceeding in this manner when the surgeon entered the room.

The lieutenant immediately asked how his patient did. But he

resolved him only by saying, "Better, I believe, than he would have

been by this time, if I had not been called; and even as it is,

perhaps it would have been lucky if I could have been called

sooner."- "I hope, sir," said the lieutenant, "the skull is not

fractured."- "Hum," cries the surgeon: "fractures are not always the

most dangerous symptoms. Contusions and lacerations are often attended

with worse phaenomena, and with more fatal consequences, than

fractures. People who know nothing of the matter conclude, if the

skull is not fractured, all is well; whereas, I had rather see a man's

skull broke all to pieces, than some contusions I have met with."- "I

hope," says the lieutenant, "there are no such symptoms here."-

"Symptoms," answered the surgeon, "are not always regular nor

constant. I have known very unfavourable symptoms in the morning

change to favourable ones at noon, and return to unfavourable again at

night. Of wounds, indeed, it is rightly and truly said, Nemo repente

fuit turpissimus.* I was once, I remember, called to a patient who had

received a violent contusion in his tibia, by which the exterior cutis

was lacerated, so that there was a profuse sanguinary discharge; and

the interior membranes were so divellicated, that the os or bone

very plainly appeared through the aperture of the vulnus or wound.

Some febrile symptoms intervening at the same time (for the pulse

was exuberant and indicated much phlebotomy), I apprehended an

immediate mortification. To prevent which, I presently made a large

orifice in the vein of the left arm, whence I drew twenty ounces of

blood; which I expected to have found extremely sizy and glutinous, or

indeed coagulated, as it is in pleuretic complaints; but, to my

surprize, it appeared rosy and florid, and its consistency differed

little from the blood of those in perfect health. I then applied a

fomentation to the part, which highly answered the intention; and

after three or four times dressing, the wound began to discharge a

thick pus or matter, by which means the cohesion-- But perhaps I do

not make myself perfectly well understood?"- "No, really," answered

the lieutenant, "I cannot say I understand a syllable."- "Well, sir,"

said the surgeon, "then I shall not tire your patience; in short,

within six weeks my patient was able to walk upon his legs as

perfectly as he could have done before he received the contusion."-

"I wish sir," said the lieutenant, "you would be so kind only to

inform me, whether the wound this young gentleman hath had the

misfortune to receive, is likely to prove mortal."- "Sir," answered

the surgeon, "to say whether a wound will prove mortal or not at first

dressing, would be very weak and foolish presumption: we are all

mortal, and symptoms often occur in a cure which the greatest of our

profession could never foresee."- "But do you think him in danger?"

says the other.- "In danger! ay, surely," cries the doctor: "who is

there among us, who, in the most perfect health, can be said not to be

in danger? Can a man, therefore, with so bad a wound as this be said

to be out of danger? All I can say at present is, that it is well I

was called as I was, and perhaps it would have been better if I had

been called sooner. I will see him again early in the morning; and

in the meantime let him be kept extremely quiet, and drink liberally

of water-gruel."- "Won't you allow him sack-whey?" said the

landlady.- "Ay, ay, sack-whey," cries the doctor, "if you will,

provided it be very small."- "And a little chicken broth too?" added

she.- "Yes, yes, chicken broth," said the doctor, "is very

good."- "Mayn't I make him some jellies too?" said the landlady.- "Ay,

ay," answered the doctor, "jellies are very good for wounds, for

they promote cohesion." And indeed it was lucky she had not named soup

or high sauces, for the doctor would have complied, rather than have

lost the custom of the house.



  *No man ever became extremely wicked all at once.



  The doctor was no sooner gone, than the landlady began to trumpet

forth his fame to the lieutenant, who had not, from their short

acquaintance, conceived quite so favourable an opinion of his physical

abilities as the good woman, and all the neighbourhood, entertained

(and perhaps very rightly); for though I am afraid the doctor was a

little of a coxcomb, he might be nevertheless very much of a surgeon.

  The lieutenant having collected from the learned discourse of the

surgeon that Mr. Jones was in great danger, gave orders for keeping

Mr. Northerton under a very strict guard, designing in the morning

to attend him to a justice of peace, and to commit the conducting

the troops to Gloucester to the French lieutenant, who, though he

could neither read, write, nor speak any language, was, however, a

good officer.

  In the evening, our commander sent a message to Mr. Jones, that if a

visit would not be troublesome, he would wait on him. This civility

was very kindly and thankfully received by Jones, and the lieutenant

accordingly went up to his room, where he found the wounded man much

better than he expected; nay, Jones assured his friend, that if he had

not received express orders to the contrary from the surgeon, he

should have got up long ago; for he appeared to himself to be as

well as ever, and felt no other inconvenience from his wound but an

extreme soreness on that side of his head.

  "I should be very glad," quoth the lieutenant, "if you was as well

as you fancy yourself, for then you could be able to do yourself

justice immediately; for when a matter can't be made up, as in case of

a blow, the sooner you take him out the better; but I am afraid you

think yourself better than you are, and he would have too much

advantage over you."

  "I'll try, however," answered Jones, "if you please, and will be

so kind to lend me a sword, for I have none here of my own."

  "My sword is heartily at your service, my dear boy," cries the

lieutenant, kissing him: "you are a brave lad, and I love your spirit;

but I fear your strength; for such a blow, and so much loss of

blood, must have very much weakened you; and though you feel no want

of strength in your bed, yet you most probably would after a thrust or

two. I can't consent to your taking him out to-night; but I hope you

will be able to come up with us before we get many days' march

advance; and I give you my honour you shall have satisfaction, or

the man who hath injured you shan't stay in our regiment."

  "I wish," said Jones, "it was possible to decide this matter

to-night: now you have mentioned it to me, I shall not be able to

rest."

  "Oh, never think of it," returned the other: "a few days will make

no difference. The wounds of honour are not like those in your body:

they suffer nothing by the delay of cure. It will be altogether as

well for you to receive satisfaction a week hence as now."

  "But suppose," says Jones, "I should grow worse, and die of the

consequences of my present wound?"

  "Then your honour," answered the lieutenant, "will require no

reparation at all. I myself will do justice to your character, and

testify to the world your intention to have acted properly, if you had

recovered."

  "Still," replied Jones, "I am concerned at the delay. I am almost

afraid to mention it to you who are a soldier; but though I have

been a very wild young fellow, still in my most serious moments, and

at the bottom, I am really a Christian."

  "So am I too, I assure you," said the officer; "and so zealous a

one, that I was pleased with you at dinner for taking up the cause

of your religion; and I am a little offended with you now, young

gentleman, that you should express a fear of declaring your faith

before any one."

  "But how terrible must it be," cries Jones, "to any one who is

really a Christian, to cherish malice in his breast, in opposition

to the command of Him who hath expressly forbid it? How can I bear

to do this on a sick-bed? Or how shall I make up my account, with such

an article as this in my bosom against me?"

  "Why, I believe there is such a command," cries the lieutenant; "but

a man of honour can't keep it. And you must be a man of honour, if you

will be in the army. I remember I once put the case to our chaplain

over a bowl of punch, and he confessed there was much difficulty in

it; but he said, he hoped there might be a latitude granted to

soldiers in this one instance; and to be sure it is our duty to hope

so; for who would bear to live without his honour? No, no, my dear

boy, be a good Christian as long as you live; but be a man of honour

too, and never put up an affront; not all the books, nor all the

parsons in the world, shall ever persuade me to that. I love my

religion very well, but I love my honour more. There must be some

mistake in the wording the text, or in the translation, or in the

understanding it, or somewhere or other. But however that be, a man

must run the risque, for he must preserve his honour. So compose

yourself to-night, and I promise you you have an opportunity of

doing yourself justice." Here he gave Jones a hearty buss, shook him

by the hand, and took his leave.

  But though the lieutenant's reasoning was very satisfactory to

himself, it was not entirely so to his friend. Jones therefore, having

revolved this matter much in his thoughts, at last came to a

resolution, which the reader will find in the next chapter.





                                Chapter 14



  A most dreadful chapter indeed; and which few readers ought to

venture upon in an evening, especially when alone



  Jones swallowed a large mess of chicken, or rather cock, broth, with

a very good appetite, as indeed he would have done the cock it was

made of, with a pound of bacon into the bargain; and now, finding in

himself no deficiency of either health or spirit, he resolved to get

up and seek his enemy.

  But first he sent for the serjeant, who was his first acquaintance

among these military gentlemen. Unluckily that worthy officer

having, in a literal sense, taken his fill of liquor, had been some

time retired to his bolster, where he was snoring so loud that it

was not easy to convey a noise in at his ears capable of drowning that

which issued from his nostrils.

  However, as Jones persisted in his desire of seeing him, a

vociferous drawer at length found means to disturb his slumbers, and

to acquaint him with the message. Of which the serjeant was no

sooner made sensible, than he arose from his bed, and having his

clothes already on, immediately attended. Jones did not think fit to

acquaint the serjeant with his design; though he might have done it

with great safety, for the halberdier was himself a man of honour, and

had killed his man. He would therefore have faithfully kept this

secret, or indeed any other which no reward was published for

discovering. But as Jones knew not those virtues in so short an

acquaintance, his caution was perhaps prudent and commendable enough.

  He began therefore by acquainting the serjeant, that as he was now

entered into the army, he was ashamed of being without what was

perhaps the most necessary implement of a soldier; namely, a sword;

adding, that he should be infinitely obliged to him, if he could

procure one. "For which," says he, "I will give you any reasonable

price; nor do I insist upon its being silver-hilted; only a good

blade, and such as may become a soldier's thigh."

  The serjeant, who well knew what had happened, and had heard that

Jones was in a very dangerous condition, immediately concluded, from

such a message, at such a time of night, and from a man in such a

situation, that he was light-headed. Now as he had his wit (to use

that word in its common signification) always ready, he bethought

himself of making his advantage of this humour in the sick man. "Sir,"

says he, "I believe I can fit you. I have a most excellent piece of

stuff by me. It is not indeed silver-hilted, which, as you say, doth

not become a soldier; but the handle is decent enough, and the blade

one of the best in Europe. It is a blade that- a blade that- in short

I will fetch it you this instant, and you shall see it and handle

it. I am glad to see your honour so well with all my heart."

  Being instantly returned with the sword, he delivered it to Jones,

who took it and drew it; and then told the serjeant it would do very

well, and bid him name his price.

  The serjeant now began to harangue in praise of his goods. He said

(nay he swore very heartily), "that the blade was taken from a

French officer, of very high rank, at the battle of Dettingen. I

took it myself," says he, "from his side, after I had knocked him o'

the head. The hilt was a golden one. That I sold to one of our fine

gentlemen; for there are some of them, an't please your honour, who

value the hilt of a sword more than the blade."

  Here the other stopped him, and begged him to name a price. The

serjeant, who thought Jones absolutely out of his senses, and very

near his end, was afraid lest he should injure his family by asking

too little. However, after a moment's hesitation, he contented himself

with naming twenty guineas, and swore he would not sell it for less to

his own brother.

  "Twenty guineas!" says Jones, in the utmost surprize: "sure you

think I am mad, or that I never saw a sword in my life. Twenty

guineas, indeed! I did not imagine you would endeavour to impose

upon me. Here, take the sword- No, now I think on't, I will keep it

myself, and show it your officer in the morning, acquainting him, at

the same time, what a price you asked me for it."

  The serjeant, as we have said, had always his wit (in sensu

praedicto*) about him, and now plainly saw that Jones was not in the

condition he had apprehended him to be; he now, therefore,

counterfeited as great surprize as the other had shown, and said, "I

am certain, sir, I have not asked you so much out of the way. Besides,

you are to consider, it is the only sword I have, and I must run the

risque of my officer's displeasure, by going without one myself. And

truly, putting all this together, I don't think twenty shillings was

so much out of the way."



  *In the aforementioned sense.



  "Twenty shillings!" cries Jones; "why, you just now asked me

twenty guineas."- "How!" cries the serjeant, "sure your honour must

have mistaken me: or else I mistook myself- and indeed I am but half

awake. Twenty guineas, indeed! no wonder your honour flew into such

a passion. I say twenty guineas too. No, no, I mean twenty

shillings, I assure you. And when your honour comes to consider

everything, I hope you will not think that so extravagant a price.

It is indeed true, you may buy a weapon which looks as well for less

money. But-"

  Here Jones interrupted him, saying, "I will be so far from making

any words with you, that I will give you a shilling more than your

demand." He then gave him a guinea, bid him return to his bed, and

wished him a good march; adding, he hoped to overtake them before

the division reached Worcester.

  The serjeant very civilly took his leave, fully satisfied with his

merchandize, and not a little pleased with his dexterous recovery from

the false step into which his opinion of the sick man's

light-headedness had betrayed him.

  As soon as the serjeant was departed, Jones rose from his bed, and

dressed himself entirely, putting on even his coat, which, as its

colour was white, showed very visibly the streams of blood which had

flowed down it; and now, having grasped his new-purchased sword in his

hand, he was going to issue forth, when the thought of what he was

about to undertake laid suddenly hold of him, and he began to

reflect that in a few minutes he might possibly deprive a human

being of life, or might lose his own. "Very well," said he, "and in

what cause do I venture my life? Why, in that of my honour. And who is

this human being? A rascal who hath injured and insulted me without

provocation. But is not revenge forbidden by Heaven? Yes, but it is

enjoined by the world. Well, but shall I obey the world in

opposition to the express commands of Heaven? Shall I incur the Divine

displeasure rather than be called- ha- coward- scoundrel?- I'll think

no more; I am resolved, and must fight him."

  The clock had now struck twelve, and every one in the house were

in their beds, except the centinel who stood to guard Northerton, when

Jones softly opening his door, issued forth in pursuit of his enemy,

of whose place of confinement he had received a perfect description

from the drawer. It is not easy to conceive a much more tremendous

figure than he now exhibited. He had on, as we have said, a

light-coloured coat, covered with streams of blood. His face, which

missed that very blood, as well as twenty ounces more drawn from him

by the surgeon, was pallid. Round his head was a quantity of

bandage, not unlike a turban. In the right hand he carried a sword,

and in the left a candle. So that the bloody Banquo was not worthy

to be compared to him. In fact, I believe a more dreadful apparition

was never raised in a church-yard, nor in the imagination of any

good people met in a winter evening over a Christmas fire in

Somersetshire.

  When the centinel first saw our heroe approach, his hair began

gently to lift up his grenadier cap; and in the same instant his knees

fell to blows with each other. Presently his whole body was seized

with worse than an ague fit. He then fired his piece, and fell flat on

his face.

  Whether fear or courage was the occasion of his firing, or whether

he took aim at the object of his terror, I cannot say. If he did,

however, he had the good fortune to miss his man.

  Jones seeing the fellow fall, guessed the cause of his fright, at

which he could not forbear smiling, not in the least reflecting on the

danger from which he had just escaped. He then passed by the fellow,

who still continued in the posture in which he fell, and entered the

room where Northerton, as he had heard, was confined. Here, in a

solitary situation, he found- an empty quart pot standing on the

table, on which some beer being spilt, it looked as if the room had

lately been inhabited; but at present it was entirely vacant.

  Jones then apprehended it might lead to some other apartment; but

upon searching all round it, he could perceive no other door than that

at which he entered, and where the centinel had been posted. He then

proceeded to call Northerton several times by his name; but no one

answered; nor did this serve to any other purpose than to confirm

the centinel in his terrors, who was now convinced that the

volunteer was dead of his wounds, and that his ghost was come in

search of the murderer: he now lay in all the agonies of horror; and I

wish, with all my heart, some of those actors who are hereafter to

represent a man frighted out of his wits had seen him, that they might

be taught to copy nature, instead of performing several antic tricks

and gestures, for the entertainment and applause of the galleries.

  Perceiving the bird was flown, at least despairing to find him,

and rightly apprehending that the report of the firelock would alarm

the whole house, our heroe now blew out his candle, and gently stole

back again to his chamber, and to his bed; whither he would not have

been able to have gotten undiscovered, had any other person been on

the same staircase, save only one gentleman who was confined to his

bed by the gout; for before he could reach the door to his chamber,

the hall where the centinel had been posted was half full of people,

some in their shirts, and others not half drest, all very earnestly

enquiring of each other what was the matter.

  The soldier was now found lying in the same place and posture in

which we just now left him. Several immediately applied themselves

to raise him, and some concluded him dead; but they presently saw

their mistake, for he not only struggled with those who laid their

hands on him, but fell a roaring like a bull. In reality, he

imagined so many spirits or devils were handling him; for his

imagination being possessed with the horror of an apparition,

converted every object he saw or felt into nothing but ghosts and

spectres.

  At length he was overpowered by numbers, and got upon his legs; when

candles being brought, and seeing two or three of his comrades

present, he came a little to himself; but when they asked him what was

the matter? he answered, "I am a dead man, that's all, I am a dead

man, I can't recover it, I have seen him." "What hast thou seen,

Jack?" says one of the soldiers. "Why, I have seen the young volunteer

that was killed yesterday." He then imprecated the most heavy curses

on himself, if he had not seen the volunteer, all over blood, vomiting

fire out of his mouth and nostrils, pass by him into the chamber where

Ensign Northerton was, and then seizing the ensign by the throat,

fly away with him in a clap of thunder.

  This relation met with a gracious reception from the audience. All

the women present believed it firmly, and prayed Heaven to defend them

from murder. Amongst the men too, many had faith in the story; but

others turned it into derision and ridicule; and a serjeant who was

present answered very coolly, "Young man, you will hear more of

this, for going to sleep and dreaming on your post."

  The soldier replied, "You may punish me if you please; but I was

as broad awake as I am now; and the devil carry me away, as he hath

the ensign, if I did not see the dead man, as I tell you, with eyes as

big and as fiery as two large flambeaux."

  The commander of the forces, and the commander of the house, were

now both arrived; for the former being awake at the time, and

hearing the centinel fire his piece, thought it his duty to rise

immediately, though he had no great apprehensions of any mischief;

whereas the apprehensions of the latter were much greater, lest her

spoons and tankards should be upon the march, without having

received any such orders from her.

  Our poor centinel, to whom the sight of this officer was not much

more welcome than the apparition, as he thought it, which he had

seen before, again related the dreadful story, and with many additions

of blood and fire; but he had the misfortune to gain no credit with

either of the last-mentioned persons: for the officer, though a very

religious man, was free from all terrors of this kind; besides, having

so lately left Jones in the condition we have seen, he had no

suspicion of his being dead. As for the landlady, though not over

religious, she had no kind of aversion to the doctrine of spirits; but

there was a circumstance in the tale which she well knew to be

false, as we shall inform the reader presently.

  But whether Northerton was carried away in thunder or fire, or in

whatever other manner he was gone, it was now certain that his body

was no longer in custody. Upon this occasion the lieutenant formed a

conclusion not very different from what the serjeant is just mentioned

to have made before, and immediately ordered the centinel to be

taken prisoner. So that, by a strange reverse of fortune (though not

very uncommon in a military life), the guard became the guarded.





                                Chapter 15



  The conclusion of the foregoing adventure



  Besides the suspicion of sleep, the lieutenant harboured another and

worse doubt against the poor centinel, and this was, that of

treachery; for as he believed not one syllable of the apparition, so

he imagined the whole to be an invention formed only to impose upon

him, and that the fellow had in reality been bribed by Northerton to

let him escape. And this he imagined the rather, as the fright

appeared to him the more unnatural in one who had the character of

as brave and bold a man as any in the regiment, having been in several

actions, having received several wounds, and, in a word, having

behaved himself always like a good and valiant soldier.

  That the reader, therefore, may not conceive the least ill opinion

of such a person, we shall not delay a moment in rescuing his

character from the imputation of this guilt.

  Mr. Northerton then, as we have before observed, was fully satisfied

with the glory which he had obtained from this action. He had

perhaps seen, or heard, or guessed, that envy is apt to attend fame.

Not that I would here insinuate that he was heathenishly inclined to

believe in or to worship the goddess Nemesis: for, in fact, I am

convinced he never heard of her name. He was, besides, of an active

disposition, and had a great antipathy to those close quarters in

the castle of Gloucester, for which a justice of peace might

possibly give him a billet. Nor was he moreover free from some

uneasy meditations on a certain wooden edifice, which I forbear to

name, in conformity to the opinion of mankind, who, I think, rather

ought to honour than to be ashamed of this building, as it is, or at

least might be made, of more benefit to society than almost any

other public erection. In a word, to hint at no more reasons for his

conduct, Mr. Northerton was desirous of departing that evening, and

nothing remained for him but to contrive the quomodo, which appeared

to be a matter of some difficulty.

  Now this young gentleman, though somewhat crooked in his morals, was

perfectly straight in his person, which was extremely strong and

well made. His face too was accounted handsome by the generality of

women, for it was broad and ruddy, with tolerably good teeth. Such

charms did not fail making an impression on my landlady, who had no

little relish for this kind of beauty. She had, indeed, a real

compassion for the young man; and hearing from the surgeon that

affairs were like to go ill with the volunteer, she suspected they

might hereafter wear no benign aspect with the ensign. Having

obtained, therefore, leave to make him a visit, and finding him in a

very melancholy mood, which she considerably heightened by telling him

there were scarce any hopes of the volunteer's life, she proceeded

to throw forth some hints, which the other readily and eagerly

taking up, they soon came to a right understanding; and it was at

length agreed that the ensign should, at a certain signal, ascend

the chimney, which communicating very soon with that of the kitchen,

he might there again let himself down; for which she would give him an

opportunity by keeping the coast clear.

  But lest our readers, of a different complexion, should take this

occasion of too hastily condemning all compassion as a folly, and

pernicious to society, we think proper to mention another particular

which might possibly have some little share in this action. The ensign

happened to be at this time possessed of the sum of fifty pounds,

which did indeed belong to the whole company; for the captain having

quarrelled with his lieutenant, had entrusted the payment of his

company to the ensign. This money, however, he thought proper to

deposit in my landlady's hand, possibly by way of bail or security

that he would hereafter appear and answer to the charge against him;

but whatever were the conditions, certain it is, that she had the

money and the ensign his liberty.

  The reader may perhaps expect, from the compassionate temper of this

good woman, that when she saw the poor centinel taken prisoner for a

fact of which she knew him innocent, she should immediately have

interposed in his behalf; but whether it was that she had already

exhausted all her compassion in the above-mentioned instance, or

that the features of this fellow, though not very different from those

of the ensign, could not raise it, I will not determine; but, far from

being an advocate for the present prisoner, she urged his guilt to his

officer, declaring, with uplifted eyes and hands, that she would not

have had any concern in the escape of a murderer for all the world.

  Everything was now once more quiet, and most of the company returned

again to their beds; but the landlady, either from the natural

activity of her disposition, or from her fear for her plate, having no

propensity to sleep, prevailed with the officers, as they were to

march within little more than an hour, to spend that time with her

over a bowl of punch.

  Jones had lain awake all this while, and had heard great part of the

hurry and bustle that had passed, of which he had now some curiosity

to know the particulars. He therefore applied to his bell, which he

rung at least twenty times without any effect: for my landlady was

in such high mirth with her company, that no clapper could be heard

there but her own; and the drawer and chambermaid, who were sitting

together in the kitchen (for neither durst he sit up nor she lie in

bed alone), the more they heard the bell ring the more they were

frightened, and as it were nailed down in their places.

  At last, at a lucky interval of chat, the sound reached the ears

of our good landlady, who presently sent forth her summons, which

both her servants instantly obeyed. "Joe," says the mistress, "don't

you hear the gentleman's bell ring? Why don't you go up?"- "It is not

my business," answered the drawer, "to wait upon the chambers- it is

Betty Chambermaid's." "If you come to that," answered the maid, "it is

not my business to wait upon gentlemen. I have done it indeed

sometimes; but the devil fetch me if ever I do again, since you make

your preambles about it." The bell still ringing violently, their

mistress fell into a passion, and swore, if the drawer did not go up

immediately, she would turn him away that very morning. "If you do,

madam," says he, "I can't help it. I won't do another servant's

business." She then applied herself to the maid, and endeavoured to

prevail by gentle means; but all in vain: Betty was as inflexible as

joe. Both insisted it was not their business, and they would not do

it.

  The lieutenant then fell a laughing, and said, "Come, I will put

an end to this contention"; and then turning to the servants,

commended them for their resolution in not giving up the point; but

added, he was sure, if one would consent to go the other would. To

which proposal they both agreed in an instant, and accordingly. went

up very lovingly and close together. When they were gone, the

lieutenant appeased the wrath of the landlady, by satisfying her why

they were both so unwilling to go alone.

  They returned soon after, and acquainted their mistress, that the

sick gentleman was so far from being dead, that he spoke as heartily

as if he was well; and that he gave his service to the captain, and

should be very glad of the favour of seeing him before he marched.

  The good lieutenant immediately complied with his desires, and

sitting down by his bedside, acquainted him with the scene which had

happened below, concluding with his intentions to make an example of

the centinel.

  Upon this Jones related to him the whole truth, and earnestly begged

him not to punish the poor soldier, "who, I am confident," says he,

"is as innocent of the ensign's escape, as he is of forging any lie,

or of endeavouring to impose on you."

  The lieutenant hesitated a few moments, and then answered: "Why,

as you have cleared the fellow of one part of the charge, so it will

be impossible to prove the other, because he was not the only

centinel. But I have a good mind to punish the rascal for being a

coward. Yet who knows what effect the terror of such an apprehension

may have? and, to say the truth, he hath always behaved well against

an enemy. Come, it is a good thing to see any sign of religion in

these fellows; so I promise you shall be set at liberty when we march.

But hark, the general beats. My dear boy, give me another buss.

Don't discompose nor hurry yourself; but remember the Christian

doctrine of patience, and I warrant you will soon be able to do

yourself justice, and to take an honourable revenge on the fellow

who hath injured you." The lieutenant then departed, and Jones

endeavoured to compose himself to rest.
