



                                   BOOK XIII

                      CONTAINING THE SPACE OF TWELVE DAYS





                                Chapter 1



  An invocation



  Come, bright love of fame, inspire my glowing breast: not thee I

call, who, over swelling tides of blood and tears, dost bear the heroe

on to glory, while sighs of millions waft his spreading sails; but

thee, fair, gentle maid, whom Mnesis, happy nympth, first on the banks

of Hebrus did produce. Thee, whom Maeonia educated, whom Mantua

charmed, and who, on that fair hill which overlooks the proud

metropolis of Britain, sat'st, with thy Milton, sweetly tuning the

heroic lyre; fill my ravished fancy with the hopes of charming ages

yet to come. Foretel me that some tender maid, whose grandmother is

yet unborn, hereafter, when, under the fictitious name of Sophia,

she reads the real worth which once existed in my Charlotte, shall

from her sympathetic breast send forth the heaving sigh. Do thou teach

me not only to foresee, but to enjoy, nay, even to feed on future

praise. Comfort me by a solemn assurance, that when the little parlour

in which I sit at this instant shall be reduced to a worse furnished

box, I shall be read with honour by those who never knew nor saw me,

and whom I shall neither know nor see.

  And thou, much plumper dame, whom no airy forms nor phantoms of

imagination cloathe; whom the well-seasoned beef, and pudding richly

stained with plums, delight: thee I call: of whom in a treckschuyte,

in some Dutch canal, the fat Jufvrouw Gelt, impregnated by a jolly

merchant of Amsterdam, was delivered: in Grub-street school didst thou

suck in the clements of thy erudition. Here hast thou, in thy

maturer age, taught poetry to tickle not the fancy, but the pride of

the patron. Comedy from thee learns a grave and solemn air; while

tragedy storms aloud, and rends th' affrighted theatres with its

thunders. To soothe thy wearied limbs in slumber, Alderman History

tells his tedious tale; and, again, to awaken thee, Monsieur Romance

performs his surprizing tricks of dexterity. Nor less thy well-fed

bookseller obeys thy influence. By thy advice the heavy, unread, folio

lump, which long had dozed on the dusty shelf, piecemealed into

numbers, runs nimbly through the nation. Instructed by thee, some

books, like quacks, impose on the world by promising wonders; while

others turn beaus, and trust all their merits to a gilded outside.

Come, thou jolly substance, with thy shining face, keep back thy

inspiration, but hold forth thy tempting rewards; thy shining,

chinking heap; thy quickly convertible bank-bill, big with unseen

riches; thy often-varying stock; the warm, the comfortable house; and,

lastly, a fair portion of that bounteous mother, whose flowing breasts

yield redundant sustenance for all her numerous offspring, did not

some too greedily and wantonly drive their brethren from the teat.

Come thou, and if I am too tasteless of thy valuable treasures, warm

my heart with the transporting thought of conveying them to others.

Tell me, that through thy bounty, the pratling babes, whose innocent

play hath often been interrupted by my labours, may one time be

amply rewarded for them.

  And now this ill-yoked pair, this lean shadow and this fat

substance, have prompted me to write, whose assistance shall I

invoke to direct my pen?

  First, Genius; thou gift of Heaven; without whose aid in vain we

struggle against the stream of nature. Thou who dost sow the

generous seeds which art nourishes, and brings to perfection. Do

thou kindly take me by the hand, and lead me through all the mazes,

the winding labyrinths of nature. Initiate me into all those mysteries

which profane eyes never beheld. Teach me, which to thee is no

difficult task, to know mankind better than they know themselves.

Remove that mist which dims the intellects of mortals, and causes them

to adore men for their art, or to detest them for their cunning, in

deceiving others, when they are, in reality, the objects only of

ridicule, for deceiving themselves. Strip off the thin disguise of

wisdom from self-conceit, of plenty from avarice, and of glory from

ambition. Come, thou that hast inspired thy Aristophanes, thy

Lucian, thy Cervantes, thy Rabelais, thy Moliere, thy Shakespear,

thy Swift, thy Marivaux, fill my pages with humour; till mankind learn

the good-nature to laugh only at the follies of others, and the

humility to grieve at their own.

  And thou, almost the constant attendant on true genius, Humanity,

bring all thy tender sensations. If thou hast already disposed of them

all between thy Allen and thy Lyttleton, steal them a little while

from their bosoms. Not without these the tender scene is painted. From

these alone proceed the noble, disinterested friendship, the melting

love, the generous sentiment, the ardent gratitude, the soft

compassion, the candid opinion; and all those strong energies of

a good mind, which fill the moistened eyes with tears, the glowing

cheeks with blood, and swell the heart with tides of grief, joy, and

benevolence.

  And thou, O Learning! (for without thy assistance nothing pure,

nothing correct, can genius produce) do thou guide my pen. Thee in thy

favourite fields, where the limpid, gently-rolling Thames washes thy

Etonian banks, in early youth I have worshipped. To thee, at thy

birchen altar, with true Spartan devotion, I have sacrificed my blood.

Come then, and from thy vast, luxuriant stores, in long antiquity

piled up, pour forth the rich profusion. Open thy Maeonian and thy

Mantuan coffers, with whatever else includes thy philosophic, thy

poetic, and thy historical treasures, whether with Greek or Roman

characters thou hast chosen to inscribe the ponderous chests: give

me a while that key to all thy treasures, which to thy Warburton

thou hast entrusted.

  Lastly, come Experience, long conversant with the wise, the good,

the learned, and the polite. Nor with them only, but with every kind

of character, from the minister at his levee, to the bailiff in his

spunging-house; from the dutchess at her drum, to the landlady

behind her bar. From thee only can the manners of mankind be known; to

which the recluse pedant, however great his parts or extensive his

learning may be, hath ever been a stranger.

  Come all these, and more, if possible; for arduous is the task I

have undertaken; and, without all your assistance, will, I find, be

too heavy for me to support. But if you all smile on my labours, I

hope still to bring them to a happy conclusion.





                                Chapter 2



  What befel Mr. Jones on his arrival in London



  The learned Dr. Misaubin used to say, that the proper direction to

him was To Dr. Misaubin, in the World; intimating that there were

few people in it to whom his great reputation was not known. And,

perhaps, upon a very nice examination into the matter, we shall find

that this circumstance bears no inconsiderable part among the many

blessings of grandeur.

  The great happiness of being known to posterity, with the hopes of

which we so delighted ourselves in the preceding chapter, is the

portion of few. To have the several elements which compose our

names, as Sydenham expresses it, repeated a thousand years hence, is a

gift beyond the power of title and wealth; and is scarce to be

purchased, unless by the sword and the pen. But to avoid the

scandalous imputation, while we yet live, of being one whom nobody

knows (a scandal, by the bye, as old as the days of Homer*), will

always be the envied portion of those, who have a legal title either

to honour or estate.



  *See Odyssey II.



  From that figure, therefore, which the Irish peer, who brought

Sophia to town, hath already made in this history, the reader will

conclude, doubtless, it must have been an easy matter to have

discovered his house in London without knowing the particular street

or square which he inhabited, since he must have been one whom

everybody knows. To say the truth, so it would have been to any of

those tradesmen who are accustomed to attend the regions of the great;

for the doors of the great are generally no less easy to find than

it is difficult to get entrance into them. But Jones, as well at

Partridge, was an entire stranger in London; and as he happened to

arrive first in a quarter of the town, the inhabitants of which have

very little intercourse with the householders of Hanover or

Grosvenor-square (for he entered through Gray's-inn-lane), so he

rambled about some time, before he could even find his way to those

happy mansions where fortune segregates from the vulgar those

magnanimous heroes, the descendants of antient Britons, Saxons, or

Danes, whose ancestors, being born in better days, by sundry kinds

of merit, have entailed riches and honour on their posterity.

  Jones, being at length arrived at those terrestrial Elysian

fields, would now soon have discovered his lordship's mansion; but the

peer unluckily quitted his former house when he went for Ireland;

and as he was just entered into a new one, the fame of his equipage

had not yet sufficiently blazed in the neighbourhood; so that, after a

successless inquiry till the clock had struck eleven, Jones at last

yielded to the advice of Partridge, and retreated to the Bull and Gate

in Holborn, that being the inn where he had first alighted, and

where he retired to enjoy that kind of repose which usually attends

persons in his circumstances.

  Early in the morning he again set forth in pursuit of Sophia; and

many a weary step he took to no better purpose than before. At last,

whether it was that Fortune relented, or whether it was no longer in

her power to disappoint him, he came into the very street which was

honoured by his lordship's residence; and, being directed to the

house, he gave one gentle rap at the door.

  The porter, who, from the modesty of the knock, had conceived no

high idea of the person approaching, conceived but little better

from the appearance of Mr. Jones, who was drest in a suit of

fustian, and had by his side the weapon formerly purchased of the

serjeant; of which, though the blade might be composed of

well-tempered steel, the handle was composed only of brass, and that

none of the brightest. When Jones, therefore, enquired after the young

lady who had come to town with his lordship, this fellow answered

surlily, "That there were no ladies there." Jones then desired to

see the master of the house; but was informed that his lordship

would see nobody that morning. And upon growing more pressing the

porter said, "he had positive orders to let no person in; but if you

think proper," said he, "to leave your name, I will acquaint his

lordship; and if you call another time you shall know when he will see

you."

  Jones now declared, "that he had very particular business with the

young lady, and could not depart without seeing her." Upon which the

porter, with no very agreeable voice or aspect, affirmed, "that

there was no young lady in that house, and consequently none could

he see;" adding, "sure you are the strangest man I ever met with,

for you will not take an answer."

  I have often thought that, by the particular description of

Cerberus, the porter of hell, in the 6th AEneid, Virgil might possibly

intend to satirize the porters of the great men in his time; the

picture, at least, resembles those who have the honour to attend at

the doors of our great men. The porter in his lodge answers exactly to

Cerberus in his den, and, like him, must be appeased by a sop before

access can be gained to his master. Perhaps Jones might have seen

him in that light, and have recollected the passage where the Sibyl,

in order to procure an entrance for Eneas, presents the keeper of

the Stygian avenue with such a sop. Jones, in like manner, now began

to offer a bribe to the human Cerberus, which a footman overhearing,

instantly advanced, and declared, "if Mr. Jones would give him the sum

proposed, he would conduct him to the lady." Jones instantly agreed,

and was forthwith conducted to the lodging of Mrs. Fitzpatrick, by the

very fellow who had attended the ladies thither the day before.

  Nothing more aggravates ill success than the near approach to

good. The gamester, who loses his party at piquet by a single point,

laments his bad luck ten times as much as he who never came within a

prospect of the game. So in a lottery, the proprietors of the next

numbers to that which wins the great prize, are apt to account

themselves much more unfortunate than their fellow-suffers. In

short, these kind of hairbreadth missings of happiness look like the

insults of Fortune, who may be considered as thus playing tricks

with us, and wantonly diverting herself at our expense.

  Jones, who more than once already had experienced this frolicsome

disposition of the heathen goddess, was now again doomed to be

tantalized in the like manner; for he arrived at the door of Mrs.

Fitzpatrick about ten minutes after the departure of Sophia. He now

addressed himself to the waiting-woman belonging to Mrs.

Fitzpatrick, who told him the disagreeable news that the lady was

gone, but could not tell him whither; and the same answer he

afterwards received from Mrs. Fitzpatrick herself. For as that lady

made no doubt but that Mr. Jones was a person detached from her

uncle Western, in pursuit of his daughter, so she was too generous

to betray her.

  Though Jones had never seen Mrs. Fitzpatrick, yet he had heard

that a cousin of Sophia was married to a gentleman of that name. This,

however, in the present tumult of his mind, never once recurred to his

memory; but when the footman, who had conducted him from his

lordship's, acquainted him with the great intimacy between the ladies,

and with their calling each other cousin, he then recollected the

story of the marriage which he had formerly heard; and as he was

presently convinced that this was the same woman, he became more

surprized at the answer which he had received, and very earnestly

desired leave to wait on the lady herself; but she positively

refused him that honour.

  Jones, who, though he had never seen a court, was better bred than

most who frequent it, was incapable of any rude or abrupt behaviour to

a lady. When he had received, therefore, a peremptory denial, he

retired for the present, saying to the waiting-woman, "That if this

was an improper hour to wait on her lady, he would return in the

afternoon; and that he then hoped to have the honour of seeing her."

The civility with which he uttered this, added to the great comeliness

of his person, made an impression on the waiting-woman, and she

could not help answering; "Perhaps, sir, you may;" and, indeed, she

afterwards said everything to her mistress, which she thought most

likely to prevail on her to admit a visit from the handsome young

gentleman; for so she called him.

  Jones very shrewdly suspected that Sophia herself was now with her

cousin, and was denied to him; which he imputed to her resentment of

what had happened at Upton. Having, therefore, dispatched Partridge to

procure him lodgings, he remained all day in the street, watching

the door where he thought his angel lay concealed; but no person did

he see issue forth, except a servant of the house, and in the

evening he returned to pay his visit to Mrs. Fitzpatrick, which that

good lady at last condescended to admit.

  There is a certain air of natural gentility, which it is neither

in the power of dress to give, nor to conceal. Mr. Jones, as hath been

before hinted, was possessed of this in a very eminent degree. He met,

therefore, with a reception from the lady, somewhat different from

what his apparel seemed to demand; and after he had paid her his

proper respects, was desired to sit down.

  The reader will not, I believe, be desirous of knowing all the

particulars of this conversation, which ended very little to the

satisfaction of poor Jones. For though Mrs. Fitzpatrick soon

discovered the lover (as all women have the eyes of hawks in those

matters), yet she still thought it was such a lover, as a generous

friend of the lady should not betray her to. In short, she suspected

this was the very Mr. Blifil, from whom Sophia had flown; and all

the answers which she artfully drew from Jones, concerning Mr.

Allworthy's family, confirmed her in this opinion. She therefore

strictly denied any knowledge concerning the place whither Sophia

was gone; nor could Jones obtain more than a permission to wait on her

again the next evening.

  When Jones was departed, Mrs. Fitzpatrick communicated her suspicion

concerning Mr. Blifil to her maid; who answered, "Sure, madam, he is

too pretty a man, in my opinion, for any woman in the world to run

away from. I had rather fancy it is Mr. Jones."- "Mr. Jones!" said

the lady, "what Jones?" For Sophia had not given the least hint of any

such person in all their conversation; but Mrs. Honour had been much

more communicative, and had acquainted her sister Abigail with the

whole history of Jones, which this now again related to her mistress.

  Mrs. Fitzpatrick no sooner received this information, than she

immediately agreed with the opinion of her maid; and, what is very

unaccountable, saw charms in the gallant, happy lover, which she had

overlooked in the slighted squire. "Betty," says she, "you are

certainly in the right: he is a very pretty fellow, and I don't wonder

that my cousin's maid should tell you so many women are fond of him. I

am sorry now I did not inform him where my cousin was; and yet, if

he be so terrible a rake as you tell me, it is a pity she should

ever see him any more; for what but her ruin can happen from

marrying a rake and a beggar against her father's consent? I

protest, if he be such a man as the wench described him to you, it

is but an office of charity to keep her from him; and I am sure it

would be unpardonable in me to do otherwise, who have tasted so

bitterly of the misfortunes attending such marriages."

  Here she was interrupted by the arrival of a visitor, which was no

other than his lordship; and as nothing passed at this visit either

new or extraordinary, or any ways material to this history, we shall

here put an end to this chapter.





                                Chapter 3



  A project of Mrs. Fitzpatrick, and her visit to Lady Bellaston



  When Mrs. Fitzpatrick retired to rest, her thoughts were entirely

taken up by her cousin Sophia and Mr. Jones. She was, indeed, a little

offended with the former, for the disingenuity which she now

discovered. In which meditation she had not long exercised her

imagination, before the following conceit suggested itself; that could

she possibly become the means of preserving Sophia from this man,

and of restoring her to her father, she should, in all human

probability, by so great a service to the family, reconcile to herself

both her uncle and her aunt Western.

  As this was one of her most favourite wishes, so the hope of success

seemed so reasonable, that nothing remained but to consider of

proper methods to accomplish her scheme. To attempt to reason the case

with Sophia did not appear to her one of those methods: for as Betty

had reported from Mrs. Honour, that Sophia had a violent inclination

to Jones, she conceived that to dissuade her from the match was an

endeavour of the same kind, as it would be very heartily and earnestly

to entreat a moth not to fly into a candle.

  If the reader will please to remember, that the acquaintance which

Sophia had with Lady Bellaston was contracted at the house of Mrs.

Western, and must have grown at the very time when Mrs. Fitzpatrick

lived with this latter lady, he will want no information, that Mrs.

Fitzpatrick must have been acquainted with her likewise. They were,

besides, both equally her distant relations.

  After much consideration, therefore, she resolved to go early in the

morning to that lady, and endeavour to see her, unknown to Sophia, and

to acquaint her with the whole affair. For she did not in the least

doubt, but that the prudent lady, who had often ridiculed romantic

love, and indiscreet marriages, in her conversation, would very

readily concur in her sentiments concerning this match, and would lend

her utmost assistance to prevent it.

  This resolution she accordingly executed; and the next morning

before the sun, she huddled on her cloaths, and at a very

unfashionable, unseasonable, unvisitable hour, went to Lady Bellaston,

to whom she got access, without the least knowledge or suspicion of

Sophia, who, though not asleep, lay at that time awake in her bed,

with Honour snoring by her side.

  Mrs. Fitzpatrick made many apologies for an early abrupt visit, at

an hour when, she said, "she should not have thought of disturbing her

ladyship, but upon business of the utmost consequence." She then

opened the whole affair, told all she had heard from Betty; and did

not forget the visit which Jones had paid to herself the preceding

evening.

  Lady Bellaston answered with a smile, "Then you have seen this

terrible man, madam; pray, is he so very fine a figure as he is

represented? for Etoff entertained me last night almost two hours with

him. The wench, I believe, is in love with him by reputation." Here

the reader will be apt to wonder; but the truth is, that Mrs. Etoff,

who had the honour to pin and unpin the Lady Bellaston, had received

compleat information concerning the said Mr. Jones, and had faithfully

conveyed the same to her lady last night (or rather that morning)

while she was undressing; on which accounts she had been detained in

her office above the space of an hour and a half.

  The lady indeed, though generally well enough pleased with the

narratives of Mrs. Etoff at those seasons, gave an extraordinary

attention to her account of Jones; for Honour had described him as a

very handsome fellow, and Mrs. Etoff, in her hurry, added so much to

the beauty of his person to her report, that Lady Bellaston began to

conceive him to be a kind of miracle in nature.

  The curiosity which her woman had inspired was now greatly increased

by Mrs. Fitzpatrick, who spoke as much in favour of the person of

Jones as she had before spoken in dispraise of his birth, character,

and fortune.

  When Lady Bellaston had heard the whole, she answered gravely,

"Indeed, madam, this is a matter of great consequence. Nothing can

certainly be more commendable than the part you act; and I shall be

very glad to have my share in the preservation of a young lady of so

much merit, and for whom I have so much esteem."

  "Doth not your ladyship think," says Mrs. Fitzpatrick eagerly, "that

it would be the best way to write immediately to my uncle, and

acquaint him where my cousin is?"

  The lady pondered a little upon this, and thus answered- "Why, no,

madam, I think not. Di Western hath described her brother to me to

be such a brute, that I cannot consent to put any woman under his

power who hath escaped from it. I have heard he behaved like a monster

to his own wife, for he is one of those wretches who think they have a

right to tyrannise over us, and from such I shall ever esteem it the

cause of my sex to rescue any woman who is so unfortunate to be

under their power.- The business, dear cousin, will be only to keep

Miss Western from seeing this young fellow, till the good company

which she will have an opportunity of meeting here, give her a

properer turn."

  "If he should find out her, madam," answered the other, "your

ladyship may be assured he will leave nothing unattempted to come at

her."

  "But, madam," replied the lady, "it is impossible he should come

here- though indeed it is possible he may get some intelligence where

she is, and then may lurk about the house- I wish therefore I knew

his person. Is there no way, madam, by which I could have a sight of

him? for, otherwise, you know, cousin, she may contrive to see him

here without my knowledge."

  Mrs. Fitzpatrick answered, "That he had threatened her with

another visit that afternoon, and that, if her ladyship pleased to

do her the honour of calling upon her then, she would hardly fail of

seeing him between six and seven: and if he came earlier she would, by

some means or other, detain him till her ladyship's arrival."- Lady

Bellaston replied, "She would come the moment she could get from

dinner, which she supposed would be by seven at farthest; for that

it was absolutely necessary she should be acquainted with his

person. Upon my word, madam," says she, "it was very good to take this

care of Miss Western; but common humanity, as well as regard to our

family, requires it of us both; for it would be a dreadful match

indeed."

  Mrs. Fitzpatrick failed not to make a proper return to the

compliment which Lady Bellaston had bestowed on her cousin, and, after

some little immaterial conversation, withdrew; and, getting as fast as

she could into her chair, unseen by Sophia or Honour, returned home.





                                Chapter 4



  Which consists of visiting



  Mr. Jones had walked within sight of a certain door during the whole

day, which, though one of the shortest, appeared to him to be one of

the longest in the whole year. At length, the clock having struck

five, he returned to Mrs. Fitzpatrick, who, though it was a full

hour earlier than the decent time of visiting, received him very

civilly; but still persisted in her ignorance concerning Sophia.

  Jones, in asking for his angel, had dropped the word cousin, upon

which Mrs. Fitzpatrick said, "Then, sir, you know we are related: and,

as we are, you will permit me the right of inquiring into the

particulars of your business with my cousin." Here Jones hesitated a

good while, and at last answered, "He had a considerable sum of

money of hers in his hands, which he desired to deliver to her." He

then produced the pocket-book, and acquainted Mrs. Fitzpatrick with

the contents, and with the method in which they came into his hands.

He had scarce finished his story, when a most violent noise shook

the whole house. To attempt to describe this noise to those who have

heard it would be in vain; and to aim at giving any idea of it to

those who have never heard the like, would be still more vain: for

it may be truly said-



     --------Non acuta

     Sic geminant Corybantes aera.



The priests of Cybele do not so rattle their sounding brass.

  In short, a footman knocked, or rather thundered, at the door. Jones

was a little surprized at the sound, having never heard it before; but

Mrs. Fitzpatrick very calmly said, that, as some company were

coming, she could not make him any answer now; but if he pleased to

stay till they were gone, she intimated she had something to say to

him.

  The door of the room now flew open, and, after pushing in her hoop

sideways before her; entered Lady Bellaston, who having first made a

very low courtesy to Mrs. Fitzpatrick, and as low a one to Mr.

Jones, was ushered to the upper end of the room.

  We mention these minute matters for the sake of some country

ladies of our acquaintance, who think it contrary to the rules of

modesty to bend their knees to a man.

  The company were hardly well settled, before the arrival of the peer

lately mentioned, caused a fresh disturbance, and a repetition of

ceremonials.

  These being over, the conversation began to be (as the phrase is)

extremely brilliant. However, as nothing past in it which can be

thought material to this history, or, indeed, very material in itself,

I shall omit the relation; the rather, as I have known some very

fine polite conversation grow extremely dull, when transcribed into

books, or repeated on the stage. Indeed, this mental repast is a

dainty, of which those who are excluded from polite assemblies must be

contented to remain as ignorant as they must of the several dainties

of French cookery, which are served only at the tables of the great.

To say the truth, as neither of these are adapted to every taste, they

might both be of thrown away on the vulgar.

  Poor Jones was rather a spectator of this elegant scene, than an

actor in it; for though, in the short interval before the peer's

arrival, Lady Bellaston first, and afterwards Mrs. Fitzpatrick, had

addressed some of their discourse to him; yet no sooner was the

noble lord entered, than he engrossed the whole attention of the two

ladies to himself; and as he took no more notice of Jones than if no

such person had been present, unless by now and then staring at him,

the ladies followed his example.

  The company had now staid so long, that Mrs. Fitzpatrick plainly

perceived they all designed to stay out each other. She therefore

resolved to rid herself of Jones, he being the visitant to whom she

thought the least ceremony was due. Taking therefore an opportunity of

a cessation of chat, she addressed herself gravely to him, and said,

"Sir, I shall not possibly be able to give you an answer to-night as

to that business; but if you please to leave word where I may send

to you to-morrow--"

  Jones had natural, but not artificial good-breeding. Instead,

therefore, of communicating the secret of his lodgings to a servant,

he acquainted the lady herself with it particularly, and soon after

very ceremoniously withdrew.

  He was no sooner gone, than the great personages, who had taken no

notice of him present, began to take much notice of him in his

absence; but if the reader hath already excused us from relating the

more brilliant part of this conversation, he will surely be ready to

excuse the repetition of what may be called vulgar abuse; though,

perhaps, it may be material to our history to mention an observation

of Lady Bellaston, who took her leave in a few minutes after him,

and then said to Mrs. Fitzpatrick, at her departure, "I am satisfied

on the account of my cousin; she can be in no danger from this

fellow."

  Our history shall follow the example of Lady Bellaston, and take

leave of the present company, which was now reduced to two persons;

between whom, as nothing passed, which in the least concerns us or our

reader, we shall not suffer ourselves to be diverted by it from

matters which must seem of more consequence to all those who are at

all interested in the affairs of our heroe.





                                Chapter 5



  An adventure which happened to Mr. Jones at his lodgings, with

some account of a young gentleman who lodged there, and of the

mistress of the house, and her two daughters



  The next morning, as early as it was decent, Jones attended at

Mrs. Fitzpatrick's door, where he was answered that the lady was not

at home; an answer which surprized him the more, as he had walked

backwards and forwards in the street from break of day; and if she had

gone out, he must have seen her. This answer, however, he was

obliged to receive, and not only now, but to five several visits which

he made her that day.

  To be plain with the reader, the noble peer had from some reason

or other, perhaps from a regard for the lady's honour, insisted that

she should not see Mr. Jones, whom he looked on as a scrub, any

more; and the lady had complied in making that promise to which we now

see her so strictly adhere.

  But as our gentle reader may possibly have a better opinion of the

young gentleman than her ladyship, and may even have some concern,

should it be apprehended that, during this unhappy separation from

Sophia, he took up his residence either at an inn, or in the street;

we shall now give an account of his lodging, which was indeed in a

very reputable house, and in a very good part of the town.

  Mr. Jones, then, had often heard Mr. Allworthy mention the

gentlewoman at whose house he used to lodge when he was in town.

This person, who, as Jones likewise knew, lived in Bond-street, was

the widow of a clergyman, and was left by him, at his decease, in

possession of two daughters, and of a compleat set of manuscript

sermons.

  Of these two daughters, Nancy, the elder, was now arrived at the age

of seventeen, and Betty, the younger, at that of ten.

  Hither Jones had dispatched Partridge, and in this house he was

provided with a room for himself in the second floor, and with one for

Partridge in the fourth.

  The first floor was inhabited by one of those young gentlemen,

who, in the last age, were called men of wit and pleasure about

town, and properly enough; for as men are usually denominated from

their business or profession, so pleasure may be said to have been the

only business or profession of those gentlemen to whom fortune had

made all useful occupations unnecessary. Play-houses, coffee-houses,

and taverns were the scenes of their rendezvous. Wit and humour were

the entertainment of their looser hours, and love was the business

of their more serious moments. Wine and the muses conspired to

kindle the brightest flames in their breasts; nor did they only

admire, but some were able to celebrate the beauty they admired, and

all to judge of the merit of such compositions.

  Such, therefore, were properly called the men of wit and pleasure;

but I question whether the same appellation may, with the same

propriety, be given to those young gentlemen of our times, who have

the same ambition to be distinguished for parts. Wit certainly they

have nothing to do with. To give them their due, they soar a step

higher than their predecessors, and may be called men of wisdom and

vertu (take heed you do not read virtue). Thus at an age when the

gentlemen above mentioned employ their time in toasting the charms

of a woman, or in making sonnets in her praise; in giving their

opinion of a play at the theatre, or of a poem at Will's or

Button's; these gentlemen are considering the methods to bribe a

corporation, or meditating speeches for the House of Commons, or

rather for the magazines. But the science of gaming is that which

above all others employs their thoughts. These are the studies of

their graver hours, while for their amusements they have the vast

circle of connoisseurship, painting, music, statuary, and natural

philosophy, or rather unnatural, which deals in the wonderful, and

knows nothing of Nature, except her monsters and imperfections.

  When Jones had spent the whole day in vain inquiries after Mrs.

Fitzpatrick, he returned at last disconsolate to his apartment.

Here, while he was venting his grief in private, he heard a violent

uproar below-stairs; and soon after a female voice begged him for

heaven's sake to come and prevent murder. Jones, who was never

backward on any occasion to help the distressed, immediately ran

downstairs; when stepping into the dining-room, whence all the noise

issued, he beheld the young gentleman of wisdom and vertu just

before mentioned, pinned close to the wall by his footman, and a young

woman standing by, wringing her hands, and crying out, "He will be

murdered! he will be murdered!" and, indeed, the poor gentleman seemed

in some danger of being choaked, when Jones flew hastily to his

assistance, and rescued him, just as he was breathing his last, from

the unmerciful clutches of the enemy.

  Though the fellow had received several kicks and cuffs from the

little gentleman, who had more spirit than strength, he had made it

a kind of scruple of conscience to strike his master, and would have

contented himself with only choaking him; but towards Jones he bore no

such respect: he no sooner therefore found himself a little roughly

handled by his new antagonist, than he gave him one of those punches

in the guts which, though the spectators at Broughton's amphitheatre

have such exquisite delight in seeing them, convey but very little

pleasure in the feeling.

  The lusty youth had no sooner received this blow, than he

meditated a most grateful return; and now ensued a combat between

Jones and the footman, which was very fierce, but short; for this

fellow was no more able to contend with Jones than his master had

before been to contend with him.

  And now, Fortune, according to her usual custom, reversed the face

of affairs. The former victor lay breathless on the ground, and the

vanquished gentleman had recovered breath enough to thank Mr. Jones

for his seasonable assistance; he received likewise the hearty

thanks of the young woman present, who was indeed no other than Miss

Nancy, the eldest daughter of the house.

  The footman, having now recovered his legs, shook his head at Jones,

and, with a sagacious look, cried- "O d--n me, I'll have nothing more

to do with you; you have been upon the stage, or I'm d--nably

mistaken." And indeed we may forgive this his suspicion; for such was

the agility and strength of our heroe, that he was, perhaps, a match

for one of the first-rate boxers, and could, with great ease, have

beaten all the muffled* graduates of Mr. Broughton's school.



  *Lest posterity should be puzzled by this epithet, I think proper to

explain it by an advertisement which was published Feb. 1, 1747.

  N.B.- Mr. Broughton proposes, with proper assistance, to open an

academy at his house in the Haymarket, for the instruction of those

who are willing to be initiated in the mystery of boxing: where the

whole theory and practice of that truly British art, with all the

various stops, blows, cross-buttocks, &c., incident to combatants,

will be fully taught and explained; and that persons of quality and

distinction may not be deterred from entering into A course of those

lectures, they will be given with the utmost tenderness and regard

to the delicacy of the frame and constitution of the pupil, for

which reason muffles are provided, that will effectually secure them

from the inconveniency of black eyes, broken jaws, and bloody noses.



  The master, foaming with wrath, ordered his man immediately to

strip, to which the latter very readily agreed, on condition of

receiving his wages. This condition was presently complied with, and

the fellow was discharged.

  And now the young gentleman, whose name was Nightingale, very

strenuously insisted that his deliverer should take part of a bottle

of wine with him; to which Jones, after much entreaty, consented,

though more out of complacence than inclination; for the uneasiness of

his mind fitted him very little for conversation at this time. Miss

Nancy likewise, who was the only female then in the house, her mamma

and sister being both gone to the play, condescended to favour them

with her company.

  When the bottle and glasses were on the table, the gentleman began

to relate the occasion of the preceding disturbance.

  "I hope, sir," said he to Jones, "you will not from this accident

conclude, that I make a custom of striking my servants, for I assure

you this is the first time I have been guilty of it in my remembrance,

and I have passed by many provoking faults in this very fellow, before

he could provoke me to it; but when you hear what hath happened this

evening, you will, I believe, think me excusable. I happened to come

home several hours before my usual time, when I found four gentlemen

of the cloth at whist by my fire;- and my Hoyle, sir- my best Hoyle,

which cost me a guinea, lying open on the table, with a quantity of

porter spilt on one of the most material leaves of the whole book.

This, you will allow, was provoking; but I said nothing till the

rest of the honest company were gone, and then gave the fellow a

gentle rebuke, who, instead of expressing any concern, made me a

pert answer, 'That servants must have their diversions as well as

other people; that he was sorry for the accident which had happened to

the book, but that several of his acquaintance had bought the same for

a shilling, and that I might stop as much in his wages, if I pleased.'

I now gave him a severer reprimand than before, when the rascal had

the insolence to-- In short, he imputed my early coming home to-- In

short, he cast a reflection-- He mentioned the name of a young lady,

in a manner- in such a manner that incensed me beyond all patience,

and, in my passion, I struck him."

  Jones answered, "That he believed no person living would blame

him; for my part," said he, "I confess I should, on the last-mentioned

provocation, have done the same thing."

  Our company had not sat long before they were joined by the mother

and daughter, at their return from the play. And now they all spent

a very chearful evening together; for all but Jones were heartily

merry, and even he put on as much constrained mirth as possible.

indeed, half his natural flow of animal spirits, joined to the

sweetness of his temper, was sufficient to make a most amiable

companion; and notwithstanding the heaviness of his heart, so

agreeable did he make himself on the present occasion, that, at

their breaking up, the young gentleman earnestly desired his further

acquaintance. Miss Nancy was well pleased with him; and the widow,

quite charmed with her new lodger, invited him, with the other, next

morning to breakfast.

  Jones on his part was no less satisfied. As for Miss Nancy, though a

very little creature, she was extremely pretty, and the widow had

all the charms which can adorn a woman near fifty. As she was one of

the most innocent creatures in the world, so she was one of the most

chearful. She never thought, nor spoke, nor wished any ill, and had

constantly that desire of pleasing, which may be called the happiest

of all desires in this, that it scarce ever fails of attaining its

ends, when not disgraced by affectation. In short, though her power

was very small, she was in her heart one of the warmest friends. She

had been a most affectionate wife, and was a most fond and tender

mother. As our history doth not, like a newspaper, give great

characters to people who never were heard of before, nor will ever

be heard of again, the reader may hence conclude, that this

excellent woman will hereafter appear to be of some importance in

our history.

  Nor was Jones a little pleased with the young gentleman himself,

whose wine he had been drinking. He thought he discerned in him much

good sense, though a little too much tainted with town-foppery; but

what recommended him most to Jones were some sentiments of great

generosity and humanity, which occasionally dropt from him; and

particularly many expressions of the highest disinterestedness in

the affair of love. On which subject the young gentleman delivered

himself in a language which might have very well become an Arcadian

shepherd of old, and which appeared very extraordinary when proceeding

from the lips of a modern fine gentleman; but he was only one by

imitation, and meant by nature for a much better character.





                                Chapter 6



  What arrived while the company were at breakfast, with some hints

concerning the government of daughters



  Our company brought together in the morning the same good

inclinations towards each other, with which they had separated the

evening before; but poor Jones was extremely disconsolate; for he

had just received information from Partridge, that Mrs. Fitzpatrick

had left her lodging, and that he could not learn whither she was

gone. This news highly afflicted him, and his countenance, as well

as his behaviour, in defiance of all his endeavours to the contrary,

betrayed manifest indications of a disordered mind.

  The discourse turned at present, as before, on love; and Mr.

Nightingale again expressed many of those warm, generous, and

disinterested sentiments upon this subject, which wise and sober men

call romantic, but which wise and sober women generally regard in a

better light. Mrs. Miller (for so the mistress of the house was

called) greatly approved these sentiments; but when the young

gentleman appealed to Miss Nancy, she answered only, "That she

believed the gentleman who had spoke the least was capable of

feeling most."

  This compliment was so apparently directed to Jones, that we

should have been sorry had he passed it by unregarded. He made her

indeed a very polite answer, and concluded with an oblique hint,

that her own silence subjected to a suspicion of the same kind: for

indeed she had scarce opened her lips either now or the last evening.

  "I am glad, Nanny," says Mrs. Miller, "the gentleman hath made the

observation; I protest I am almost of his opinion. What can be the

matter with you, child? I never saw such an alteration. What is become

of all your gaiety? Would you think, sir, I used to call her my little

pratler? She hath not spoke twenty words this week."

  Here their conversation was interrupted by the entrance of a

maid-servant, who brought a bundle in her hand, which, she said,

"was delivered by a porter for Mr. Jones." She added, "That the man

immediately went away, saying, it required no answer."

  Jones expressed some surprize on this occasion, and declared it must

be some mistake; but the maid persisting that she was certain of the

name, all the women were desirous of having the bundle immediately

opened; which operation was at length performed by little Betsy,

with the consent of Mr. Jones: and the contents were found to be a

domino, a mask, and a masquerade ticket.

  Jones was now more positive than ever in asserting, that these

things must have been delivered by mistake; and Mrs. Miller herself

expressed some doubt, and said, "She knew not what to think." But when

Mr. Nightingale was asked, he delivered a very different opinion. "All

I can conclude from it, sir," said he, "is, that you are a very

happy man; for I make no doubt but these were sent you by some lady

whom you will have the happiness of meeting at the masquerade."

  Jones had not a sufficient degree of vanity to entertain any such

flattering imagination; nor did Mrs. Miller herself give much assent

to what Mr. Nightingale had said, till Miss Nancy having lifted up the

domino, a card dropt from the sleeve; in which was written as

follows:-



                             TO MR. JONES

     The queen of the fairies sends you this;

     Use her favours not amiss.



  Mrs. Miller and Miss Nancy now both agreed with Mr. Nightingale;

nay, Jones himself was almost persuaded to be of the same opinion. And

as no other lady but Mrs. Fitzpatrick, he thought, knew his lodging,

he began to flatter himself with some hopes, that it came from her,

and that he might possibly see his Sophia. These hopes had surely very

little foundation; but as the conduct of Mrs. Fitzpatrick, in not

seeing him according to her promise, and in quitting her lodgings, had

been very odd and unaccountable, he conceived some faint hopes, that

she (of whom he had formerly heard a very whimsical character) might

possibly intend to do him that service in a strange manner, which

she declined doing by more ordinary methods. To say the truth, as

nothing certain could be concluded from so odd and uncommon an

incident, he had the greater latitude to draw what imaginary

conclusions from it he pleased. As his temper therefore was

naturally sanguine, he indulged it on this occasion, and his

imagination worked up a thousand conceits, to favour and support his

expectations of meeting his dear Sophia in the evening.

  Reader, if thou hast any good wishes towards me, I will fully

repay them by wishing thee to be possessed of this sanguine

disposition of mind; since, after having read much and considered long

on that subject of happiness which hath employed so many great pens, I

am almost inclined to fix it in the possession of this temper; which

puts us, in a manner, out of the reach of Fortune, and makes us

happy without her assistance. Indeed, the sensations of pleasure it

gives are much more constant, as well as much keener, than those which

that blind lady bestows; nature having wisely contrived, that some

satiety and languor should be annexed to all our real enjoyments, lest

we should be so taken up by them, as to be stopt from further

pursuits. I make no manner of doubt but that, in this light, we may

see the imaginary future chancellor just called to the bar, the

archbishop in crape, and the prime minister at the tail of an

opposition, more truly happy than those who are invested with all

the power and profit of those respective offices.

  Mr. Jones having now determined to go to the masquerade that

evening, Mr. Nightingale offered to conduct him thither. The young

gentleman, at the same time, offered tickets to Miss Nancy and her

mother; but the good woman would not accept them. She said, "she did

not conceive the harm which some people imagined in a masquerade;

but that such extravagant diversions were proper only for persons of

quality and fortune, and not for young women who were to get their

living, and could, at best, hope to be married to a good

tradesman."-- "A tradesman!" cries Nightingale, you shan't undervalue

my Nancy. There is not a nobleman upon earth above her merit." "O fie!

Mr. Nightingale," answered Mrs. Miller, "you must not fill the

girl's head with such fancies: but if it was her good luck" (says

the mother with a simper) "to find a gentleman of your generous way of

thinking, I hope she would make a better return to his generosity than

to give her mind up to extravagant pleasures. Indeed, where young

ladies bring great fortunes themselves, they have some right to insist

on spending what is their own; and on that account I have heard the

gentlemen say, a man has sometimes a better bargain with a poor

wife, than with a rich one.-- But let my daughters marry whom they

will, I shall endeavour to make them blessings to their husbands:-- I

beg, therefore, I may hear of no more masquerades. Nancy is, I am

certain, too good a girl to desire to go; for she must remember when

you carried her thither last year, it almost turned her head; and

she did not return to herself, or to her needle, in a month

afterwards."

  Though a gentle sigh, which stole from the bosom of Nancy, seemed to

argue some secret disapprobation of these sentiments, she did not dare

openly to oppose them. For as this good woman had all the

tenderness, so she had preserved all the authority of a parent; and as

her indulgence to the desires of her children was restrained only by

her fears for their safety and future welfare, so she never suffered

those commands which proceeded from such fears to be either

disobeyed or disputed. And this the young gentleman, who had lodged

two years in the house, knew so well, that he presently acquiesced

in the refusal.

  Mr. Nightingale, who grew every minute fonder of Jones, was very

desirous of his company that day to dinner at the tavern, where he

offered to introduce him to some of his acquaintance; but Jones begged

to be excused, "as his cloaths," he said, "were not yet come to town."

  To confess the truth, Mr. Jones was now in a situation, which

sometimes happens to be the case of young gentlemen of much better

figure than himself. In short, he had not one penny in his pocket; a

situation in much greater credit among the antient philosophers,

than among the modern wise men who live in Lombard-street, or those

who frequent White's chocolate-house. And, perhaps, the great

honours which those philosophers have ascribed to an empty pocket, may

be one of the reasons of that high contempt in which they are held

in the aforesaid street and chocolate-house.

  Now if the antient opinion, that men might live very comfortably

on virtue only, be, as the modern wise men just above-mentioned

pretend to have discovered, a notorious error; no less false is, I

apprehend, that position of some writers of romance, that a man can

live altogether on love: for however delicious repasts this may afford

to some of our senses or appetites, it is most certain it can afford

none to others. Those, therefore, who have placed too great a

confidence in such writers, have experienced their error when it was

too late; and have found that love was no more capable of allaying

hunger, than a rose is capable of delighting the ear, or a violin of

gratifying the smell.

  Notwithstanding, therefore, all the delicacies which love had set

before him, namely, the hopes of seeing Sophia at the masquerade; on

which, however ill-founded his imagination might be, he had

voluptuously feasted during the whole day, the evening no sooner came,

than Mr. Jones began to languish for some food of a grosser kind.

Partridge discovered this by intuition, and took the occasion to

give some oblique hints concerning the bankbill; and, when these

were rejected with disdain, he collected courage enough once more to

mention a return to Mr. Allworthy.

  "Partridge," cries Jones, "you cannot see my fortune in a more

desperate light than I see it myself; and I begin heartily to repent

that I suffered you to leave a place where you was settled, and to

follow me. However, I insist now on your returning home; and for the

expense and trouble which you have so kindly put yourself to on my

account, all the cloaths I left behind in your care I desire you would

take as your own. I am sorry I can make you no other acknowledgment."

  He spoke these words with so pathetic an accent, that Partridge,

among whose vices ill-nature or hardness of heart were not numbered,

burst into tears; and after swearing he would not quit him in his

distress, he began with the most earnest entreaties to urge his return

home. "For heaven's sake, sir," says he, "do but consider; what can

your honour do?- how is it possible you can live in this town without

money? Do what you will, sir, or go wherever you please, I am resolved

not to desert you. But pray, sir, consider- do pray, sir, for your

own sake, take it into your consideration; and I'm sure," says he,

"that your own good sense will bid you return home."

  "How often shall I tell thee," answered Jones, "that I have no

home to return to? Had I any hopes that Mr. Allworthy's doors would be

open to receive me, I want no distress to urge me- nay, there is no

other cause upon earth, which could detain me a moment from flying

to his presence; but, alas! that I am for ever banished from. His last

words were- O, Partridge, they still ring in my ears- his last words

were, when he gave me a sum of money- what it was I know not, but

considerable I'm sure it was- his last words were- 'I am resolved from

this day forward, on no account, to converse with you any more.'

  Here passion stopt the mouth of Jones, as surprize for a moment

did that of Partridge; but he soon recovered the use of speech, and

after a short preface, in which he declared he had no

inquisitiveness in his temper, inquired what Jones meant by a

considerable sum- he knew not how much- and what was become of the

money.

  In both these points he now received full satisfaction; on which

he was proceeding to comment, when he was interrupted by a message

from Mr. Nightingale, who desired his master's company in his

apartment.

  When the two gentlemen were both attired for the masquerade, and Mr.

Nightingale had given orders for chairs to be sent for, a circumstance

of distress occurred to Jones, which will appear very ridiculous to

many of my readers. This was how to procure a shilling; but if such

readers will reflect a little on what they have themselves felt from

the want of a thousand pounds, or, perhaps, of ten or twenty, to

execute a favourite scheme, they will have a perfect idea of what

Mr. Jones felt on this occasion. For this sum, therefore, he applied

to Partridge, which was the first he had permitted him to advance, and

was the last he intended that poor fellow should advance in his

service. To say the truth, Partridge had lately made no offer of

this kind. Whether it was that he desired to see the bank-bill broke

in upon, or that distress should prevail on Jones to return home, or

from what other motive it proceeded, I will not determine.





                                Chapter 7



  Containing the whole humours of a masquerade



  Our cavaliers now arrived at that temple, where Heydegger, the great

Arbiter Deliciarum, the great high-priest of pleasure, presides;

and, like other heathen priests, imposes on his votaries by the

pretended presence of the deity, when in reality no such deity is

there.

  Mr. Nightingale, having taken a turn or two with his companion, soon

left him, and walked off with a female, saying, "Now you are here,

sir, you must beat about for your own game."

  Jones began to entertain strong hopes that his Sophia was present;

and these hopes gave him more spirits than the lights, the music,

and the company; though these are pretty strong antidotes against

the spleen. He now accosted every woman he saw, whose stature,

shape, or air, bore any resemblance to his angel. To all of whom he

endeavoured to say something smart, in order to engage an answer, by

which he might discover that voice which he thought it impossible he

should mistake. Some of these answered by a question, in a squeaking

voice, Do you know me? Much the greater number said, I don't know you,

sir, and nothing more. Some called him an impertinent fellow; some

made him no answer at all; some said, Indeed I don't know your

voice, and I shall have nothing to say to you; and many gave him as

kind answers as he could wish, but not in the voice he desired to

hear.

  Whilst he was talking with one of these last (who was in the habit

of a shepherdess) a lady in a domino came up to him, and slapping

him on the shoulder, whispered him, at the same time, in the ear,

"If you talk any longer with that trollop, I will acquaint Miss

Western."

  Jones no sooner heard that name, than, immediately quitting his

former companion, he applied to the domino, begging and entreating her

to show him the lady she had mentioned, if she was then in the room.

  The mask walked hastily to the upper end of the innermost

apartment before she spoke; and then, instead of answering him, sat

down, and declared she was tired. Jones sat down by her, and still

persisted in his entreaties: at last the lady coldly answered, "I

imagined Mr. Jones had been a more discerning lover, than to suffer

any disguise to conceal his mistress from him." "Is she here, then,

madam?" replied Jones, with some vehemence. Upon which the lady

cries- "Hush, sir, you will be observed. I promise you, upon my

honour, Miss Western is not here."

  Jones, now taking the mask by the hand, fell to entreating her in

the most earnest manner, to acquaint him where he might find Sophia:

and when he could obtain no direct answer, he began to upbraid her

gently for having disappointed him the day before; and concluded,

saying, "Indeed, my good fairy queen, I know your majesty very well,

notwithstanding the affected disguise of your voice. Indeed, Mrs.

Fitzpatrick, it is a little cruel to divert yourself at the expense of

my torments."

  The mask answered, "Though you have so ingeniously discovered me,

I must still speak in the same voice, lest I should be known by

others. And do you think, good sir, that I have no greater regard

for my cousin, than to assist in carrying on an affair between you

two, which must end in her ruin, as well as your own? Besides, I

promise you, my cousin is not mad enough to consent to her own

destruction, if you are so much her enemy as to tempt her to it."

  "Alas, madam!" said Jones, "you little know my heart, when you

call me an enemy of Sophia."

  "And yet to ruin any one," cries the other, "you will allow, is

the act of an enemy; and when by the same act you must knowingly and

certainly bring ruin on yourself, is it not folly or madness, as

well as guilt? Now, sir, my cousin hath very little more than her

father will please to give her; very little for one of her fashion-

you know him, and you know your own situation."

  Jones vowed he had no such design on Sophia, "That he would rather

suffer the most violent of deaths than sacrifice her interest to his

desires." He said, "he knew how unworthy he was of her, every way,

that he had long ago resolved to quit all such aspiring thoughts,

but that some strange accidents had made him desirous to see her

once more, when he promised he would take leave of her for ever. No,

madam," concluded he, "my love is not of that base kind which seeks

its own satisfaction at the expense of what is most dear to its

object. I would sacrifice everything to the possession of my Sophia,

but Sophia herself."

  Though the reader may have already conceived no very sublime idea of

the virtue of the lady in the mask; and though possibly she may

hereafter appear not to deserve one of the first characters of her

sex; yet, it is certain, these generous sentiments made a strong

impression upon her, and greatly added to the affection she had before

conceived for our young heroe.

  The lady now, after a silence of a few moments, said, "She did not

see his pretensions to Sophia so much in the light of presumption,

as of imprudence. Young fellows," says she, can never have too

aspiring thoughts. I love ambition in a young man, and I would have

you cultivate it as much as possible. Perhaps you may succeed with

those who are infinitely superior in fortune; nay, I am convinced

there are women-- but don't you think me a strange creature, Mr.

Jones, to be thus giving advice to a man with whom I am so little

acquainted, and one with whose behaviour to me I have so little reason

to be pleased?"

  Here Jones began to apologize, and to hope he had not offended in

anything he had said of her cousin.- To which the mask answered, "And

are you so little versed in the sex, to imagine you can well affront a

lady more than by entertaining her with your passion for another

woman? If the fairy queen had conceived no better opinion of your

gallantry, she would scarce have appointed you to meet her at the

masquerade."

  Jones had never less inclination to an amour than at present; but

gallantry to the ladies was among his principles of honour; and he

held it as much incumbent on him to accept a challenge to love, as

if it had been a challenge to fight. Nay, his very love to Sophia made

it necessary for him to keep well with the lady, as he made no doubt

but she was capable of bringing him into the presence of the other.

  He began therefore to make a very warm answer to her last speech,

when a mask, in the character of an old woman, joined them. This

mask was one of those ladies who go to a masquerade only to vent

ill-nature, by telling people rude truths, and by endeavouring, as the

phrase is, to spoil as much sport as they are able. This good lady,

therefore, having observed Jones, and his friend, whom she well

knew, in close consultation together in a corner of the room,

concluded she could nowhere satisfy her spleen better than by

interrupting them. She attacked them, therefore, and soon drove them

from their retirement; nor was she contented with this, but pursued

them to every place which they shifted to avoid her; till Mr.

Nightingale, seeing the distress of his friend, at last relieved

him, and engaged the old woman in another pursuit.

  While Jones and his mask were walking together about the room, to

rid themselves of the teazer, he observed his lady speak to several

masks, with the same freedom of acquaintance as if they had been

barefaced. He could not help expressing his surprize at this;

saying, "Sure, madam, you must have infinite discernment, to know

people in all disguises." To which the lady answered, "You cannot

conceive anything more insipid and childish than a masquerade to the

people of fashion, who in general know one another as well here, as

when they meet in an assembly or a drawing-room; nor will any woman of

condition converse with a person with whom she is not acquainted. In

short, the generality of persons whom you see here, may more

properly be said to kill time in this place than in any other; and

generally retire from hence more tired than from the longest sermon.

To say the truth, I begin to be in that situation myself; and if I

have any faculty at guessing, you are not much better pleased. I

protest it would be almost charity in me to go home for your sake." "I

know but one charity equal to it," cries Jones, "and that is to suffer

me to wait on you home." "Sure," answered the lady, "you have a

strange opinion of me, to imagine, that upon such an acquaintance, I

would let you into my doors at this time of night. I fancy you

impute the friendship I have shown my cousin to some other motive.

Confess honestly; don't you consider this contrived interview as

little better than a downright assignation? Are you used, Mr. Jones,

to make these sudden conquests?" "I am not used, madam," said Jones,

"to submit to such sudden conquests; but as you have taken my heart by

surprize, the rest of my body hath a right to follow; so you must

pardon me if I resolve to attend you wherever you go." He

accompanied these words with some proper actions; upon which the lady,

after a gentle rebuke, and saying their familiarity would be observed,

told him, "She was going to sup with an acquaintance, whither she

hoped he would not follow her; for if you should," said she, "I

shall be thought an unaccountable creature, though my friend indeed is

not censorious: yet I hope you won't follow me; I protest I shall

not know what to say if you do."

  The lady presently after quitted the masquerade, and Jones,

notwithstanding the severe prohibition he had received, presumed to

attend her. He was now reduced to the same dilemma we have mentioned

before, namely, the want of a shilling, and could not relieve it by

borrowing as before. He therefore walked boldly on after the chair

in which his lady rode, pursued by a grand huzza, from all the

chairmen present, who wisely take the best care they can to

discountenance all walking afoot by their betters. Luckily, however,

the gentry who attend at the Opera-house were too busy to quit their

stations, and as the lateness of the hour prevented him from meeting

many of their brethren in the street, he proceeded without

molestation, in a dress, which, at another season, would have

certainly raised a mob at his heels.

  The lady was set down in a street not far from Hanover-square, where

the door being presently opened, she was carried in, and the

gentleman, without any ceremony, walked in after her.

  Jones and his companion were now together in a very well-furnished

and well-warmed room; when the female, still speaking in her

masquerade voice, said she was surprized at her friend, who must

absolutely have forgot her appointment; at which, after venting much

resentment, she suddenly exprest some apprehension from Jones, and

asked him what the world would think of their having been alone

together in a house at that time of night? But instead of a direct

answer to so important a question, Jones began to be very

importunate with the lady to unmask; and at length having prevailed,

there appeared, not Mrs. Fitzpatrick, but the Lady Bellaston herself.

  It would be tedious to give the particular conversation, which

consisted of very common and ordinary occurrences, and which lasted

from two till six o'clock in the morning. It is sufficient to

mention all of it that is anywise material to this history. And this

was a promise that the lady would endeavour to find out Sophia, and in

a few days bring him to an interview with her, on condition that he

would then take his leave of her. When this was thoroughly settled,

and a second meeting in the evening appointed at the same place,

they separated; the lady returned to her house, and Jones to his

lodgings.





                                Chapter 8



  Containing a scene of distress, which will appear very extraordinary

to most of our readers



  Jones having refreshed himself with a few hours' sleep, summoned

Partridge to his presence; and delivering him a bank-note of fifty

pounds, ordered him to go and change it. Partridge received this

with sparkling eyes, though, when he came to reflect farther, it

raised in him some suspicions not very advantageous to the honour of

his master: to these the dreadful idea he had of the masquerade, the

disguise in which his master had gone out and returned, and his having

been abroad all night, contributed. In plain language, the only way he

could possibly find to account for the possession of this note, was by

robbery: and, to confess the truth, the reader, unless he should

suspect it was owing to the generosity of Lady Bellaston, can hardly

imagine any other.

  To clear, therefore, the honour of Mr. Jones, and to do justice to

the liberality of the lady, he had really received this present from

her, who, though she did not give much into the hackney charities of

the age, such as building hospitals, &c., was not, however, entirely

void of that Christian virtue; and conceived (very rightly I think)

that a young fellow of merit, without a shilling in the world, was

no improper object of this virtue.

  Mr. Jones and Mr. Nightingale had been invited to dine this day with

Mrs. Miller. At the appointed hour, therefore, the two young

gentlemen, with the two girls, attended in the parlour, where they

waited from three till almost five before the good woman appeared. She

had been out of town to visit a relation, of whom, at her return,

she gave the following account.

  "I hope, gentlemen, you will pardon my making you wait; I am sure if

you knew the occasion- I have been to see a cousin of mine, about six

miles off, who now lies in.- It should be a warning to all persons

(says she, looking at her daughters) how they marry indiscreetly.

There is no happiness in this world without a competency. O Nancy! how

shall I describe the wretched condition in which I found your poor

cousin? she hath scarce lain in a week, and there was she, this

dreadful weather, in a cold room, without any curtains to her bed, and

not a bushel of coals in her house to supply her with fire: her second

son, that sweet little fellow, lies ill of a quinzy in the same bed

with his mother; for there is no other bed in the house. Poor little

Tommy! I believe, Nancy, you will never see your favourite any more;

for he is really very ill. The rest of the children are in pretty good

health: but Molly, I am afraid, will do herself an injury: she is

but thirteen years old, Mr. Nightingale, and yet, in my life, I

never saw a better nurse: she tends both her mother and her brother;

and, what is wonderful in a creature so young, she shows all the

chearfulness in the world to her mother; and yet I saw her- I saw the

poor child, Mr. Nightingale, turn about, and privately wipe the

tears from her eyes." Here Mrs. Miller was prevented, by her own

tears, from going on, and there was not, I believe, a person present

who did not accompany her in them; at length she a little recovered

herself, and proceeded thus: "In all this distress the mother supports

her spirits in a surprizing manner. The danger of her son sits

heaviest upon her, and yet she endeavours as much as possible to

conceal even this concern, on her husband's account. Her grief,

however, sometimes gets the better of all her endeavours; for she

was always extravagantly fond of this boy, and a most sensible,

sweet-tempered creature it is. I protest I was never more affected

in my life, than when I heard the little wretch, who is hardly yet

seven years old, while his mother was wetting him with her tears,

beg her to be comforted. 'Indeed, mamma,' cried the child, 'I shan't

die; God Almighty, I'm sure, won't take Tommy away; let heaven be ever

so fine a place, I had rather stay here and starve with you and my

papa, than go to it.' Pardon me, gentlemen, I can't help it" (says

she, wiping her eyes), "such sensibility and affection in a child.-

And yet, perhaps, he is least the object of pity; for a day or two

will, most probably, place him beyond the reach of all human evils.

The father is, indeed, most worthy of compassion. Poor man, his

countenance is the very picture of horror, and he looks like one

rather dead than alive. Oh heavens! what a scene did I behold at my

first coming into the room! The good creature was lying behind the

bolster, supporting at once both his child and his wife. He had

nothing on but a thin waistcoat; for his coat was spread over the bed,

to supply the want of blankets.- When he rose up at my entrance, I

scarce knew him. As comely a man, Mr. Jones, within this fortnight, as

you ever beheld; Mr. Nightingale hath seen him. His eyes sunk, his

face pale, with a long beard. His body shivering with cold, and worn

with hunger too; for my cousin says she can hardly prevail upon him to

eat.- He told me himself in a whisper- he told me- I can't repeat it-

he said he could not bear to eat the bread his children wanted. And

yet, can you believe it, gentlemen? in all this misery his wife has as

good caudle as if she lay in the midst of the greatest affluence; I

tasted it, and I scarce ever tasted better.- The means of procuring

her this, he said, he believed was sent by an angel from heaven. I

know not what he meant; for I had not spirits enough to ask a single

question.

  "This was a love-match, as they call it, on both sides; that is, a

match between two beggars. I must, indeed, say, I never saw a fonder

Tom Jones couple; but what is their fondness good for, but to

torment each other?" "Indeed, mamma," cries Nancy, "I have always

looked on my cousin Anderson" (for that was her name) "as one of the

happiest of women." "I am sure," says Mrs. Miller, "the case at

present is much otherwise; for any one might have discerned that the

tender consideration of each other's sufferings makes the most

intolerable part of their calamity, both to the husband and wife.

Compared to which, hunger and cold, as they affect their own persons

only, are scarce evils. Nay, the very children, the youngest, which is

not two years old, excepted, feel in the same manner; for they are a

most loving family, and, if they had but a bare competency, would be

the happiest people in the world." "I never saw the least sign of

misery at her house," replied Nancy; "I am sure my heart bleeds for

what you now tell me."- "O child," answered the mother, "she hath

always endeavoured to make the best of everything. They have always

been in great distress; but, indeed, this absolute ruin hath been

brought upon them by others. The poor man was bail for the villain his

brother; and about a week ago, the very day before her lying-in, their

goods were all carried away, and sold by an execution. He sent a

letter to me of it by one of the bailiffs, which the villain never

delivered.- What must he think of my suffering a week to pass before

he heard of me?"

  It was not with dry eyes that Jones heard this narrative; when it

was ended he took Mrs. Miller apart with him into another room, and,

delivering her his purse, in which was the sum of L50, desired her

to send as much of it as she thought proper to these poor people.

The look which Mrs. Miller gave Jones, on this occasion, is not easy

to be described. She burst into a kind of agony of transport, and

cryed out- "Good heavens! is there such a man in the world?"- But

recollecting herself, she said, "Indeed I know one such; but can there

be another?" "I hope, madam," cries Jones, "there are many who have

common humanity; for to relieve such distress in our fellow-creatures,

can hardly be called more." Mrs. Miller then took ten guineas, which

were the utmost he could prevail with her to accept, and said, "She

would find some means of conveying them early the next morning;"

adding, "that she had herself done some little matter for the poor


people, and had not left them in quite so much misery as she found

them."

  They then returned to the parlour, where Nightingale expressed

much concern at the dreadful situation of these wretches, whom

indeed he knew; for he had seen them more than once at Mrs.

Miller's. He inveighed against the folly of making oneself liable

for the debts of others; vented many bitter execrations against the

brother; and concluded with wishing something could be done for the

unfortunate family. "Suppose, madam," said he, "you should recommend

them to Mr. Allworthy? Or what think you of a collection? I will

give them a guinea with all my heart."

  Mrs. Miller made no answer; and Nancy, to whom her mother had

whispered the generosity of Jones, turned pale upon the occasion;

though, if either of them was angry with Nightingale, it was surely

without reason. For the liberality of Jones, if he had known it, was

not an example which he had any obligation to follow, and there are

thousands who would not have contributed a single halfpenny, as indeed

he did not in effect, for he made no tender of anything; and

therefore, as the others thought proper to make no demand, he kept his

money in his pocket.

  I have, in truth, observed, and shall never have a better

opportunity than at present to communicate my observation, that the

world are in general divided into two opinions concerning charity,

which are the very reverse of each other. One party seems to hold,

that all acts of this kind are to be esteemed as voluntary gifts, and,

however little you give (if indeed no more than your good wishes), you

acquire a great degree of merit in so doing. Others, on the

contrary, appear to be as firmly persuaded that beneficence is a

positive duty, and that whenever the rich fall greatly short of

their ability in relieving the distresses of the poor, their pitiful

largesses are so far from being meritorious, that they have only

performed their duty by halves, and are in some sense more

contemptible than those who have entirely neglected it.

  To reconcile these different opinions is not in my power. I shall

only add, that the givers are generally of the former sentiment, and

the receivers are almost universally inclined to the latter.





                                Chapter 9



  Which treats of matters of a very different kind from those in the

preceding chapter



  In the evening Jones met his lady again, and a long conversation

again ensued between them: but as it consisted only of the same

ordinary occurrences as before, we shall avoid mentioning particulars,

which we despair of rendering agreeable to the reader; unless he is

one whose devotion to the fair sex, like that of the papists to

their saints, wants to be raised by the help of pictures. But I am

so far from desiring to exhibit such pictures to the public, that I

would wish to draw a curtain over those that have been lately set

forth in certain French novels; very bungling copies of which have

been presented us here under the name of translations.

  Jones grew still more and more impatient to see Sophia; and finding,

after repeated interviews with Lady Bellaston, no likelihood of

obtaining this by her means (for, on the contrary, the lady began to

treat even the mention of the name of Sophia with resentment), he

resolved to try some other method. He made no doubt but that Lady

Bellaston knew where his angel was, so he thought it most likely

that some of her servants should be acquainted with the same secret.

Partridge therefore was employed to get acquainted with those

servants, in order to fish this secret out of them.

  Few situations can be imagined more uneasy than that to which his

poor master was at present reduced; for besides the difficulties he

met with in discovering Sophia, besides the fears he had of having

disobliged her, and the assurances he had received from Lady Bellaston

of the resolution which Sophia had taken against him, and of her

having purposely concealed herself from him, which he had sufficient

reason to believe might be true; he had still a difficulty to

combat, which it was not in the power of his mistress to remove,

however kind her inclination might have been. This was the exposing of

her to be disinherited of all her father's estate, the almost

inevitable consequence of their coming together without a consent,

which he had no hopes of ever obtaining.

  Add to all these the many obligations which Lady Bellaston, whose

violent fondness we can no longer conceal, had heaped upon him; so

that by her means he was now become one of the best-dressed men

about town; and was not only relieved from those ridiculous distresses

we have before mentioned, but was actually raised to a state of

affluence beyond what he had ever known.

  Now, though there are many gentlemen who very well reconcile it to

their consciences to possess themselves of the whole fortune of a

woman, without making her any kind of return; yet to a mind, the

proprietor of which doth not deserved to be hanged, nothing is, I

believe, more irksome than to support love with gratitude only;

especially where inclination pulls the heart a contrary way. Such

was the unhappy case of Jones; for though the virtuous love he bore to

Sophia, and which left very little affection for any other woman,

had been entirely out of the question, he could never have been able

to have made any adequate return to the generous passion of this lady,

who had indeed been once an object of desire, but was now entered at

least into the autumn of life, though she wore all the gaiety of

youth, both in her dress and manner; nay, she contrived still to

maintain the roses in her cheeks; but these, like flowers forced out

of season by art, had none of that lively blooming freshness with

which Nature, at the proper time, bedecks her own productions. She

had, besides, a certain imperfection, which renders some flowers,

though very beautiful to the eye, very improper to be placed in a

wilderness of sweets, and what above all others is most disagreeable

to the breath of love.

  Though Jones saw all these discouragements on the one side, he

felt his obligations full as strongly on the other; nor did he less

plainly discern the ardent passion whence those obligations proceeded,

the extreme violence of which if he failed to equal, he well knew

the lady would think him ungrateful; and, what is worse, he would have

thought himself so. He knew the tacit consideration upon which all her

favours were conferred; and as his necessity obliged him to accept

them, so his honour, he concluded, forced him to pay the price. This

therefore he resolved to do, whatever misery it cost him, and to

devote himself to her, from that great principle of justice, by

which the laws of some countries oblige a debtor, who is no

otherwise capable of discharging his debt, to become the slave of

his creditor.

  While he was meditating on these matters, he received the

following note from the lady:-



  A very foolish, but a very perverse accident hath happened since our

last meeting, which makes it improper I should see you any more , if

possible, contrive at the usual place. I will some other place by

to-morrow. In the meantime, adieu.



  This disappointment, perhaps, the reader may conclude was not very

great; but if it was, he was quickly relieved; for in less than an

hour afterwards another note was brought him from the same hand, which

contained as follows:-



  I have altered my mind since I wrote; a change which, if you are

no stranger to the tenderest of all passions, you will not wonder

at. I am now resolved to see you this evening at my own house,

whatever may be the consequence. Come to me exactly at seven; I dine

abroad, but will be at home by that time. A day, I find, to those that

sincerely love, seems longer than I imagined.

  If you should accidentally be a few moments before me, bid them show

you into the drawing-room.



  To confess the truth, Jones was less pleased with this last

epistle than he had been with the former, as he was prevented by it

from complying with the earnest entreaties of Mr. Nightingale, with

whom he had now contracted much intimacy and friendship. These

entreaties were to go with that young gentleman and his company to a

new play, which was to be acted that evening, and which a very large

party had agreed to damn, from some dislike they had taken to the

author, who was a friend to one of Mr. Nightingale's acquaintance. And

this sort of fun, our heroe, we are ashamed to confess, would

willingly have preferred to the above kind appointment; but his honour

got the better of his inclination.

  Before we attend him to this intended interview with the lady, we

think proper to account for both the preceding notes, as the reader

may possibly be not a little surprized at the imprudence of Lady

Bellaston, in bringing her lover to the very house where her rival was

lodged.

  First, then, the mistress of the house where these lovers had

hitherto met, and who had been for some years a pensioner to that

lady, was now become a methodist, and had that very morning waited

upon her ladyship, and after rebuking her very severely for her past

life, had positively declared that she would, on no account, be

instrumental in carrying on any of her affairs for the future.

  The hurry of spirits into which this accident threw the lady, made

her despair of possibly finding any other convenience to meet Jones

that evening; bit as she began a little to recover from her uneasiness

at the disappointment, she set her thoughts to work, when luckily it

came into her head to propose to Sophia to go to the play, which was

immediately consented to, and a proper lady provided for her

companion. Mrs. Honour was likewise despatched with Mrs. Etoff on

the same errand of pleasure; and thus her own house was left free

for the safe reception of Mr. Jones, with whom she promised herself

two or three hours of uninterrupted conversation, after her return

from the place where she dined, which was at a friend's house in a

pretty distant part of the town, near her old place of assignation,

where she had engaged herself before she was well apprized of the

revolution that had happened in the mind and morals of her late

confidante.





                                Chapter 10



  A chapter which, though short, may draw tears from some eyes



  Mr. Jones was just dressed to wait on Lady Bellaston, when Mrs.

Miller rapped at his door; and, being admitted, very earnestly desired

his company below-stairs, to drink tea in the parlour.

  Upon his entrance into the room, she presently introduced a person

to him, saying, "This, sir, is my cousin, who hath been so greatly

beholden to your goodness, for which he begs to return you his

sincerest thanks."

  The man had scarce entered upon that speech, which Mrs. Miller had

so kindly prefaced, when both Jones and he, looking stedfastly at each

other, showed at once the utmost tokens of surprize. The voice of

the latter began instantly to faulter; and, instead of finishing his

speech, he sunk down into a chair, crying, "It is so, I am convinced

it is so!"

  "Bless me! what's the meaning of this?" cries Mrs. Miller; "you

are not ill, I hope, cousin? Some water, a dram this instant."

  "Be not frighted, madam," cries Jones, "I have almost as much need

of a dram as your cousin. We are equally surprized at this

unexpected meeting. Your cousin is an acquaintance of mine, Mrs.

Miller."

  "An acquaintance!" cries the man.-- "Oh, heaven!"

  "Ay, an acquaintance," repeated Jones, "and an honoured acquaintance

too. When I do not love and honour the man who dares venture

everything to preserve his wife and children from instant destruction,

may I have a friend capable of disowning me in adversity!"

  "Oh, you are an excellent young man," cries Mrs. Miller:- "Yes,

indeed, poor creature! he hath ventured everything.- If he had not

had one of the best of constitutions, it must have killed him."

  "Cousin," cries the man, who had now pretty well recovered

himself, "this is the angel from heaven whom I meant. This is he to

whom, before I saw you, I owed the preservation of my Peggy. He it was

to whose generosity every comfort, every support which I have procured

for her, was owing. He is, indeed, the worthiest, bravest, noblest, of

all human beings. O cousin, I have obligations to this gentleman of

such a nature!"

  "Mention nothing of obligations," cries Jones eagerly; "not a

word, I insist upon it, not a word" (meaning, I suppose, that he would

not have him betray the affair of the robbery to any person). "If,

by the trifle you have received from me, I have preserved a whole

family, sure pleasure was never bought so cheap."

  "Oh, sir!" cries the man, "I wish you could this instant see my

house. If any person had ever a right to the pleasure you mention, I

am convinced it is yourself. My cousin tells me she acquainted you

with the distress in which she found us. That, sir, is all greatly

removed, and chiefly by your goodness.-- My children have now a bed to

lie on-- and they have-- they have-- eternal blessings reward you for

it!-- they have bread to eat. My little boy is recovered; my wife is

out of danger, and I am happy. All, all owing to you, sir, and to my

cousin here, one of the best of women. Indeed, sir, I must see you

at my house.- Indeed my wife must see you, and thank you.- My children

too must express their gratitude.-- Indeed, sir, they are not without

a sense of their obligation; but what is my feeling, when I reflect to

whom I owe that they are now capable of expressing their

gratitude.-- Oh, sir, the little hearts which you have warmed had now

been cold as ice without your assistance."

  Here Jones attempted to prevent the poor man from proceeding; but

indeed the overflowing of his own heart would of itself have stopped

his words. And now Mrs. Miller likewise began to pour forth

thanksgivings, as well in her own name, as in that of her cousin,

and concluded with saying, "She doubted not but such goodness would

meet a glorious reward."

  Jones answered, "He had been sufficiently rewarded already. Your

cousin's account, madam," said he, "hath given me a sensation more

pleasing than I have ever known. He must be a wretch who is unmoved at

hearing such a story; how transporting then must be the thought of

having happily acted a part in this scene! If there are men who cannot

feel the delight of giving happiness to others, I sincerely pity them,

as they are incapable of tasting what is, in my opinion, a greater

honour, a higher interest, and a sweeter pleasure, than the ambitious,

the avaricious, or the voluptuous man can ever obtain."

  The hour of appointment being now come, Jones was forced to take a

hasty leave, but not before he had heartily shaken his friend by the

hand, and desired to see him again as soon as possible; promising that

he would himself take the first opportunity of visiting him at his own

house. He then stept into his chair, and proceeded to Lady

Bellaston's, greatly exulting in the happiness which he had procured

to this poor family; nor could he forbear reflecting, without

horror, on the dreadful consequences which must have attended them,

had he listened rather to the voice of strict justice, than to that of

mercy, when he was attacked on the high road.

  Mrs. Miller sung forth the praise of Jones during the whole evening,

in which Mr. Anderson, while he stayed, so passionately accompanied

her, that he was often on the very point of mentioning the

circumstance of the robbery. However, he luckily recollected

himself, and avoided an indiscretion which would have been so much the

greater, as he knew Mrs. Miller to be extremely strict and nice in her

principles. He was likewise well apprized of the loquacity of this

lady; and yet such was his gratitude, that it had almost got the

better both of discretion and shame, and made him publish that which

would have defamed his own character, rather than omit any

circumstances which might do the fullest honour to his benefactor.





                                Chapter 11



  In which the reader will be surprized



  Mr. Jones was rather earlier than the time appointed, and earlier

than the lady; whose arrival was hindered, not only by the distance of

the place where she dined, but by some other cross accidents very

vexatious to one in her situation of mind. He was accordingly shown

into the drawing-room, where he had not been many minutes before the

door opened, and in came-- no other than Sophia herself, who had left

the play before the end of the first act; for this, as we have already

said, being a new play, at which two large parties met, the one to

damn, and the other to applaud, a violent uproar, and an engagement

between the two parties, had so terrified our heroine, that she was

glad to put herself under the protection of a young gentleman, who

safely conveyed her to her chair.

  As Lady Bellaston had acquainted her that she should not be at

home till late, Sophia, expecting to find no one in the room, came

hastily in, and went directly to a glass which almost fronted her,

without once looking towards the upper end of the room, where the

statue of Jones now stood motionless.- In this glass it was, after

contemplating her own lovely face, that she first discovered the

said statue; when, instantly turning about, she perceived the

reality of the vision: upon which she gave a violent scream, and

scarce preserved herself from fainting, till Jones was able to move to

her, and support her in his arms.

  To paint the looks or thoughts of either of these lovers, is

beyond my power. As their sensations, from their mutual silence, may

be judged to have been too big for their own utterance, it cannot be

supposed that I should be able to express them: and the misfortune is,

that few of my readers have been enough in love to feel by their own

hearts what past at this time in theirs.

  After a short pause, Jones, with faultering accents, said- "I see,

madam, you are surprized."- "Surprized!" answered she; "Oh heavens!

Indeed, I am surprized. I almost doubt whether you are the person

you seem."- "Indeed," cries she, "my Sophia, pardon me, madam, for

this once calling you so, I am that very wretched Jones, whom fortune,

after so many disappointments, hath, at last, kindly conducted to you.

Oh! my Sophia, did you know the thousand torments I have suffered in

this long, fruitless pursuit."- "Pursuit of whom?" said Sophia, a

little recollecting herself, and assuming a reserve air.- "Can you be

so cruel to ask that question?" cries Jones; "Need I say, of you?" "Of

me! answered Sophia: "Hath Mr. Jones, then, any such important

business with me?"- "To some, madam," cries Jones, "this might seem

an important business" (giving her the pocket-book), "I hope, madam,

you will find it of the same value as when it was lost." Sophia took

the pocket-book, and was going to speak, when he interrupted her

thus:- "Let us not, I beseech you, lose one of these precious moments

which fortune hath so kindly sent us. O, my Sophia! I have business of

a much superior kind. Thus, on my knees, let me ask your pardon."- "My

pardon!" cries she; "Sure, sir, after what is past, you cannot expect,

after what I have heard."- "I scarce know what I say," answered Jones.

"By heavens! I scarce wish you should pardon me. O my Sophia!

henceforth never cast away a thought on such a wretch as I am. If any

remembrance of me should ever intrude to give a moment's uneasiness to

that tender bosom, think of my unworthiness; and let the remembrance

of what passed at Upton blot me for ever from your mind."

  Sophia stood trembling all this while. Her face was whiter than

snow, and her heart was throbbing through her stays. But at the

mention of Upton, a blush arose in her cheeks, and her eyes, which

before she had scarce lifted up, were turned upon Jones with a

glance of disdain. He understood this silent reproach, and replied

to it thus: "O my Sophia! my only love! you cannot hate or despise

me more for what happened there, than I do myself; but yet do me the

justice to think, that my heart was never unfaithful to you. That

had no share in the folly I was guilty of; it was even then

unalterably yours. Though I despaired of possessing you, nay, almost

of ever seeing you more, I doated still on your charming idea, and

could seriously love no other woman. But if my heart had not been

engaged, she, into company I accidently fell at that cursed place, was

not an object of serious love. Believe me, my angel, I never have seen

her from that day to this; and never intend or desire to see her

again." Sophia, in her heart, was very glad to hear this; but

forcing into her face an air of more coldness than she had yet

assumed, "Why," said she, "Mr. Jones, do you take the trouble to

make a defence where you are not accused? If I thought it worth

while to accuse you, I have a charge of an unpardonable nature

indeed."- "What is it, for heaven's sake?" answered Jones, trembling

and pale, expecting to hear of his amour with Lady Bellaston. "Oh,"

said she, "how is it possible! can everything noble, and everything

base, be lodged together in the same bosom?" Lady Bellaston, and the

ignominious circumstance of having been kept, rose again in his

mind, and stopt his mouth from any reply. "Could I have expected,"

proceeded Sophia, "such treatment from you? Nay, from any gentleman,

from any man of honour? To have my name traduced in public; in inns,

among the meanest vulgar! to have any little favours, that my

unguarded heart may have too lightly betrayed me to grant, boasted

of there! nay, even to hear that you had been forced to fly from my

love!"

  Nothing could equal Jones's surprize at these words of Sophia; but

yet, not being guilty, he was much less embarrassed how to defend

himself, than if she had touched that tender string at which his

conscience had been alarmed. By some examination he presently found,

that her supposing him guilty of so shocking an outrage against his

love, and her reputation, was entirely owing to Partridge's talk at

the inns before landlords and servants; for Sophia confessed to him it

was from them that she received her intelligence. He had no very great

difficulty to make her believe that he was entirely innocent of an

offence so foreign to his character; but she had a great deal to

hinder him from going instantly home, and putting Partridge to

death, which he more than once swore he would do. This point being

cleared up, they soon found themselves so well pleased with each

other, that Jones quite forgot he had begun the conversation with

conjuring her to give up all thoughts of him; and she was in a

temper to have given ear to a petition of a very different nature; for

before they were aware they had both gone so far, that he let fall

some words that sounded like a proposal of marriage. To which she

replied, "That, did not her duty to her father forbid her to follow

her own inclinations, ruin with him would be more welcome to her

than the most affluent fortune with another man." At the mention of

the word ruin, he started, let drop her hand, which he had held for

some time, and striking his breast with his own, cried out, "Oh,

Sophia! can I then ruin thee? No; by heavens, no! I never will act

so base a part. Dearest Sophia, whatever it costs me, I will

renounce you; I will give you up; I will tear all such hopes from my

heart as are inconsistent with your real good. My love I will ever

retain, but it shall be in silence; it shall be at a distance from

you; it shall be in some foreign land; from whence no voice, no sigh

of my despair, shall ever reach and disturb your ears. And when I am

dead"- He would have gone on, but was stopt by a flood of tears which

Sophia let fall in his bosom, upon which she leaned, without being

able to speak one word. He kissed them off, which, for some moments,

she allowed him to do without any resistance; but then recollecting

herself, gently withdrew out of his arms; and, to turn the discourse

from a subject too tender, and which she found she could not

support, bethought herself to ask him a question she never had time to

put to him before, "How he came into that room?" He began to

stammer, and would, in all probability, have raised her suspicions

by the answer he was going to give, when, at once, the door opened,

and in came Lady Bellaston.

  Having advanced a few steps, and seeing Jones and Sophia together,

she suddenly stopt; when, after a pause of a few moments, recollecting

herself with admirable presence of mind, she said- though with

sufficient indications of surprize both in voice and countenance- "I

thought, Miss Western, you had been at the play?"

  Though Sophia had no opportunity of learning of Jones by what

means he had discovered her, yet, as she had not the least suspicion

of the real truth, or that Jones and Lady Bellaston were acquainted,

so she was very little confounded; and the less, as the lady had, in

all their conversations on the subject, entirely taken her side

against her father. With very little hesitation, therefore, she went

through the whole story of what had happened at the play-house, and

the cause of her hasty return.

  The length of this narrative gave Lady Bellaston an opportunity of

rallying her spirits, and of considering in what manner to act. And as

the behaviour of Sophia gave her hopes that Jones had not betrayed

her, she put on an air of good humour, and said, "I should not have

broke in so abruptly upon you, Miss Western, if I had known you had

company."

  Lady Bellaston fixed her eyes on Sophia whilst she spoke these

words. To which that poor young lady, having her face overspread

with blushes and confusion, answered, in a stammering voice, "I am

sure, madam, I shall always think the honour of your ladyship's

company--" "I hope, at least," cries Lady Bellaston, "I interrupt no

business."- "No, madam," answered Sophia, "our business was at an

end. Your ladyship may be pleased to remember I have often mentioned

the loss of my pocket-book, which this gentleman, having very

luckily found, was so kind to return it to me with the bill in it."

  Jones, ever since the arrival of Lady Bellaston, had been ready to

sink with fear. He sat kicking his heels, playing with his fingers,

and looking more like a fool, if it be possible, than a young booby

squire, when he is first introduced into a polite assembly. He

began, however, now to recover himself; and taking a hint from the

behaviour of Lady Bellaston, who he saw did not intend to claim any

acquaintance with him, he resolved as entirely to affect the

stranger on his part. He said, "Ever since he had the pocket-book in

his possession, he had used great diligence in inquiring out the

lady whose name was writ in it; but never till that day could be so

fortunate to discover her."

  Sophia indeed mentioned the loss of her pocket-book to Lady

Bellaston; but as Jones, for some reason or other, had never once

hinted to her that it was in his possession, she believed not one

syllable of what Sophia now said, and wonderfully admired the

extreme quickness of the young lady in inventing such an excuse. The

reason of Sophia's leaving the playhouse met with no better credit;

and though she could not account for the meeting. between these two

lovers, she was firmly persuaded it was not accidental.

  With an affected smile, therefore, she said, "Indeed, Miss

Western, you have had very good luck in recovering your money. Not

only as it fell into the hands of a gentleman of honour, but as he

happened to discover to whom it belonged. I think you would not

consent to have it advertised.- It was great good fortune, sir, that

you found out to whom the note belonged."

  "Oh, madam," cries Jones, "it was enclosed in a pocket-book, in

which the young lady's name was written."

  "That was very fortunate indeed," cries the lady:- "And it was no

less so, that you heard Miss Western was at my house; for she is

very little known."

  Jones had at length perfectly recovered his spirits; and as he

conceived he had now an opportunity of satisfying Sophia, as to the

question she had asked him just before Lady Bellaston came in, he

proceeded thus: "Why, madam," answered he, "it was by the luckiest

chance imaginable I made this discovery. I was mentioning what I had

found, and the name of the owner, the other night to a lady at the

masquerade, who told me she believed she knew where I might see Miss

Western; and if I would come to her house the next morning she would

inform me. I went according to her appointment, but she was not at

home; nor could I ever meet with her till this morning, when she

directed me to your ladyship's house. I came accordingly, and did

myself the honour to ask for your ladyship; and upon my saying that

I had very particular business, a servant showed me into this room;

where I had not been long before the young lady returned from the

play."

  Upon his mentioning the masquerade, he looked very slily at Lady

Bellaston, without any fear of being remarked my Sophia; for she was

visibly too much confounded to make any observations. This hint a

little alarmed the lady, and she was silent; when Jones, who saw the

agitation of Sophia's mind, resolved to take the only method of

relieving her, which was by retiring; but, before he did this, he

said, believe, madam, it is customary to give some reward on these

occasions;- I must insist on a very high one for my honesty;- it is,

madam, no less than the honour of being permitted to pay another visit

here."

  "Sir," replied the lady, "I make no doubt that you are a

gentleman, and my doors are never shut to people of fashion."

  Jones, then after proper ceremonials, departed, highly to his own

satisfaction, and no less to that of Sophia; who was terribly

alarmed lest Lady Bellaston should discover what she knew already

but too well.

  Upon the stairs Jones met his old acquaintance, Mrs. Honour, who,

notwithstanding all she had said against him, was now so well bred

to behave with great civility. This meeting proved indeed a lucky

circumstance, is he communicated to her the house where he lodged,

with which Sophia was unacquainted.





                                Chapter 12



  In which the thirteenth book is concluded



  The elegant Lord Shaftesbury somewhere objects to telling too much

truth: by which it may be fairly inferred, that, in some cases, to lie

is not only excusable, but commendable.

  And surely there are no persons who may so properly challenge a

right to this commendable deviation from truth, as young women in

the affair of love; for which they may plead precept, education, and

above all, the sanction, nay, I may say the necessity of custom, by

which they are restrained, not from submitting to the honest

impulses of nature (for that would be a foolish prohibition), but from

owning them.

  We are not, therefore, ashamed to say, that our heroine now

pursued the dictates of the above-mentioned right honourable

philosopher. As she was perfectly satisfied then, that Lady

Bellaston was ignorant of the person of Jones, so she determined to

keep her in that ignorance, though at the expense of a little fibbing.

  Jones had not been long gone, before Lady Bellaston cryed, "Upton my

word, a good pretty young fellow; I wonder who he is; for I don't

remember ever to have seen his face before."

  "Nor I neither, madam," cries Sophia. "I must say he behaved very

handsomely in relation to my note."

  "Yes; and he is a very handsome fellow," said the lady: "don't you

think so?"

  "I did not take much notice of him," answered Sophia, "but I thought

he seemed rather awkward, and ungenteel than otherwise."

  "You are extremely right," cries Lady Bellaston: "you may see, by

his manner, that he hath not kept good company. Nay, notwithstanding

his returning your note, and refusing the reward, I almost question

whether he is a gentleman.-- I have always observed there is a

something in persons well born, which others can never acquire.-- I

think I will give orders not to be at home to him."

  "Nay, sure, madam," answered Sophia, "one can't suspect after what

he hath done;- besides, if your ladyship observed him, there was an

elegance in his discourse, a delicacy, a prettiness of expression

that, that--"

  "I confess," said Lady Bellaston, "the fellow hath words-- And

indeed Sophia, you must forgive me, indeed you must."

  "I forgive your ladyship!" said Sophia.

  "Yes, indeed you must," answered she, laughing; "for I had a

horrible suspicion when I first came into the room-- I vow you must

forgive it; but I suspected it was Mr. Jones himself."

  "Did your ladyship, indeed?" cries Sophia, blushing, and affecting a

laugh.

  "Yes, I vow I did," answered she. "I can't imagine what put it

into my head: for, give the fellow his due, he was genteely drest;

which, I think, dear Sophy, is not commonly the case with your

friend."

  "This raillery," cries Sophia, "is a little cruel, Lady Bellaston,

after my promise to your ladyship."

  "Not at all, child," said the lady;-- "It would have been cruel

before; but after you have promised me never to marry your father's

consent, in which you know is implied your giving up Jones, sure you

can bear a little raillery on a passion which was pardonable enough in

a young girl in the country, and of which you tell me you have so

entirely got the better. What must I think, my dear Sophy, if you

cannot bear a little ridicule even on his dress? I shall begin to fear

you are very far gone indeed; and almost question whether you have

dealt ingenuously with me."

  "Indeed, madam," cries Sophia, "your ladyship mistakes me, if you

imagine I had any concern on his account."

  "On his account!" answered the lady: "You must have mistaken me; I

went no farther than his dress;-- for I would not injure your taste by

any other comparison-- I don't imagine, my dear Sophy, if your Mr.

Jones had been such a fellow as this-"

  "I thought," says Sophia, "your ladyship had allowed him to be

handsome"--

  "Whom, pray?" cried the lady hastily.

  "Mr. Jones," answered Sophia;- and immediately recollecting

herself, "Mr. Jones!- no, no; I ask your pardon;- I mean the gentleman

who was just now here."

  "O Sophy! Sophy!" cries the lady; "this Mr. Jones, I am afraid,

still runs in your head."

  "Then, upon my honour, madam," said Sophia, "Mr. Jones is as

entirely indifferent to me, as the gentleman who just now left us."

  "Upon my honour," said Lady Bellaston, "I believe it. Forgive me,

therefore, a little innocent raillery; but I promise you I will

never mention his name any more."

  And now the two ladies separated, infinitely more to the delight

of Sophia than of Lady Bellaston, who would willingly have tormented

her rival a little longer, had not business of more importance

called her away. As for Sophia, her mind was not perfectly easy

under this first practice of deceit; upon which, when she retired to

her chamber, she reflected with the highest uneasiness and conscious

shame. Nor could the peculiar hardship of her situation, and the

necessity of the case, at all reconcile her mind to her conduct; for

the frame of her mind was too delicate to bear the thought of having

been guilty of a falsehood, however qualified by circumstances. Nor

did this thought once suffer her to close her eyes during the whole

succeeding night.
