                                      


                     THE HISTORY OF TOM JONES, A FOUNDLING

                               by Henry Fielding



                                     BOOK I

        CONTAINING AS MUCH OF THE BIRTH OF THE FOUNDLING AS IS NECESSARY

     OR PROPER TO ACQUAINT THE READER WITH IN THE BEGINNING OF THIS HISTORY




                                Chapter 1



  The introduction to the work, or bill of fare to the feast



  An author ought to consider himself, not as a gentleman who gives

a private or eleemosynary treat, but rather as one who keeps a

public ordinary, at which all persons are welcome for their money.

In the former case, it is well known that the entertainer provides

what fare he pleases; and though this should be very indifferent,

and utterly disagreeable to the taste of his company, they must not

find any fault; nay, on the contrary, good breeding forces them

outwardly to approve and to commend whatever is set before them. Now

the contrary of this happens to the master of an ordinary. Men who pay

for what they eat will insist on gratifying their palates, however

nice and whimsical these may prove; and if everything is not agreeable

to their taste, will challenge a right to censure, to abuse, and to

d--n their dinner without controul.

  To prevent, therefore, giving offence to their customers by any such

disappointment, it hath been usual with the honest and well-meaning

host to provide a bill of fare which all persons may peruse at their

first entrance into the house; and having thence acquainted themselves

with the entertainment which they may expect, may either stay and

regale with what is provided for them, or may depart to some other

ordinary better accommodated to their taste.

  As we do not disdain to borrow wit or wisdom from any man who is

capable of lending us either, we have condescended to take a hint from

these honest victuallers, and shall prefix not only a general bill

of fare to our whole entertainment, but shall likewise give the reader

particular bills to every course which is to be served up in this

and the ensuing volumes.

  The provision, then, which we have here made is no other than

Human Nature. Nor do I fear that my sensible reader, though most

luxurious in his taste, will start, cavil, or be offended, because I

have named but one article. The tortise- as the alderman of Bristol,

well learned in eating, knows by much experience- besides the

delicious calipash and calipee, contains many different kinds of food;

nor can the learned reader be ignorant, that in human nature, though

here collected under one general name, is such prodigious variety,

that a cook will have sooner gone through all the several species of

animal and vegetable food in the world, than an author will be able to

exhaust so extensive a subject.

  An objection may perhaps be apprehended from the more delicate, that

this dish is too common and vulgar; for what else is the subject of

all the romances, novels, plays, and poems, with which the stalls

abound? Many exquisite viands might be rejected by the epicure, if

it was a sufficient cause for his contemning of them as common and

vulgar, that something was to be found in the most paltry alleys under

the same name. In reality, true nature is as difficult to be met

with in authors, as the Bayonne ham, or Bologna sausage, is to be

found in the shops.

  But the whole, to continue the same metaphor, consists in the

cookery of the author; for, as Mr. Pope tells us-



      True wit is nature to advantage drest;

      What oft was thought, but ne'er so well exprest.



  The same animal which hath the honour to have some part of his flesh

eaten at the table of a duke, may perhaps be degraded in another part,

and some of his limbs gibbeted, as it were, in the vilest stall in

town. Where, then, lies the difference between the food of the

nobleman and the porter, if both are at dinner on the same ox or calf,

but in the seasoning, the dressing, the garnishing, and the setting

forth? Hence the one provokes and incites the most languid appetite,

and the other turns and palls that which is the sharpest and keenest.

  In like manner, the excellence of the mental entertainment

consists less in the subject than in the author's skill in well

dressing it up. How pleased, therefore, will the reader be to find

that we have, in the following work, adhered closely to one of the

highest principles of the best cook which the present age, or

perhaps that of Heliogabalus, hath produced. This great man, as is

well known to all lovers of polite eating, begins at first by

setting plain things before his hungry guests, rising afterwards by

degrees as their stomachs may be supposed to decrease, to the very

quintessence of sauce and spices. In like manner, we shall represent

human nature at first to the keen appetite of our reader, in that more

plain and simple manner in which it is found in the country, and shall

hereafter hash and ragoo it with all the high French and Italian

seasoning of affectation and vice which courts and cities afford. By

these means, we doubt not but our reader may be rendered desirous to

read on for ever, as the great person just above-mentioned is supposed

to have made some persons eat.

  Having premised thus much, we will now detain those who like our

bill of fare no longer from their diet, and shall proceed directly

to serve up the first course of our history for their entertainment.






                                Chapter 2



  A short description of Squire Allworthy, and a fuller account of

Miss Bridget Allworthy, his sister



  In that part of the western division of this kingdom which is

commonly called Somersetshire, there lately lived, and perhaps lives

still, a gentleman whose name was Allworthy, and who might well be

called the favourite of both nature and fortune; for both of these

seem to have contended which should bless and enrich him most. In this

contention, nature may seem to some to have come off victorious, as

she bestowed on him many gifts, while fortune had only one gift in her

power; but in pouring forth this, she was so very profuse, that others

perhaps may think this single endowment to have been more than

equivalent to all the various blessings which he enjoyed from

nature. From the former of these, he derived an agreeable person, a

sound constitution, a solid understanding, and a benevolent heart;

by the latter, he was decreed to the inheritance of one of the largest

estates in the county.

  This gentleman had in his youth married a very worthy and

beautiful woman, of whom he had been extremely fond: by her he had

three children, all of whom died in their infancy. He had likewise had

the misfortune of burying this beloved wife herself, about five

years before the time in which this history chuses to set out. This

loss, however great, he bore like a man of sense and constancy, though

it must be confest he would often talk a little whimsically on this

head; for he sometimes said he looked on himself as still married, and

considered his wife as only gone a little before him, a journey

which he should most certainly, sooner or later, take after her; and

that he had not the least doubt of meeting her again in a place

where he should never part with her more- sentiments for which his

sense was arraigned by one part of his neighbours, his religion by a

second, and his sincerity by a third.

  He now lived, for the most part, retired in the country, with one

sister, for whom he had a very tender affection. This lady was now

somewhat past the age of thirty, an aera at which, in the opinion of

the malicious, the title of old maid may with no impropriety be

assumed. She was of that species of women whom you commend rather

for good qualities than beauty, and who are generally called, by their

own sex, very good sort of women- as good a sort of woman, madam, as

you would wish to know. Indeed, she was so far from regretting want of

beauty, that she never mentioned that perfection, if it can be

called one, without contempt; and would often thank God she was not as

handsome as Miss Such-a-one, whom perhaps beauty had led into errors

which she might have otherwise avoided. Miss Bridget Allworthy (for

that was the name of this lady) very rightly conceived the charms of

person in a woman to be no better than snares for herself, as well

as for others; and yet so discreet was she in her conduct, that her

prudence was as much on the guard as if she had all the snares to

apprehend which were ever laid for her whole sex. Indeed, I have

observed, though it may seem unaccountable to the reader, that this

guard of prudence, like the trained bands, is always readiest to go on

duty where there is the least danger. It often basely and cowardly

deserts those paragons for whom the men are all wishing, sighing,

dying, and spreading every net in their power; and constantly

attends at the heels of that higher order of women for whom the

other sex have a more distant and awful respect, and whom (from

despair, I suppose, of success) they never venture to attack.

  Reader, I think proper, before we proceed any farther together, to

acquaint thee that I intend to digress, through this whole history, as

often as I see occasion, of which I am myself a better judge than any

pitiful critic whatever; and here I must desire all those critics to

mind their own business, and not to intermeddle with affairs or

works which no ways concern them; for till they produce the

authority by which they are constituted judges, I shall not plead to

their jurisdiction.






                                Chapter 3



  An odd accident which befel Mr. Allworthy at his return home. The

decent behaviour of Mrs. Deborah Wilkins, with some proper

animadversions on bastards



  I have told my reader, in the preceding chapter, that Mr.

Allworthy inherited a large fortune; that he had a good heart, and

no family. Hence, doubtless, it will be concluded by many that he

lived like an honest man, owed no one a shilling, took nothing but

what was his own, kept a good house, entertained his neighbours with a

hearty welcome at his table, and was charitable to the poor, i.e.,

to those who had rather beg than work, by giving them the offals

from it; that he died immensely rich and built an hospital.

  And true it is that he did many of these things; but had he done

nothing more I should have left him to have recorded his own merit

on some fair freestone over the door of that hospital. Matters of a

much more extraordinary kind are to be the subject of this history, or

I should grossly mis-spend my time in writing so voluminous a work;

and you, my sagacious friend, might with equal profit and pleasure

travel through some pages which certain droll authors have been

facetiously pleased to call The History of England.

  Mr. Allworthy had been absent a full quarter of a year in London, on

some very particular business, though I know not what it was; but

judge of its importance by its having detained him so long from

home, whence he had not been absent a month at a time during the space

of many years. He came to his house very late in the evening, and

after a short supper with his sister, retired much fatigued to his

chamber. Here, having spent some minutes on his knees- a custom which

he never broke through on any account- he was preparing to step into

bed, when, upon opening the cloathes, to his great surprize he

beheld an infant, wrapt up in some coarse linen, in a sweet and

profound sleep, between his sheets. He stood some time lost in

astonishment at this sight; but, as good nature had always the

ascendant in his mind, he soon began to be touched with sentiments

of compassion for the little wretch before him. He then rang his bell,

and ordered an elderly woman-servant to rise immediately, and come

to him; and in the meantime was so eager in contemplating the beauty

of innocence, appearing in those lively colours with which infancy and

sleep always display it, that his thoughts were too much engaged to

reflect that he was in his shirt when the matron came in. She had

indeed given her master sufficient time to dress himself; for out of

respect to him, and regard to decency, she had spent many minutes in

adjusting her hair at the looking-glass, notwithstanding all the hurry

in which she had been summoned by the servant, and though her

master, for aught she knew, lay expiring in an apoplexy, or in some

other fit.

  It will not be wondered at that a creature who had so strict a

regard to decency in her own person, should be shocked at the least

deviation from it in another. She therefore no sooner opened the door,

and saw her master standing by the bedside in his shirt, with a candle

in his hand, than she started back in a most terrible fright, and

might perhaps have swooned away, had he not now recollected his

being undrest, and put an end to her terrors by desiring her to stay

without the door till he had thrown some cloathes over his back, and

was become incapable of shocking the pure eyes of Mrs. Deborah

Wilkins, who, though in the fifty-second year of her age, vowed she

had never beheld a man without his coat. Sneerers and prophane wits

may perhaps laugh at her first fright; yet my graver reader, when he

considers the time of night, the summons from her bed, and the

situation in which she found her master, will highly justify and

applaud her conduct, unless the prudence which must be supposed to

attend maidens at that period of life at which Mrs. Deborah had

arrived, should a little lessen his admiration.

  When Mrs. Deborah returned into the room, and was acquainted by

her master with the finding the little infant, her consternation was

rather greater than his had been; nor could she refrain from crying

out, with great horror of accent as well as look, "My good sir! what's

to be done?" Mr. Allworthy answered, she must take care of the child

that evening, and in the morning he would give orders to provide it

a nurse. "Yes, sir," says she; "and I hope your worship will send

out your warrant to take up the hussy its mother, for she must be

one of the neighbourhood; and I should be glad to see her committed to

Bridewell, and whipt at the cart's tail. Indeed, such wicked sluts

cannot be too severely punished. I'll warrant 'tis not her first, by

her impudence in laying it to your worship." "In laying it to me,

Deborah!" answered Allworthy: "I can't think she hath any such design.

I suppose she hath only taken this method to provide for her child;

and truly I am glad she hath not done worse." "I don't know what is

worse," cries Deborah, "than for such wicked strumpets to lay their

sins at honest men's doors; and though your worship knows your own

innocence, yet the world is censorious; and it hath been many an

honest man's hap to pass for the father of children he never begot;

and if your worship should provide for the child, it may make the

people the apter to believe; besides, why should your worship

provide for what the parish is obliged to maintain? For my own part,

if it was an honest man's child, indeed- but for my own part, it goes

against me to touch these misbegotten wretches, whom I don't look upon

as my fellow-creatures. Faugh! how it stinks! It doth not smell like a

Christian. If I might be so bold to give my advice, I would have it

put in a basket, and sent out and laid at the churchwarden's door.

It is a good night, only a little rainy and windy; and if it was

well wrapt up, and put in a warm basket, it is two to one but it lives

till it found in the morning. But if it should not, we have discharged

our duty in taking proper care of it; and it is, perhaps, better

such creatures to die in a state of innocence, than to grow up and

imitate their mothers; for nothing better can be expected of them."

  There were some strokes in this speech which perhaps would have

offended Mr. Allworthy, had he strictly attended to it; but he had now

got one of his fingers into the infant's hand, which, by its gentle

pressure, seeming to implore his assistance, had certainly outpleaded

the eloquence of Mrs. Deborah, had it been ten times greater than it

was. He now gave Mrs. Deborah positive orders to take the child to her

own bed, and to call up a maidservant to provide it pap, and other

things, against it waked. He likewise ordered that proper cloathes

should be procured for it early in the morning, and that it should

be brought to himself as soon as he was stirring.

  Such was the discernment of Mrs. Wilkins, and such the respect she

bore her master, under whom she enjoyed a most excellent place, that

her scruples gave way to his peremptory commands; and she took the

child under her arms, without any apparent disgust at the illegality

of its birth; and declaring it was a sweet little infant, walked off

with it to her own chamber.

  Allworthy here betook himself to those pleasing slumbers which a

heart that hungers after goodness is apt to enjoy when thoroughly

satisfied. As these are possibly sweeter than what are occasioned by

any other hearty meal, I should take more pains to display them to the

reader, if I knew any air to recommend him to for the procuring such

an appetite.







                                Chapter 4



  The reader's neck brought into danger by a description; his

escape; and the great condescension of Miss Bridget Allworthy



  The Gothic stile of building could produce nothing nobler than Mr.

Allworthy's house. There was an air of grandeur in it that struck

you with awe, and rivalled the beauties of the best Grecian

architecture; and it was as commodious within as venerable without.

  It stood on the south-east side of a hill, but nearer the bottom

than the top of it, so as to be sheltered from the north-east by a

grove of old oaks which rose above it in a gradual ascent of near half

a mile, and yet high enough to enjoy a most charming prospect of the

valley beneath.

  In the midst of the grove was a fine lawn, sloping down towards

the house, near the summit of which rose a plentiful spring, gushing

out of a rock covered with firs, and forming a constant cascade of

about thirty feet, not carried down a regular flight of steps, but

tumbling in a natural fall over the broken and mossy stones till it

came to the bottom of the rock, then running off in a pebly channel,

that with many lesser falls winded along, till it fell into a lake

at the foot of the hill, about a quarter of a mile below the house

on the south side, and which was seen from every room in the front.

Out of this lake, which filled the center of a beautiful plain,

embellished with groups of beeches and elms, and fed with sheep,

issued a river, that for several miles was seen to meander through

an amazing variety of meadows and woods till it emptied itself into

the sea, with a large arm of which, and an island beyond it, the

prospect was closed.

  On the right of this valley opened another of less extent, adorned

with several villages, and terminated by one of the towers of an old

ruined abby, grown over with ivy, and part of the front, which

remained still entire.

  The left-hand scene presented the view of a very fine park, composed

of very unequal ground, and agreeably varied with all the diversity

that hills, lawns, wood, and water, laid out with admirable taste, but

owing less to art than to nature, could give. Beyond this, the country

gradually rose into a ridge of wild mountains, the tops of which

were above the clouds.

  It was now the middle of May, and the morning was remarkably serene,

when Mr. Allworthy walked forth on the terrace, where the dawn

opened every minute that lovely prospect we have before described to

his eye; and now having sent forth streams of light, which ascended

the blue firmament before him, as harbingers preceding his pomp, in

the full blaze of his majesty rose the sun, than which one object

alone in this lower creation could be more glorious, and that Mr.

Allworthy himself presented- a human being replete with benevolence,

meditating in what manner he might render himself most acceptable to

his Creator, by doing most good to his creatures.

  Reader, take care. I have unadvisedly led thee to the top of as high

a hill as Mr. Allworthy and how to get thee down without breaking

thy neck, I do not well know. However, let us e'en venture to slide

down together; for Miss Bridget rings her bell, and Mr. Allworthy is

summoned to breakfast, where I must attend, and, if you please,

shall be glad of your company.

  The usual compliments having past between Mr. Allworthy and Miss

Bridget, and the tea being poured out, he summoned Mrs. Wilkins, and

told his sister he had a present for her, for which she thanked

him- imagining, I suppose, it had been a gown, or some ornament for

her person. Indeed, he very often made her such presents; and she, in

complacence to him, spent much time in adorning herself. I say in

complacence to him, because she always exprest the greatest contempt

for dress, and for those ladies who made it their study.

  But if such was her expectation, how was she disappointed when

Mrs. Wilkins, according to the order she had received from her master,

produced the little infant? Great surprizes, as hath been observed,

are apt to be silent; and so was Miss Bridget, till her brother began,

and told her the whole story, which, as the reader knows it already,

we shall not repeat.

  Miss Bridget had always exprest so great a regard for what the

ladies are pleased to call virtue, and had herself maintained such a

severity of character, that it was expected, especially by Wilkins,

that she would have vented much bitterness on this occasion, and would

have voted for sending the child, as a kind of noxious animal,

immediately out of the house; but, on the contrary, she rather took

the good-natured side of the question, intimated some compassion for

the helpless little creature, and commended her brother's charity in

what he had done.

  Perhaps the reader may account for this behaviour from her

condescension to Mr. Allworthy, when we have informed him that the

good man had ended his narrative with owning a resolution to take care

of the child, and to breed him up as his own; for, to acknowledge

the truth, she was always ready to oblige her brother, and very

seldom, if ever, contradicted his sentiments. She would, indeed,

sometimes make a few observations, as that men were headstrong, and

must have their own way, and would wish she had been blest with an

independent fortune; but these were always vented in a low voice,

and at the most amounted only to what is called muttering.

  However, what she withheld from the infant, she bestowed with the

utmost profuseness on the poor unknown mother, whom she called an

impudent slut, a wanton hussy, an audacious harlot, a wicked jade, a

vile strumpet, with every other appellation with which the tongue of

virtue never fails to lash those who bring a disgrace on the sex.

  A consultation was now entered into how to proceed in order to

discover the mother. A scrutiny was first made into the characters

of the female servants of the house, who were all acquitted by Mrs.

Wilkins, and with apparent merit; for she had collected them

herself, and perhaps it would be difficult to find such another set of

scarecrows.

  The next step was to examine among the inhabitants of the parish;

and this was referred to Mrs. Wilkins, who was to enquire with all

imaginable diligence, and to make her report in the afternoon.

  Matters being thus settled, Mr. Allworthy withdrew to his study,

as was his custom, and left the child to his sister, who, at his

desire, had undertaken the care of it.







                                Chapter 5



  Containing a few common matters, with a very uncommon observation

upon them



  When her master was departed, Mrs. Deborah stood silent, expecting

her cue from Miss Bridget; for as to what had past before her

master, the prudent housekeeper by no means relied upon it, as she had

often known the sentiments of the lady in her brother's absence to

differ greatly from those which she had expressed in his presence.

Miss Bridget did not, however, suffer her to continue long in this

doubtful situation; for having looked some time earnestly at the

child, as it lay asleep in the lap of Mrs. Deborah, the good lady

could not forbear giving it a hearty kiss, at the same time

declaring herself wonderfully pleased with its beauty and innocence.

Mrs. Deborah no sooner observed this than she fell to squeezing and

kissing, with as great raptures as sometimes inspire the sage dame

of forty and five towards a youthful and vigorous bridegroom, crying

out, in a shrill voice, "O, the dear little creature!- The dear,

sweet, pretty creature! Well, I vow it is as fine a boy as ever was

seen!"

  These exclamations continued till they were interrupted by the lady,

who now proceeded to execute the commission given her by her

brother, and gave orders for providing all necessaries for the

child, appointing a very good room in the house for his nursery. Her

orders were indeed so liberal, that, had it been a child of her own,

she could not have exceeded them; but, lest the virtuous reader may

condemn her for showing too great regard to a base-born infant, to

which all charity is condemned by law as irreligious, we think

proper to observe that she concluded the whole with saying, "Since

it was her brother's whim to adopt the little brat, she supposed

little master must be treated with great tenderness. For her part, she

could not help thinking it was an encouragement to vice; but that

she knew too much of the obstinacy of mankind to oppose any of their

ridiculous humours."

  With reflections of this nature she usually, as has been hinted,

accompanied every act of compliance with her brother's inclinations;

and surely nothing could more contribute to heighten the merit of this

compliance than a declaration that she knew, at the same time, the

folly and unreasonableness of those inclinations to which she

submitted. Tacit obedience implies no force upon the will, and

consequently may be easily, and without any pains, preserved; but when

a wife, a child, a relation, or a friend, performs what we desire,

with grumbling and reluctance, with expressions of dislike and

dissatisfaction, the manifest difficulty which they undergo must

greatly enhance the obligation.

  As this is one of those deep observations which very few readers can

be supposed capable of making themselves, I have thought proper to

lend them my assistance; but this is a favour rarely to be expected in

the course of my work; Indeed, I shall seldom or never so indulge him,

unless in such instances as this, where nothing but the inspiration

with which we writers are gifted, can possibly enable any one to

make the discovery.







                                Chapter 6



  Mrs. Deborah is introduced into the parish with a simile. A short

account of Jenny Jones, with the difficulties and discouragements

which may attend young women in the pursuit of learning



  Mrs. Deborah, having disposed of the child according to the will

of her master, now prepared to visit those habitations which were

supposed to conceal its mother.

  Not otherwise than when a kite, tremendous bird, is beheld by the

feathered generation soaring aloft, and hovering over their heads, the

amorous dove, and every innocent little bird, spread wide the alarm,

and fly trembling to their hiding-places. He proudly beats the air,

conscious of his dignity, and meditates intended mischief.

  So when the approach of Mrs. Deborah was proclaimed through the

street, all the inhabitants ran trembling into their houses, each

matron dreading lest the visit should fall to her lot. She with

stately steps proudly advances over the field: aloft she bears her

towering head, filled with conceit of her own preeminence, and schemes

to effect her intended discovery.

  The sagacious reader will not from this simile imagine these poor

people had any apprehension of the design with which Mrs. Wilkins

was now coming towards them; but as the great beauty of the simile may

possibly sleep these hundred years, till some future commentator shall

take this work in hand, I think proper to lend the reader a little

assistance in this place.

  It is my intention, therefore, to signify, that, as it is the nature

of a kite to devour little birds, so is it the nature of such

persons as Mrs. Wilkins to insult and tyrannize over little people.

This being indeed the means which they use to recompense to themselves

their extreme servility and condescension to their superiors; for

nothing can be more reasonable, than that slaves and flatterers should

exact the same taxes on all below them, which they themselves pay to

all above them.

  Whenever Mrs. Deborah had occasion to exert any extraordinary

condescension to Miss Bridget, and by that means had a little soured

her natural disposition, it was usual with her to walk forth among

these people, in order to refine her temper, by venting, and, as it

were, purging off all ill humours; on which account she was by no

means a welcome visitant: to say the truth, she was universally

dreaded and hated by them all.

  On her arrival in this place, she went immediately to the habitation

of an elderly matron; to whom, as this matron had the good fortune

to resemble herself in the comeliness of her person, as well as in her

age, she had generally been more favourable than to any of the rest.

To this woman she imparted what had happened, and the design upon

which she was come thither that morning. These two began presently

to scrutinize the characters of the several young girls who lived in

any of those houses, and at last fixed their strongest suspicion on

one Jenny Jones, who, they both agreed, was the likeliest person to

have committed this fact.

  This Jenny Jones was no very comely girl, either in her face or

person; but nature had somewhat compensated the want of beauty with

what is generally more esteemed by those ladies whose judgment is

arrived at years of perfect maturity, for she had given her a very

uncommon share of understanding. This gift Jenny had a good deal

improved by erudition. She had lived several years a servant with a

schoolmaster, who, discovering a great quickness of parts in the girl,

and an extraordinary desire of learning- for every leisure hour she

was always found reading in the books of the scholars- had the

good-nature, or folly- just as the reader pleases to call it- to

instruct her so far, that she obtained a competent skill in the Latin

language, and was, perhaps, as good a scholar as most of the young men

of quality of the age. This advantage, however, like most others of an

extraordinary kind, was attended with some small inconveniences: for

as it is not to be wondered at, that a young woman so well

accomplished should have little relish for the society of those whom

fortune had made her equals, but whom education had rendered so much

her inferiors; so it is matter of no greater astonishment, that this

superiority in Jenny, together with that behaviour which is its

certain consequence, should produce among the rest some little envy

and ill-will towards her; and these had, perhaps, secretly burnt in

the bosoms of her neighbours ever since her return from her service.

  Their envy did not, however, display itself openly, till poor Jenny,

to the surprize of everybody, and to the vexation of all the young

women in these parts, had publickly shone forth on a Sunday in a new

silk gown, with a laced cap, and other proper appendages to these.

  The flame, which had before lain in embryo, now burst forth. Jenny

had, by her learning, increased her own pride, which none of her

neighbours were kind enough to feed with the honour she seemed to

demand; and now, instead of respect and adoration, she gained

nothing but hatred and abuse by her finery. The whole parish

declared she could not come honestly by such things; and parents,

instead of wishing their daughters the same, felicitated themselves

that their children had them not.

  Hence, perhaps, it was, that the good woman first mentioned the name

of this poor girl to Mrs. Wilkins; but there was another

circumstance that confirmed the latter in her suspicion; for Jenny had

lately been often at Mr. Allworthy's house. She had officiated as

nurse to Miss Bridget, in a violent fit of illness, and had sat up

many nights with that lady; besides which, she had been seen there the

very day before Mr. Allworthy's return, by Mrs. Wilkins herself,

though that sagacious person had not at first conceived any

suspicion of her on that account; for, as she herself said, "She had

always esteemed Jenny as a very sober girl (though indeed she knew

very little of her), and had rather suspected some of those wanton

trollops, who gave themselves airs, because, forsooth, they thought

themselves handsome."

  Jenny was now summoned to appear in person before Mrs. Deborah,

which she immediately did. When Mrs. Deborah, putting on the gravity

of a judge, with somewhat more than his austerity, began an oration

with the words, "You audacious strumpet!" in which she proceeded

rather to pass sentence on the prisoner than to accuse her.

  Though Mrs. Deborah was fully satisfied of the guilt of Jenny,

from the reasons above shown, it is possible Mr. Allworthy might

have required some stronger evidence to have convicted her; but she

saved her accusers any such trouble, by freely confessing the whole

fact with which she was charged.

  This confession, though delivered rather in terms of contrition,

as it appeared, did not at all mollify Mrs. Deborah, who now

pronounced a second judgment against her, in more opprobrious language

than before; nor had it any better success with the bystanders, who

were now grown very numerous. Many of them cried out, "They thought

what madam's silk gown would end in"; others spoke sarcastically of

her learning. Not a single female was present but found some means

of expressing her abhorrence of poor Jenny, who bore all very

patiently, except the malice of one woman, who reflected upon her

person, and tossing up her nose, said, "The man must have a good

stomach who would give silk gowns for such sort of trumpery!" Jenny

replied to this with a bitterness which might have surprized a

judicious person, who had observed the tranquillity with which she

bore all the affronts to her chastity; but her patience was perhaps

tired out, for this is a virtue which is very apt to be fatigued by

exercise.

  Mrs. Deborah having succeeded beyond her hopes in her inquiry,

returned with much triumph, and, at the appointed hour, made a

faithful report to Mr. Allworthy, who was much surprized at the

relation; for he had heard of the extraordinary parts and improvements

of this girl, whom he intended to have given in marriage, together

with a small living, to a neighbouring curate. His concern, therefore,

on this occasion, was at least equal to the satisfaction which

appeared in Mrs. Deborah, and to many readers may seem much more

reasonable.

  Miss Bridget blessed herself, and said, "For her part, she should

never hereafter entertain a good opinion of any woman." For Jenny

before this had the happiness of being much in her good graces also.

  The prudent housekeeper was again dispatched to bring the unhappy

culprit before Mr. Allworthy, in order, not as it was hoped by some,

and expected by all, to be sent to the House of Correction, but to

receive wholesome admonition and reproof; which those who relish

that kind of instructive writing may peruse in the next chapter.







                                Chapter 7



  Containing such grave matter, that the reader cannot laugh once

through the whole chapter, unless peradventure he should laugh at

the author



  When Jenny appeared, Mr. Allworthy took her into his study, and

spoke to her as follows: "You know, child, it is in my power as a

magistrate, to punish you very rigorously for what you have done;

and you will, perhaps, be the more apt to fear I should execute that

power, because you have in a manner laid your sins at my door.

  "But, perhaps, this is one reason which hath determined me to act in

a milder manner with you: for, as no private resentment should ever

influence a magistrate, I will be so far from considering your

having deposited the infant in my house as an aggravation of your

offence, that I will suppose, in your favour, this to have proceeded

from a natural affection to your child, since you might have some

hopes to see it thus better provided for than was in the power of

yourself, or its wicked father, to provide for it. I should indeed

have been highly offended with you had you exposed the little wretch

in the manner of some inhuman mothers, who seem no less to have

abandoned their humanity, than to have parted with their chastity.

It is the other part of your offence, therefore, upon which I intend

to admonish you, I mean the violation of your chastity;- a crime,

however lightly it may be treated by debauched persons, very heinous

in itself, and very dreadful in its consequences.

  "The heinous nature of this offence must be sufficiently apparent to

every Christian, inasmuch as it is committed in defiance of the laws

of our religion, and of the express commands of Him who founded that

religion.

  "And here its consequences may well be argued to be dreadful; for

what can be more so, than to incur the divine displeasure, by the

breach of the divine commands; and that in an instance against which

the highest vengeance is specifically denounced?

  "But these things, though too little, I am afraid, regarded, are

so plain, that mankind, however they may want to be reminded, can

never need information on this head. A hint, therefore, to awaken your

sense of this matter, shall suffice; for I would inspire you with

repentance, and not drive you to desperation.

  "There are other consequences, not indeed so dreadful or replete

with horror as this; and yet such, as, if attentively considered,

must, one would think, deter all of your sex at least from the

commission of this crime.

  "For by it you are rendered infamous, and driven, like lepers of

old, out of society; at least, from the society of all but wicked

and reprobate persons; for no others will associate with you.

  "If you have fortunes, you are hereby rendered incapable of enjoying

them; if you have none, you are disabled from acquiring any, nay

almost of procuring your sustenance; for no persons of character

will receive you into their houses. Thus you are often driven by

necessity itself into a state of shame and misery, which unavoidably

ends in the destruction of both body and soul.

  "Can any pleasure compensate these evils? Can any temptation have

sophistry and delusion strong enough to persuade you to so simple a

bargain? Or can any carnal appetite so overpower your reason, or so

totally lay it asleep, as to prevent your flying with affright and

terror from a crime which carries such punishment always with it?

  "How base and mean must that woman be, how void of that dignity of

mind, and decent pride, without which we are not worthy the name of

human creatures, who can bear to level herself with the lowest animal,

and to sacrifice all that is great and noble in her, all her

heavenly part, to an appetite which she hath in common with the vilest

branch of the creation! For no woman, sure, will plead the passion

of love for an excuse. This would be to own herself the mere tool

and bubble of the man. Love, however barbarously we may corrupt and

pervert its meaning, as it is a laudable, is a rational passion, and

can never be violent but when reciprocal; for though the Scripture

bids us love our enemies, it means not with that fervent love which we

naturally beat towards our friends; much less that we should sacrifice

to them our lives, and what ought to be dearer to us, our innocence.

Now in what light, but that of an enemy, can a reasonable woman regard

the man who solicits her to entail on herself all the misery I have

described to you, and who would purchase to himself a short,

trivial, contemptible pleasure, so greatly at her expense! For, by the

laws of custom, the whole shame, with all its dreadful consequences,

falls intirely upon her. Can love, which always seeks the good of

its object, attempt to betray a woman into a bargain where she is so

greatly to be the loser? If such corrupter, therefore, should have the

impudence to pretend a real affection for her, ought not the woman

to regard him not only as an enemy, but as the worst of all enemies, a

false, designing, treacherous, pretended friend, who intends not

only to debauch her body, but her understanding at the same time?"

  Here Jenny expressing great concern, Allworthy paused a moment,

and then proceeded: "I have talked thus to you, child, not to insult

you for what is past and irrevocable, but to caution and strengthen

you for the future. Nor should I have taken this trouble, but from

some opinion of your good sense, notwithstanding the dreadful slip you

have made; and from some hopes of your hearty repentance, which are

founded on the openness and sincerity of your confession. If these

do not deceive me, I will take care to convey you from this scene of

your shame, where you shall, by being unknown, avoid the punishment

which, as I have said, is allotted to your crime in this world; and

I hope, by repentance, you will avoid the much heavier sentence

denounced against it in the other. Be a good girl the rest of your

days, and want shall be no motive to your going astray; and, believe

me, there is more pleasure, even in this world, in an innocent and

virtuous life, than in one debauched and vicious.

  "As to your child, let no thoughts concerning it molest you; I

will provide for it in a better manner than you can ever hope. And now

nothing remains but that you inform me who was the wicked man that

seduced you; for my anger against him will be much greater than you

have experienced on this occasion."

  Jenny now lifted her eyes from the ground, and with a modest look

and decent voice thus began:-

  "To know you, sir, and not love your goodness, would be an

argument of total want of sense or goodness in any one. In me it would

amount to the highest ingratitude, not to feel, in the most sensible

manner, the great degree of goodness you have been pleased to exert on

this occasion. As to my concern for what is past, I know you will

spare my blushes the repetition. My future conduct will much better

declare my sentiments than any professions I can now make. I beg leave

to assure you, sir, that I take your advice much kinder than your

generous offer with which you concluded it; for, as you are pleased to

say, sir, it is an instance of your opinion of my understanding."-

Here her tears flowing apace, she stopped a few moments, and then

proceeded thus:- "Indeed, sir, your kindness overcomes me; but I will

endeavour to deserve this good opinion: for if I have the

understanding you are so kindly pleased to allow me, such advice

cannot be thrown away upon me. I thank you, sir, heartily, for your

intended kindness to my poor helpless child: he is innocent, and I

hope will live to be grateful for all the favours you shall show him.

But now, sir, I must on my knees entreat you not to persist in asking

me to declare the father of my infant. I promise you faithfully you

shall one day know; but I am under the most solemn ties and

engagements of honour, as well as the most religious vows and

protestations, to conceal his name at this time. And I know you too

well, to think you would desire I should sacrifice either my honour or

my religion."

  Mr. Allworthy, whom the least mention of those sacred words was

sufficient to stagger, hesitated a moment before he replied, and

then told her, she had done wrong to enter into such engagements to

a villain; but since she had, he could not insist on her breaking

them. He said, it was not from a motive of vain curiosity he had

inquired, but in order to punish the fellow; at least, that he might

not ignorantly confer favours on the undeserving.

  As to these points, Jenny satisfied him by the most solemn

assurances, that the man was entirely out of his reach; and was

neither subject to his power, nor in any probability of becoming an

object of his goodness.

  The ingenuity of this behaviour had gained Jenny so much credit with

this worthy man, that he easily believed what she told him; for as she

had disdained to excuse herself by a lie, and had hazarded his further

displeasure in her present situation, rather than she would forfeit

her honour or integrity by betraying another, he had but little

apprehensions that she would be guilty of falsehood towards himself.

  He therefore dismissed her with assurances that he would very soon

remove her out of the reach of that obloquy she had incurred;

concluding with some additional documents, in which he recommended

repentance, saying, "Consider, child, there is One still to

reconcile yourself to, whose favour is of much greater importance to

you than mine."



                                Chapter 8



  A dialogue between Mesdames Bridget and Deborah; containing more

amusement, but less instruction, than the former



  When Mr. Allworthy had retired to his study with Jenny Jones, as

hath been seen, Mrs. Bridget, with the good housekeeper, had betaken

themselves to a post next adjoining to the said study; whence, through

the conveyance of a keyhole, they sucked in at their ears the

instructive lecture delivered by Mr. Allworthy, together with the

answers of Jenny, and indeed every other particular which passed in

the last chapter.

  This hole in her brother's study-door was indeed as well known to

Mrs. Bridget, and had been as frequently applied to by her, as the

famous hole in the wall was by Thisbe of old. This served to many good

purposes. For by such means Mrs. Bridget became often acquainted

with her brother's inclinations, without giving him the trouble of

repeating them to her. It is true, some inconveniences attended this

intercourse, and she had sometimes reason to cry out with Thisbe, in

Shakespear, "O, wicked, wicked wall!" For as Mr. Allworthy was a

justice of peace, certain things occurred in examinations concerning

bastards, and such like, which are apt to give great offence to the

chaste ears of virgins, especially when they approach the age of

forty, as was the case of Miss Bridget. However, she had, on such

occasions, the advantage of concealing her blushes from the eyes of

men; and De non apparentibus, et non existentibus eadem est

ratio*- in English, "When a woman is not seen to blush, she doth not

blush at all."



  *Things which do not appear are to be treated the same as those

which do not exist.- COKE



  Both the good women kept strict silence during the whole scene

between Mr. Allworthy and the girl; but as soon as it was ended, and

that gentleman was out of hearing, Mrs. Deborah could not help

exclaiming against the clemency of her master, and especially

against his suffering her to conceal the father of the child, which

she swore she would have out of her before the sun set.

  At these words Miss Bridget discomposed her features with a smile (a

thing very unusual to her). Not that I would have my reader imagine,

that this was one of those wanton smiles which Homer would have you

conceive came from Venus, when he calls her the laughter-loving

goddess; nor was it one of those smiles which Lady Seraphina shoots

from the stage-box, and which Venus would quit her immortality to be

able to equal. No, this was rather one of those smiles which might

be supposed to have come from the dimpled cheeks of the august

Tisiphone, or from one of the misses, her sisters.

  With such a smile then, and with a voice sweet as the evening breeze

of Boreas in the pleasant month of November, Miss Bridget gently

reproved the curiosity of Mrs. Deborah; a vice with which it seems the

latter was too much tainted, and which the former inveighed against

with great bitterness, adding, "That, among all her faults, she

thanked Heaven her enemies could not accuse her of prying into the

affairs of other people."

  She then proceeded to commend the honour and spirit with which Jenny

had acted. She said, she could not help agreeing with her brother,

that there was some merit in the sincerity of her confession, and in

her integrity to her lover: that she had always thought her a very

good girl, and doubted not but she had been seduced by some rascal,

who had been infinitely more to blame than herself, and very

probably had prevailed with her by a promise of marriage, or some

other treacherous proceeding.

  This behaviour of Miss Bridget greatly surprised Mrs. Deborah; for

this well-bred woman seldom opened her lips, either to her master or

his sister, till she had first sounded their inclinations, with

which her sentiments were always consonant. Here, however, she thought

she might have launched forth with safety; and the sagacious reader

will not perhaps accuse her of want of sufficient forecast in so

doing, but will rather admire with what wonderful celerity she

tacked about, when she found herself steering a wrong course.

  "Nay, madam," said this able woman, and truly great politician, "I

must own I cannot help admiring the girl's spirit, as well as your

ladyship. And, as your ladyship says, if she was deceived by some

wicked man, the poor wretch is to be pitied. And to be sure, as your

ladyship says, the girl hath always appeared like a good, honest,

plain girl, and not vain of her face, forsooth, as some wanton husseys

in the neighbourhood are."

  "You say true, Deborah," said Miss Bridget. "If the girl had been

one of those vain trollops, of which we have too many in the parish, I

should have condemned my brother for his lenity towards her. I saw two

farmers' daughters at church, the other day, with bare necks. I

protest they shocked me. If wenches will hang out lures for fellows,

it is no matter what they suffer. I detest such creatures; and it

would be much better for them that their faces had been seamed with

the smallpox; but I must confess, I never saw any of this wanton

behaviour in poor Jenny: some artful villain, I am convinced, hath

betrayed, nay perhaps forced her; and I pity the poor wretch with

all my heart."

  Mrs. Deborah approved all these sentiments, and the dialogue

concluded with a general and bitter invective against beauty, and with

many compassionate considerations for all honest, plain girls who

are deluded by the wicked arts of deceitful men.



                                Chapter 9



  Containing matters which will surprize the reader



  Jenny returned home well pleased with the reception she had met with

from Mr. Allworthy, whose indulgence to her she industriously made

public; partly perhaps as a sacrifice to her own pride, and partly

from the more prudent motive of reconciling her neighbours to her, and

silencing their clamours.

  But though this latter view, if she indeed had it, may appear

reasonable enough, yet the event did not answer her expectation; for

when she was convened before the justice, and it was universally

apprehended that the House of Correction would have been her fate,

though some of the young women cryed out "It was good enough for her,"

and diverted themselves with the thoughts of her beating hemp in a

silk gown; yet there were many others who began to pity her condition:

but when it was known in what manner Mr. Allworthy had behaved, the

tide turned against her. One said, "I'll assure you, madam hath had

good luck." A second cryed, "See what it is to be a favourite!" A

third, "Ay, this comes of her learning." Every person made some

malicious comment or other on the occasion, and reflected on the

partiality of the justice.

  The behaviour of these people may appear impolitic and ungrateful to

the reader, who considers the power and benevolence of Mr.

Allworthy. But as to his power, he never used it; and as to his

benevolence, he exerted so much, that he had thereby disobliged all

his neighbours; for it is a secret well known to great men, that, by

conferring an obligation, they do not always procure a friend, but are

certain of creating many enemies.

  Jenny was, however, by the care and goodness of Mr. Allworthy,

soon removed out of the reach of reproach; when malice being no longer

able to vent its rage on her, began to seek another object of its

bitterness, and this was no less than Mr. Allworthy, himself; for a

whisper soon went abroad, that he himself was the father of the

foundling child.

  This supposition so well reconciled his conduct to the general

opinion, that it met with universal assent; and the outcry against his

lenity soon began to take another turn, and was changed into an

invective against his cruelty to the poor girl. Very grave and good

women exclaimed against men who begot children, and then disowned

them. Nor were there wanting some, who, after the departure of

Jenny, insinuated that she was spirited away with a design too black

to be mentioned, and who gave frequent hints that a legal inquiry

ought to be made into the whole matter, and that some people should be

forced to produce the girl.

  These calumnies might have probably produced ill consequences, at

the least might gave occasioned some trouble, to a person of a more

doubtful and suspicious character than Mr. Allworthy was blessed with;

but in his case they had no such effect; and, being heartily

despised by him, they served only to afford an innocent amusement to

the good gossips of the neighbourhood.

  But as we cannot possibly divine what complection our reader may

be of, and as it will be some time before he will hear any more of

Jenny, we think proper to give him a very early intimation, that Mr.

Allworthy was, and will hereafter appear to be, absolutely innocent of

any criminal intention whatever. He had indeed committed no other than

an error in politics, by tempering justice with mercy, and by refusing

to gratify the good-natured disposition of the mob,* with an object

for their compassion to work on in the person of poor Jenny, whom,

in order to pity, they desired to have seen sacrificed to ruin and

infamy, by a shameful correction in Bridewell.



  *Whenever this word occurs in our writings, it intends persons

without virtue or sense, in all stations; and many of the highest rank

are often meant by it.



  So far from complying with this their inclination, by which all

hopes of reformation would have been abolished, and even the gate shut

against her if her own inclinations should ever hereafter lead her

to chuse the road of virtue, Mr. Allworthy rather chose to encourage

the girl to return thither by the only possible means; for too true

I am afraid it is, that many women have become abandoned, and have

sunk to the last degree of vice, by being unable to retrieve the first

slip. This will be, I am afraid, always the case while they remain

among their former acquaintance; it was therefore wisely done by Mr.

Allworthy, to remove Jenny to a place where she might enjoy the

pleasure of reputation, after having tasted the ill consequences of

losing it.

  To this place therefore, wherever it was, we will wish her a good

journey, and for the present take leave of her, and of the little

foundling her child, having matters of much higher importance to

communicate to the reader.



                                Chapter 10



  The hospitality of Allworthy; with a short sketch of the

characters of two brothers, a doctor and a captain, who were

entertained by that gentleman



  Neither Mr. Allworthy's house, nor his heart, were shut against

any part of mankind, but they were both more particularly open to

men of merit. To say the truth, this was the only house in the kingdom

where you was sure to gain a dinner by deserving it.

  Above all others, men of genius and learning shared the principal

place in his favour; and in these he had much discernment: for

though he had missed the advantage of a learned education, yet,

being blest with vast natural abilities, he had so well profited by

a vigorous though late application to letters, and by much

conversation with men of eminence in this way, that he was himself a

very competent judge in most kinds of literature.

  It is no wonder that in an age when this kind of merit is so

little in fashion, and so slenderly provided for, persons possessed of

it should very eagerly flock to a place where they were sure of

being received with great complaisance; indeed, where they might enjoy

almost the same advantages of a liberal fortune as if they were

entitled to it in their own right; for Mr. Allworthy was not one of

those generous persons who are ready most bountifully to bestow

meat, drink, and lodging on men of wit and learning, for which they

expect no other return but entertainment, instruction, flattery, and

subserviency; in a word, that such persons should be enrolled in the

number of domestics, without wearing their master's cloathes, or

receiving wages.

  On the contrary, every person in this house was perfect master of

his own time: and as he might at his pleasure satisfy all his

appetites within the restrictions only of law, virtue, and religion;

so he might, if his health required, or his inclination prompted him

to temperance, or even to abstinence, absent himself from any meals,

or retire from them, whenever he was so disposed, without even a

sollicitation to the contrary: for, indeed, such sollicitations from

superiors always savour very strongly of commands. But all here were

free from such impertinence, not only those whose company is in all

other places esteemed a favour from their equality of fortune, but

even those whose indigent circumstances make such an eleemosynary

abode convenient to them, and who are therefore less welcome to a

great man's table because they stand in need of it.

  Among others of this kind was Dr. Blifil, a gentleman who had the

misfortune of losing the advantage of great talents by the obstinacy

of a father, who would breed him to a profession he disliked. In

obedience to this obstinacy the doctor had in his youth been obliged

to study physic, or rather to say he studied it; for in reality

books of this kind were almost the only ones with which he was

unacquainted; and unfortunately for him, the doctor was master of

almost every other science but that by which he was to get his

bread; the consequence of which was, that the doctor at the age of

forty had no bread to eat.

  Such a person as this was certain to find a welcome at Mr.

Allworthy's table, to whom misfortunes were ever a recommendation,

when they were derived from the folly or villany of others, and not of

the unfortunate person himself. Besides this negative merit, the

doctor had one positive recommendation;- this was a great appearance

of religion. Whether his religion was real, or consisted only in

appearance, I shall not presume to say, as I am not possessed of any

touchstone which can distinguish the true from the false.

  If this part of his character pleased Mr. Allworthy, it delighted

Miss Bridget. She engaged him in many religious controversies; on

which occasions she constantly expressed great satisfaction in the

doctor's knowledge, and not much less in the compliments which he

frequently bestowed on her own. To say the truth, she had read much

English divinity, and had puzzled more than one of the neighbouring

curates. Indeed, her conversation was so pure, her looks so sage,

and her whole deportment so grave and solemn, that she seemed to

deserve the name of saint equally with her namesake, or with any other

female in the Roman kalendar.

  As sympathies of all kinds are apt to beget love, so experience

teaches us that none have a more direct tendency this way than those

of a religious kind between persons of different sexes. The doctor

found himself so agreeable to Miss Bridget, that he now began to

lament an unfortunate accident which had happened to him about ten

years before; namely, his marriage with another woman, who was not

only still alive, but, what was worse, known to be so by Mr.

Allworthy. This was a fatal bar to that happiness which he otherwise

saw sufficient probability of obtaining with this young lady; for as

to criminal indulgences, he certainly never thought of them. This

was owing either to his religion, as is most probable, or to the

purity of his passion, which was fixed on those things which matrimony

only, and not criminal correspondence, could put him in possession of,

or could give him any title to.

  He had not long ruminated on these matters, before it occurred to

his memory that he had a brother who was under no such unhappy

incapacity. This brother he made no doubt would succeed; for he

discerned, as he thought, an inclination to marriage in the lady;

and the reader perhaps, when he hears the brother's qualifications,

will not blame the confidence which he entertained of his success.

  This gentleman was about thirty-five years of age. He was of a

middle size, and what is called well-built. He had a scar on his

forehead, which did not so much injure his beauty as it denoted his

valour (for he was a half-pay officer). He had good teeth, and

something affable, when he pleased, in his smile; though naturally his

countenance, as well as his air and voice, had much of roughness in

it: yet he could at any time deposit this, and appear all gentleness

and good humour. He was not ungenteel, nor entirely devoid of wit, and

in his youth had abounded in sprightliness, which, though he had

lately put on a more serious character, he could, when he pleased,

resume.

  He had, as well as the doctor, an academic education; for his father

had, with the same paternal authority we have mentioned before,

decreed him for holy orders; but as the old gentleman died before he

was ordained, he chose the church military, and preferred the king's

commission to the bishop's.

  He had purchased the post of lieutenant of dragoons, and

afterwards came to be a captain; but having quarrelled with his

colonel, was by his interest obliged to sell; from which time he had

entirely rusticated himself, had betaken himself to studying the

Scriptures, and was not a little suspected of an inclination to

methodism.

  It seemed, therefore, not unlikely that such a person should succeed

with a lady of so saint-like a disposition, and whose inclinations

were no otherwise engaged than to the marriage state in general; but

why the doctor, who certainly had no great friendship for his brother,

should for his sake think of making so ill a return to the hospitality

of Allworthy, is a matter not so easy to be accounted for.

  Is it that some natures delight in evil, as others are thought to

delight in virtue? Or is there a pleasure in being accessory to a

theft when we cannot commit it ourselves? Or lastly (which

experience seems to make probable), have we a satisfaction in

aggrandizing our families, even though we have not the least love or

respect for them?

  Whether any of these motives operated on the doctor, we will not

determine; but so the fact was. He sent for his brother, and easily

found means to introduce him at Allworthy's as a person who intended

only a short visit to himself.

  The captain had not been in the house a week before the doctor had

reason to felicitate himself on his discernment. The captain was

indeed as great a master of the art of love as Ovid was formerly. He

had besides received proper hints from his brother, which he failed

not to improve to the best advantage.



                                Chapter 11



  Containing many rules, and some examples, concerning falling in

love: descriptions of beauty, and other more prudential inducements to

matrimony



  It hath been observed, by wise men or women, I forget which, that

all persons are doomed to be in love once in their lives. No

particular season is, as I remember, assigned for this; but the age at

which Miss Bridget was arrived, seems to me as proper a period as

any to be fixed on for this purpose: it often, indeed, happens much

earlier; but when it doth not, I have observed it seldom or never

fails about this time. Moreover, we may remark that at this season

love is of a more serious and steady nature than what sometimes

shows itself in the younger parts of life. The love of girls is

uncertain, capricious, and so foolish that we cannot always discover

what the young lady would be at; nay, it may almost be doubted whether

she always knows this herself.

  Now we are never at a loss to discern this in women about forty; for

as such grave, serious, and experienced ladies well know their own

meaning, so it is always very easy for a man of the least sagacity

to discover it with the utmost certainty.

  Miss Bridget is an example of all these observations. She had not

been many times in the captain's company before she was seized with

this passion. Nor did she go pining and moping about the house, like a

puny, foolish girl, ignorant of her distemper: she felt, she knew, and

she enjoyed, the pleasing sensation, of which, as she was certain it

was not only innocent but laudable, she was neither afraid nor

ashamed.

  And to say the truth, there is, in all points, great difference

between the reasonable passion which women at this age conceive

towards men, and the idle and childish liking of a girl to a boy,

which is often fixed on the outside only, and on things of little

value and no duration; as on cherry-cheeks, small, lily-white hands,

sloe-black eyes, flowing locks, downy chins, dapper shapes; nay,

sometimes on charms more worthless than these, and less the party's

own; such are the outward ornaments of the person, for which men are

beholden to the taylor, the laceman, the periwig-maker, the hatter,

and the milliner, and not to nature. Such a passion girls may well

be ashamed, as they generally are, to own either to themselves or

others.

  The love of Miss Bridget was of another kind. The captain owed

nothing to any of these fop-makers in his dress, nor was his person

much more beholden to nature. Both his dress and person were such

as, had they appeared in an assembly or a drawing-room, would have

been the contempt and ridicule of all the fine ladies there. The

former of these was indeed neat, but plain, coarse, ill-fancied, and

out of fashion. As for the latter, we have expressly described it

above. So far was the skin on his cheeks from being cherry-coloured,

that you could not discern what the natural colour of his cheeks

was, they being totally overgrown by a black beard, which ascended

to his eyes. His shape and limbs were indeed exactly proportioned, but

so large that they denoted the strength rather of a ploughman than any

other. His shoulders were broad beyond all size, and the calves of his

legs larger than those of a common chairman. In short, his whole

person wanted all that elegance and beauty which is the very reverse

of clumsy strength, and which so agreeably sets off most of our fine

gentlemen; being partly owing to the high blood of their ancestors,

viz., blood made of rich sauces and generous wines, and partly to an

early town education.

  Though Miss Bridget was a woman of the greatest delicacy of taste,

yet such were the charms of the captain's conversation, that she

totally overlooked the defects of his person. She imagined, and

perhaps very wisely, that she should enjoy more agreeable minutes with

the captain than with a much prettier fellow; and forewent the

consideration of pleasing her eyes, in order to procure herself much

more solid satisfaction.

  The captain no sooner perceived the passion of Miss Bridget, in

which discovery he was very quick-sighted, than he faithfully returned

it. The lady, no more than her lover, was remarkable for beauty. I

would attempt to draw her picture, but that is done already by a

more able master, Mr. Hogarth himself, to whom she sat many years ago,

and hath been lately exhibited by that gentleman in his print of a

winter's morning, of which she was no improper emblem, and may be seen

walking (for walk she doth in the print) to Covent Garden church, with

a starved foot-boy behind carrying her prayer-book.

  The captain likewise very wisely preferred the more solid enjoyments

he expected with this lady, to the fleeting charms of person. He was

one of those wise men who regard beauty in the other sex as a very

worthless and superficial qualification; or, to speak more truly,

who rather chuse to possess every convenience of life with an ugly

woman, than a handsome one without any of those conveniences. And

having a very good appetite, and but little nicety, he fancied he

should play his part very well at the matrimonial banquet, without the

sauce of beauty.

  To deal plainly with the reader, the captain, ever since his

arrival, at least from the moment his brother had proposed the match

to him, long before he had discovered any flattering symptoms in

Miss Bridget, had been greatly enamoured; that is to say, of Mr.

Allworthy's house and gardens, and of his lands, tenements, and

hereditaments; of all which the captain was passionately fond, that he

would most probably have contracted marriage with had he been

obliged to have taken the witch of Endor into the bargain.

  As Mr. Allworthy, therefore, had declared to the doctor that he

never intended to take a second wife, as his sister was his nearest

relation, and as the doctor had fished out that his intentions were to

make any child of hers his heir, which indeed the law, without his

interposition, would have done for him; the doctor and his brother

thought it an act of benevolence to give being to a human creature,

who would be so plentifully provided with the most essential means

of happiness. The whole thoughts, therefore, of both the brothers were

how to engage the affections of this amiable lady.

  But fortune, who is a tender parent, and often doth more for her

favourite offspring than either they deserve or wish, had been so

industrious for the captain, that whilst he was laying schemes to

execute his purpose, the lady conceived the same desires with himself,

and was on her side contriving how to give the captain proper

encouragement, without appearing too forward; for she was a strict

observer of all rules of decorum. In this, however, she easily

succeeded; for as the captain was always on the look-out, no glance,

gesture, or word escaped him.

  The satisfaction which the captain received from the kind

behaviour of Miss Bridget, was not a little abated by his

apprehensions of Mr. Allworthy; for, notwithstanding his disinterested

professions, the captain imagined he would, when he came to act,

follow the example of the rest of the world, and refuse his consent to

a match so disadvantageous, in point of interest, to his sister.

From what oracle he received this opinion, I shall leave the reader to

determine: but however he came by it, it strangely perplexed him how

to regulate his conduct so as at once to convey his affection to the

lady, and to conceal it from her brother. He at length resolved to

take all private opportunities of making his addresses; but in the

presence of Mr. Allworthy to be as reserved and as much upon his guard

as was possible; and this conduct was highly approved by the brother.

  He soon found means to make his addresses, in express terms, to

his mistress, from whom he received an answer in the proper form,

viz.: the answer which was first made some thousands of years ago, and

which hath been handed down by tradition from mother to daughter

ever since. If I was to translate this into Latin, I should render

it by these two words, Nolo Episcopari: a phrase likewise of

immemorial use on another occasion.

  The captain, however he came by his knowledge, perfectly well

understood the lady, and very soon after repeated his application with

more warmth and earnestness than before, and was again, according to

due form, rejected; but as he had increased in the eagerness of his

desires, so the lady, with the same propriety, decreased in the

violence of her refusal.

  Not to tire the reader, by leading him through every scene of this

courtship (which, though in the opinion of a certain great author,

it is the pleasantest scene of life to the actor, is, perhaps, as dull

and tiresome as any whatever to the audience), the captain made his

advances in form, the citadel was defended in form, and at length,

in proper form, surrendered at discretion.

  During this whole time, which filled the space of near a month,

the captain preserved great distance of behaviour to his lady in the

presence of the brother; and the more he succeeded with her in

private, the more reserved was he in public. And as for the lady,

she had no sooner secured her lover than she behaved to him before

company with the highest degree of indifference; so that Mr. Allworthy

must have had the insight of the devil (or perhaps some of his worse

qualities) to have entertained the least suspicion of what was going

forward.



                                Chapter 12



  Containing what the reader may, perhaps, expect to find in it



  In all bargains, whether to fight or to marry, or concerning any

other such business, little previous ceremony is required to bring the

matter to an issue when both parties are really in earnest. This was

the case at present, and in less than a month the captain and his lady

were man and wife.

  The great concern now was to break the matter to Mr. Allworthy;

and this was undertaken by the doctor.

  One day, then, as Allworthy was walking in his garden, the doctor

came to him, and, with great gravity of aspect, and all the concern

which he could possibly affect in his countenance, said, "I am come,

sir, to impart an affair to you of the utmost consequence; but how

shall I mention to you what it almost distracts me to think of!" He

then launched forth into the most bitter invectives both against men

and women; accusing the former of having no attachment but to their

interest, and the latter of being so addicted to vicious

inclinations that they could never be safely trusted with one of the

other sex. "Could I," said he, "sir, have suspected that a lady of

such prudence, such judgment, such learning, should indulge so

indiscreet a passion! or could I have imagined that my brother- why

do I call him so? he is no longer a brother of mine-"

  "Indeed but he is," said Allworthy, "and a brother of mine too."

  "Bless me, sir!" said the doctor, "do you know the shocking affair?"

  "Look'ee, Mr. Blifil," answered the good man, "it hath been my

constant maxim in life to make the best of all matters which happen.

My sister, though many years younger than I, is at least old enough to

be at the age of discretion. Had he imposed on a child, I should

have been more averse to have forgiven him; but a woman upwards of

thirty must certainly be supposed to know what will make her most

happy. She hath married a gentleman, though perhaps not quite her

equal in fortune; and if he hath any perfections in her eye which

can make up that deficiency, I see no reason why I should object to

her choice of her own happiness; which I, no more than herself,

imagine to consist only in immense wealth. I might, perhaps, from

the many declarations I have made of complying with almost any

proposal, have expected to have been consulted on this occasion; but

these matters are of a very delicate nature, and the scruples of

modesty, perhaps, are not to be overcome. As to your brother, I have

really no anger against him at all. He hath no obligations to me,

nor do I think he was under any necessity of asking my consent,

since the woman is, as I have said, sui juris,* and of a proper age to

be entirely answerable only to herself for her conduct."



  *Of her own right.



  The doctor accused Mr. Allworthy of too great lenity, repeated his

accusations against his brother, and declared that he should never

more be brought either to see, or to own him for his relation. He then

launched forth into a panegyric on Allworthy's goodness; into the

highest encomiums on his friendship; and concluded by saying, he

should never forgive his brother for having put the place which he

bore in that friendship to a hazard.

  Allworthy thus answered: "Had I conceived any displeasure against

your brother, I should never have carried that resentment to the

innocent: but I assure you I have no such displeasure. Your brother

appears to me to be a man of sense and honour. I do not disapprove the

taste of my sister; nor will I doubt but that she is equally the

object of his inclinations. I have always thought love the only

foundation of happiness in a married state, as it can only produce

that high and tender friendship which should always be the cement of

this union; and, in my opinion, all those marriages which are

contracted from other motives are greatly criminal; they are a

profanation of a most holy ceremony, and generally end in disquiet and

misery: for surely we may call it a profanation to convert this most

sacred institution into a wicked sacrifice to lust or avarice: and

what better can be said of those matches to which men are induced

merely by the consideration of a beautiful person, or a great fortune?

  "To deny that beauty is an agreeable object to the eye, and even

worthy some admiration, would be false and foolish. Beautiful is an

epithet often used in Scripture, and always mentioned with honour.

It was my own fortune to marry a woman whom the world thought

handsome, and I can truly say I liked her the better on that

account. But to make this the sole consideration of marriage, to

lust after it so violently as to overlook all imperfections for its

sake, or to require it so absolutely as to reject and disdain

religion, virtue, and sense, which are qualities in their nature of

much higher perfection, only because an elegance of person is wanting:

this is surely inconsistent, either with a wise man or a good

Christian. And it is, perhaps, being too charitable to conclude that

such persons mean anything more by their marriage than to please their

carnal appetites; for the satisfaction of which, we are taught, it was

not ordained.

  "In the next place, with respect to fortune. Worldly prudence

perhaps, exacts some consideration on this head; nor will I absolutely

and altogether condemn it. As the world is constituted, the demands of

a married state, and the care of posterity, require some little regard

to what we call circumstances. Yet this provision is greatly

increased, beyond what is really necessary, by folly and vanity, which

create abundantly more wants than nature. Equipage for the wife, and

large fortunes for the children, are by custom enrolled in the list of

necessaries; and to procure these, everything truly solid and sweet,

and virtuous and religious, are neglected and overlooked.

  "And this in many degrees; the last and greatest of which seems

scarce distinguishable from madness;- I mean where persons of immense

fortunes contract themselves to those who are, and must be,

disagreeable to them- to fools and knaves- in order to increase an

estate already larger even than the demands of their pleasures. Surely

such persons, if they will not be thought mad, must own, either that

they are incapable of tasting the sweets of the tenderest

friendship, or that they sacrifice the greatest happiness of which

they are capable to the vain, uncertain, and senseless laws of

vulgar opinion, which owe as well their force as their foundation to

folly."

  Here Allworthy concluded his sermon, to which Blifil had listened

with the profoundest attention, though it cost him some pains to

prevent now and then a small discomposure of his muscles. He now

praised every period of what he had heard with the warmth of a young

divine, who hath the honour to dine with a bishop the same day in

which his lordship hath mounted the pulpit.



                                Chapter 13



  Which concludes the first book; with an instance of ingratitude,

which, we hope, will appear unnatural



  The reader, from what hath been said, may imagine that the

reconciliation (if indeed it could be so called) was only matter of

form; we shall therefore pass it over, and hasten to what must

surely be thought matter of substance.

  The doctor had acquainted his brother with what had past between Mr.

Allworthy and him; and added with a smile, "I promise you I paid you

off; nay, I absolutely desired the good gentleman not to forgive

you: for you know after he had made a declaration in your favour, I

might with safety venture on such a request with a person of his

temper; and I was willing, as well for your sake as for my own, to

prevent the least possibility of a suspicion."

  Captain Blifil took not the least notice of this, at that time;

but he afterwards made a very notable use of it.

  One of the maxims which the devil, in a late visit upon earth,

left to his disciples, is, when once you are got up, to kick the stool

from under you. In plain English, when you have made your fortune by

the good offices of a friend, you are advised to discard him as soon

as you can.

  Whether the captain acted by this maxim, I will not positively

determine: so far we may confidently say, that his actions may be

fairly derived from this diabolical principle; and indeed it is

difficult to assign any other motive to them: for no sooner was he

possessed of Miss Bridget, and reconciled to Allworthy, than he

began to show a coldness to his brother which increased daily; till at

length it grew into rudeness, and became very visible to every one.

 The doctor remonstrated to him privately concerning this behaviour,

but could obtain no other satisfaction than the following plain

declaration: "If you dislike anything in my brother's house, sir,

you know you are at liberty to quit it." This strange, cruel, and

almost unaccountable ingratitude in the captain, absolutely broke

the poor doctor's heart; for ingratitude never so thoroughly pierces

the human breast as when it proceeds from those in whose behalf we

have been guilty of transgressions. Reflections on great and good

actions, however they are received or returned by those in whose

favour they are performed, always administer some comfort to us; but

what consolation shall we receive under so biting a calamity as the

ungrateful behaviour of our friend, when our wounded conscience at the

same time flies in our face, and upbraids us with having spotted it in

the service of one so worthless!

  Mr. Allworthy himself spoke to the captain in his brother's

behalf, and desired to know what offence the doctor had committed;

when the hard-hearted villain had the baseness to say that he should

never forgive him for the injury which he had endeavoured to do him in

his favour; which, he said, he had pumped out of him, and was such a

cruelty that it ought not to be forgiven.

  Allworthy spoke in very high terms upon this declaration, which,

he said, became not a human creature. He expressed, indeed, so much

resentment against an unforgiving temper, that the captain at last

pretended to be convinced by his arguments, and outwardly professed to

be reconciled.

  As for the bride, she was now in her honeymoon, and so

passionately fond of her new husband that he never appeared to her

to be in the wrong; and his displeasure against any person was a

sufficient reason for her dislike to the same.

  The captain, at Mr. Allworthy's instance, was outwardly, as we

have said, reconciled to his brother; yet the same rancour remained in

his heart; and he found so many opportunities of giving him private

hints of this, that the house at last grew insupportable to the poor

doctor; and he chose rather to submit to any inconveniences which he

might encounter in the world, than longer to bear these cruel and

ungrateful insults from a brother for whom he had done so much.

  He once intended to acquaint Allworthy with the whole; but he

could not bring himself to submit to the confession, by which he

must take to his share so great a portion of guilt. Besides, by how

much the worse man he represented his brother to be, so much the

greater would his own offence appear to Allworthy, and so much the

greater, he had reason to imagine, would be his resentment.

  He feigned, therefore, some excuse of business for his departure,

and promised to return soon again; and took leave of his brother

with so well-dissembled content, that, as the captain played his

part to the same perfection, Allworthy remained well satisfied with

the truth of the reconciliation.

  The doctor went directly to London, where he died soon after of a

broken heart; a distemper which kills many more than is generally

imagined, and would have a fair title to a place in the bill of

mortality, did it not differ in one instance from all other

diseases- viz., that no physician can cure it.

  Now, upon the most diligent enquiry into the former lives of these

two brothers, I find, besides the cursed and hellish maxim of policy

above mentioned, another reason for the captain's conduct: the

captain, besides what we have before said of him, was a man of great

pride and fierceness, and had always treated his brother, who was of a

different complexion, and greatly deficient in both these qualities,

with the utmost air of superiority. The doctor, however, had much

the larger share of learning, and was by many reputed to have the

better understanding. This the captain knew, and could not bear; for

though envy is at best a very malignant passion, yet is its bitterness

greatly heightened by mixing with contempt towards the same object;

and very much afraid I am, that whenever an obligation is joined to

these two, indignation and not gratitude will be the product of all

three.

