



                                    BOOK XIV

                              CONTAINING TWO DAYS




                                Chapter 1



  An essay to prove that an author will write the better for having

some knowledge of the subject on which he writes



  As several gentlemen in these times, by the wonderful force of

genius only, without the least assistance of learning, perhaps without

being well able to read, have made a considerable figure in the

republic of letters; the modern critics, I am told, have lately

begun to assert, that all kind of learning is entirely useless to a

writer; and, indeed, no other than a kind of fetters on the natural

sprightliness and activity of the imagination, which is thus weighed

down, and prevented from soaring to those high flights which otherwise

it would be able to reach.

  This doctrine, I am afraid, is at present carried much too far:

for why should writing differ so much from all other arts? The

nimbleness of a dancing-master is not at all prejudiced by being

taught to move; nor doth any mechanic, I believe, exercise his tools

the worse by having learnt to use them. For my own part, I cannot

conceive that Homer or Virgil would have writ with more fire, if,

instead of being masters of all the learning their times, they had

been as ignorant as most of the authors of the present age. Nor do I

believe that all the imagination, fire, and judgment of Pitt, could

have produced those orations that have made the senate of England,

in these our times, a rival in eloquence to Greece and Rome, if he had

not been so well read in the writings of Demosthenes and Cicero, as to

have transferred their whole spirit into his speeches, and, with their

spirit, their knowledge too.

  I would not here be understood to insist on the same fund of

learning in any of my brethren, as Cicero persuades us is necessary to

the composition of an orator. On the contrary, very little reading is,

I conceive, necessary to the poet, less to the critic, and the least

of all to the politician. For the first, perhaps, Byshe's Art of

Poetry, and a few of our modern poets, may suffice; for the second,

a moderate heap of plays; and, for the last, an indifferent collection

of political journals.

  To say the truth, I require no more than that a man should have some

little knowledge of the subject on which he treats, according to the

old maxim of law, Quam quisque norit artem in ed se exerceat. With

this alone a writer may sometimes do tolerably well; and, indeed,

without this, all the other learning in the world will stand him in

little stead.

  For instance, let us suppose that Homer and Virgil, Aristotle and

Cicero, Thucydides and Livy, could have met all together, and have

clubbed their several talents to have composed a treatise on the art

of dancing: I believe it will be readily agreed they could not have

equalled the excellent treatise which Mr. Essex hath given us on

that subject, entitled, The Rudiments of Genteel Education. And,

indeed, should the excellent Mr. Broughton be prevailed on to set fist

to paper, and to complete the above-said rudiments, by delivering down

the true principles of athletics, I question whether the world will

have any cause to lament, that none of the great writers, either

antient or modern, have ever treated about that noble and useful art.

  To avoid a multiplicity of examples in so plain a case, and to

come at once to my point, I am apt to conceive, that one reason why

many English writers have totally failed in describing the manners

of upper life, may possibly be, that in reality they know nothing of

it.

  This is a knowledge unhappily not in the power of many authors to

arrive at. Books will give us a very imperfect idea of it; nor will

the stage a much better: the fine gentleman formed upon reading the

former will almost always turn out a pedant, and he who forms

himself upon the latter, a coxcomb.

  Nor are the characters drawn from these models better supported.

Vanbrugh and Congreve copied nature; but they who copy them draw as

unlike the present age as Hogarth would do if he was to paint a

rout, or a drum, in the dresses of Titian and of Vandyke. In short,

imitation here will not do the business. The picture must be after

Nature herself. A true knowledge of the world is gained only by

conversation, and the manners of every rank must be seen in order to

be known.

  Now it happens that this higher order of mortals is not to be

seen, like all the rest of the human species, for nothing, in the

streets, shops, and coffee-house; nor are they shown, like the upper

rank of animals, for so much a-piece. In short, this is a sight to

which no persons are admitted without one or other of these

qualifications, viz., either birth or fortune, or, what is

equivalent to both, the honourable profession of a gamester. And, very

unluckily x , for the world, persons so qualified very seldom care

to take upon themselves the bad trade of writing; which is generally

entered upon by the lower and poorer sort, as it is a trade which many

think requires no kind of stock to set up with.

  Hence those strange monsters in lace and embroidery, in silks and

brocades, with vast wigs and hoops; which, under the name of lords and

ladies, strut the stage, to the great delight of attorneys and their

clerks in the pit, and of the citizens and their apprentices in the

galleries; and which are no more to be found in real life, than the

centaur, the chimera, or any other creature of mere fiction. But to

let my reader into a secret, this knowledge of upper life, though very

necessary for preventing mistakes, is no very great resource to a

writer whose province is comedy, or that kind of novels, which, like

this I am writing, is of the comic class.

  What Mr. Pope says of women is very applicable to most in this

station, who are, indeed, so entirely made up of form and affectation,

that they have no character at all, at least, none which appears. I

will venture to say the highest life is much the dullest, and

affords very little humour or entertainment. The various callings in

lower spheres produce the great variety of humorous characters;

whereas here, except among the few who are engaged in the pursuit of

ambition, and the fewer still who have a relish for pleasure, all is

vanity and servile imitation. Dressing and cards, eating and drinking,

bowing and courtesying, make up the business of their lives.

  Some there are, however, of this rank, upon whom passion exercises

its tryanny, and hurries them far beyond the bounds which decorum

prescribes; of these, the ladies are as much distinguished by their

noble intrepidity, and a certain superior contempt of reputation, from

the frail ones of meaner degree, as a virtuous woman of quality is

by the elegance and delicacy of her sentiments from the honest wife of

a yeoman or shopkeeper. Lady Bellaston was of this intrepid character;

but let not my country readers conclude from her, that this is the

general conduct of women of fashion, or that we mean to represent them

as such. They might as well suppose that every clergyman was

represented by Thwackum, or every soldier by ensign Northerton.

  There is not, indeed, a greater error than that which universally

prevails among the vulgar, who, borrowing their opinion from some

ignorant satirists, have affixed the character of lewdness to these

times. On the contrary, I am convinced there never was less of love

intrigue carried on among persons of condition, than now. Our

present women have been taught by their mothers to fix their

thoughts only on ambition and vanity, and to despise the pleasures

of love as unworthy their regard; and being afterwards, by the care of

such mothers, married without having husbands, they seem pretty well

confirmed in the justness of those sentiments; whence they content

themselves, for the dull remainder of life, with the pursuit of more

innocent, but I am afraid more childish amusements, the bare mention

of which would ill suit with the dignity of this history. In my humble

opinion, the true characteristic of the present beau monde is rather

folly than vice, and the only epithet which it deserves is that of

frivolous.





                                Chapter 2



  Containing letters and other matters which attend amours



  Jones had not been long at home, before he received the following

letter:-



  I was never more surprized than when I found you was gone. When

you left the room, I little imagined you intended to have left the

house without seeing me again. Your behaviour is all of a piece, and

convinces me how much I ought to despise a heart which can doat upon

an idiot; though I know not whether I should not admire her cunning

more than her simplicity: wonderful both! For though she understood

not a word of what passed between us, yet she had the skill, the

assurance, the-- what shall I call it? to deny to my face that she

knows you, or ever saw you before.-- Was this a scheme laid between

you, and have you been base enough to betray me?-- O how I despise

her, you, and all the world, but chiefly myself! for-- I dare not

write what I should afterwards run mad to read; but remember, I can

detest as violently as I have loved.



  Jones had but little time given him to reflect on this letter,

before a second was brought him from the same hand; and this,

likewise, we shall set down in the precise words.



  When you consider the hurry of spirits in which I must have writ,

you cannot be surprized at any expressions in my former note.- Yet,

perhaps, on reflection, they were rather too warm. At least I would,

if possible, think all owing to the odious playhouse, and to the

impertinence of a fool, which detained me beyond my appointment.-- How

easy is it to think in k well of those we love!-- Perhaps you desire I

should think so. I have resolved to see you to-night; so come to me

immediately.

  P.S.- I have ordered to be at home to none but yourself.

  P.S.- Mr. Jones will imagine I shall assist him in his defence; for

I believe he cannot desire to impose on me more than I desire to

impose on myself.

  P.S.- Come immediately.



  To the men of intrigue I refer the determination, whether the

angry or the tender letter gave the greatest uneasiness to Jones.

Certain it is, he had no violent inclination to pay any more visits

that evening, unless to one single person. However, he thought his

honour engaged, and had not this been motive sufficient, he would

not have ventured to blow the temper of Lady Bellaston into that flame

of which he had reason to think it susceptible, and of which he feared

the consequence might be a discovery to Sophia, which he dreaded.

After some discontented walks, therefore, about the room, he was

preparing to depart, when the lady kindly prevented him, not by

another letter, but by her own presence. She entered the room very

disordered in her dress, and very discomposed in her looks, and

threw herself into a chair, where, having recovered her breath, she

said- "You see, sir, when women have gone one length too far, they

will stop at none. If any person would have sworn this to me a week

ago, I would not have believed it of myself." "I hope, madam," said

Jones, "my charming Lady Bellaston will be as difficult to believe

anything against one who is so sensible of the many obligations she

hath conferred upon him." "Indeed!" says she, "sensible of

obligations! Did I expect to hear such cold language from Mr.

Jones?" "Pardon me, my dear angel," said he, "if, after the letters

I have received, the terrors of your anger, though I know not how I

have deserved it"-- "And have I then," says she, with a smile, "so

angry a countenance?- Have I really brought a chiding face with me?"-

"If there be honour in man," said he, "I have done nothing to merit

your anger.- You remember the appointment you sent me; I went in

pursuance"- "I beseech you," cried she, "do not run through the

odious recital.- Answer me but one question, and I shall be easy.

Have you not betrayed my honour to her?"- Jones fell upon his knees,

and began to utter the most violent protestations, when Partridge came

dancing and capering into the room, like one drunk with joy, crying

out, "She's found! she's found!- Here, sir, here, she's here- Mrs.

Honour is upon the stairs." "Stop her a moment," cries Jones- "Here,

madam, step behind the bed, I have no other room nor closet, nor place

on earth to hide you in; sure never so damned an accident."- "D--n'd

indeed!" said the lady, as she went to her place of concealment; and

presently afterwards in came Mrs. Honour. "Hey-day!" says she, "Mr.

Jones, what's the matter?- That impudent rascal your servant would

scarce let me come upstairs. I hope he hath not the same reason to

keep me from you as he had at Upton.- I suppose you hardly expected

to see me; but you have certainly bewitched my lady. Poor dear young

lady! To be sure, I loves her as tenderly as if she was my own sister.

Lord have mercy upon you, if you don't make her a good husband! and to

be sure, if you do not, nothing can be bad enough for you." Jones

begged her only to whisper, for that there was a lady dying in the

next room. "A lady!" cries she; ay, I suppose one of your ladies.- O

Mr. Jones, there are too many of them in the world; I believe we are

got into the house of one, for my Lady Bellaston, I darst to say, is

no better than she should be."- "Hush! hush!" cries Jones, every word

is overheard in the next room."- "I don't care a farthing," cries

Honour, "I speaks no scandal of any one; but to be sure the servants

make no scruple of saying as how her ladyship meets men at another

place- where the house goes under the name of a poor gentlewoman; but

her ladyship pays the rent, and many's the good thing besides, they

say, she hath of her."- Here Jones, after expressing the utmost

uneasiness, offered to stop her mouth:- "Hey-day! why sure, Mr.

Jones, you will let me speak; I speaks no scandal, for I only says

what I heard from others- and thinks I to myself, much good may it do

the gentlewoman with her riches, if she comes by it in such a wicked

manner. To be sure it is better to be poor and honest." "The

servants are villains," cries Jones, "and abuse their lady

unjustly."- "Ay, to be sure, servants are always villains, and so my

lady says, and won't hear a word of it."- "No, I am convinced," says

Jones, "my Sophia is above listening to such base scandal."- "Nay, I

believe it is no scandal, neither," cries Honour, "for why should

she meet men at another house?- It can never be for any good: for if

she had a lawful design of being courted, as to be sure any lady may

lawfully give her company to men upon that account: why, where can

be the sense?"- "I protest," cries Jones, "I can't hear all this of a

lady of such honour, and a relation of Sophia; besides, you will

distract the poor lady in the next room.- Let me entreat you to walk

with me down stairs."- "Nay, sir, if you won't let me speak, I have

done.- Here, sir, is a letter from my young lady- what would some men

give to have this? But, Mr. Jones, I think you are not over and

above generous, and yet I have heard some servants say-- but I am sure

you will do me the justice to own I never saw the colour of your

money." Here Jones hastily took the letter, and presently after

slipped five pieces into her hand. He then returned a thousand

thanks to his dear Sophia in a whisper, and begged her to leave him to

read her letter: she presently departed, not without expressing much

grateful sense of his generosity.

  Lady Bellaston now came from behind the curtain. How shall I

describe her rage? Her tongue was at first incapable of utterance; but

streams of fire darted from her eyes, and well indeed they might,

for her heart was all in a flame. And now, as soon as her voice

found way, instead of expressing any indignation against Honour or her

own servants, she began to attack poor Jones. "You see," said she,

"what I have sacrificed to you; my reputation, my honour- gone for

ever! And what return have I found? Neglected, slighted for a

country girl, for an idiot."- "What neglect, madam, or what slight,"

cries Jones, "have I been guilty of?"- "Mr. Jones," said she, "it is

in vain to dissemble; if you will make me easy, you must entirely give

her up; and as a proof of your intention, show me the letter."- "What

letter, madam?" said Jones. "Nay, surely," said she, "you cannot

have the confidence to deny your having received a letter by the hands

of that trollop."-"And can your ladyship," cries he, "ask of me what I

must part with my honour before I grant? Have I acted in such a manner

by your ladyship? Could I be guilty of betraying this poor innocent

girl to you, what security could you have that I should not act the

same part by yourself? A moment's reflection will, I am sure, convince

you, that a man with whom the secrets of a lady are not safe must be

the most contemptible of wretches."-"Very well," said she- "I need

not insist on your becoming this contemptible wretch in your own

opinion; for the inside of the letter could inform me of nothing

more than I know already. I see the footing you are upon."- Here

ensued a long conversation, which the reader, who is not too curious,

will thank me for not inserting at length. It shall suffice,

therefore, to inform him, that Lady Bellaston grew more and more

pacified, and at length believed, or affected to believe, his

protestations, that his meeting with Sophia that evening was merely

accidental, and every other matter which the reader already knows, and

which as Jones set before her in the strongest light, it is plain that

she had in reality no reason to be angry with him.

  She was not, however, in her heart perfectly satisfied with his

refusal to show her the letter; so deaf are we to the clearest reason,

when it argues against our prevailing passions. She was, indeed,

well convinced that Sophia possessed the first place in Jones's

affections; and yet, haughty and amorous as this lady was, she

submitted at last to bear the second place; or, to express it more

properly in a legal phrase, was contented with the possession of

that of which another woman had the reversion.

  It was at length agreed that Jones should for the future visit at

the house: for that Sophia, her maid, and all the servants, would

place these visits to the account of Sophia; and that she herself

would be considered as the person imposed upon.

  This scheme was contrived by the lady, and highly relished by Jones,

who was indeed glad to have a prospect of seeing his Sophia at any

rate; and the lady herself was not a little pleased with the

imposition on Sophia, which Jones, she thought, could not possibly

discover to her for his own sake.

  The next day was appointed for the first visit, and then, after

proper ceremonials, the Lady Bellaston returned home.





                                Chapter 3



  Containing various matters



  Jones was no sooner alone, than he eagerly broke open his letter,

and read as follows:-



  Sir, it is impossible to express what I have suffered since you left

this house; and as I have reason to think you intend coming here

again, I have sent Honour, though so late at night, as she tells me

she knows your lodgings, to prevent you. I charge you, by all the

regard you have for me, not to think of visiting here; for it will

certainly be discovered; nay, I almost doubt, from some things which

have dropt from her ladyship, that she is not already without some

suspicion. Something favourable, perhaps, may happen; we must wait

with patience; but I once more entreat you, if you have any concern

for my ease, do not think of returning hither.



  This letter administered the same kind of consolation to poor Jones,

which job formerly received from his friends. Besides disappointing

all the hopes which he promised to himself from seeing Sophia, he

was reduced to an unhappy dilemma, with regard to Lady Bellaston;

for there are some certain engagements, which, as he well knew, do

very difficultly admit of any excuse for the failure; and to go, after

the strict prohibition from Sophia, he was not to be forced by any

human power. At length, after much deliberation, which during that

night supplied the place of sleep, he determined to feign himself

sick: for this suggested itself as the only means of failing the

appointed visit, without incensing Lady Bellaston, which he had more

than one reason of desiring to avoid.

  The first thing, however, which he did in the morning, was, to write

an answer to Sophia, which he inclosed in one to Honour. He then

despatched another to Lady Bellaston, containing the above-mentioned

excuse; and to this he soon received the following answer:-



  I am vexed that I cannot see you here this afternoon, but more

concerned for the occasion; take great care of yourself, and have

the best advice, and I hope there will be no danger.- I am so

tormented all this morning with that I have scarce a moment's time to

write to you. Adieu.

  P.S.- I will endeavour to call on you this evening, at nine.- Be

sure to be alone.



  Mr. Jones now received a visit from Mrs. Miller, who, after some

formal introduction, began the following speech:- "I am very sorry,

sir, to wait upon you on such an occasion; but I hope you will

consider the ill consequence which it must be to the reputation of

my poor girls, if my house should once be talked of as a house of

ill-fame. I hope you won't think me, therefore, guilty of

impertinence, if I beg you not to bring any more ladies in at that

time of night. The clock had struck two before one of them went

away."- "I do assure you, madam," said Jones, "the lady who was here

last night, and who staid the latest (for the other only brought me a

letter), is a woman of very great fashion, and my near relation."- "I

don't know what fashion she is of," answered Mrs. Miller; "but I am

sure no woman of virtue, unless a very near relation indeed, would

visit a young gentleman at ten at night, and stay four hours in his

room with him alone; besides, sir, the behaviour of her chairmen shows

what she was; for they did nothing but make jests all the evening in

the entry, and asked Mr. Partridge, in the hearing of my own maid, if

madam intended to stay with his master all night; with a great deal of

stuff not proper to be repeated. I have really a great respect for

you, Mr. Jones, upon your own account; nay, I have a very high

obligation to you for your generosity to my cousin. Indeed, I did not

know how very good you had been till lately. Little did I imagine to

what dreadful courses the poor man's distress had driven him. Little

did I think, when you gave me the ten guineas, that you had given them

to a highwayman! O heavens! what goodness have you shown! How have you

preserved this family!- The character which Mr. Allworthy hath

formerly given me of you was, I find, strictly true.- And indeed, if I

had no obligation to you, my obligations to him are such, that, on his

account, I should show you the utmost respect in my power.- Nay,

believe me, dear Mr. Jones, if my daughters' and my own reputation

were out of the case, I should, for your own sake, be sorry that so

pretty a young gentleman should converse with these women; but if

you are resolved to do it, I must beg you to take another lodging; for

I do not myself like to have such things carried on under my roof; but

more especially upon the account of my girls, who have little,

heaven knows, besides their characters, to recommend them." Jones

started and changed colour at the name of Allworthy. "Indeed, Mrs.

Miller," answered he, a little warmly, "I do not take this at all

kind. I will never bring any slander on your house; but I must

insist on seeing what company I please in my own room; and if that

gives you any offence, I shall, as soon as I am able, look for another

lodging."- "I am sorry we must part then, sir," said she; "but I am

convinced Mr. Allworthy himself would never come within my doors, if

he had the least suspicion of my keeping an ill house."- "Very well,

madam," said Jones.- "I hope, sir," said she, "you are not angry; for

I would not for the world offend any of Mr. Allworthy's family. I have

not slept a wink all night about this matter."- "I am sorry I have

disturbed your rest, madam," said Jones, "but I beg you will send

Partridge up to me immediately"; which she promised to do, and then

with a very low courtesy retired.

  As soon as Partridge arrived, Jones fell upon him in the most

outrageous manner. "How often," said he, "am I to suffer for your

folly, or rather for my own in keeping you? is that tongue of yours

resolved upon my destruction?" "What have I done, sir?" answered

affrighted Partridge. "Who was it gave you authority to mention the

story of the robbery, or that the man you saw here was the person?"

"I, sir?" cries Partridge. "Now don't be guilty of a falsehood in

denying it," said Jones. "If I did mention such a matter," answers

Partridge, "I am sure I thought no harm; for I should not have

opened my lips, if it had not been to his own friends and relations,

who, I imagined, would have let it go no farther." "But I have a

much heavier charge against you," cries Jones, "than this. How durst

you, after all the precautions I gave you, mention the name of Mr.

Allworthy in this house?" Partridge denied that he ever had, with many

oaths. "How else," said Jones, "should Mrs. Miller be acquainted

that there was any connexion between him and me? And it is but this

moment she told me she respected me on his account." "O Lord, sir,"

said Partridge, "I desire only to be heard out; and to be sure,

never was anything so unfortunate: hear me but out, and you will own

how wrong. fully you have accused me. When Mrs. Honour came downstairs

last night, she met me in the entry, and asked me when my master had

heard from Mr. Allworthy; and to be sure Mrs. Miller heard the very

words; and the moment Madam Honour was gone, she called me into the

parlour to her. 'Mr. Partridge,' says she, 'what Mr. Allworthy is it

that the gentlewoman mentioned? is it the great Mr. Allworthy of

Somersetshire?' 'Upon my word, madam,' says I, 'I know nothing of

the matter.' 'Sure,' says she, 'your master is not the Mr. Jones I

have heard Mr. Allworthy talk of?' 'Upon my word, madam,' says I, 'I

know nothing of the matter.' 'Then,' says she, turning to her daughter

Nancy, says she, 'as sure as tenpence this is the very young

gentleman, and he agrees exactly with the squire's description.' The

Lord above knows who it was told her: for I am the arrantest villain

that ever walked upon two legs if ever it came out of my mouth. I

promise you, sir, I can keep a secret when I am desired. Nay, sir,

so far was I from telling her anything about Mr. Allworthy, that I

told her the very direct contrary; for, though I did not contradict it

at that moment, yet, as second thoughts, they say, are best, so when I

came to consider that somebody must have informed her, thinks I to

myself, I will put an end to the story; and so I went back again

into the parlour some time afterwards, and says I, upon my word,

says I, whoever, says I, told you that this gentleman was Mr. Jones;

that is, says I, that this Mr. Jones was that Mr. Jones, told you a

confounded lie: and I beg, says I, you will never mention any such

matter, says I; for my master, says I, will think I must have told you

so; and I defy anybody in the house ever to say I mentioned any such

word. To be certain, sir, it is a wonderful thing, and I have been

thinking with myself ever since, how it was she came to know it; not

but I saw an old woman here t'other day a begging at the door, who

looked as like her we saw in Warwickshire, that caused all that

mischief to us. To be sure it is never good to pass by an old woman

without giving her something, especially if she looks at you; for

all the world shall never persuade me but that they have a great power

to do mischief, and to be sure I shall never see an old woman again,

but I shall think to myself, Infandum, regina, jubes renovare

dolorem."

  The simplicity of Partridge set Jones a laughing, and put a final

end to his anger, which had indeed seldom any long duration in his

mind; and, instead of commenting on his defence, he told him he

intended presently to leave those lodgings, and ordered him to go

and endeavour to get him others.




                                Chapter 4



  Which we hope will be very attentively perused by young people of

both sexes



  Partridge had no sooner left Mr. Jones, than Mr. Nightingale, with

whom he had now contracted a great intimacy, came to him, and, after a

short salutation, said, "So, Tom, I hear you had company very late

last night. Upon my soul you are a happy fellow, who have not been

in town above a fortnight, and can keep chairs waiting at your door

till two in the morning." He then ran on with much commonplace

raillery of the same kind, till Jones at last interrupted him, saying,

"I suppose you have received all this information from Mrs. Miller,

who hath been up here a little while ago to give me warning. The

good woman is afraid, it seems, of the reputation of her daughters."

"Oh! she is wonderfully nice," says Nightingale, "upon that account;

if you remember, she would not let Nancy go with us to the

masquerade." "Nay, upon my honour, I think she's in the right of

it," says Jones: "however, I have taken her at her word, and have sent

Partridge to look for another lodging." "If you will," says

Nightingale, "we may, I believe, be again together; for, to tell you a

secret, which I desire you won't mention in the family, I intend to

quit the house to-day." "What, hath Mrs. Miller given you warning too,

my friend?" cries Jones. "No," answered the other; "but the rooms

are not convenient enough. Besides, I am grown weary of this part of

the town. I want to be nearer the places of diversion; so I am going

to Pall-mall." "And do you intend to make a secret of your going

away?" said Jones. "I promise you," answered Nightingale, "I don't

intend to bilk my lodgings; but I have a private reason for not taking

a formal leave." "Not so private," answered Jones; "I promise you, I

have seen it ever since the second day of my coming to the house. Here

will be some wet eyes on your departure. Poor Nancy, I pity her,

faith! Indeed, Jack, you have played the fool with that girl. You have

given her a longing, which I am afraid nothing will ever cure her of."

Nightingale answered, "What the devil would you have me do? would

you have me marry her to cure her?" "No," answered Jones, "I would not

have had you make love to her, as you have often done in my

presence. I have been astonished at the blindness of her mother in

never seeing it." "Pugh, see it!" cries Nightingale. "What the devil

should she see?" "Why, see," said Jones, "that you have made her

daughter distractedly in love with you. The poor girl cannot conceal

it a moment; her eyes are never off from you, and she always colours

every time you come into the room. Indeed, I pity her heartily; for

she seems to be one of the best-natured and honestest of human

creatures." "And so," answered Nightingale, "according to your

doctrine, one must not amuse oneself by any common gallantries with

women, for fear they should fall in love with us." "Indeed, Jack,"

said Jones, "you wilfully misunderstand me; I do not fancy women are

so apt to fall in love; but you have gone far beyond common

gallantries." "What, do you suppose," says Nightingale, "that we

have been a-bed together?" "No, upon my honour, answered Jones, very

seriously, "I do not suppose so ill of you; nay, I will go farther,

I do not imagine you have laid a regular premeditated scheme for the

destruction of the quiet of a poor little creature, or have even

foreseen the consequence: for I am sure thou are a very good-natured

fellow, and such a one can never be guilty of a cruelty of that

kind; but at the same time you have pleased your own vanity, without

considering that this poor girl was made a sacrifice to it; and

while you have had no design but of amusing an idle hour, you have

actually given her reason to flatter herself that you had the most

serious designs in her favour. Prithee, Jack, answer me honestly; to

what have tended all those elegant and luscious descriptions of

happiness arising from violent and mutual fondness? all those warm

professions of tenderness, and generous disinterested love? Did you

imagine she would not apply them? or, speak ingenuously, did not you

intend she should?" "Upon my soul, Tom," cries Nightingale, "I did not

think this was in thee. Thou wilt make an admirable parson. So I

suppose you would not go to bed to Nancy now, if she would let you?"

"No," cries Jones, "may I be d--n'd if I would." "Tom, Tom," answered

Nightingale, "last night; remember last night--



     When every eye was closed, and the pale moon,

     And silent stars, shone conscious of the theft."



  "Lookee, Mr. Nightingale," said Jones, "I am no canting hypocrite,

nor do I pretend to the gift of chastity, more than my neighbours. I

have been guilty with women, I own it; but am not conscious that I

have ever injured any.- Nor would I, to procure pleasure to myself,

be knowingly the cause of misery to any human being."

  "Well, well," said Nightingale, "I believe you, and I am convinced

you acquit me of any such thing."

  "I do, from my heart," answered Jones, "of having debauched the

girl, but not from having gained her affections."

  "If I have," said Nightingale, "I am sorry for it; but time and

absence will soon wear off such impressions. It is a receipt I must

take myself; for, to confess the truth to you- I never liked any girl

half so much in my whole life; but I must let you into the whole

secret, Tom. My father hath provided a match for me with a woman I

never saw; and she is now coming to town, in order for me to make my

addresses to her."

  At these words Jones burst into a loud fit of laughter; when

Nightingale cried- "Nay, prithee, don't turn me into ridicule. The

devil take me if I am not half mad about this matter! my poor Nancy!

Oh! Jones, Jones, I wish I had a fortune in my own possession."

  "I heartily wish you had," cries Jones; "for, if this be the case, I

sincerely pity you both; but surely you don't intend to go away

without taking your leave of her?"

  "I would not," answered Nightingale, "undergo the pain of taking

leave, for ten thousand pounds; besides, I am convinced, instead of

answering any good purpose, it would only serve to inflame my poor

Nancy the more. I beg, therefore, you would not mention a word of it

to-day, and in the evening, or to-morrow morning, I intend to depart."

  Jones promised he would not; and said, upon reflection, he

thought, as he had determined and was obliged to leave her, he took

the most prudent method. He then told Nightingale he should be very

glad to lodge in the same house with him; and it was accordingly

agreed between them, that Nightingale should procure him either the

ground floor, or the two pair of stairs; for the young gentleman

himself was to occupy that which was between them.

  This Nightingale, of whom, we shall be presently obliged to say a

little more, was in the ordinary transactions of life a man of

strict honour, and, what is more rare among young gentlemen of the

town, one of strict honesty too; yet in affairs of love he was

somewhat loose in his morals; not that he was even here as void of

principle as gentlemen sometimes are, and oftener affect to be; but it

is certain he had been guilty of some indefensible treachery to women,

and had, in a certain mystery, called making love, practised many

deceits, which, if he had used in trade, he would have been counted

the greatest villain upon earth.

  But as the world, I know not well for what reason, agree to see this

treachery in a better light, he was so far from being ashamed of his

iniquities of this kind, that he gloried in them, and would often

boast of his skill in gaining of women, and his triumphs over their

hearts, for which he had before this time received some rebukes from

Jones, who always exprest great bitterness against any misbehaviour to

the fair part of the species, who, if considered, he said, as they

ought to be, in the light of the dearest friends, were to be

cultivated, honoured, and caressed with the utmost love and

tenderness; but, if regarded as enemies, were a conquest of which a

man ought rather to be ashamed than to value himself upon it.





                                Chapter 5



  A short account of the history of Mrs. Miller



  Jones this day eat a pretty good dinner for a sick man, that is to

say, the larger half of a shoulder of mutton. In the afternoon, he

received an invitation from Mrs. Miller to drink tea; for that good

woman, having learnt, either by means of Partridge, or by some other

means natural or supernatural, that he had a connexion with Mr.

Allworthy, could not endure the thoughts of parting with him in an

angry manner.

  Jones accepted the invitation; and no sooner was the teakettle

removed, and the girls sent out of the room, than the widow, without

much preface, began as follows: "Well, there are very surprizing

things happen in this world; but certainly it is a wonderful

business that I should have a relation of Mr. Allworthy in my house

and never know anything of the matter. Alas! sir, you little imagine

what a friend that best of gentlemen hath been to me and mine. Yes,

sir, I am not ashamed to own it; it is owing to his goodness that I

did not long since perish for want, and leave my poor little wretches,

two destitute, helpless, friendless orphans, to the care, or rather to

the cruelty, of the world.

  "You must know, sir, though I am now reduced to get my living by

letting lodgings, I was born and bred a gentlewoman. My father was

an officer of the army, and died in a considerable rank: but he

lived up to his pay; and, as that expired with him, his family, at his

death, became beggars. We were three sisters. One of us had the good

luck to die soon after of the small-pox; a lady was so kind as to take

the second out of charity, as she said, to wait upon her. The mother

of this lady had been a servant to my grandmother; and, having

inherited a vast fortune from her father, which he had got by

pawnbroking, was married to a gentleman of great estate and fashion.

She used my sister so barbarously, often upbraiding her with her birth

and poverty, calling her in derision a gentlewoman, that I believe she

at length broke the heart of the poor girl. In short, she likewise

died within a twelvemonth after my father. Fortune thought proper to

provide better for me, and within a month from his decease I was

married to a clergyman, who had been my lover a long time before,

and who had been very ill used by my father on that account: for

though my poor father could not give any of us a shilling, yet he bred

us up as delicately, considered us, and would have had us consider

ourselves, as highly as if we had been the richest heiresses. But my

dear husband forgot all this usage, and the moment we were become

fatherless, he immediately renewed his addresses to me so warmly, that

I, who always liked, and now more than ever esteemed him, soon

complied. Five years did I live in a state of perfect happiness with

that best of men, till at last- Oh! cruel! cruel fortune, that ever

separated us, that deprived me of the kindest of husbands and my

poor girls of the tenderest parent.- O my poor girls! you never know

the blessing which ye lost.-I am ashamed, Mr. Jones, of this

womanish weakness; but I shall never mention him without tears." "I

ought rather, madam," said Jones, "to be ashamed that I do not

accompany you." "Well, sir," continued she, "I was now left a second

time in a much worse condition than before; besides the terrible

affliction I was to encounter, I had now two children to provide

for; and was, if possible, more pennyless than ever; when that

great, that good, that glorious man, Mr. Allworthy, who had some

little acquaintance with my husband, accidentally heard of my

distress, and immediately writ this letter to me. Here, sir, here it

is; I put it into my pocket to shew it you. This is the letter, sir; I

must and will read it to you.



  "MADAM,

  "I heartily condole with you on your late grievous loss, which

your own good sense, and the excellent lessons you must have learnt

from the worthiest of men, will better enable you to bear than any

advice which I am capable of giving. Nor have I any doubt that you,

whom I have heard to be the tenderest of mothers, will suffer any

immoderate indulgence of grief to prevent you from discharging your

duty to those poor infants, who now alone stand in need of your

tenderness.

  "However, as you must be supposed at present to be incapable of much

worldly consideration, you will pardon my having ordered a person to

wait on you, and to pay you twenty guineas, which I beg you will

accept till I have the pleasure of seeing you, and believe me to be,

madam, &c.



  "This letter, sir, I received within a fortnight after the

irreparable loss I have mentioned; and within a fortnight

afterwards, Mr. Allworthy- the blessed Mr. Allworthy- came to pay me a

visit, when he placed me in the house where you now see me, gave me

a large sum of money to furnish it, and settled an annuity of L50

a-year upon me, which I have constantly received ever since. judge,

then, Mr. Jones, in what regard I must hold a benefactor, to whom I

owe the preservation of my life, and of those dear children, for whose

sake alone my life is valuable. Do not, therefore, think me

impertinent, Mr. Jones (since I must esteem one for whom I know Mr.

Allworthy hath so much value), if I beg you not to converse with these

wicked women. You are a young gentleman, and do not know half their

artful wiles. Do not be angry with me, sir, for what I said upon

account of my house; you must be sensible it would be the ruin of my

poor dear girls. Besides, sir, you cannot but be acquainted, that

Mr. Allworthy himself would never forgive my conniving at such

matters, and particularly with you."

  "Upon my word, madam," said Jones, "you need make no farther

apology; nor do I in the least take anything ill you have said; but

give me leave, as no one can have more value than myself for Mr.

Allworthy, to deliver you from one mistake, which, perhaps, would

not be altogether for his honour; I do assure you, I am no relation of

his."

  "Alas! sir," answered she, "I know you are not, I know very well who

you are; for Mr. Allworthy hath told me all; but I do assure you,

had you been twenty times his son, he could not have expressed more

regard for you than he hath often expressed in my presence. You need

not be ashamed, sir, of what you are; I promise you no good person

will esteem you the less on that account. No, Mr. Jones, the words

'dishonourable birth' are nonsense, as my dear, dear husband used to

say, unless the word 'dishonourable' be applied to the parents; for

the children can derive no real dishonour from an act of which they

are intirely innocent."

  Here Jones heaved a deep sigh, and then said, "Since I perceive,

madam, you really do know me, and Mr. Allworthy hath thought proper to

mention my name to you; and since you have been so explicit with me as

to your own affairs, I will acquaint you with some more

circumstances concerning myself." And these Mrs. Miller having

expressed great desire and curiosity to hear, he began and related

to her his whole history, without once mentioning the name of Sophia.

  There a kind of sympathy in honest minds, by means of which they

give an easy credit to each other. Mrs. Miller believed all which

Jones told her to be true, and exprest much pity and concern for

him. She was beginning to comment on the story, but Jones

interrupted her; for, as the hour of assignation now drew nigh, he

began to stipulate for a second interview with the lady that

evening, which he promised should be the last at her house;

swearing, at the same time, that she was one of great distinction, and

that nothing but what was intirely innocent was to pass between

them; and I do firmly believe he intended to keep his word.

  Mrs. Miller was at length prevailed on, and Jones departed to his

chamber, where he sat alone till twelve o'clock, but no Lady Bellaston

appeared.

  As we have said that this lady had a great affection for Jones,

and as it must have appeared that she really had so, the reader may

perhaps wonder at the first failure of her appointment, as she

apprehended him to be confined by sickness, a season when friendship

seems most to require such visits. This behaviour, therefore, in the

lady, may, by some, be condemned as unnatural; but that is not our

fault; for our business is only to record truth.





                                Chapter 6



  Containing a scene which we doubt not will affect all our readers



  Mr. Jones closed not his eyes during all the former part of the

night; not owing to any uneasiness which he conceived at being

disappointed by Lady Bellaston; nor was Sophia herself, though most of

his waking hours were justly to be charged to her account, the present

cause of dispelling his slumbers. In fact, poor Jones was one of the

best-natured fellows alive, and had all that weakness which is

called compassion, and which distinguishes this imperfect character

from that noble firmness of mind, which rolls a man, as it were,

within himself, and like a polished bowl, enables him to run through

the world without being once stopped by the calamities which happen to

others. He could not help, therefore, compassionating the situation of

poor Nancy, whose love for Mr. Nightingale seemed to him so

apparent, that he was astonished at the blindness of her mother, who

had more than once, the preceding evening, remarked to him the great

change in the temper of her daughter, "who from being," she said, "one

of the liveliest, merriest girls in the world, was, on a sudden,

become all gloom and melancholy."

  Sleep, however, at length got the better of all resistance; and

now as if he had already been a deity, as the antients imagined, and

an offended one too, he seemed to enjoy his dear-bought conquest.- To

speak simply, and without any metaphor, Mr. Jones slept till eleven

the next morning, and would, perhaps, have continued in the same quiet

situation much longer, had not a violent uproar awakened him.

  Partridge was now summoned, who, being asked what was the matter,

answered, "That there was a dreadful hurricane below-stairs; that Miss

Nancy was in fits; and that the other sister, and the mother, were

both crying and lamenting over her." Jones expressed much concern at

this news; which Partridge endeavoured to relieve, by saying, with a

smile, "He fancied the young lady was in no danger of death; for

that Susan" (which was the name of the maid) "had given him to

understand, it was nothing more than a common affair. In short,"

said he, "Miss Nancy hath had a mind to be as wise as her mother;

that's all; she was a little hungry, it seems, and so sat down to

dinner before grace was said; and so there is a child coming for the

Foundling Hospital."-- "Prithee, leave thy stupid jesting," cries

Jones. "Is the misery of these poor wretches a subject of mirth? Go

immediately to Mrs. Miller, and tell her I beg leave- Stay, you will

make some blunder; I will go myself; for she desired me to breakfast

with her." He then rose and dressed himself as fast as he could; and

while he was dressing, Partridge, notwithstanding many severe rebukes,

could not avoid throwing forth certain pieces of brutality, commonly

called jests, on this occasion. Jones was no sooner dressed than he

walked downstairs, and knocking at the door, was presently admitted by

the maid, into the outward parlour, which was as empty of company as

it was of any apparatus for eating. Mrs. Miller was in the inner

room with her daughter, whence the maid presently brought a message to

Mr. Jones, "That her mistress hoped he would excuse the

disappointment, but an accident had happened, which made it impossible

for her to have the pleasure of his company at breakfast that day; and

begged his pardon for not sending him up notice sooner." Jones

desired, "She would give herself no trouble about anything so trifling

as his disappointment; that he was heartily sorry for the occasion;

and that if he could be of any service to her, she might command him."

  He had scarce spoke these words, when Mrs. Miller, who heard them

all, suddenly threw open the door, and coming out to him, in a flood

of tears, said, "O Mr. Jones! you are certainly one of the best

young men alive. I give you a thousand thanks for your kind offer of

your service; but, alas! sir, it is out of your power to preserve my

poor girl.-O my child! my child! she is undone, she is ruined

forever!" "I hope, madam," said Jones, "no villain"-- "O Mr. Jones!"

said she, "that villain who yesterday left my lodgings, hath

betrayed my poor girl; hath destroyed her.- I know you are a man of

honour. You have a good-a noble heart, Mr. Jones. The actions to which

I have been myself a witness, could proceed from no other. I will tell

you all: nay, indeed, it is impossible, after what hath happened, to

keep it a secret. That Nightingale, that barbarous villain, hath

undone my daughter. She is- she is is- oh! Mr. Jones, my girl is with

child by him; and in that condition he hath deserted her. Here!

here, sir, is his cruel letter: read it, Mr. Jones, and tell me if

such another monster lives."

  The letter was as follows:



  DEAR NANCY,

  As I found it impossible to mention to you what, I am afraid, will

be no less shocking to you, than it is to me, I have taken this method

to inform you, that my father insists upon my immediately paying my

addresses to a young lady of fortune, whom he hath provided for my-I

need not write the detested word. Your own good understanding will

make you sensible, how intirely I am obliged to an obedience, by which

I shall be forever excluded from your dear arms. The fondness of

your mother may encourage you to trust her with the unhappy

consequence of our love, which may be easily kept a secret from the

world, and for which I will take care to provide, as I will for you. I

wish you may feel less on this account than I nave suffered; but

summon all your fortitude to your assistance, and forgive and forget

the man, whom nothing but the prospect of certain ruin could have

forced to write this letter. I bid you forget me, I mean only as a

lover; but the best of friends you shall ever find in your faithful,

though unhappy,

                                                  J. N.



  When Jones had read this letter, they both stood silent during a

minute, looking at each other; at last he began thus: "I cannot

express, madam, how much I am shocked at what I have read; yet let

me beg you, in one particular, to take the writer's advice. Consider

the reputation of your daughter."-- "It is gone, it is lost, Mr.

Jones," cryed she, "as well as her innocence. She received the letter

in a room full of company, and immediately swooning away upon opening

it, the contents were known to every one present. But the loss of her

reputation, bad as it is, is not the worst; I shall lose my child; she

hath attempted twice to destroy herself already; and though she hath

been hitherto prevented, vows she will not outlive it; nor could I

myself outlive any accident of that nature.- What then will become of

my little Betsy, a helpless infant orphan? and the poor little

wretch will, I believe, break her heart at the miseries with which she

sees her sister and myself distracted, while she is ignorant of the

cause. O 'tis the most sensible, and best-natured little thing! The

barbarous, cruel-- hath destroyed us all. O my poor children! Is this

the reward of all my cares? Is this the fruit of all my prospects?

Have I so chearfully undergone all the labours and duties of a mother?

Have I been so tender of their infancy, so careful of their education?

Have I been toiling so many years, denying myself even the

conveniences of life, to provide some little sustenance for them, to

lose one or both in such a manner?" "Indeed, madam," said Jones,

with tears in his eyes, "I pity you from my soul."- "O! Mr. Jones,"

answered she, "even you, though I know the goodness of your heart, can

have no idea of what I feel. The best, the kindest, the most dutiful

of children! O my poor Nancy, the darling of my soul! the delight of

my eyes! the pride of my heart! too much, indeed, my pride; for to

those foolish, ambitious hopes, arising from her beauty, I owe her

ruin. Alas! I saw with pleasure the liking which this young man had

for her. I thought it an honourable affection; and flattered my

foolish vanity with the thoughts of seeing her married to one so

much her superior. And a thousand times in my presence, nay, often

in yours, he hath endeavoured to soothe and encourage these hopes by

the most generous expressions of disinterested love, which he hath

always directed to my poor girl, and which I, as well as she, believed

to be real. Could I have believed that these were only snares laid

to betray the innocence of my child, and for the ruin of us all?"- At

these words little Betsy came running into the room, crying, "Dear

mamma, for heaven's sake come to my sister; for she is in another fit,

and my cousin can't hold her." Mrs. Miller immediately obeyed the

summons; but first ordered Betsy to stay with Mr. Jones, and begged

him to entertain her a few minutes, saying, in the most pathetic

voice, "Good heaven! let me preserve one of my children at least."

  Jones, in compliance with this request, did all he could to

comfort the little girl, though he was, in reality, himself very

highly affected with Mrs. Miller's story. He told her "Her sister

would be soon very well again; that by taking on in that manner she

would not only make her sister worse, but make her mother ill too."

"Indeed, sir," says she, "I would not do anything to hurt them for the

world. I would burst my heart rather than they should see me

cry.- But my poor sister can't see me cry.- I am afraid she will never

be able to see me cry any more. Indeed, I can't part with her;

indeed I can't.- And then poor mamma too, what will become of

her?- She says she will die too, and leave me: but I am resolved I

won't be left behind." "And are you not afraid to die, my little

Betsy?" said Jones. "Yes," answered she, "I was always afraid to

die; because I must have left my mamma, and my sister; but I am not

afraid of going anywhere with those I love."

  Jones was so pleased with this answer' that he eagerly kissed the

child; and soon after Mrs. Miller returned, saying, "She thanked

heaven, Nancy was now come to herself. And now, Betsy," says she, "you

may go in, for your sister is better, and longs to see you." She

then turned to Jones, and began to renew her apologies for having

disappointed him of his breakfast.

  "I hope, madam," said Jones, "I shall have a more exquisite repast

than any you could have provided for me. This, I assure you, will be

the case, if I can do any service to this little family of love. But

whatever success may attend my endeavours, I am resolved to attempt

it. I am very much deceived in Mr. Nightingale, if, notwithstanding

what hath happened, he hath not much goodness of heart at the

bottom, as well as a very violent affection for your daughter. If this

be the case, I think the picture which I shall lay before him will

affect him. Endeavour, madam, to comfort yourself, and Miss Nancy,

as well as you can. I will go instantly in quest of Mr. Nightingale;

and I hope to bring you good news."

  Mrs. Miller fell upon her knees and invoked all the blessings of

heaven upon Mr. Jones; to which she afterwards added the most

passionate expressions of gratitude. He then departed to find Mr.

Nightingale, and the good woman returned to comfort her daughter,

who was somewhat cheared at what her mother told her; and both

joined in resounding the praises of Mr. Jones.





                                Chapter 7



  The interview between Mr. Jones and Mr. Nightingale



  The good or evil we confer on others, very often, I believe, recoils

on ourselves. For as men of a benign disposition enjoy their own

acts of beneficence equally with those to whom they are done, so there

are scarce any natures so entirely diabolical, as to be capable of

doing injuries, without paying themselves some pangs for the ruin

which they bring on their fellow creatures.

  Mr. Nightingale, at least, was not such a person. On the contrary,

Jones found him in his new lodgings, sitting melancholy by the fire,

and silently lamenting the unhappy situation in which he had placed

poor Nancy. He no sooner saw his friend appear, than he arose

hastily to meet him; and after much congratulation said, "Nothing

could be more opportune than this kind visit; for I was never more

in the spleen in my life."

  "I am sorry," answered Jones, "that I bring news very unlikely to

relieve you: nay, what I am convinced must, of all other, shock you

the most. However, it is necessary you should know it. Without further

preface, then, I come to you, Mr. Nightingale, from a worthy family,

which you have involved in misery and ruin." Mr. Nightingale changed

colour at these words; but Jones, without regarding it, proceeded,

in the liveliest manner, to paint the tragical story with which the

reader was acquainted in the last chapter.

  Nightingale never once interrupted the narration, though he

discovered violent emotions at many parts of it. But when it was

concluded, after fetching a deep sigh, he said, "What you tell me,

my friend, affects me in the tenderest manner. Sure there never was so

cursed an accident as the poor girl's betraying my letter. Her

reputation might otherwise have been safe, and the affair might have

remained a profound secret; and then the girl might have gone off

never the worse; for many such things happen in this town: and if

the husband should suspect a little, when it is too late, it will be

his wiser conduct to conceal his suspicion both from his wife and

the world."

  "Indeed, my friend," answered Jones, "this could not have been the

case with your poor Nancy. You have so intirely gained her affections,

that it is the loss of you, and not of her reputation, which

afflicts her, and will end in the destruction of her and her

family." "Nay, for that matter, I promise you," cries Nightingale,

"she hath my affections so absolutely, that my wife, whoever she is to

be, will have very little share in them." "And is it possible,

then," said Jones, "you can think of deserting her?" "Why, what can

I do?" answered the other. "Ask Miss Nancy," replied Jones warmly. "In

the condition to which you have reduced her, I sincerely think she

ought to determine what reparation you shall make her. Her interest

alone, and not yours, ought to be your sole consideration. But if

you ask me what you shall do, what can you do less," cries Jones,

"than fulfil the expectations of her family, and her own? Nay, I

sincerely tell you, they were mine too, ever since I first saw you

together. You will pardon me if I presume on the friendship you have

favoured me with, moved as I am with compassion for those poor

creatures. But your own heart will best suggest to you, whether you

have never intended, by your conduct, to persuade the mother, as

well as the daughter, into an opinion, that you designed honourably:

and if so, though there may have been no direct promise of marriage in

the case, I will leave to your own good understanding, how far you are

bound to proceed."

  "Nay, I must not only confess what you have hinted," said

Nightingale; "but I am afraid even that very promise you mention I

have given." "And can you, after owning that," said Jones, "hesitate a

moment?" "Consider, my friend," answered the other; "I know you are

a man of honour, and would advise no one to act contrary to its rules;

if there were no other objection, can I, after this publication of her

disgrace, think of such an alliance with honour?" "Undoubtedly,"

replied Jones, "and the very best and truest honour, which is

goodness, requires it of you. As you mention a scruple of this kind,

you will give me leave to examine it. Can you with honour be guilty of

having under false pretences deceived a young woman and her family,

and of having by these means treacherously robbed her of her

innocence? Can you, with honour, be the knowing, the wilful

occasion, nay, the artful contriver of the ruin of a human being?

Can you, with honour, destroy the fame, the peace, nay, probably, both

the life and soul too, of this creature? Can honour bear the

thought, that this creature is a tender, helpless, defenceless,

young woman? A young woman, who loves, who doats on you, who dies

for you; who hath placed the utmost confidence in your promises; and

to that confidence hath sacrificed everything which is dear to her?

Can honour support such contemplations as these a moment?"

  "Common sense, indeed," said Nightingale, "warrants all you say; but

yet you well know the opinion of the world is so contrary to it, that,

was I to marry a whore, though my own, I should be ashamed of ever

showing my face again."

  "Fie upon it, Mr. Nightingale!" said Jones, "do not call her by so

ungenerous a name: when you promised to marry her, she became your

wife; and she hath sinned more against prudence than virtue. And

what is this world, which you would be ashamed to face, but the

vile, the foolish, and the profligate? Forgive me if I say such a

shame must proceed from false modesty, which always attends false

honour as its shadow.- But I am well assured there is not a man of

real sense and goodness in the world, who would not honour and applaud

the action. But, admit no other would, would not your own heart, my

friend, applaud it? And do not the warm, rapturous sensations, which

we feel from the consciousness of an honest, noble, generous,

benevolent action, convey more delight to the mind than the undeserved

praise of millions? Set the alternative fairly before your eyes. On

the one side, see this poor, unhappy, tender, believing girl, in the

arms of her wretched mother, breathing her last. Hear her breaking

heart in agonies, sighing out your name; and lamenting, rather than

accusing, the cruelty which weighs her down to destruction. Paint to

your imagination the circumstance of her fond bespairing parent,

driven to madness, or, perhaps, to death, by the loss of her lovely

daughter. View the poor, helpless, orphan infant; and when your mind

hath dwelt a moment only on such ideas, consider yourself as the cause

of all the ruin of this poor, little, worthy, defenceless family. On

the other side, consider yourself, as relieving them from their

temporary sufferings. Think with what joy, with what transports that

lovely creature will fly to your arms. See her blood returning to

her pale cheeks, her fire to her languid eyes, and raptures to her

tortured breast. Consider the exultations of her mother, the happiness

of all. Think of this little family made by one act of yours

completely happy. Think of this alternative, and sure I am mistaken in

my friend, if it requires any long deliberation, whether he will

sink these wretches down for ever, or, by one generous, noble

resolution, raise them all from the brink of misery and despair to the

highest pitch of human happiness. Add to this but one consideration

more; the consideration that it is your duty so to do- That the

misery from which you will relieve these poor people, is the misery

which you yourself have wilfully brought upon them."

  "O, my dear friend!" cries Nightingale, "I wanted not your eloquence

to rouse me. I pity poor Nancy from my soul, and would willingly

give anything in my power that no familiarities had ever passed

between us. Nay, believe me, I had many struggles with my passion

before I could prevail with myself to write that cruel letter, which

hath caused all the misery in that unhappy family. If I had no

inclinations to consult but my own, I would marry her to-morrow

morning: I would, by heaven! but you will easily imagine how

impossible it would be to prevail on my father to consent to such a

match; besides, he hath provided another for me; and to-morrow, by his

express command, I am to wait on the lady."

  "I have not the honour to know your father," said Jones; "but,

suppose he could be persuaded, would you yourself consent to the

only means of preserving these poor people?" "As eagerly as I would

pursue my happiness," answered Nightingale: "for I never shall find it

in any other woman.- O, my dear friend! could you imagine what I have

felt within these twelve hours for my poor girl, I am convinced she

would not engross all your pity. Passion leads me only to her; and, if

I had any foolish scruples of honour, you have fully satisfied them:

could my father be induced to comply with my desires, nothing would be

wanting to compleat my own happiness, or that of my Nancy."

  "Then I am resolved to undertake it," said Jones. "You must not be

angry with me, in whatever light it may be necessary to set this

affair, which, you may depend on it, could not otherwise be long hid

from him: for things of this nature make a quick progress when once

they get abroad, as this unhappily hath already. Besides, should any

fatal accident follow, as upon my soul I am afraid will, unless

immediately prevented, the public would ring of your name in a

manner which, if your father hath common humanity, must offend him. If

you will therefore tell me where I may find the old gentleman, I

will not lose a moment in the business; which, while I pursue, you

cannot do a more generous action than by paying a visit to the poor

girl. You will find I have not exaggerated in the account I have given

of the wretchedness of the family."

  Nightingale immediately consented to the proposal; and now, having

acquainted Jones with his father's lodging, and the coffee-house where

he would most probably find him, he hesitated a moment, and then said,

"My dear Tom, you are going to undertake an impossibility. If you knew

my father, you would never think of obtaining his consent.-- Stay,

there is one way- suppose you told him I was already married, it might

be easier to reconcile him to the fact after it was done; and, upon my

honour, I am so affected with what you have said, and I love my

Nancy so passionately, I almost wish it was done, whatever might be

the consequence."

  Jones greatly approved the hint, and promised to pursue it. They

then separated, Nightingale, to visit his Nancy, and Jones in quest of

the old gentleman.





                                Chapter 8



  What passed between Jones and old Mr. Nightingale; with the

arrival of a person not yet mentioned in this history



  Notwithstanding the sentiment of the Roman satirist, which denies

the divinity of fortune, and the opinion of Seneca to the same

purpose; Cicero, who was, I believe, a wiser man than either of

them, expressly holds the contrary; and certain it is, there are

some incidents in life so very strange and unaccountable, that it

seems to require more than human skill and foresight in producing

them.

  Of this kind was what now happened to Jones, who found Mr.

Nightingale the elder in so critical a minute, that Fortune, if she

was really worthy all the worship she received at Rome, could not have

contrived such another. In short, the old gentleman, and the father of

the young lady whom he intended for his son, had been hard at it for

many hours; and the latter was just now gone, and had left the

former delighted with the thoughts that he had succeeded in a long

contention, which had been between the two fathers of the future bride

and bridegroom; in which both endeavoured to overreach the other, and,

as it not rarely happens in such cases, both had retreated fully

satisfied of having obtained the victory.

  This gentleman, whom Mr. Jones now visited, was what they call a man

of the world; that is to say, a man who directs his conduct in this

world as one who, being fully persuaded there is no other, is resolved

to make the most of this. In his early years he had been bred to

trade; but, having acquired a very good fortune, he had lately

declined his business; or, to speak more properly, had changed it from

dealing in goods, to dealing only in money, of which he had always a

plentiful fund at command, and of which he knew very well how to

make a very plentiful advantage, sometimes of the necessities of

private men, and sometimes of those of the public. He had indeed

conversed so intirely with money, that it may be almost doubted

whether he imagined there was any other thing really existing in the

world; this at least may be certainly averred, that he firmly believed

nothing else to have any real value.

  The reader will, I fancy, allow that Fortune could not have culled

out a more improper person for Mr. Jones to attack with any

probability of success; nor could the whimsical lady have directed

this attack at a more unseasonable time.

  As money then was always uppermost in this gentleman's thoughts,

so the moment he saw a stranger within his doors, it immediately

occurred to his imagination, that such stranger was either come to

bring him money, or to fetch it from him. And according as one or

other of these thoughts prevailed, he conceived a favourable or

unfavourable idea of the person who approached him.

  Unluckily for Jones, the latter of these was the ascendant at

present; for as a young gentleman had visited him the day before, with

a bill from his son for a play debt, he apprehended, at the first

sight of Jones, that he was come on such another errand. Jones

therefore had no sooner told him that he was come on his son's

account, than the old gentleman, being confirmed in his suspicion,

burst forth into an exclamation, "That he would lose his labour."

"Is it then possible, sir," answered Jones, "that you can guess my

business?" "If I do guess it," replied the other, "I repeat again to

you, you will lose your labour. What, I suppose you are one of those

sparks who lead my son into all those scenes of riot and debauchery,

which will be his destruction? but I shall pay no more of his bills, I

promise you. I expect he will quit all such company for the future. If

I had imagined otherwise, I should not have provided a wife for him;

for I would be instrumental in the ruin of nobody." "How, sir," said

Jones, "and was this lady of your providing?" "Pray, sir," answered

the old gentleman, "how comes it to be any concern of yours?"- "Nay,

dear sir," replied Jones, "be not offended that I interest myself in

what regards your son's happiness, for whom I have so great an

honour and value. It was upon that very account I came to wait upon

you. I can't express the satisfaction you have given me by what you

say; for I do assure you, your son is a person for whom I have the

highest honour.- Nay, sir, it is not easy to express the esteem I

have for you; who could be so generous, so good, so kind, so indulgent

to provide such a match for your son; a woman, who, I dare swear, will

make him one of the happiest men upon earth."

  There is scarce anything which so happily introduces men to our good

liking, as having conceived some alarm at their first appearance; when

once those apprehensions begin to vanish, we soon forget the fears

which they occasioned, and look on ourselves as indebted for our

present ease to those very persons who at first raised our fears.

  Thus it happened to Nightingale, who no sooner found that Jones

had no demand on him, as he suspected, than he began to be pleased

with his presence. "Pray, good sir," said he, "be pleased to sit down.

I do not remember to have ever had the pleasure of seeing you

before; but if you are a friend of my son, and have anything to say

concerning this young lady, I shall be glad to hear you. As to her

making him happy, it will be his own fault if she doth not. I have

discharged my duty, in taking care of the main article. She will bring

him a fortune capable of making any reasonable, prudent, sober man,

happy." "Undoubtedly" cries Jones, "for she is in herself a fortune;

so beautiful, so genteel, so sweet-tempered, and so well-educated; she

is indeed a most accomplished young lady; sings admirably well, and

hath a most delicate hand at the harpsichord." "I did not know any

of these matters," answered the old gentleman, "for I never saw the

lady: but I do not like her the worse for what you tell me; and I am

the better pleased with her father for not laying any stress on

these qualifications in our bargain. I shall always think it a proof

of his understanding. A silly fellow would have brought in these

articles as an addition to her fortune; but, to give him his due, he

never mentioned any such matter; though to be sure they are no

disparagements to a woman." "I do assure you, sir," cries Jones,

"she hath them all in the most eminent degree: for my part, I own I

was afraid you might have been a little backward, a little less

inclined to the match; for your son told me you had never seen the

lady; therefore I came, sir, in that case, to entreat you, to

conjure you, as you value the happiness of your son, not to be

averse to his match with a woman who hath not only all the good

qualities I have mentioned, but many more."- "If that was your

business, sir," said the old gentleman, "we are both obliged to you;

and you may be perfectly easy; for I give you my word I was very

well satisfied with her fortune." "Sir," answered Jones, "I honour you

every moment more and more. To be so easily satisfied, so very

moderate on that account, is a proof of the soundness of your

understanding, as well as the nobleness of your mind."--"Not so very

moderate, young gentleman, not so very moderate," answered the

father.-- "Still more and more noble," replied Jones; "and give me

leave to add, sensible: for sure it is little less than madness to

consider money as the sole foundation of happiness. Such a woman as

this with her little, her nothing of a fortune"- "I find," cries the

old gentleman, "you have a pretty just opinion of money, my friend, or

else you are better acquainted with the person of the lady than with

her circumstances. Why, pray, what fortune do you imagine this lady to

have?" "What fortune?" cries Jones, "why, too contemptible a one to be

named for your son."- "Well, well, well," said the other, "perhaps he

might have done better."- "That I deny," said Jones, "for she is one

of the best of women."- "Ay, ay, but in point of fortune I mean,"

answered the other. "And yet, as to that now, how much do you imagine

your friend is to have?"- "How much?" cries Jones, "how much? Why, at

the utmost, perhaps L200." "Do you mean to banter me, young

gentleman?" said the father, a little angry. "No, upon my soul,"

answered Jones, "I am in earnest: nay, I believe I have gone to the

utmost farthing. If I do the lady an injury, I ask her pardon."

"Indeed you do," cries the father; "I am certain she hath fifty times

that sum, and she shall produce fifty to that before I consent that

she shall marry my son." "Nay," said Jones, "it is too late to talk of

consent now; if she had not fifty farthings, your son is married."-

"My son married!" answered the old gentleman, with surprize. "Nay,"

said Jones, "I thought you was unacquainted with it." "My son married

to Miss Harris!" answered he again. "To Miss Harris!" said Jones; "no,

sir; to Miss Nancy Miller, the daughter of Mrs Miller, at whose house

he lodged; a young lady, who, though her mother is reduced to let

lodgings-"- "Are you bantering, or are you in earnest?" cries the

father, with a most solemn voice. "Indeed, sir," answered Jones, "I

scorn the character of a banterer. I came to you in most serious

earnest, imagining, as I find true, that your son had never dared to

acquaint you with a match so much inferior to him in point of fortune,

though the reputation of the lady will suffer it no longer to remain a

secret."

  While the father stood like one struck suddenly dumb at this news, a

gentleman came into the room, and saluted him by the name of brother.

  But though these two were in consanguinity so nearly related, they

were in their dispositions almost the opposites to each other. The

brother who now arrived had likewise been bred to trade, in which he

no sooner saw himself worth L6000 than he purchased a small estate

with the greatest part of it, and retired into the country; where he

married the daughter of an unbeneficed clergyman; a young lady, who,

though she had neither beauty nor fortune, had recommended herself

to his choice entirely by her good humour, of which she possessed a

very large share.

  With this woman he had, during twenty-five years, lived a life

more resembling the model which certain poets ascribe to the golden

age, than any of those patterns which are furnished by the present

times. By her he had four children, but none of them arrived at

maturity, except only one daughter, whom, in vulgar language, he and

his wife had spoiled; that is, had educated with the utmost tenderness

and fondness, which she returned to such a degree, that she had

actually refused a very extraordinary match with a gentleman a

little turned of forty, because she could not bring herself to part

with her parents.

  The young lady whom Mr. Nightingale had intended for his son was a

near neighbour of his brother, and an acquaintance of his niece; and

in reality it was upon the account of his projected match, that he was

now come to town; not, indeed, to forward, but to dissuade his brother

from a purpose which he conceived would inevitably ruin his nephew;

for he foresaw no other event from a union with Miss Harris,

notwithstanding the largeness of her fortune, as neither her person

nor mind seemed to promise any kind of matrimonial felicity: for she

was very tall, very thin, very ugly, very affected, very silly, and

very ill-natured.

  His brother, therefore, no sooner mentioned the marriage of his

nephew with Miss Miller, than he exprest the utmost satisfaction;

and when the father had very bitterly reviled his son, and

pronounced sentence of beggary upon him, the uncle began in the

following manner:

  "If you was a little cooler, brother, I would ask you whether you

love your son for his sake or for your own. You would answer, I

suppose, and so I suppose you think, for his sake; and doubtless it is

his happiness which you intended in the marriage you proposed for him.

  "Now, brother, to prescribe rules of happiness to others hath always

appeared to me very absurd, and to insist on doing this, very

tyrannical. It is a vulgar error, I know; but it is, nevertheless,

an error. And if this be absurd in other things, it is mostly so in

the affair of marriage, the happiness of which depends intirely on the

affection which subsists between the parties.

  "I have therefore always thought it unreasonable in parents to

desire to chuse for their children on this occasion; since to force

affection is an impossible attempt; nay, so much doth love abhor

force, that I know not whether, through an unfortunate but uncurable

perverseness in our natures, it may not be even impatient of

persuasion.

  "It is, however, true that, though a parent will not, I think,

wisely prescribe, he ought to be consulted on this occasion; and, in

strictness, perhaps, should at least have a negative voice. My nephew,

therefore, I own, in marrying, without asking your advice, hath been

guilty of a fault. But, honestly speaking, brother, have you not a

little promoted this fault? Have not your frequent declarations on

this subject given him a moral certainty of your refusal, where

there was any deficiency in point of fortune? Nay, doth not your

present anger arise solely from that deficiency? And if he hath failed

in his duty here, did you not as much exceed that authority, when

you absolutely bargained with him for a woman, without his

knowledge, whom you yourself never saw, and whom, if you had seen

and known as well as I, it must have been madness in you to have

ever thought of bringing her into your family?

  "Still I own my nephew in a fault; but surely it is not an

unpardonable fault. He hath acted indeed without your consent, in a

matter in which he ought to have asked it, but it is in a matter in

which his interest is principally concerned; you yourself must and

will acknowledge, that you consulted his interest only, and if he

unfortunately differed from you, and hath been mistaken in his

notion of happiness, will you, brother, if you love your son, carry

him still wider from the point? Will you increase the ill consequences

of his simple choice? Will you endeavour to make an event certain

misery to him, which may accidentally prove so? In a word, brother,

because he hath put it out of your power to make his circumstances

as affluent as you would, will you distress them as much as you can?"

  By the force of the true Catholic faith, St. Anthony won upon the

fishes. Orpheus and Amphion went a little farther, and by the charms

of music enchanted things merely inanimate. Wonderful, both! but

neither history nor fable have ever yet ventured to record an instance

of any one, who, by force of argument and reason, hath triumphed

over habitual avarice.

  Mr. Nightingale, the father, instead of attempting to answer his

brother, contented himself with only observing, that they had always

differed in their sentiments concerning the education of their

children. "I wish," said he, "brother, you would have confined your

care to your own daughter, and never have troubled yourself with my

son, who hath, I believe, as little profited by your precepts, as by

your example." For young Nightingale was his uncle's godson, and had

lived more with him than with his father. So that the uncle had

often declared, he loved his nephew almost equally with his own child.

  Jones fell into raptures with this good gentleman; and when, after

much persuasion, they found the father grew still more and more

irritated, instead of appeased, Jones conducted the uncle to his

nephew at the house of Mrs. Miller.





                                Chapter 9



  Containing strange matters



  At his return to his lodgings, Jones found the situation of

affairs greatly altered from what they had been in at his departure.

The mother, the two daughters, and young Mr. Nightingale, were now sat

down to supper together, when the uncle was, at his own desire,

introduced without any ceremony into the company, to all of whom he

was well known; for he had several times visited his nephew at that

house.

  The old gentleman immediately walked up to Miss Nancy, saluted and

wished her joy, as he did afterwards the mother and the other

sister; and lastly, he paid the proper compliments to his nephew, with

the same good humour and courtesy, as if his nephew had married his

equal or superior in fortune, with all the previous requisites first

performed.

  Miss Nancy and her supposed husband both turned pale, and looked

rather foolish than otherwise upon this occasion; but Mrs. Miller took

the first opportunity of withdrawing; and, having sent for Jones

into the dining-room, she threw herself at his feet, and in a most

passionate flood of tears, called him her good angel, the preserver of

her poor little family, with many other respectful and endearing

appellations, and made him every acknowledgment which the highest

benefit can extract from the most grateful heart.

  After the first gust of her passion was a little over, which she

declared, if she had not vented, would have burst her, she proceeded

to inform Mr. Jones that all matters were settled between Mr.

Nightingale and her daughter, and that they were to be married the

next morning; at which Mr. Jones having expressed much pleasure, the

poor woman fell again into a fit of joy and thanksgiving, which he

at length with difficulty silenced, and prevailed on her to return

with him back to the company, whom they found in the same good

humour in which they had left them.

  This little society now past two or three very agreeable hours

together, in which the uncle, who was a very great lover of his

bottle, had so well plyed his nephew, that this latter, though not

drunk, began to be somewhat flustered; and now Mr. Nightingale, taking

the old gentleman with him upstairs into the apartment he had lately

occupied, unbosomed himself as follows:-

  "As you have been always the best and kindest of uncles to me, and

as you have shown such unparalleled goodness in forgiving this

match, which to be sure may be thought a little improvident, I

should never forgive myself if I attempted to deceive you in

anything." He then confessed the truth, and opened the whole affair.

  "How, Jack?" said the old gentleman, "and are you really then not

married to this young woman?" "No, upon my honour," answered

Nightingale, "I have told you the simple truth." "My dear boy,"

cries the uncle, kissing him, "I am heartily glad to hear it. I

never was better pleased in my life. If you had been married, I should

have assisted you as much as was in my power to have made the best

of a bad matter; but there is a great difference between considering a

thing which is already done and irrecoverable, and that which is yet

to do. Let your reason have fair play, Jack, and you will see this

match in so foolish and preposterous a light, that there will be no

need of any dissuasive arguments." "How, sir?" replies young

Nightingale, "is there this difference between having already done

an act, and being in honour engaged to do it?" "Pugh!" said the uncle,

"honour is a creature of the world's making, and the world hath the

power of a creator over it, and may govern and direct it as they

please. Now you well know how trivial these breaches of contract are

thought; even the grossest make but the wonder and conversation of a

day. Is there a man who afterwards will be more backward in giving you

his sister, or daughter? or is there any sister or daughter who

would be more backward to receive you? Honour is not concerned in

these engagements." "Pardon me, dear sir," cries Nightingale, "I can

never think so; and not only honour, but conscience and humanity,

are concerned. I am well satisfied, that, was I now to disappoint

the young creature, her death would be the consequence, and I should

look upon myself as her murderer; nay, as her murderer by the

cruellest of all methods, by breaking her heart." "Break her heart,

indeed! no, no, Jack," cries the uncle, "the hearts of women are not

so soon broke; they are tough, boy, they are tough." "But, sir,"

answered Nightingale, "my own affections are engaged, and I never

could be happy with any other woman. How often have I heard you say,

that children should be always suffered to chuse for themselves, and

that you would let my cousin Harriet do so?" "Why, ay," replied the

old gentleman, "so I would have them; but then I would have them chuse

wisely.- Indeed, Jack, you must and shall leave the girl."-- "Indeed,

uncle," cries the other, "I must and will have her." "You will,

young gentleman!" said the uncle; "I did not expect such a word from

you. I should not wonder if you had used such language to your father,

who hath always treated you like a dog, and kept you at the distance

which a tyrant preserves over his subjects; but I, who have lived with

you upon an equal footing, might surely expect better usage: but I

know how to account for it all: it is all owing to your preposterous

education, in which I have had too little share. There is my daughter,

now, whom I have brought up as my friend, never doth anything

without my advice, nor ever refuses to take it when I give it her."

"You have never yet given her advice in an affair of this kind,"

said Nightingale; "for I am greatly mistaken in my cousin, if she

would be very ready to obey even your most positive commands in

abandoning her inclinations." "Don't abuse my girl," answered the

old gentleman with some emotion; "don't abuse my Harriet. I have

brought her up to have no inclinations contrary to my own. By

suffering her to do whatever she pleases, I have enured her to a habit

of being pleased to do whatever I like." Pardon me, sir," said

Nightingale, "I have not the least design to reflect on my cousin, for

whom I have the greatest esteem; and indeed I am convinced you will

never put her to so severe a tryal, or lay such hard commands on her

as you would do on me.- But, dear sir, let us return to the company;

for they will begin to be uneasy at our long absence. I must beg one

favour of my dear uncle, which is that he would not say anything to

shock the poor girl or her mother." "Oh! you need not fear me,"

answered he, "I understand myself too well to affront women; so I will

readily grant you that favour; and in return I must expect another

of you." "There are but few of your commands, sir," said

Nightingale, "which I shall not very chearfully obey." "Nay, sir, I

ask nothing," said the uncle, "but the honour of your company home

to my lodging, that I may reason the case a little more fully with

you; for I would, if possible, have the satisfaction of preserving

my family, notwithstanding the headstrong folly of my brother, who, in

his opinion, is the wisest man in the world."

  Nightingale, who well knew his uncle to be as headstrong as his

father, submitted to attend him home, and then they both returned back

into the room, where the old gentleman promised to carty himself

with the same decorum which he had before maintained.





                                Chapter 10



  A short chapter, which concludes the book



  The long absence of the uncle and nephew had occasioned some

disquiet in the minds of all whom they had left behind them; and the

more, as, during the preceding dialogue, the uncle had more than

once elevated his voice, so as to be heard downstairs; which, though

they could not distinguish what he said, had caused some evil

foreboding in Nancy and her mother, and, indeed, even in Jones

himself.

  When the good company, therefore, again assembled, there was a

visible alteration in all their faces; and the good humour which, at

their last meeting, universally shone forth in every countenance,

was now changed into a much less agreeable aspect. It was a change,

indeed, common enough to the weather in this climate, from sunshine to

clouds, from June to December.

  This alteration was not, however, greatly remarked by any present;

for as they were all now endeavouring to conceal their own thoughts,

and to act a part, they became all too busily engaged in the scene

to be spectators of it. Thus neither the uncle nor nephew saw any

symptoms of suspicion in the mother or daughter; nor did the mother or

daughter remark the overacted complacence of the old man, nor the

counterfeit satisfaction which grinned in the features of the young

one.

  Something like this, I believe, frequently happens, where the

whole attention of two friends being engaged in the part which each is

to act, in order to impose on the other, neither sees nor suspects the

arts practised against himself; and thus the thrust of both (to borrow

no improper metaphor on the occasion) alike takes place.

  From the same reason it is no unusual thing for both parties to be

overreached in a bargain, though the one must be always the greater

loser; as was he who sold a blind horse, and received a bad note in

payment.

  Our company in about half an hour broke up, and the uncle carried

off his nephew; but not before the latter had assured Miss Nancy, in a

whisper, that he would attend her early in the morning, and fulfil all

his engagements.

  Jones, who was the least concerned in this scene, saw the most. He

did indeed suspect the very fact; for, besides observing the great

alteration in the behaviour of the uncle, the distance he assumed, and

his overstrained civility to Miss Nancy; the carrying off a bridegroom

from his bride at that time of night was so extraordinary a

proceeding, that it could be accounted for only by imagining that

young Nightingale had revealed the whole truth, which the apparent

openness of his temper, and his being flustered with liquor, made too

probable.

  While he was reasoning with himself, whether he should acquaint

these poor people with his suspicion, the maid of the house informed

him that a gentlewoman desired to speak with him.-- He went

immediately out, and, taking the candle from the maid, ushered his

visitant upstairs, who, in the person of Mrs. Honour, acquainted him

with such dreadful news concerning his Sophia, that he immediately

lost all consideration for every other person; and his whole stock

of compassion was entirely swallowed up in reflections on his own

misery, and on that of his unfortunate angel.

  What this dreadful matter was, the reader will be informed, after we

have first related the many preceding steps which produced it, and

those will be the subject of the following book.
