



                                    BOOK III

         CONTAINING THE MOST MEMORABLE TRANSACTIONS WHICH PASSED IN THE

     FAMILY OF MR. ALLWORTHY, FROM THE TIME WHEN TOMMY JONES ARRIVED AT THE

      AGE OF FOURTEEN, TILL HE ATTAINED THE AGE OF NINETEEN. IN THIS BOOK

     THE READER MAY PICK UP SOME HINTS CONCERNING THE EDUCATION OF CHILDREN




                                Chapter 1



  Containing little or nothing



  The reader will be pleased to remember, that, at the beginning of

the second book of this history, we gave him a hint of our intention

to pass over several large periods of time, in which nothing

happened worthy of being recorded in a chronicle of this kind.

  In so doing, we do not only consult our own dignity and ease, but

the good and advantage of the reader: for besides that by these

means we prevent him from throwing away his time, in reading without

either pleasure or emolument, we give him, at all such seasons, an

opportunity of employing that wonderful sagacity, of which he is

master, by filling up these vacant spaces of time with his

conjectures; for which purpose we have taken care to qualify him in

the preceding pages.

  For instance, what reader but knows that Mr. Allworthy felt, at

first, for the loss of his friend, those emotions of grief, which on

such occasions enter into all men whose hearts are not composed of

flint, or their heads of as solid materials? Again, what reader doth

not know that philosophy and religion in time moderated, and at last

extinguished, this grief? The former of these teaching the folly and

vanity of it, and the latter correcting it as unlawful, and at the

same time assuaging it, by raising future hopes and assurances,

which enable a strong and religious mind to take leave of a friend, on

his deathbed, with little less indifference than if he was preparing

for a long journey; and, indeed, with little less hope of seeing him

again.

  Nor can the judicious reader be at a greater loss on account of Mrs.

Bridget Blifil, who, he may be assured, conducted herself through

the whole season in which grief is to make its appearance on the

outside of the body, with the strictest regard to all the rules of

custom and decency, suiting the alterations of her countenance to

the several alterations of her habit: for as this changed from weeds

to black, from black to grey, from grey to white, so did her

countenance change from dismal to sorrowful, from sorrowful to sad,

and from sad to serious, till the day came in which she was allowed to

return to her former serenity.

  We have mentioned these two, as examples only of the task which

may be imposed on readers of the lowest class. Much higher and

harder exercises of judgment and penetration may reasonably be

expected from the upper graduates in criticism. Many notable

discoveries will, I doubt not, be made by such, of the transactions

which happened in the family of our worthy man, during all the years

which we have thought proper to pass over: for though nothing worthy

of a place in this history occurred within that period, yet did

several incidents happen of equal importance with those reported by

the daily and weekly historians of the age; in reading which great

numbers of persons consume a considerable part of their time, very

little, I am afraid, to their emolument. Now, in the conjectures

here proposed, some of the most excellent faculties of the mind may be

employed to much advantage, since it is a more useful capacity to be

able to foretel the actions of men, in any circumstance, from their

characters, than to judge of their characters from their actions.

The former, I own, requires the greater penetration; but may be

accomplished by true sagacity with no less certainty than the latter.

  As we are sensible that much the greatest part of our readers are

very eminently possessed of this quality, we have left them a space of

twelve years to exert it in; and shall now bring forth our heroe, at

about fourteen years of age, not questioning that many have been

long impatient to be introduced to his acquaintance.





                                Chapter 2



  The heroe of this great history appears with very bad omens. A

little tale of so low a kind that some may think it not worth their

notice. A word or two concerning a squire, and more relating to a

gamekeeper and a schoolmaster



  As we determined, when we first sat down to write this history, to

flatter no man, but to guide our pen throughout by the directions of

truth, we are obliged to bring our heroe on the stage in a much more

disadvantageous manner than we could wish; and to declare honestly,

even at his first appearance, that it was the universal opinion of all

Mr. Allworthy's family that he was certainly born to be hanged.

  Indeed, I am sorry to say there was too much reason for this

conjecture; the lad having from his earliest years discovered a

propensity to many vices, and especially to one which hath as direct a

tendency as any other to that fate which we have just now observed

to have been prophetically denounced against him: he had been

already convicted of three robberies, viz., of robbing an orchard,

of stealing a duck out of a farmer's yard, and of picking Master

Blifil's pocket of a ball.

  The vices of this young man were, moreover, heightened by the

disadvantageous light in which they appeared when opposed to the

virtues of Master Blifil, his companion; a youth of so different a

cast from little Jones, that not only the family but all the

neighbourhood resounded his praises. He was, indeed, a lad of a

remarkable disposition; sober, discreet, and pious beyond his age;

qualities which gained him the love of every one who knew him: while

Tom Jones was universally disliked; and many expressed their wonder

that Mr. Allworthy would suffer such a lad to be educated with his

nephew, lest the morals of the latter should be corrupted by his

example.

  An incident which happened about this time will set the characters

of these two lads more fairly before the discerning reader than is

in the power of the longest dissertation.

  Tom Jones, who, bad as he is, must serve for the heroe of this

history, had only one friend among all the servants of the family; for

as to Mrs. Wilkins, she had long since given him up, and was perfectly

reconciled to her mistress. This friend was the gamekeeper, a fellow

of a loose kind of disposition, and who was thought not to entertain

much stricter notions concerning the difference of meum and tuum

than the young gentleman himself. And hence this friendship gave

occasion to many sarcastical remarks among the domestics, most of

which were either proverbs before, or at least are become so now; and,

indeed, the wit of them all may be comprised in that short Latin

proverb, "Noscitur a socio"; which, I think, is thus expressed in

English, "You may know him by the company he keeps."

  To say the truth, some of that atrocious wickedness in Jones, of

which we have just mentioned three examples, might perhaps be

derived from the encouragement he had received from this fellow who,

in two or three instances, had been what the law calls an accessary

after the fact: for the whole duck, and great part of the apples, were

converted to the use of the gamekeeper and his family; though, as

Jones alone was discovered, the poor lad bore not only the whole

smart, but the whole blame; both which fell again to his lot on the

following occasion.

  Contiguous to Mr. Allworthy's estate was the manor of one of those

gentlemen who are called preservers of the game. This species of

men, from the great severity with which they revenge the death of a

hare or partridge, might be thought to cultivate the same superstition

with the Bannians in India; many of whom, we are told, dedicate

their whole lives to the preservation and protection of certain

animals; was it not that our English Bannians, while they preserve

them from other enemies, will most unmercifully slaughter whole

horseloads themselves; so that they stand clearly acquitted of any

such heathenish superstition.

  I have, indeed, a much better opinion of this kind of men than is

entertained by some, as I take them to answer the order of Nature, and

the good purposes for which they were ordained, in a more ample manner

than many others. Now, as Horace tells us that there are a set of

human beings



     Fruges consumere nati,



"Born to consume the fruits of the earth"; so I make no manner of

doubt but that there are others



     Feras consumere nati,



"Born to consume the beasts of the field"; or, as it is commonly

called, the game; and none, I believe, will deny but that those

squires fulfil this end of their creation.

  Little Jones went one day a shooting with the gamekeeper; when

happening to spring a covey of partridges near the border of that

manor over which Fortune, to fulfil the wise purposes of Nature, had

planted one of the game consumers, the birds flew into it, and were

marked (as it is called) by the two sportsmen, in some furze bushes,

about two or three hundred paces beyond Mr. Allworthy's dominions.

  Mr. Allworthy had given the fellow strict orders, on pain of

forfeiting his place, never to trespass on any of his neighbours; no

more on those who were less rigid in this matter than on the lord of

this manor. With regard to others, indeed, these orders had not been

always very scrupulously kept; but as the disposition of the gentleman

with whom the partridges had taken sanctuary was well known, the

gamekeeper had never yet attempted to invade his territories. Nor

had he done it now, had not the younger sportsman, who was excessively

eager to pursue the flying game, over-persuaded him; but Jones being

very importunate, the other, who was himself keen enough after the

sport, yielded to his persuasions, entered the manor, and shot one

of the partridges.

  The gentleman himself was at that time on horse-back, at a little

distance from them; and hearing the gun go off, he immediately made

towards the place, and discovered poor Tom; for the gamekeeper had

leapt into the thickest part of the furze-brake, where he had

happily concealed himself.

  The gentleman having searched the lad, and found the partridge

upon him, denounced great vengeance, swearing he would acquaint Mr.

Allworthy. He was as good as his word: for he rode immediately to

his house, and complained of the trespass on his manor in as high

terms and as bitter language as if his house had been broken open, and

the most valuable furniture stole out of it. He added, that some other

person was in his company, though he could not discover him; for

that two guns had been discharged almost in the same instant. And,

says he, "We have found only this partridge, but the Lord knows what

mischief they have done."

  At his return home, Tom was presently convened before Mr. Allworthy.

He owned the fact, and alledged no other excuse but what was really

true, viz., that the covey was originally sprung in Mr. Allworthy's

own manor.

  Tom was then interrogated who was with him, which Mr. Allworthy

declared he was resolved to know, acquainting the culprit with the

circumstance of the two guns, which had been deposed by the squire and

both his servants; but Tom stoutly persisted in asserting that he

was alone; yet, to say the truth, he hesitated a little at first,

which would have confirmed Mr. Allworthy's belief, had what the squire

and his servants said wanted any further confirmation.

  The gamekeeper, being a suspected person, was now sent for, and

the question put to him; but he, relying on the promise which Tom

had made him, to take all upon himself, very resolutely denied being

in company with the young gentleman, or indeed having seen him the

whole afternoon.

  Mr. Allworthy then turned towards Tom, with more than usual anger in

his countenance, and advised him to confess who was with him;

repeating, that he was resolved to know. The lad, however, still

maintained his resolution, and was dismissed with much wrath by Mr.

Allworthy, who told him he should have to the next morning to consider

of it, when he should be questioned by another person, and in

another manner.

  Poor Jones spent a very melancholy night; and the more so, as he was

without his usual companion; for Master Blifil was gone abroad on a

visit with his mother. Fear of the punishment he was to suffer was

on this occasion his least evil; his chief anxiety being, lest his

constancy should fail him, and he should be brought to betray the

gamekeeper, whose ruin he knew must now be the consequence.

  Nor did the gamekeeper pass his time much better. He had the same

apprehensions with the youth; for whose honour he had likewise a

much tenderer regard than for his skin.

  In the morning, when Tom attended the reverend Mr. Thwackum, the

person to whom Mr. Allworthy had committed the instruction of the

two boys, he had the same questions put to him by that gentleman which

he been asked the evening before, to which he returned the same

answers. The consequence of this was, so severe a whipping, that it

possibly fell little short of the torture with which confessions are

in some countries extorted from criminals.

  Tom bore his punishment with great resolution; and though his master

asked him, between every stroke, whether he would not confess, he

was contented to be flead rather than betray his friend, or break

the promise he had made.

  The gamekeeper was now relieved from his anxiety, and Mr.

Allworthy himself began to be concerned at Tom's sufferings: for

besides that Mr. Thwackum, being highly enraged that he was not able

to make the boy say what he himself pleased, had carried his

severity much beyond the good man's intention, this latter began now

to suspect that the squire had been mistaken; which his extreme

eagerness and anger seemed to make probable; and as for what the

servants had said in confirmation of their master's account, he laid

no great stress upon that. Now, as cruelty and injustice were two

ideas of which Mr. Allworthy could by no means support the

consciousness a single moment, he sent for Tom, and after many kind

and friendly exhortations, said, "I am convinced, my dear child,

that my suspicions have wronged you; I am sorry that you have been

so severely punished on this account." And at last gave him a little

horse to make him amends; again repeating his sorrow for what had

past.

  Tom's guilt now flew in his face more than any severity could make

it. He could more easily bear the lashes of Thwackum, than the

generosity of Allworthy. The tears burst from his eyes, and he fell

upon his knees, crying, "Oh, sir, you are too good to me. Indeed you

are. Indeed I don't deserve it." And at that very instant, from the

fulness of his heart, had almost betrayed the secret; but the good

genius of the gamekeeper suggested to him what might be the

consequence to the poor fellow, and this consideration sealed his

lips.

  Thwackum did all he could to persuade Allworthy from showing any

compassion or kindness to the boy, saying, "He had persisted in an

untruth"; and gave some hints, that a second whipping might probably

bring the matter to light.

  But Mr. Allworthy absolutely refused to consent to the experiment.

He said, the boy had suffered enough already for concealing the truth,

even if he was guilty, seeing that he could have no motive but a

mistaken point of honour for so doing.

  "Honour!" cryed Thwackum, with some warmth, "mere stubbornness and

obstinacy! Can honour teach any one to tell a lie, or can any honour

exist independent of religion?"

  This discourse happened at table when dinner was just ended; and

there were present Mr. Allworthy, Mr. Thwackum, and a third gentleman,

who now entered into the debate, and whom, before we proceed any

further, we shall briefly introduce to our reader's acquaintance.





                                Chapter 3



  The character of Mr. Square the philosopher, and of Mr. Thwackum the

divine; with a dispute concerning-



  The name of this gentleman, who had then resided some time at Mr.

Allworthy's house, was Mr. Square. His natural parts were not of the

first rate, but he had greatly improved them by a learned education.

He was deeply read in the antients, and a profest master of all the

works of Plato and Aristotle. Upon which great models he had

principally formed himself; sometimes according with the opinion of

the one, and sometimes with that of the other. In morals he was a

profest Platonist, and in religion he inclined to be an Aristotelian.

  But though he had, as we have said, formed his morals on the

Platonic model, yet he perfectly agreed with the opinion of Aristotle,

in considering that great man rather in the quality of a philosopher

or a speculatist, than as a legislator. This sentiment he carried a

great way; indeed, so far, as to regard all virtue as matter of theory

only. This, it is true, he never affirmed, as I have heard, to any

one; and yet upon the least attention to his conduct, I cannot help

thinking it was his real opinion, as it will perfectly reconcile

some contradictions which might otherwise appear in his character.

  This gentleman and Mr. Thwackum scarce ever met without a

disputation; for their tenets were indeed diametrically opposite to

each other. Square held human nature to be the perfection of all

virtue, and that vice was a deviation from our nature, in the same

manner as deformity of body is. Thwackum, on the contrary,

maintained that the human mind, since the fall, was nothing but a sink

of iniquity, till purified and redeemed by grace. In one point only

they agreed, which was, in all their discourses on morality never to

mention the word goodness. The favourite phrase of the former, was the

natural beauty of virtue; that of the latter, was the divine power

of grace. The former measured all actions by the unalterable rule of

right, and the eternal fitness of things; the latter decided all

matters by authority; but in doing this, he always used the scriptures

and their commentators, as the lawyer doth his Coke upon Lyttleton,

where the comment is of equal authority with the text.

  After this short introduction, the reader will be pleased to

remember, that the parson had concluded his speech with a triumphant

question, to which he had apprehended no answer; viz., Can any

honour exist independent of religion?

  To this Square answered; that it was impossible to discourse

philosophically concerning words, till their meaning was first

established: that there were scarce any two words of a more vague

and uncertain signification, than the two he had mentioned; for that

there were almost as many different opinions concerning honour, as

concerning religion. "But," says he, "if by honour you mean the true

natural beauty of virtue, I will maintain it may exist independent

of any religion whatever. Nay," added he, "you yourself will allow

it may exist independent of all but one: so will a Mahometan, a Jew,

and all the maintainers of all the different sects in the world."

  Thwackum replied, this was arguing with the usual malice of all

the enemies to the true Church. He said, he doubted not but that all

the infidels and hereticks in the world would, if they could,

confine honour to their own absurd errors and damnable deceptions;

"but honour," says he, "is not therefore manifold, because there are

many absurd opinions about it; nor is religion manifold, because there

are various sects and heresies in the world. When I mention

religion, I mean the Christian religion; and not only the Christian

religion, but the Protestant religion; and not only the Protestant

religion, but the Church of England. And when I mention honour, I mean

that mode of Divine grace which is not only consistent with, but

dependent upon, this religion; and is consistent with and dependent

upon no other. Now to say that the honour I here mean, and which

was, I thought, all the honour I could be supposed to mean, will

uphold, must less dictate an untruth, is to assert an absurdity too

shocking to be conceived."

  "I purposely avoided," says Square, "drawing a conclusion which I

thought evident from what I have said; but if you perceived it, I am

sure you have not attempted to answer it. However, to drop the article

of religion, I think it is plain, from what you have said, that we

have different ideas of honour; or why do we not agree in the same

terms of its explanation? I have asserted, that true honour and true

virtue are almost synonymous terms, and they are both founded on the

unalterable rule of right, and the eternal fitness of things; to which

an untruth being absolutely repugnant and contrary, it is certain that

true honour cannot support an untruth. In this, therefore, I think

we are agreed; but that this honour can be said to be founded on

religion, to which it is antecedent, if by religion be meant any

positive law--"

  "I agree," answered Thwackum, with great warmth, "with a man who

asserts honour to be antecedent to religion! Mr. Allworthy, did I

agree--?"

  He was proceeding when Mr. Allworthy interposed, telling them very

coldly, they had both mistaken his meaning; for that he had said

nothing of true honour.- It is possible, however, he would not have

easily quieted the disputants, who were growing equally warm, had

not another matter now fallen out, which put a final end to the

conversation at present.





                                Chapter 4



  Containing a necessary apology for the author; and a childish

incident, which perhaps requires an apology likewise



  Before I proceed farther, I shall beg leave to obviate some

misconstructions into which the zeal of some few readers may lead

them; for I would not willingly give offence to any, especially to men

who are warm in the cause of virtue or religion.

  I hope, therefore, no man will, by the grossest misunderstanding

of perversion of my meaning, misrepresent me, as endeavouring to

cast any ridicule on the greatest perfections of human nature; and

which do, indeed, alone purify and ennoble the heart of man, and raise

him above the brute creation. This, reader, I will venture to say (and

by how much the better man you are yourself, by so much the more

will you be inclined to believe me), that I would rather have buried

the sentiments of these two persons in eternal oblivion, than have

done any injury to either of these glorious causes.

  On the contrary, it is with a view to their service, that I have

taken upon me to record the lives and actions of two of their false

and pretended champions. A treacherous friend is the most dangerous

enemy; and I will say boldly, that both religion and virtue have

received more real discredit from hypocrites than the wittiest

profligates or infidels could ever cast upon them: nay, farther, as

these two, in their purity, are rightly called the bands of civil

society, and are indeed the greatest of blessings; so when poisoned

and corrupted with fraud, pretence, and effectation, they have

become the worst of civil curses, and have enabled men to perpetrate

the most cruel mischiefs to their own species.

  Indeed, I doubt not but this ridicule will in general be allowed: my

chief apprehension is, as many true and just sentiments often came

from the mouths of these persons, lest the whole should be taken

together, and I should be conceived to ridicule all alike. Now the

reader will be pleased to consider, that, as neither of these men were

fools, they could not be supposed to have holden none but wrong

principles, and to have uttered nothing but absurdities; what

injustice, therefore, must I have done to their characters, had I

selected only what was bad! And how horribly wretched and maimed

must their arguments have appeared!

  Upon the whole, it is not religion or virtue, but the want or

them, which is here exposed. Had not Thwackum too much neglected

virtue, and Square, religion, in the composition of their several

systems, and had not both utterly discarded all natural goodness of

heart, they had never been represented as the objects of derision in

this history; in which we will now proceed.

  This matter then, which put an end to the debate mentioned in the

last chapter, was no other than a quarrel between Master Blifil and

Tom Jones, the consequence of which had been a bloody nose to the

former; for though Master Blifil, notwithstanding he was the

younger, was in size above the other's match, yet Tom was much his

superior at the noble art of boxing.

  Tom, however, cautiously avoided all engagements with that youth;

for besides that Tommy Jones was an inoffensive lad amidst all his

roguery, and really loved Blifil, Mr. Thwackum being always the second

of the latter, would have been sufficient to deter him.

  But well says a certain author, No man is wise at all hours; it is

therefore no wonder that a boy is not so. A difference arising at play

between the two lads, Master Blifil called Tom a beggarly bastard.

Upon which the latter, who was somewhat passionate in his disposition,

immediately caused that phenomenon in the face of the former, which we

have above remembered.

  Master Blifil now, with his blood running from his nose, and the

tears galloping after from his eyes, appeared before his uncle and the

tremendous Thwackum. In which court an indictment of assault, battery,

and wounding, was instantly preferred against Tom; who in his excuse

only pleaded the provocation, which was indeed all the matter that

Master Blifil had omitted.

  It is indeed possible that this circumstance might have escaped

his memory; for, in his reply, he positively insisted, that he had

made use of no such appellation; adding, "Heaven forbid such naughty

words should ever come out of his mouth!"

  Tom, though against all form of law, rejoined in affirmance of the

words. Upon which Master Blifil said, "It is no wonder. Those who will

tell one fib, will hardly stick at another. If I had told my master

such a wicked fib as you have done, I should be ashamed to show my

face."

  "What fib, child?" cries Thwackum pretty eagerly.

  "Why, he told you that nobody was with him a shooting when he killed

the partridge; but he knows" (here he burst into a flood of tears),

"yes, he knows, for he confessed it to me, that Black George the

gamekeeper was there. Nay, he said- yes you did- deny it if you can,

that you would not have confest the truth, though master had cut you

to pieces."

  At this the fire flashed from Thwackum's eyes, and he cried out in

triumph- "Oh! ho! this is your mistaken notion of honour! This is the

boy who was not to be whipped again!" But Mr. Allworthy, with a more

gentle aspect, turned towards the lad, and said, "Is this true, child?

How came you to persist so obstinately in a falsehood?"

  Tom said, "He scorned a lie as much as any one: but he thought his

honour engaged him to act as he did; for he had promised the poor

fellow to conceal him: which," he said, "he thought himself farther

obliged to, as the gamekeeper had begged him not to go into the

gentleman's manor, and had at last gone himself, in compliance with

his persuasions." He said, "This was the whole truth of the matter,

and he would take his oath of it"; and concluded with very

passionately begging Mr. Allworthy "to have compassion on the poor

fellow's family, especially as he himself only had been guilty, and

the other had been very difficultly prevailed on to do what he did.

Indeed, sir," said he, "it could hardly be called a lie that I told;

for the poor fellow was entirely innocent of the whole matter. I

should have gone alone after the birds; nay, I did go at first, and he

only followed me to prevent more mischief. Do, pray, sir, let me be

punished; take my little horse away again; but pray, sir, forgive poor

George."

  Mr. Allworthy hesitated a few moments, and then dismissed the

boys, advising them to live more friendly and peaceably together.





                                Chapter 5



  The opinions of the divine and the philosopher concerning the two

boys; with some reasons for their opinions, and other matters



  It is probable, that by disclosing this secret, which had been

communicated in the utmost confidence to him, young Blifil preserved

his companion from a good lashing; for the offence of the bloody

nose would have been of itself sufficient cause for Thwackum to have

proceeded to correction; but now this was totally absorbed in the

consideration of the other matter; and with regard to this, Mr.

Allworthy declared privately, he thought the boy deserved reward

rather than punishment, so that Thwackum's hand was withheld by a

general pardon.

  Thwackum, whose meditations were full of birch, exclaimed against

this weak, and, as he said he would venture to call it, wicked lenity.

To remit the punishment of such crimes was, he said, to encourage

them. He enlarged much on the correction of children, and quoted

many texts from Solomon, and others; which being to be found in so

many other books, shall not be found here. He then applied himself

to the vice of lying, on which head he was altogether as learned as he

had been on the other.

  Square said, he had been endeavouring to reconcile the behaviour

of Tom with his idea of perfect virtue, but could not. He owned

there was something which at first sight appeared like fortitude in

the action; but as fortitude was a virtue, and falsehood a vice,

they could by no means agree or unite together. He added, that as this

was in some measure to confound virtue and vice, it might be worth Mr.

Thwackum's consideration, whether a larger castigation might not be

laid on upon the account.

  As both these learned men concurred in censuring Jones, so were they

no less unanimous in applauding Master Blifil. To bring truth to

light, was by the parson asserted to be the duty of every religious

man; and by the philosopher this was declared to be highly conformable

with the rule of right, and the eternal and unalterable fitness of

things.

  All this, however, weighed very little with Mr. Allworthy. He

could not be prevailed on to sign the warrant for the execution of

Jones. There was something within his own breast with which the

invincible fidelity which that youth had preserved, corresponded

much better than it had done with the religion of Thwackum, or with

the virtue of Square. He therefore strictly ordered the former of

these gentlemen to abstain from laying violent hands on Tom for what

had past. The pedagogue was obliged to obey those orders; but not

without great reluctance, and frequent mutterings that the boy would

be certainly spoiled.

  Towards the gamekeeper the good man behaved with more severity. He

presently summoned that poor fellow before him, and after many

bitter remonstrances, paid him his wages, and dismist him from his

service; for Mr. Allworthy rightly observed, that there was a great

difference between being guilty of a falsehood to excuse yourself, and

to excuse another. He likewise urged, as the principal motive to his

inflexible severity against this man, that he had basely suffered

Tom Jones to undergo so heavy a punishment for his sake, whereas he

ought to have prevented it by making the discovery himself.

  When this story became public, many people differed from Square

and Thwackum, in judging the conduct of the two lads on the

occasion. Master Blifil was generally called a sneaking rascal, a

poor-spirited wretch, with other epithets of the like kind; whilst Tom

was honoured with the appellations of a brave lad, a jolly dog, and an

honest fellow. Indeed, his behaviour to Black George much

ingratiated him with all the servants; for though that fellow was

before universally disliked, yet he was no sooner turned away than

he was as universally pitied; and the friendship and gallantry of

Tom Jones was celebrated by them all with the highest applause; and

they condemned Master Blifil as openly as they durst, without

incurring the danger of offending his mother. For all this, however,

poor Tom smarted in the flesh; for though Thwackum had been

inhibited to exercise his arm on the foregoing account, yet, as the

proverb says, It is easy to find a stick, &c. So was it easy to find a

rod; and, indeed, the not being able to find one was the only thing

which could have kept Thwackum any long time from chastising poor

Jones.

  Had the bare delight in the sport been the only inducement to the

pedagogue, it is probable Master Blifil would likewise have had his

share; but though Mr. Allworthy had given him frequent orders to

make no difference between the lads, yet was Thwackum altogether as

kind and gentle to this youth, as he was harsh, nay even barbarous, to

the other. To say the truth, Blifil had greatly gained his master's

affections; partly by the profound respect he always showed his

person, but much more by the decent reverence with which he received

his doctrine; for he had got by heart, and frequently repeated, his

phrases, and maintained all his master's religious principles with a

zeal which was surprizing in one so young, and which greatly

endeared him to the worthy preceptor.

  Tom Jones, on the other hand, was not only deficient in outward

tokens of respect, often forgetting to pull off his hat, or to bow

at his master's approach; but was altogether as unmindful both of

his master's precepts and example. He was indeed a thoughtless,

giddy youth, with little sobriety in his manners, and less in his

countenance; and would often very impudently and indecently laugh at

his companion for his serious behaviour.

  Mr. Square had the same reason for his preference of the former lad;

for Tom Jones showed no more regard to the learned discourses which

this gentleman would sometimes throw away upon him, than to those of

Thwackum. He once ventured to make a jest of the rule of right; and at

another time said, he believed there was no rule in the world

capable of making such a man as his father (for so Mr. Allworthy

suffered himself to be called).

  Master Blifil, on the contrary, had address enough at sixteen to

recommend himself at one and the same time to both these opposites.

With one he was all religion, with the other he was all virtue. And

when both were present, he was profoundly silent, which both

interpreted in his favour and in their own.

  Nor was Blifil contented with flattering both these gentlemen to

their faces; he took frequent occasions of praising them behind

their backs to Allworthy; before whom, when they two were alone, and

his uncle commended any religious or virtuous sentiment (for many such

came constantly from him) he seldom failed to ascribe it to the good

instructions he had received from either Thwackum or Square; for he

knew his uncle repeated all such compliments to the persons for

whose use they were meant; and he found by experience the great

impressions which they made on the philosopher, as well as on the

divine: for, to say the truth, there is no kind of flattery so

irresistible as this, at second hand.

  The young gentleman, moreover, soon perceived how extremely grateful

all those panegyrics on his instructors were to Mr. Allworthy himself,

as they so loudly resounded the praise of that singular plan of

education which he had laid down; for this worthy man having

observed the imperfect institution of our public schools, and the many

vices which boys were there liable to learn, had resolved to educate

his nephew, as well as the other lad, whom he had in a manner adopted,

in his own house; where he thought their morals would escape all

that danger of being corrupted to which they would be unavoidably

exposed in any public school or university.

  Having, therefore, determined to commit these boys to the tuition of

a private tutor, Mr. Thwackum was recommended to him for that

office, by a very particular friend, of whose understanding Mr.

Allworthy had a great opinion, and in whose integrity he placed much

confidence. This Thwackum was fellow of a college, where he almost

entirely resided; and had a great reputation for learning, religion,

and sobriety of manners. And these were doubtless the qualifications

by which Mr. Allworthy's friend had been induced to recommend him;

though indeed this friend had some obligations to Thwackum's family,

who were the most considerable persons in a borough which that

gentleman represented in parliament.

  Thwackum, at his first arrival, was extremely agreeable to

Allworthy; and indeed he perfectly answered the character which had

been given of him. Upon longer acquaintance, however, and more

intimate conversation, this worthy man saw infirmities in the tutor,

which he could have wished him to have been without; though as those

seemed greatly overbalanced by his good qualities, they did not

incline Mr. Allworthy to part with him: nor would they indeed have

justified such a proceeding; for the reader is greatly mistaken, if he

conceives that Thwackum appeared to Mr. Allworthy in the same light as

he doth to him in this history; and he is as much deceived, if he

imagines that the most intimate acquaintance which he himself could

have had with that divine, would have informed him of those things

which we, from our inspiration, are enabled to open and discover. Of

readers who, from such conceits as these, condemn the wisdom or

penetration of Mr. Allworthy, I shall not scruple to say, that they

make a very bad and ungrateful use of that knowledge which we have

communicated to them.

  These apparent errors in the doctrine of Thwackum served greatly

to palliate the contrary errors in that of Square, which our good

man no less saw and condemned. He thought, indeed, that the

different exuberancies of these gentlemen would correct their

different imperfections; and that from both, especially with his

assistance, the two lads would derive sufficient precepts of true

religion and virtue. If the event happened contrary to his

expectations, this possibly proceeded from some fault in the plan

itself; which the reader hath my leave to discover, if he can: for

we do not pretend to introduce any infallible characters into this

history; where we hope nothing will be found which hath never yet been

seen in human nature.

  To return therefore: the reader will not, I think, wonder that the

different behaviour of the two lads above commemorated, produced the

different effects of which he hath already seen some instance; and

besides this, there was another reason for the conduct of the

philosopher and the pedagogue; but this being matter of great

importance, we shall reveal it in the next chapter.





                                Chapter 6



  Containing a better reason still for the before-mentioned opinions



  It is to be known then, that those two learned personages, who

have lately made a considerable figure on the theatre of this history,

had, from their first arrival at Mr. Allworthy's house, taken so great

an affection, the one to his virtue, the other to his religion, that

they had meditated the closest alliance with him.

  For this purpose they had cast their eyes on that fair widow,

whom, though we have not for some time made any mention of her, the

reader, we trust, hath not forgot. Mrs. Blifil was indeed the object

to which they both aspired.

  It may seem remarkable, that, of four persons whom we have

commemorated at Mr. Allworthy's house, three of them should fix

their inclinations on a lady who was never greatly celebrated for

her beauty, and who was, moreover, now a little descended into the

vale of years; but in reality bosom friends, and intimate

acquaintance, have a kind of natural propensity to particular

females at the house of a friend- viz., to his grandmother, mother,

sister, daughter, aunt, niece, or cousin, when they are rich; and to

his wife, sister, daughter, niece, cousin, mistress, or

servant-maid, if they should be handsome.

  We would not, however, have our reader imagine, that persons of such

characters as were supported by Thwackum and Square, would undertake a

matter of this kind, which hath been a little censured by some rigid

moralists, before they had thoroughly examined it, and considered

whether it was (as Shakespear phrases it) "Stuff o' th' conscience,"

or no. Thwackum was encouraged to the undertaking by reflecting that

to covet your neighbour's sister is nowhere forbidden: and he knew

it was a rule in the construction of all laws, that "Expressum facit

cessare tacitum." The sense of which is, "When a lawgiver sets down

plainly his whole meaning, we are prevented from making him mean

what we please ourselves." As some instances of women, therefore,

are mentioned in the divine law, which forbids us to covet our

neighbour's goods, and that of a sister omitted, he concluded it to be

lawful. And as to Square, who was in his person what is called a jolly

fellow, or a widow's man, he easily reconciled his choice to the

eternal fitness of things.

  Now, as both of these gentlemen were industrious in taking every

opportunity of recommending themselves to the widow, they

apprehended one certain method was, by giving her son the constant

preference to the other lad; and as they conceived the kindness and

affection which Mr. Allworthy showed the latter, must be highly

disagreeable to her, they doubted not but the laying hold on all

occasions to degrade and vilify him, would be highly pleasing to

her; who, as she hated the boy, must love all those who did him any

hurt. In this Thwackum had the advantage; for while Square could

only scarify the poor lad's reputation, he could flea his skin; and,

indeed, he considered every lash he gave him as a compliment paid to

his mistress; so that he could, with the utmost propriety, repeat this

old flogging line, "Castigo te non quod odio habeam, sed quod AMEN.

I chastise thee not out of hatred, but out of love." And this, indeed,

he often had in his mouth, or rather, according to the old phrase,

never more properly applied, at his fingers' ends.

  For this reason, principally, the two gentlemen concurred, as we

have seen above, in their opinion concerning the two lads; this being,

indeed, almost the only instance of their concurring on any point;

for, beside the difference of their principles, they had both long ago

strongly suspected each other's design, and hated one another with

no little degree of inveteracy.

  This mutual animosity was a good deal increased by their alternate

successes; for Mrs. Blifil knew what they would be at long before they

imagined it; or, indeed, intended she should: for they proceeded

with great caution, lest she should be offended, and acquaint Mr.

Allworthy. But they had no reason for any such fear; she was well

enough pleased with a passion, of which she intended none should

have any fruits but herself. And the only fruits she designed for

herself were, flattery and courtship; for which purpose she soothed

them by turns, and a long time equally. She was, indeed, rather

inclined to favour the parson's principles; but Square's person was

more agreeable to her eye, for he was a comly man; whereas the

pedagogue did in countenance very nearly resemble that gentleman, who,

in the Harlot's Progress, is seen correcting the ladies in Bridewell.

  Whether Mrs. Blifil had been surfeited with the sweets of

marriage, or disgusted by its bitters, or from what other cause it

proceeded, I will not determine; but she could never be brought to

listen to any second proposals. However, she at last conversed with

Square with such a degree of intimacy that malicious tongues began

to whisper things of her, to which as well for the sake of the lady,

as that they were highly disagreeable to the rule of right and the

fitness of things, we will give no credit, and therefore shall not

blot our paper with them. The pedagogue, 'tis certain, whipped on,

without getting a step nearer to his journey's end.

  Indeed he had committed a great error, and that Square discovered

much sooner than himself. Mrs. Blifil (as, perhaps, the reader may

have formerly guessed) was not over and above pleased with the

behaviour of her husband; nay, to be honest, she absolutely hated him,

till his death at last a little reconciled him to her affections. It

will not be therefore greatly wondered at, if she had not the most

violent regard to the offspring she had by him. And, in fact, she

had so little of this regard, that in his infancy she seldom saw her

son, or took any notice of him; and hence she acquiesced, after a

little reluctance, in all the favours which Mr. Allworthy showered

on the foundling; whom the good man called his own boy, and in all

things put on an entire equality with Master Blifil. This acquiescence

in Mrs. Blifil was considered by the neighbours, and by the family, as

a mark of her condescension to her brother's humour, and she was

imagined by all others, as well as Thwackum and Square, to hate the

foundling in her heart; nay, the more civility she showed him, the

more they conceived she detested him, and the surer schemes she was

laying for his ruin: for as they thought it her interest to hate

him, it was very difficult for her to persuade them she did not.

  Thwackum was the more confirmed in his opinion, as she had more than

once slily caused him to whip Tom Jones, when Mr. Allworthy, who was

an enemy to this exercise, was abroad; whereas she had never given any

such orders concerning young Blifil. And this had likewise imposed

upon Square. In reality, though she certainly hated her own son- of

which, however monstrous it appears, I am assured she is not a

singular instance- she appeared, notwithstanding all her outward

compliance, to be in her heart sufficiently displeased with all the

favour shown by Mr. Allworthy to the foundling. She frequently

complained of this behind her brother's back, and very sharply

censured him for it, both to Thwackum and Square; nay, she would throw

it in the teeth of Allworthy himself, when a little quarrel, or

miff, as it is vulgarly called, arose between them.

  However, when Tom grew up, and gave tokens of that gallantry of

temper which greatly recommends men to women, this disinclination

which she had discovered to him when a child, by degrees abated, and

at last she so evidently demonstrated her affection to him to be

much stronger than what she bore her own son, that it was impossible

to mistake her any longer. She was so desirous of often seeing him,

and discovered such satisfaction and delight in his company, that

before he was eighteen years old he was become a rival to both

Square and Thwackum; and what is worse, the whole country began to

talk as loudly of her inclination to Tom, as they had before done of

that which she had shown to Square: on which account the philosopher

conceived the most implacable hatred for our poor heroe.





                                Chapter 7



  In which the author himself makes his appearance on the stage



  Though Mr. Allworthy was not of himself hasty to see things in a

disadvantageous light, and was a stranger to the public voice, which

seldom reaches to a brother or a husband, though it rings in the

ears of all the neighbourhood; yet was this affection of Mrs. Blifil

to Tom, and the preference which she too visibly gave him to her own

son, of the utmost disadvantage to that youth.

  For such was the compassion which inhabited Mr. Allworthy's mind,

that nothing but the steel of justice could ever subdue it. To be

unfortunate in any respect was sufficient, if there was no demerit

to counterpoise it, to turn the scale of that good man's pity, and

to engage his friendship and his benefaction.

  When therefore he plainly saw Master Blifil was absolutely

detested (for that he was) by his own mother, he began, on that

account only, to look with an eye of compassion upon him; and what the

effects of compassion are, in good and benevolent minds, I need not

here explain to most of my readers.

  Henceforward he saw every appearance of virtue in the youth

through the magnifying end, and viewed all his faults with the glass

inverted, so that they became scarce perceptible. And this perhaps the

amiable temper of pity may make commendable; but the next step the

weakness of human nature alone must excuse; for he no sooner perceived

that preference which Mrs. Blifil gave to Tom, than that poor youth

(however innocent) began to sink in his affections as he rose in hers.

This, it is true, would of itself alone never have been able to

eradicate Jones from his bosom; but it was greatly injurious to him,

and prepared Mr. Allworthy's mind for those impressions which

afterwards produced the mighty events that will be contained hereafter

in this history; and to which, it must be confest, the unfortunate

lad, by his own wantonness, wildness, and want of caution, too much

contributed.

  In recording some instances of these, we shall, if rightly

understood, afford a very useful lesson to those well-disposed

youths who shall hereafter be our readers; for they may here find,

that goodness of heart, and openness of temper, though these may

give them great comfort within, and administer to an honest pride in

their own minds, will by no means, alas! do their business in the

world. Prudence and circumspection are necessary even to the best of

men. They are indeed, as it were, a guard to Virtue, without which she

can never be safe. It is not enough that your designs, nay, that

your actions, are intrinsically good; you must take care they shall

appear so. If your inside be never so beautiful, you must preserve a

fair outside also. This must be constantly looked to, or malice and

envy will take care to blacken it so, that the sagacity and goodness

of an Allworthy will not be able to see through it, and to discern the

beauties within. Let this, my young readers, be your constant maxim,

that no man can be good enough to enable him to neglect the rules of

prudence; nor will Virtue herself look beautiful, unless she be

bedecked with the outward ornaments of decency and decorum. And this

precept, my worthy disciples, if you read with due attention, you

will, I hope, find sufficiently enforced by examples in the

following pages.

  I ask pardon for this short appearance, by way of chorus, on the

stage. It is in reality for my own sake, that, while I am

discovering the rocks on which innocence and goodness often split, I

may not be misunderstood to recommend the very means to my worthy

readers, by which I intend to show them they will be undone. And this,

as I could not prevail on any of my actors to speak, I myself was

obliged to declare.





                                Chapter 8



  A childish incident, in which, however, is seen a good-natured

disposition in Tom Jones



  The reader may remember that Mr. Allworthy gave Tom Jones a little

horse, as a kind of smart-money for the punishment which he imagined

he had suffered innocently.

  This horse Tom kept above half a year, and then rode him to a

neighbouring fair, and sold him.

  At his return, being questioned by Thwackum what he had done with

the money for which the horse was sold, he frankly declared he would

not tell him.

  "Oho!" says Thwackum, "you will not! then I will have it out of your

br-h"; that being the place to which he always applied for information

on every doubtful occasion.

  Tom was now mounted on the back of a footman, and everything

prepared for execution, when Mr. Allworthy, entering the room, gave

the criminal a reprieve, and took him with him into another apartment;

where, being alone with Tom, he put the same question to him which

Thwackum had before asked him.

  Tom answered, he could in duty refuse him nothing; but as for that

tyrannical rascal, he would never make him any other answer than

with a cudgel, with which he hoped soon to be able to pay him for

all his barbarities.

  Mr. Allworthy very severely reprimanded the lad for his indecent and

disrespectful expressions concerning his master; but much more for his

avowing an intention of revenge. He threatened him with the entire

loss of his favour, if he ever heard such another word from his mouth;

for, he said, he would never support or befriend a reprobate. By these

and the like declarations, he extorted some compunction from Tom, in

which that youth was not over-sincere; for he really meditated some

return for all the smarting favours he had received at the hands of

the pedagogue. He was, however, brought by Mr. Allworthy to express

a concern for his resentment against Thwackum; and then the good

man, after some wholesome admonition, permitted him to proceed,

which he did as follows:-

  "Indeed, my dear sir, I love and honour you more than all the world:

I know the great obligations I have to you, and should detest myself

if I thought my heart was capable of ingratitude. Could the little

horse you gave me speak, I am sure he could tell you how fond I was of

your present; for I had more pleasure in feeding him than in riding

him. Indeed, sir, it went to my heart to part with him; nor would I

have sold him upon any other account in the world than what I did. You

yourself, sir, I am convinced, in my case, would have done the same:

for none ever so sensibly felt the misfortunes of others. What would

you feel, dear sir, if you thought yourself the occasion of them?

Indeed, sir, there never was any misery like theirs."

  "Like whose, child?" says Allworthy: "What do you mean?"

  "Oh, sir!" answered Tom, "your poor gamekeeper, with all his large

family, ever since your discarding him, have been perishing with all

the miseries of cold and hunger: I could not bear to see these poor

wretches naked and starving, and at the same time know myself to

have been the occasion of all their sufferings. I could not bear it,

sir; upon my soul, I could not." [Here the tears ran down his

cheeks, and he thus proceeded.] "It was to save them from absolute

destruction I parted with your dear present, notwithstanding all the

value I had for it: I sold the horse for them, and they have every

farthing of the money."

  Mr. Allworthy now stood silent for some moments, and before he spoke

the tears started from his eyes. He at length dismissed Tom with a

gentle rebuke, advising him for the future to apply to him in cases of

distress, rather than to use extraordinary means of relieving them

himself.

  This affair was afterwards the subject of much debate between

Thwackum and Square. Thwackum held, that this was flying in Mr.

Allworthy's face, who had intended to punish the fellow for his

disobedience. He said, in some instances, what the world called

charity appeared to him to be opposing the will of the Almighty, which

had marked some particular persons for destruction; and that this

was in like manner acting in opposition to Mr. Allworthy;

concluding, as usual, with a hearty recommendation of birch.

  Square argued strongly on the other side, in opposition perhaps to

Thwackum, or in compliance with Mr. Allworthy, who seemed very much to

approve what Jones had done. As to what he urged on this occasion,

as I am convinced most of my readers will be much abler advocates

for poor Jones, it would be impertinent to relate it. Indeed it was

not difficult to reconcile to the rule of right an action which it

would have been impossible to deduce from the rule of wrong.





                                Chapter 9



  Containing an incident of a more heinous kind, with the comments

of Thwackum and Square



  It hath been observed by some man of much greater reputation for

wisdom than myself, that misfortunes seldom come single. An instance

of this may, I believe, be seen in those gentlemen who have the

misfortune to have any of their rogueries detected; for here discovery

seldom stops till the whole is come out. Thus it happened to poor Tom;

who was no sooner pardoned for selling the horse, than he was

discovered to have some time before sold a fine Bible which Mr.

Allworthy gave him, the money arising from which sale he had

disposed of in the same manner. This Bible Master Blifil had

purchased, though he had already such another of his own, partly out

of respect for the book, and partly out of friendship to Tom, being

unwilling that the Bible should be sold out of the family at

half-price. He therefore deposited the said half-price himself; for he

was a very prudent lad, and so careful of his money, that he had

laid up almost every penny which he had received from Mr. Allworthy.

  Some people have been noted to be able to read in no book but

their own. On the contrary, from the time when Master Blifil was first

possessed of this Bible, he never used any other. Nay, he was seen

reading in it much oftener than he had before been in his own. Now, as

he frequently asked Thwackum to explain difficult passages to him,

that gentleman unfortunately took notice of Tom's name, which was

written in many parts of the book. This brought on an inquiry, which

obliged Master Blifil to discover the whole matter.

  Thwackum was resolved a crime of this kind, which he called

sacrilege, should not go unpunished. He therefore proceeded

immediately to castigation: and not contented with that he

acquainted Mr. Allworthy, at their next meeting, with this monstrous

crime, as it appeared to him: inveighing against Tom in the most

bitter terms, and likening him to the buyers and sellers who were

driven out of the temple.

  Square saw this matter in a very different light. He said, he

could not perceive any higher crime in selling one book than in

selling another. That to sell Bibles was strictly lawful by all laws

both Divine and human, and consequently there was no unfitness in

it. He told Thwackum, that his great concern on this occasion

brought to his mind the story of a very devout woman, who, out of pure

regard to religion, stole Tillotson's Sermons from a lady of her

acquaintance.

  This story caused a vast quantity of blood to rush into the parson's

face, which of itself was none of the palest; and he was going to

reply with great warmth and anger, had not Mrs. Blifil, who was

present at this debate, interposed. That lady declared herself

absolutely of Mr. Square's side. She argued, indeed, very learnedly in

support of his opinion; and concluded with saying, if Tom had been

guilty of any fault, she must confess her own son appeared to be

equally culpable; for that she could see no difference between the

buyer and the seller; both of whom were alike to be driven out of

the temple.

  Mrs. Blifil having declared her opinion, put an end to the debate.

Square's triumph would almost have stopt his words, had he needed

them; and Thwackum, who, for reasons before-mentioned, durst not

venture at disobliging the lady, was almost choaked with

indignation. As to Mr. Allworthy, he said, since the boy had been

already punished he would not deliver his sentiments on the

occasion; and whether he was or was not angry with the lad, I must

leave to the reader's own conjecture.

  Soon after this, an action was brought against the gamekeeper by

Squire Western (the gentleman in whose manor the partridge was

killed), for depredations of the like kind. This was a most

unfortunate circumstance for the fellow, as it not only of itself

threatened his ruin, but actually prevented Mr. Allworthy from

restoring him to his favour: for as that gentleman was walking out one

evening with Master Blifil and young Jones, the latter slily drew

him to the habitation of Black George; where the family of that poor

wretch, namely, his wife and children, were found in all the misery

with which cold, hunger, and nakedness, can affect human creatures:

for as to the money they had received from Jones, former debts had

consumed almost the whole.

  Such a scene as this could not fail of affecting the heart of Mr.

Allworthy. He immediately gave the mother a couple of guineas, with

which he bid her cloath her children. The poor woman burst into

tears at this goodness, and while she was thanking him, could not

refrain from expressing her gratitude to Tom; who had, she said,

long preserved both her and hers from starving. "We have not," says

she, "had a morsel to eat, nor have these poor children had a rag to

put on, but what his goodness hath bestowed on us." For, indeed,

besides the horse and the Bible, Tom had sacrificed a night-gown,

and other things, to the use of this distressed family.

  On their return home, Tom made use of all his eloquence to display

the wretchedness of these people, and the penitence of Black George

himself; and in this he succeeded so well, that Mr. Allworthy said, he

thought the man had suffered enough for what was past; that he would

forgive him, and think of some means of providing for him and his

family.

  Jones was so delighted with this news, that, though it was dark when

they returned home, he could not help going back a mile, in a shower

of rain, to acquaint the poor woman with the glad tidings; but, like

other hasty divulgers of news, he only brought on himself the

trouble of contradicting it: for the ill fortune of Black George

made use of the very opportunity of his friend's absence to overturn

all again.





                                Chapter 10



  In which Master Blifil and Jones appear in different lights



  Master Blifil fell very short of his companion in the amiable

quality of mercy; but he as greatly exceeded him in one of a much

higher kind, namely, in justice: in which he followed both the

precepts and example of Thwackum and Square; for though they would

both make frequent use of the word mercy, yet it was plain that in

reality Square held it to be inconsistent with the rule of right;

and Thwackum was for doing justice, and leaving mercy to heaven. The

two gentlemen did indeed somewhat differ in opinion concerning the

objects of this sublime virtue; by which Thwackum would probably

have destroyed one half of mankind, and Square the other half.

  Master Blifil then, though he had kept silence in the presence of

Jones, yet, when he had better considered the matter, could by no

means endure the thought of suffering his uncle to confer favours on

the undeserving. He therefore resolved immediately to acquaint him

with the fact which we have above slightly hinted to the reader. The

truth of which was as follows:

  The gamekeeper, about a year after he was dismissed from Mr.

Allworthy's service, and before Tom's selling the horse, being in want

of bread, either to fill his own mouth or those of his family, as he

passed through a field belonging to Mr. Western espied a hare

sitting in her form. This hare he had basely and barbarously knocked

on the head, against the laws of the land, and no less against the

laws of sportsmen.

  The higgler to whom the hare was sold, being unfortunately taken

many months after with a quantity of game upon him, was obliged to

make his peace with the squire, by becoming evidence against some

poacher. And now Black George was pitched upon by him, as being a

person already obnoxious to Mr. Western, and one of no good fame in

the country. He was, besides, the best sacrifice the higgler could

make, as he had supplied him with no game since; and by this means the

witness had an opportunity of screening his better customers: for

the squire, being charmed with the power of punishing Black George,

whom a single transgression was sufficient to ruin, made no further

enquiry.

  Had this fact been truly laid before Mr. Allworthy, it might

probably have done the gamekeeper very little mischief. But there is

no zeal blinder than that which is inspired with the love of justice

against offenders. Master Blifil had forgot the distance of the

time. He varied likewise in the manner of the fact: and by the hasty

addition of the single letter S he considerably altered the story; for

he said that George had wired hares. These alterations might

probably have been set right, had not Master Blifil unluckily insisted

on a promise of secrecy from Mr. Allworthy before he revealed the

matter to him; but by that means the poor gamekeeper was condemned

without having an opportunity to defend himself: for as the fact of

killing the hare, and of the action brought, were certainly true,

Mr. Allworthy had no doubt concerning the rest.

  Short-lived then was the joy of these poor people; for Mr. Allworthy

the next morning declared he had fresh reason, without assigning it,

for his anger, and strictly forbad Tom to mention George any more:

though as for his family, he said he would endeavour to keep them from

starving; but as to the fellow himself, he would leave him to the

laws, which nothing could keep him from breaking.

  Tom could by no means divine what had incensed Mr. Allworthy, for of

Master Blifil he had not the least suspicion. However, as his

friendship was to be tired out by no disappointments, he now

determined to try another method of preserving the poor gamekeeper

from ruin.

  Jones was lately grown very intimate with Mr. Western. He had so

greatly recommended himself to that gentleman, by leaping over

five-barred gates, and by other acts of sportsmanship, that the squire

had declared Tom would certainly make a great man if he had but

sufficient encouragement. He often wished he had himself a son with

such parts; and one day very solemnly asserted at a drinking bout,

that Tom should hunt a pack of hounds for a thousand pound of his

money, with any huntsman in the whole country.

  By such kind of talents he had so ingratiated himself with the

squire, that he was a most welcome guest at his table, and a favourite

companion in his sport: everything which the squire held most dear, to

wit, his guns, dogs, and horses, were now as much at the command of

Jones, as if they had been his own. He resolved therefore to make

use of this favour on behalf of his friend Black George, whom he hoped

to introduce into Mr. Western's family, in the same capacity in

which he had before served Mr. Allworthy.

  The reader, if he considers that this fellow was already obnoxious

to Mr. Western, and if he considers farther the weighty business by

which that gentleman's displeasure had been incurred, will perhaps

condemn this as a foolish and desperate undertaking; but if he

should totally condemn young Jones on that account, he will greatly

applaud him for strengthening himself with all imaginable interest

on so arduous an occasion.

  For this purpose, then, Tom applied to Mr. Western's daughter, a

young lady of about seventeen years of age, whom her father, next

after those necessary implements of sport just before mentioned, loved

and esteemed above all the world. Now, as she had some influence on

the squire, so Tom had some little influence on her. But this being

the intended heroine of this work, a lady with whom we ourselves are

greatly in love, and with whom many of our readers will probably be in

love too, before we part, it is by no means proper she should make her

appearance at the end of a book.

