



                                     BOOK X

              IN WHICH THE HISTORY GOES FORWARD ABOUT TWELVE HOURS




                                Chapter 1



  Containing instructions very necessary to be perused by modern

critics



  Reader, it is impossible we should know what sort of person thou

wilt be; for, perhaps, thou may'st be as learned in human nature as

Shakespear himself was, and, perhaps, thou may'st be no wiser than

some of his editors. Now, lest this latter should be the case, we

think proper, before we go any farther together, to give thee a few

wholesome admonitions; that thou may'st not as grossly misunderstand

and misrepresent us, as some of the said editors have misunderstood

and misrepresented their author.

  First, then, we warn thee not too hastily to condemn any of the

incidents in this our history as impertinent and foreign to our main

design, because thou dost not immediately conceive in what manner such

incident may conduce to that design. This work may, indeed, be

considered as a great creation of our own; and for a little reptile of

a critic to presume to find fault with any of its parts, without

knowing the manner in which the whole is connected, and before he

comes to the final catastrophe, is a most presumptuous absurdity.

The allusion and metaphor we have here made use of, we must

acknowledge to be infinitely too great for our occasion; but there is,

indeed, no other, which is at all adequate to express the difference

between an author of the first rate and a critic of the lowest.

  Another caution we would give thee, my good reptile, is, that thou

dost not find out too near a resemblance between certain characters

here introduced; as, for instance, between the landlady who appears in

the seventh book and her in the ninth. Thou art to know, friend,

that there are certain characteristics in which most individuals of

every profession and occupation agree. To be able to preserve these

characteristics, and at the same time to diversify their operations,

is one talent of a good writer. Again, to mark the nice distinction

between two persons actuated by the same vice or folly is another;

and, as this last talent is found in very few writers, so is the

true discernment of it found in as few readers; though, I believe, the

observation of this forms a very principal pleasure in those who are

capable of the discovery; every person, for instance, can

distinguish between Sir Epicure Mammon and Sir Fopling Flutter; but to

note the difference between Sir Fopling Flutter and Sir Courtly Nice

requires a more exquisite judgment: for want of which, vulgar

spectators of plays very often do great injustice in the theatre;

where I have sometimes known a poet in danger of being convicted as

a thief, upon much worse evidence than the resemblance of hands hath

been held to be in the law. In reality, I apprehend every amorous

widow on the stage would run the hazard of being condemned as a

servile imitation of Dido, but that happily very few of our play-house

critics understand enough of Latin to read Virgil.

  In the next place, we must admonish thee, my worthy friend (for,

perhaps, thy heart may be better than thy head), not to condemn a

character as a bad one, because it is not perfectly a good one. If

thou dost delight in these models of perfection, there are books

enow written to gratify thy taste; but, as we have not, in the

course of our conversation, ever happened to meet with any such

person, we have not chosen to introduce any such here. To say the

truth, I a little question whether mere man ever arrived at this

consummate degree of excellence, as well as whether there hath ever

existed a monster bad enough to verify that



     --nulla virtute redemptum

     A vitiis--*



in Juvenal; nor do I, indeed, conceive the good purposes served by

inserting characters of such angelic perfection, or such diabolical

depravity, in any work of invention; since, from contemplating either,

the mind of man is more likely to be overwhelmed with sorrow and shame

than to draw any good uses from such patterns; for in the former

instance he may be both concerned and ashamed to see a pattern of

excellence in his nature, which he may reasonably despair of ever

arriving at; and in contemplating the latter he may be no less

affected with those uneasy sensations, at seeing the nature of which

he is a partaker degraded into so odious and detestable a creature.



  *Whose vices are not allayed with a single virtue.



  In fact, if there be enough of goodness in a character to engage the

admiration and affection of a well-disposed mind, though there

should appear some of those little blemishes quas humana parum cavit

natura, they will raise our compassion rather than our abhorrence.

Indeed, nothing can be of more moral use than the imperfections

which are seen in examples of this kind; since such form a kind of

surprize, more apt to affect and dwell upon our minds than the

faults of very vicious and wicked persons. The foibles and vices of

men, in whom there is great mixture of good, become more glaring

objects from the virtues which contrast them and shew their deformity;

and when we find such vices attended with their evil consequence to

our favourite characters, we are not only taught to shun them for

our own sake, but to hate them for the mischiefs they have already

brought on those we love.

  And now, my friend, having given you these few admonitions, we will,

if you please, once more set forward with our history.





                                Chapter 2



  Containing the arrival of an Irish gentleman, with very

extraordinary adventures which ensued at the inn



  Now the little trembling hare, which the dread of all her numerous

enemies, and chiefly of that cunning, cruel, carnivorous animal,

man, had confined all the day to her lurking place, sports wantonly

o'er the lawns; now on some hollow tree the owl, shrill chorister of

the night, hoots forth notes which might charm the ears of some modern

connoisseurs in music; now, in the imagination of the half-drunk

clown, as he staggers through the churchyard, or rather charnelyard to

his home, fear paints the bloody hobgoblin; now thieves and ruffians

are awake, and honest watchmen fast asleep; in plain English, it was

now midnight; and the company at the inn, as well those who have

been already mentioned in this history, as some others who arrived

in the evening, were all in bed. Only Susan Chambermaid was now

stirring, she being obliged to wash the kitchen before she retired

to the arms of the fond expecting hostler.

  In this posture were affairs at the inn when a gentleman arrived

there post. He immediately alighted from his horse, and, coming up

to Susan, enquired of her, in a very abrupt and confused manner, being

almost out of breath with eagerness, Whether there was any lady in the

house? The hour of night, and the behaviour of the man, who stared

very wildly all the time, a little surprized Susan, so that she

hesitated before she made any answer; upon which the gentleman, with

redoubled eagerness, begged her to give him a true information,

saying, he had lost his wife, and was come in pursuit of her. "Upon my

shoul," cries he, "I have been near catching her already in two or

three places, if I had not found her gone just as I came up with

her. If she be in the house, do carry me up in the dark and show her

to me; and if she be gone away before me, do tell me which way I shall

go after her to meet her, and, upon my shoul, I will make you the

richest poor woman in the nation." He then pulled out a handful of

guineas, a sight which would have bribed persons of much greater

consequence than this poor wench to much worse purposes.

  Susan, from the account she had received of Mrs. Waters, made not

the least doubt but that she was the very identical stray whom the

right owner pursued. As she concluded, therefore, with great

appearance of reason, that she never could get money in an honester

way than by restoring a wife to her husband, she made no scruple of

assuring the gentleman that the lady he wanted was then in the

house; and was presently afterwards prevailed upon (by very liberal

promises, and some earnest paid into her hands) to conduct him to

the bedchamber of Mrs. Waters.

  It hath been a custom long established in the polite world, and that

upon very solid and substantial reasons, that a husband shall never

enter his wife's apartment without first knocking at the door. The

many excellent uses of this custom need scarce be hinted to a reader

who hath any knowledge of the world; for by this means the lady hath

time to adjust herself, or to remove any disagreeable object out of

the way; for there are some situations in which nice and delicate

women would not be discovered by their husbands.

  To say the truth, there are several ceremonies instituted among

the polished part mankind, which, though they may, to coarser

judgments, appear as matters of mere form, are found to have much of

substance in them, by the more discerning; and lucky would it have

been had the custom above mentioned been observed by our gentleman

in the present instance. Knock, indeed, he did at the door, but not

with one of those gentle raps which is usual on such occasions. On the

contrary, when he found the door locked, he flew at it with such

violence, that the lock immediately gave way, the door burst open, and

he fell headlong into the room.

  He had no sooner recovered his legs than forth from the bed, upon

his legs likewise, appeared- with shame and sorrow are we obliged to

proceed- our heroe himself, who, with a menacing voice, demanded of

the gentleman who he was, and what he meant by daring to burst open

his chamber in that outrageous manner.

  The gentleman at first thought he had committed a mistake, and was

going to ask pardon and retreat, when, on a sudden, as the moon

shone very bright, he cast his eyes on stays, gowns, petticoats, caps,

ribbons, stockings, garters, shoes, clogs, &c., all which lay in a

disordered manner on the floor. All these, operating on the natural

jealousy of his temper, so enraged him, that he lost all power of

speech; and, without returning any answer to Jones, he endeavoured

to approach the bed.

  Jones immediately interposing, a fierce contention arose, which soon

proceeded to blows on both sides. And now Mrs. Waters (for we must

confess she was in the same bed), being, I suppose, awakened from

her sleep, and seeing two men fighting in her bedchamber, began to

scream in the most violent manner, crying out murder! robbery! and

more frequently rape! which last, some, perhaps, may wonder she should

mention, who do not consider that these words of exclamation are

used by ladies in a fright, as fa, la, la, ra, da, &c., are in

music, only as the vehicles of sound, and without any fixed ideas.

  Next to the lady's chamber was deposited the body of an Irish

gentleman who arrived too late at the inn to have been mentioned

before. This gentleman was one of those whom the Irish call a

calabalaro, or cavalier. He was a younger brother of a good family,

and, having no fortune at home, was obliged to look abroad in order to

get one; for which purpose he was proceeding to the Bath, to try his

luck with cards and the women.

  This young fellow lay in bed reading one of Mrs. Behn's novels;

for he had been instructed by a friend that he would find no more

effectual method of recommending himself to the ladies than the

improving his understanding, and filling his mind with good

literature. He no sooner, therefore, heard the violent uproar in the

next room, than he leapt from his bolster, and, taking his sword in

one hand, and the candle which burnt by him in the other, he went

directly to Mrs. Waters's chamber.

  If the sight of another man in his shirt at first added some shock

to the deceny of the lady, it made her presently amends by

considerably abating her fears; for no sooner had the calabalaro

entered the room than he cried out, "Mr. Fitzpatrick, what the devil

is the maning of this?" Upon which the other immediately answered, "O,

Mr. Maclachlan! I am rejoiced you are here.- This villain hath

debauched my wife, and is got into bed with her."- "What wife?" cries

Maclachlan; "do not I know Mrs. Fitzpatrick very well, and don't I see

that the lady, whom the gentleman who stands here in his shirt is

lying in bed with, is none of her?"

  Fitzpatrick, now perceiving, as well by the glimpse he had of the

lady, as by her voice, which might have been distinguished at a

greater distance than he now stood from her, that he had made a very

unfortunate mistake, began to ask many pardons of the lady; and

then, turning to Jones, he said, "I would have you take notice I do

not ask your pardon, for you have bate me; for which I am resolved

to have your blood in the morning."

  Jones treated this menace with much contempt; and Mr. Maclachlan

answered, "Indeed, Mr. Fitzpatrick, you may be ashamed of your own

self, to disturb people at this time of night; if all the people in

the inn were not asleep, you would have awakened them as you have

me. The gentleman has served you very rightly. Upon my conscience,

though I have no wife, if you had treated her so, I would have cut

your throat."

  Jones was so confounded with his fears for his lady's reputation,

that he knew neither what to say or do; but the invention of women is,

as hath been observed, much readier than that of men. She

recollected that there was a communication between her chamber and

that of Mr. Jones; relying, therefore, on his honour and her own

assurance, she answered, "I know not what you mean, villains! I am

wife to none of you. Help! Rape! Murder! Rape!"- And now, the

landlady coming into the room, Mrs. Waters fell upon her with the

utmost virulence, saying, "She thought herself in a sober inn, and not

in a bawdy-house; but that a set of villains had broke into her

room, with an intent upon her honour, if not upon her life; and

both, she said, were equally dear to her."

  The landlady now began to roar as loudly as the poor woman in bed

had done before. She cried, "She was undone, and that the reputation

of her house, which was never blown upon before, was utterly

destroyed." Then, turning to the men, she cried, "What, in the devil's

name, is the reason of all this disturbance in the lady's room?"

Fitzpatrick, hanging down his head, repeated, "That he had committed a

mistake, for which he heartily asked pardon," and then retired with

his countryman. Jones, who was too ingenious to have missed the hint

given him by his fair one, boldly asserted, "That he had run to her

assistance upon hearing the door broke open, with what design he could

not conceive, unless of robbing the lady; which, if they intended,

he said, he had the good fortune to prevent." "I never had a robbery

committed in my house since I have kept it," cries the landlady; "I

would have you to know, sir, I harbour no highwaymen here; I scorn the

word, thof I say it. None but honest, good gentlefolks are welcome

to my house; and I thank good luck, I have always had enow of such

customers; indeed as many as I could entertain. Here hath been my

lord-," and then she repeated over a catalogue of names and titles,

many of which we might, perhaps, be guilty of a breach of privilege by

inserting.

  Jones after much patience, at length interrupted her, by making an

apology to Mrs. Waters, for having appeared before her in his shirt,

assuring her "That nothing but a concern for her safety could have

prevailed on him to do it." The reader may inform himself of her

answer, and, indeed, of her whole behaviour to the end of the scene,

by considering the situation which she affected, it being that of a

modest lady, who was awakened out of her sleep by three strange men in

her chamber. This was the part which she undertook to perform; and,

indeed, she executed it so well, that none of our theatrical actresses

could exceed her, in any of their performances, either on or off the

stage.

  And hence, I think, we may very fairly draw an argument, to prove

how extremely natural virtue is to the fair sex; for, though there

is not, perhaps, one in ten thousand who is capable of making a good

actress, and even among these we rarely see two who are equally able

to personate the same character, yet this of virtue they can all

admirably well put on; and as well those individuals who have it

not, as those who possess it, can all act it to the utmost degree of

perfection.

  When the men were all departed, Mrs. Waters, recovering from her

fear, recovered likewise from her anger, and spoke in much gentler

accents to the landlady, who did not so readily quit her concern for

the reputation of the house, in favour of which she began again to

number the many great persons who had slept under her roof; but the

lady stopt her short, and having absolutely acquitted her of having

had any share in the past disturbance, begged to be left to her

repose, which, she said, she hoped to enjoy unmolested during the

remainder of the night. Upon which the landlady, after much civility

and many courtsies, took her leave.





                                Chapter 3



  A dialogue between the landlady and Susan the chambermaid, proper to

be read by all inn-keepers and their servants; with the arrival, and

affable behaviour of a beautiful young lady; which may teach persons

of condition how they may acquire the love of the whole world



  The landlady, remembering that Susan had been the only person out of

bed when the door was burst open, resorted presently to her, to

enquire into the first occasion of the disturbance, as well as who the

strange gentleman was, and when and how he arrived.

  Susan related the whole story which the reader knows already,

varying the truth only in some circumstances, as she saw convenient,

and totally concealing the money which she had received. But whereas

her mistress had, in the preface to her enquiry, spoken much in

compassion for the fright which the lady had been in concerning any

intended depredations on her virtue, Susan could not help endeavouring

to quiet the concern which her mistress seemed to be under on that

account, by swearing heartily she saw Jones leap out from her bed.

  The landlady fell into a violent rage at these words. "A likely

story, truly," cried she, "that a woman should cry out, and

endeavour to expose herself, if that was the casel I desire to know

what better proof any lady can give of her virtue than her crying out,

which I believe, twenty people can witness for her she did? I beg,

madam, you would spread no such scandal of any of my guests; for it

will not only reflect on them, but upon the house; and I am sure no

vagabonds, nor wicked beggarly people, come here."

  "Well," says Susan, "then I must not believe my own eyes." "No,

indeed, must you not always," answered her mistress; "I would not have

believed my own eyes against such good gentlefolks. I have not had a

better supper ordered this half-year than they ordered last night; and

so easy and good-humoured were they, that they found no fault with

my Worcestershire perry, which I sold them for champagne; and to be

sure it is as well tasted and as wholesome as the best champagne in

the kingdom, otherwise I would scorn to give it 'em; and they drank me

two bottles. No, no, I will never believe any harm of such sober

good sort of people."

  Susan being thus silenced, her mistress proceeded to other

matters. "And so you tell me," continued she, "that the strange

gentleman came post, and there is a footman without the horses; why,

then, he is certainly some of your great gentlefolks too. Why did

not you ask him whether he'd have any supper? I think he is in the

other gentleman's room; go up and ask whether he called. Perhaps he'll

order something when he finds anybody stirring in the house to dress

it. Now don't commit any of your usual blunders, by telling him the

fire's out, and the fowls alive. And if he should order mutton,

don't blab out that we have none. The butcher, I know, killed a

sheep just before I went to bed, and he never refuses to cut it up

warm when I desire it. Go, remember there's all sorts of mutton and

fowls; go, open the door with, Gentlemen, d'ye call? and if they say

nothing, ask what his honour will be pleased to have for supper? Don't

forget his honour. Go; if you don't mind all these matters better,

you'll never come to anything."

  Susan departed, and soon returned with an account that the two

gentlemen were got both into the same bed. "Two gentlemen," says the

landlady, "in the same bed! that's impossible; they are two arrant

scrubs, I warrant them; and I believe young Squire Allworthy guessed

right, that the fellow intended to rob her ladyship; for, if he had

broke open the lady's door with any of the wicked designs of a

gentleman, he would never have sneaked away to another room to save

the expense of a supper and a bed to himself. They are certainly

thieves, and their searching after a wife is nothing but a pretence."

  In these censures my landlady did Mr. Fitzpatrick great injustice;

for he was really born a gentleman, though not worth a groat; and

though, perhaps, he had some few blemishes in his heart as well as

in his head, yet being a sneaking or a niggardly fellow was not one of

them. In reality, he was so generous a man, that, whereas he had

received a very handsome fortune with his wife, he had now spent every

penny of it, except some little pittance which was settled upon her;

and, in order to possess himself of this, he had used her with such

cruelty, that, together with his jealousy, which was of the

bitterest kind, it had forced the poor woman to run away from him.

  This gentleman then being well tired with his long journey from

Chester in one day, with which, and some good dry blows he had

received in the scuffle, his bones were so sore, that, added to the

soreness of his mind, it had quite deprived him of any appetite for

eating. And being now so violently disappointed in the woman whom,

at the maid's instance, he had mistaken for his wife, it never once

entered into his head that she might nevertheless be in the house,

though he had erred in the first person he had attacked. He

therefore yielded to the dissuasions of his friend from searching

any farther after her that night, and accepted the kind offer of

part of his bed.

  The footman and post-boy were in a different disposition. They

were more ready to order than the landlady was to provide; however,

after being pretty well satisfied by them of the real truth of the

case, and that Mr. Fitzpatrick was no thief, she was at length

prevailed on to set some cold meat before them, which they were

devouring with great greediness, when Partridge came into the kitchen.

He had been first awaked by the hurry which we have before seen; and

while he was endeavouring to compose himself again on his pillow, a

screech-owl had given him such a serenade at his window, that he leapt

in a most horrible affright from his bed, and, huddling on his clothes

with great expedition, ran down to the protection of the company, whom

he heard talking below in the kitchen.

  His arrival detained my landlady from returning to her rest; for she

was just about to leave the other two guests to the care of Susan; but

the friend of young Squire Allworthy was not to be so neglected,

especially as he called for a pint of wine to be mulled. She

immediately obeyed, by putting the same quantity of perry to the fire;

for this readily answered to the name of every kind of wine.

  The Irish footman was retired to bed, and the post-boy was going

to follow; but Partridge invited him to stay and partake of his

wine, which the lad very thankfully accepted. The schoolmaster was

indeed afraid to return to bed by himself; and as he did not know

how soon he might lose the company of my landlady, he was resolved

to secure that of the boy, in whose presence he apprehended no

danger from the devil or any of his adherents.

  And now arrived another post-boy at the gate; upon which Susan,

being ordered out, returned, introducing two young women in riding

habits, one of which was so very richly laced, that Partridge and

the post-boy instantly started from their chairs, and my landlady fell

to her courtsies, and her ladyships, with great eagerness.

  The lady in the rich habit said, with a smile of great

condescension, "If you will give me leave, madam, I will warm myself a

few minutes at your kitchen fire, for it is really very cold; but I

must insist on disturbing no one from his seat." This was spoken on

account of Partridge, who had retreated to the other end of the

room, struck with the utmost awe and astonishment at the splendor of

the lady's dress. Indeed, she had a much better title to respect

than this; for she was one of the most beautiful creatures in the

world.

  The lady earnestly desired Partridge to return to his seat; but

could not prevail. She then pulled off her gloves, and displayed to

the fire two hands, which had every property of snow in them, except

that of melting. Her companion, who was indeed her maid, likewise

pulled off her gloves, and discovered what bore an exact

resemblance, in cold and colour, to a piece of frozen beef.

  "I wish, madam," quoth the latter, "your ladyship would not think of

going any farther to-night. I am terribly afraid your ladyship will

not be able to bear the fatigue."

  "Why sure," cries the landlady, "her ladyship's honour can never

intend it. O, bless me! farther to-night, indeed! let me beseech

your ladyship not to think on't-- But, to be sure, your ladyship

can't. What will your honour be pleased to have for supper? I have

mutton of all kinds, and some nice chicken."

  "I think, madam," said the lady, "it would be rather breakfast

than supper; but I can't eat anything; and, if I stay, shall only

lie down for an hour or two. However, if you please, madam, you may

get me a little sack whey, made very small and thin."

  "Yes, madam," cries the mistress of the house, "I have some

excellent white wine."- "You have no sack, then?" says the lady.

"Yes, an't please your honour, I have; I may challenge the country for

that- but let me beg your ladyship to eat something."

  "Upon my word, I can't eat a morsel," answered the lady; "and I

shall be much obliged to you if you will please to get my apartment

ready as soon as possible; for I am resolved to be on horseback

again in three hours."

  "Why, Susan," cries the landlady, "is there a fire lit yet in the

Wild-goose? I am sorry, madam, all my best rooms are full. Several

people of the first quality are now in bed. Here's a great young

squire, and many other great gentlefolks of quality." Susan

answered, "That the Irish gentlemen were got into the Wild-goose."

  "Was ever anything like it?" says the mistress; "why the devil would

you not keep some of the best rooms for the quality, when you know

scarce a day passes without some calling here?-- If they be gentlemen,

I am certain, when they know it is for her ladyship, they will get up

again."

  "Not upon my account," says the lady; "I will have no person

disturbed for me. If you have a room that is commonly decent, it

will serve me very well, though it be never so plain. I beg, madam,

you will not give yourself so much trouble on my account." "O, madam!"

cries the other, "I have several very good rooms for that matter,

but none good enough for your honour's ladyship. However, as you are

so condescending to take up with the best I have, do, Susan, get a

fire in the Rose this minute. Will your ladyship be pleased to go up

now, or stay till the fire is lighted?" "I think I have sufficiently

warmed myself," answered the lady; "so, if you please, I will go

now; I am afraid I have kept people, and particularly that gentleman

(meaning Partridge), too long in the cold already. Indeed, I cannot

bear to think of keeping any person from the fire this dreadful

weather."- She then departed with her maid, the landlady marching

with two lighted candles before her.

  When that good woman returned, the conversation in the kitchen was

all upon the charms of the young lady. There is indeed in perfect

beauty a power which none almost can withstand; for my landlady,

though she was not pleased at the negative given to the supper,

declared she had never seen so lovely a creature. Partridge ran out

into the most extravagant encomiums on her face, though he could not

refrain from paying some compliments to the gold lace on her habit;

the post-boy sung forth the praises of her goodness, which were

likewise echoed by the other post-boy, who was now come in. "She's a

true good lady, I warrant her," says he; "for she hath mercy upon dumb

creatures; for she asked me every now and tan upon the journey, if I

did not think she should hurt the horses by riding too fast? and

when she came in she charged me to give them as much corn as ever they

would eat."

  Such charms are there in affability, and so sure is it to attract

the praises of all kinds of people. It may indeed be compared to the

celebrated Mrs. Hussey.* It is equally sure to set off every female

perfection to the highest advantage, and to palliate and conceal every

defect. A short reflection, which we could not forbear making in

this place, where my reader hath seen the loveliness of an affable

deportment; and truth will now oblige us to contrast it, by showing

the reverse.



  *A celebrated mantua-maker in the Strand, famous for setting off the

shapes of women.





                                Chapter 4



  Containing infallible nostrums for procuring universal disesteem and

hatred



  The lady had no sooner laid herself on her pillow than the

waiting-woman returned to the kitchen to regale with some of those

dainties which her mistress had refused.

  The company, at her entrance, shewed her the same respect which they

had before paid to her mistress, by rising; but she forgot to

imitate her, by desiring them to sit down again. Indeed; it was scarce

possible they should have done so, for she placed her chair in such

a posture as to occupy almost the whole fire. She then ordered a

chicken to be broiled that instant, declaring, if it was not ready

in a quarter of an hour, she would not stay for it. Now, though the

said chicken was then at roost in the stable, and required the several

ceremonies of catching, killing, and picking, before it was brought to

the gridiron, my landlady would nevertheless have undertaken to do all

within the time; but the guests, being unfortunately admitted behind

the scenes, must have been witness to the fourberie*; the poor woman

was therefore obliged to confess that she had none in the house; "but,

madam," said she, "I can get any kind of mutton in an instant from the

butcher's."



  *Deceit.



  "Do you think, then," answered the waiting gentlewoman, "that I have

the stomach of a horse, to eat mutton at this time of night? Sure

you people that keep inns imagine your betters are like yourselves.

Indeed, I expected to get nothing at this wretched place. I wonder

my lady would stop at it. I suppose none but tradesmen and grasiers

ever call here." The landlady fired at this indignity offered to her

house; however, she suppressed her temper, and contented herself

with saying, "Very good quality frequented it, she thanked heaven!"

"Don't tell me," cries the other, "of quality! I believe I know more

of people of quality than such as you.- But, prithee, without

troubling me with any of your impertinence, do tell me what I can have

for supper; for, though I cannot eat horse-flesh, I am really hungry."

"Why, truly, madam," answered the landlady, "you could not take me

again at such a disadvantage; for I must confess I have nothing in the

house, unless a cold piece of beef, which indeed a gentleman's footman

and the post-boy have almost cleared to the bone." "Woman," said

Mrs. Abigail (so for shortness we will call her), "I entreat you not

to make me sick. If I had fasted a month, I could not eat what had

been touched by the fingers of such fellows. Is there nothing neat

or decent to be had in this horrid place?" "What think you of some

eggs and bacon, madam?" said the landlady. "Are your eggs new laid?

are you certain they were laid to-day? and let me have the bacon cut

very nice and thin; for I can't endure anything that's gross.- Prithee

try if you can do a little tolerably for once, and don't think you

have a farmer's wife, or some of those creatures, in the house."- The

landlady began then to handle her knife; but the other stopt her,

saying, "Good woman, I must insist upon your first washing your hands;

for I am extremely nice, and have been always used from my cradle to

have everything in the most elegant manner."

  The landlady, who governed herself with much difficulty, began now

the necessary preparations; for as to Susan, she was utterly rejected,

and with such disdain, that the poor wench was as hard put to it to

restrain her hands from violence as her mistress had been to hold

her tongue. This indeed Susan did not entirely; for, though she

literally kept it within her teeth, yet there it muttered many

"marry-come-ups, as good flesh and blood as yourself; with other

such indignant phrases.

  While the supper was preparing, Mrs. Abigail began to lament she had

not ordered a fire in the parlour; but, she said, that was now too

late. "However," said she, "I have novelty to recommend a kitchen; for

I do not believe I ever eat in one before." Then, turning to the

post-boys, she asked them, "Why they were not in the stable with their

horses? If I must eat my hard fare here, madam," cries she to the

landlady, "I beg the kitchen may be kept clear, that I may not be

surrounded with all the blackguards in town: as for you, sir, says she

to Partridge, "you look somewhat like a gentleman, and may sit still

if you please; I don't desire to disturb anybody but mob."

  "Yes, yes, madam," cries Partridge, "I am a gentleman, I do assure

you, and I am not so easily to be disturbed. Non semper vox casualis

est verbo nominativus." This Latin she took to be some affront, and

answered, "You may be a gentleman, sir; but you don't show yourself as

one to talk Latin to a woman." Partridge made a gentle reply, and

concluded with more Latin; upon which she tossed up her nose, and

contented herself by abusing him with the name of a great scholar.

  The supper being now on the table, Mrs. Abigail eat very heartily

for so delicate a person; and, while a second course of the same was

by her order preparing, she said, "And so, madam, you tell me your

house is frequented by people of great quality?"

  The landlady answered in the affirmative, saying, "There were a

great many very good quality and gentlefolks in it now. There's

young Squire Allworthy, as that gentleman there knows."

  "And pray who is this young gentleman of quality, this young

Squire Allworthy?" said Abigail.

  "Who should he be," answered Partridge, "but the son and heir of the

great Squire Allworthy, of Somersetshire!" "Upon my word," said she,

"you tell me strange news; for I know Mr. Allworthy of Somersetshire

very well, and I know he hath no son alive."

  The landlady pricked up her ears at this, and Partridge looked a

little confounded. However, after a short hesitation, he answered,

"Indeed, madam, it is true, everybody doth not know him to be Squire

Allworthy's son; he was never married to his mother; but his son he

certainly is, and will be his heir too, as certainly as his name is

Jones." At that word, Abigail let drop the bacon which she was

conveying to her mouth, and cried out, "You surprize me, sir! Is it

possible Mr. Jones should be now in the house?" "Quare non?"

answered Partridge, "it is possible, and it is certain."

  Abigail now made haste to finish the remainder of her meal and

then repaired back to her mistress, when the conversation passed which

may be read in the next chapter.





                                Chapter 5



  Showing who the amiable lady, and her unamiable maid were



  As in the month of June, the damask rose, which chance hath

planted among the lilies, with their candid hue mixes his vermilion;

or as some playsome heifer in the pleasant month of May diffuses her

odoriferous breath over the flowery meadows; or as, in the blooming

month of April, the gentle, constant dove, perched on some fair bough,

sits meditating on her mate, so, looking a hundred charms and

breathing as many sweets, her thoughts being fixed on her Tommy,

with a heart as good and innocent as her face was beautiful, Sophia

(for it was she herself) lay reclining her lovely head on her hand,

when her maid entered the room, and, running directly to the bed,

cried, "Madam- madam- who doth your ladyship think is in the house?"

Sophia starting up, cried, "I hope my father hath not overtaken us."

"No, madam, it is one worth a hundred fathers; Mr. Jones himself is

here at this very instant." "Mr. Jones!" says Sophia, "it is

impossible! I cannot be so fortunate." Her maid averred the fact,

and was presently detached by her mistress to order him to be

called; for she said she was resolved to see him immediately.

  Mrs. Honour had no sooner left the kitchen in the manner we have

before seen than the landlady fell severely upon her. The poor woman

had indeed been loading her heart with foul language for some time,

and now it scoured out of her mouth, as filth doth from a mud-cart,

when the board which confines it is removed. Partridge likewise

shovelled in his share of calumny, and (what may surprize the

reader) not only bespattered the maid, but attempted to sully the

lily-white character of Sophia herself. "Never a barrel the better

herring," cries he, "Noscitur a socio, is a true saying. It must be

confessed, indeed, that the lady in the fine garments is the

civiller of the two; but I warrant neither of them are a bit better

than they should be. A couple of Bath trulls, I'll answer for them;

your quality don't ride about at this time o' night without servants."

"Sbodlikins, and that's true," cries the landlady, "you have certainly

hit upon the very matter; for quality don't come into a house

without bespeaking a supper, whether they eat it or no."

  While they were thus discoursing, Mrs. Honour returned and

discharged her commission, by bidding the landlady immediately wake

Mr. Jones, and tell him a lady wanted to speak with him. The

landlady referred her to Partridge, saying, "he was the squire's

friend: but, for her part, she never called menfolks, especially

gentlemen," and then walked sullenly out of the kitchen. Honour

applied herself to Partridge; but he refused, "for my friend," cries

he, "went to bed very late, and he would be very angry to be disturbed

so soon." Mrs. Honour insisted still to have him called, saying,

"she was sure, instead of being angry, that he would be to the highest

degree delighted when he knew the occasion." "Another time, perhaps,

he might," cries Partridge; "but non omnia possumus omnes. One woman

is enough at once for a reasonable man." "What do you mean by one

woman, fellow?" cries Honour. "None of your fellow," answered

Partridge. He then proceeded to inform her plainly that Jones was in

bed with a wench, and made use of an expression too indelicate to be

here inserted; which so enraged Mrs. Honour, that she called him

jackanapes, and returned in a violent hurry to her mistress, whom

she acquainted with the success of her errand, and with the account

she had received; which, if possible, she exaggerated, being as

angry with Jones as if he had pronounced all the words that came

from the mouth of Partridge. She discharged a torrent of abuse on

the master, and advised her mistress to quit all thoughts of a man who

had never shown himself deserving of her. She then ripped up the story

of Molly Seagrim, and gave the most malicious turn to his formerly

quitting Sophia herself; which, I must confess, the present incident

not a little countenanced.

  The spirits of Sophia were too much dissipated by concern to

enable her to stop the torrent of her maid. At last, however, she

interrupted her, saying, "I never can believe this; some villain

hath belied him. You say you had it from his friend; but surely it

is not the office of a friend to betray such secrets." "I suppose,"

cries Honour, "the fellow is his pimp; for I never saw so ill-looked a

villain. Besides, such profligate rakes as Mr. Jones are never ashamed

of these matters."

  To say the truth, this behaviour of Partridge was a little

inexcusable; but he had not slept off the effect of the dose which

he swallowed the evening before; which had, in the morning, received

the addition of above a pint of wine, or indeed rather of malt

spirits; for the perry was by no means pure. Now, that part of his

head which Nature designed for the reservoir of drink being very

shallow, a small quantity of liquor overflowed it, and opened the

sluices of his heart; so that all the secrets there deposited run out.

These sluices were indeed, naturally, very ill-secured. To give the

best-natured turn we can to his disposition, he was a very honest man;

for, as he was the most inquisitive of mortals, and eternally prying

into the secrets of others, so he very faithfully paid them by

communicating, in return, everything within his knowledge.

  While Sophia, tormented with anxiety, knew not what to believer, nor

what resolution to take; Susan arrived with the sack-whey. Mrs. Honour

immediately advised her mistress, in a whisper, to pump this wench,

who probably could inform her of the truth. Sophia approved it, and

began as follows: "Come hither, child; now answer me truly what I am

going to ask you, and I promise you I will very well reward you. Is

there a young gentleman in this house, a handsome young gentleman,

that--" Here Sophia blushed and was confounded. "A young gentleman,"

cries Honour, "that came hither in company with that saucy rascal

who is now in the kitchen?" Susan answered, "There was." "Do you

know anything of any lady?" continues Sophia, "any lady? I don't ask

you whether she is handsome or no; perhaps she is not; that's

nothing to the purpose; but do you know of any lady?" "La, madam,"

cries Honour, "you will make a very bad examiner. Hark'ee, child,"

says she, "is not that very young gentleman now in bed with some nasty

trull or other?" Here Susan smiled, and was silent. "Answer the

question, child," says Sophia, "and here's a guinea for you."- "A

guinea! madam," cries Susan; "la, what's a guinea? If my mistress

should know it I shall certainly lose my place that very instant."

"Here's another for you," says Sophia, "and I promise you faithfully

your mistress shall never know it." Susan, after a very short

hesitation, took the money, and told the whole story, concluding

with saying, "If you have any great curisity, madam, I can steal

softly into his room, and see whether he be in his own bed or no." She

accordingly did this by Sophia's desire, and returned with an answer

in the negative.

  Sophia now trembled and turned pale. Mrs. Honour begged her to be

comforted, and not to think any more of so worthless a fellow. "Why

there," says Susan, "I hope, madam, your ladyship won't be offended;

but pray, madam, is not your ladyship's name Madam Sophia Western?"

"How is it possible you should know me?" answered Sophia. "Why that

man, that the gentlewoman spoke of, who is in the kitchen, told

about you last night. But I hope your ladyship is not angry with

me." "Indeed, child," said she, "I am not; pray tell me all, and I

promise you I'll reward you." "Why, madam," continued Susan, "that man

told us all in the kitchen that Madam Sophia Western- indeed I don't

know how to bring it out."- Here she stopt, till, having received

encouragement from Sophia, and being vehemently pressed by Mrs.

Honour, she proceeded thus:- "He told us, madam, though to be sure it

is all a lie, that your ladyship was dying for love of the young

squire, and that he was going to the wars to get rid of you. I thought

to myself then he was a false-hearted wretch; but, now, to see such

a fine, rich, beautiful lady as you be, forsaken for such an

ordinary woman; for to be sure so she is, and another man's wife

into the bargain. It is such a strange unnatural thing, in a manner."

  Sophia gave her a third guinea, and, telling her she would certainly

be her friend if she mentioned nothing of what had passed, nor

informed any one who she was, dismissed the girl, with orders to the

post-boy to get the horses ready immediately.

  Being now left alone with her maid, she told her trusty

waiting-woman, "That she never was more easy than at present. I am now

convinced," said she, "he is not only a villain, but a low despicable

wretch. I can forgive all rather than his exposing my name in so

barbarous a manner. That renders him the object of my contempt. Yes,

Honour, I am now easy; I am indeed; I am very easy;" and then she

burst into a violent flood of tears.

  After a short interval spent by Sophia, chiefly in crying, and

assuring her maid that she was perfectly easy, Susan arrived with an

account that the horses were ready, when a very extraordinary

thought suggested itself to our young heroine, by which Mr. Jones

would be acquainted with her having been at the inn, in a way which,

if any sparks of affection for her remained in him, would be at

least some punishment for his faults.

  The reader will be pleased to remember a little muff, which hath had

the honour of being more than once remembered already in this history.

This muff, ever since the departure of Mr. Jones, had been the

constant companion of Sophia by day, and her bedfellow by night; and

this muff she had at this very instant upon her arm; whence she took

it off with great indignation, and, having writ her name with her

pencil upon a piece of paper which she pinned to it, she bribed the

maid to convey it into the empty bed of Mr. Jones, in which, if he did

not find it, she charged her to take some method of conveying it

before his eyes in the morning.

  Then, having paid for what Mrs. Honour had eaten, in which bill

was included an account for what she herself might have eaten, she

mounted her horse, and, once more assuring her companion that she

was perfectly easy, continued her journey.





                                Chapter 6



  Containing, among other things, the ingenuity of Partridge, the

madness of Jones, and the folly of Fitzpatrick



  It was now past five in the morning, and other company began to rise

and come to the kitchen, among whom were the serjeant and the

coachman, who, being thoroughly reconciled, made a libation, or, in

the English phrase, drank a hearty cup together.

  In this drinking nothing more remarkable happened than the behaviour

of Partridge, who, when the serjeant drank a health to King George,

repeated only the word King; nor could he be brought to utter more;

for though he was going to fight against his own cause, yet he could

not be prevailed upon to drink against it.

  Mr. Jones, being now returned to his own bed (but from whence he

returned we must beg to be excused from relating), summoned

Partridge from this agreeable company, who, after a ceremonious

preface, having obtained leave to offer his advice, delivered

himself as follows:-

  "It is, sir, an old saying, and a true one, that a wise man may

sometimes learn counsel from a fool; I wish, therefore, I might be

so bold as to offer you my advice, which is to return home again,

and leave these horrida bella, these bloody wars, to fellows who are

contented to swallow gunpowder, because they have nothing else to eat.

Now, everybody knows your honour wants for nothing home; when that's

the case, why should any man travel abroad?"

  "Partridge," cries Jones, "thou art certainly a coward; I wish,

therefore, thou wouldst return home thyself, and trouble me no more."

  "I ask your honour's pardon," cries Partridge; "I spoke on your

account more than my own; for as to me, Heaven knows my

circumstances are bad enough, and I am so far from being afraid,

that I value a pistol, or a blunderbuss, or any such thing, no more

than a pop-gun. Every man must die once, and what signifies the manner

how? besides, perhaps I may come off with the loss only of an arm or a

leg. I assure you, sir, I was never less afraid in my life; and so, if

your honour is resolved to go on, I am resolved to follow you. But, in

that case, I wish I might give my opinion. To be sure, it is a

scandalous way of travelling, for a great gentleman like you to walk

afoot. Now here are two or three good horses in the stable, which

the landlord will certainly make no scruple of trusting you with; but,

if he should, I can easily contrive to take them; and, let the worst

come to the worst, the king would certainly pardon you, as you are

going to fight in his cause."

  Now, as the honesty of Partridge was equal to his understanding, and

both dealt only in small matters, he would never have attempted a

roguery of this kind, had he not imagined it altogether safe; for he

was one of those who have more consideration of the gallows than of

the fitness of things; but, in reality, he thought he might have

committed this felony without any danger; for, besides that he doubted

not but the name of Mr. Allworthy would sufficiently quiet the

landlord, he conceived they should be altogether safe, whatever turn

affairs might take; as Jones, he imagined, would have friends enough

on one side, and as his friends would as well secure him on the other.

  When Mr. Jones found that Partridge was in earnest in this proposal,

he very severely rebuked him, and that in such bitter terms, that

the other attempted to laugh it off, and presently turned the

discourse to other matters; saying, he believed they were then in a

bawdy-house, and that he had with much ado prevented two wenches

from disturbing his honour in the middle of the night. "Heyday!"

says he, "I believe they got into your chamber whether I would or

no; for here lies the muff of one of them on the ground." Indeed, as

Jones returned to his bed in the dark, he had never perceived the muff

on the quilt, and, in leaping into his bed, he had tumbled it on the

floor. This Partridge now took up, and was going to put into his

pocket, when Jones desired to see it. The muff was so very remarkable,

that our heroe might possibly have recollected it without the

information annexed. But his memory was not put to that hard office;

for at the same instant he saw and read the words Sophia Western

upon the paper which was pinned to it. His looks now grew frantic in a

moment, and he eagerly cried out, "Oh Heavens! how came this muff

here?" "I know no more than your honour," cried Partridge; "but I

saw it upon the arm of one of the women who would have disturbed

you, if I would have suffered them." "Where are they?" cries Jones,

jumping out of bed, and laying hold of his cloaths. "Many miles off, I

believe, by this time," said Partridge. And now Jones, upon further

enquiry, was sufficiently assured that the bearer of this muff was

no other than the lovely Sophia herself.

  The behaviour of Jones on this occasion, his thoughts, his looks,

his words, his actions, were such as beggar all description. After

many bitter execrations on Partridge, and not fewer on himself, he

ordered the poor fellow, who was frightened out of his wits, to run

down and hire him horses at any rate; and a very few minutes

afterwards, having shuffled on his clothes, he hastened down-stairs to

execute the orders himself, which he had just before given.

  But before we proceed to what passed on his arrival in the

kitchen, it will be necessary to recur to what had there happened

since Partridge had first left it on his master's summons.

  The serjeant was just marched off with his party, when the two Irish

gentlemen arose, and came downstairs; both complaining that they had

been so often waked by the noises in the inn, that they had never once

been able to close their eyes all night.

  The coach which had brought the young lady and her maid, and

which, perhaps, the reader may have hitherto concluded was her own,

was, indeed, a returned coach belonging to Mr. King, of Bath, one of

the worthiest and honestest men that ever dealt in horseflesh, and

whose coaches we heartily recommend to all our readers who travel that

road. By which means they may, perhaps, have the pleasure of riding in

the very coach, and being driven by the very coachman, that is

recorded in this history.

  The coachman, having but two passengers, and hearing Mr.

Maclachlan was going to Bath, offered to carry him thither at a very

moderate price. He was induced to this by the report of the hostler,

who said that the horse which Mr. Maclachlan had hired from

Worcester would be much more pleased with returning to his friends

there than to prosecute a long journey; for that the said horse was

rather a two-legged than a four-legged animal.

  Mr. Maclachlan immediately closed with the proposal of the coachman,

and, at the same time, persuaded his friend Fitzpatrick to accept of

the fourth place in the coach. This conveyance the soreness of his

bones made more agreeable to him than a horse; and, being well assured

of meeting with his wife at Bath, he thought a little delay would be

of no consequence.

  Maclachlan, who was much the sharper man of the two, no sooner heard

that this lady came from Chester, with the other circumstances which

he learned from the hostler, than it came into his head that she might

possibly be his friend's wife; and presently acquainted him with

this suspicion, which had never once occurred to Fitzpatrick

himself. To say the truth, he was one of those compositions which

nature makes up in too great a hurry, and forgets to put any brains

into their heads.

  Now it happens to this sort of men, as to bad hounds, who never

hit off a fault themselves; but no sooner doth a dog of sagacity

open his mouth than they immediately do the same, and, without the

guidance of any scent, run directly forwards as fast as they are able.

In the same manner, the very moment Mr. Maclachlan had mentioned his

apprehension, Mr. Fitzpatrick instantly concurred, and flew directly

up-stairs, to surprize his wife, before he knew where she was; and

unluckily (as Fortune loves to play tricks with those gentlemen who

put themselves entirely under her conduct) ran his head against

several doors and posts to no purpose. Much kinder was she to me, when

she suggested that simile of the hounds, just before inserted; since

the poor wife may, on these occasions, be so justly compared to a

hunted hare. Like that little wretched animal, she pricks up her

ears to listen after the voice of her pursuer; like her, flies away

trembling when she hears it; and, like her, is generally overtaken and

destroyed in the end.

  This was not however the case at present; for after a long fruitless

search, Mr. Fitzpatrick returned to the kitchen, where, as if this had

been a real chace, entered a gentleman hallowing as hunters do when

the hounds are at a fault. He was just alighted from his horse, and

had many attendants at his heels.

  Here, reader, it may be necessary to acquaint thee with some

matters, which, if thou dost know already, thou art wiser than I

take thee to be. And this information thou shalt receive in the next

chapter.





                                Chapter 7



  In which are concluded the adventures that happened at the inn at

Upton




  In the first place, then, this gentleman just arrived was no other

person than Squire Western himself, who was come hither in pursuit

of his daughter; and, had he fortunately been two hours earlier, he

had not only found her, but his niece into the bargain; for such was

the wife of Mr. Fitzpatrick, who had run away with her five years

before, out of the custody of that sage lady, Madam Western.

  Now this lady had departed from the inn much about the same time

with Sophia; for, having been waked by the voice of her husband, she

had sent up for the landlady, and being by her apprized of the matter,

had bribed the good woman, at an extravagant price, to furnish her

with horses for her escape. Such prevalence had money in this

family; and though the mistress would have turned away her maid for

a corrupt hussy, if she had known as much as the reader, yet she was

no more proof against corruption herself than poor Susan had been.

  Mr. Western and his nephew were not known to one another; nor indeed

would the former have taken any notice of the latter if he had known

him; for, this being a stolen match, and consequently an unnatural one

in the opinion of the good squire, he had, from the time of her

committing it, abandoned the poor young creature, who was then no more

than eighteen, as a monster, and had never since suffered her to be

named in his presence.

  The kitchen was now a scene of universal confusion, Western

enquiring after his daughter, and Fitzpatrick as eagerly after his

wife, when Jones entered the room, unfortunately having Sophia's

muff in his hand.

  As soon as Western saw Jones, he set up the same holla as is used by

sportsmen when their game is in view. He then immediately run up and

laid hold of Jones, crying, "We have got the dog fox, I warrant the

bitch is not far off." The jargon which followed for some minutes,

where many spoke different things at the same time, as it would be

very difficult to describe, so would it be no less unpleasant to read.

  Jones having, at length, shaken Mr. Western off, and some of the

company having interfered between them, our heroe protested his

innocence as to knowing anything of the lady; when Parson Supple

stepped up, and said, "It is folly to deny it; for why, the marks of

guilt are in thy hands. I will myself asseverate and bind it by an

oath, that the muff thou bearest in thy hand belongeth unto Madam

Sophia; for I have frequently observed her, of later days, to bear

it about her." "My daughter's muff!" cries the squire in a rage. "Hath

he got my daughter's muff? bear witness the goods are found upon

him. I'll have him before a justice of peace this instant. Where is my

daughter, villain?" "Sir," said Jones, "I beg you would be pacified.

The muff, I acknowledge, is the young lady's; but, upon my honour, I

have never seen her." At these words Western lost all patience, and

grew inarticulate with rage.

  Some of the servants had acquainted Fitzpatrick who Mr. Western was.

The good Irishman, therefore, thinking he had now an opportunity to do

an act of service to his uncle, and by that means might possibly

obtain his favour, stept up to Jones, and cried out, "Upon my

conscience, sir, you may be ashamed of denying your having seen the

gentleman's daughter before my face, when you know I found you there

upon the bed together." Then, turning to Western, he offered to

conduct him immediately to the room where his daughter was; which

offer being accepted, he, the squire, the parson, and some others,

ascended directly to Mrs. Waters's chamber, which they entered with no

less violence than Mr. Fitzpatrick had done before.

  The poor lady started from her sleep with as much amazement as

terror, and beheld at her bedside a figure which might very well be

supposed to have escaped out of Bedlam. Such wildness and confusion

were in the looks of Mr. Western; who no sooner saw the lady than he

started back, shewing sufficiently by his manner, before he spoke,

that this was not the person sought after.

  So much more tenderly do women value their reputation than their

persons, that, though the latter seemed now in more danger than

before, yet, as the former was secure, the lady screamed not with such

violence as she had done on the other occasion. However, she no sooner

found herself alone than she abandoned all thoughts of further repose;

and, as she had sufficient reason tobe dissatisfied with her present

lodging, she dressed herself with all possible expedition.

  Mr. Western now proceeded to search the whole house, but to as

little purpose as he had disturbed poor Mrs. Waters. He then

returned disconsolate into the kitchen, where he found Jones in the

custody of his servants.

  This violent uproar had raised all the people in the house, though

it was yet scarcely daylight. Among these was a grave gentleman, who

had the honour to be in the commission of the peace for the county

of Worcester. Of which Mr. Western was no sooner informed than he

offered to lay his complaint before him. The justice declined

executing his office, as he said he had no clerk present, nor no

book about justice business; and that he could not carry all the law

in his head about stealing away daughters, and such sort of things.

  Here Mr. Fitzpatrick offered to lend him his assistance, informing

the company that he had been himself bred to the law. (And indeed he

had served three years as clerk to an attorney in the north of

Ireland, when, chusing a genteeler walk in life, he quitted his

master, came over to England, and set up that business which

requires no apprenticeship, namely, that of a gentleman, in which he

had succeeded, as hath been already partly mentioned.)

  Mr. Fitzpatrick declared that the law concerning daughters was out

of the present case; that stealing a muff was undoubtedly felony,

and the goods being found upon the person, were sufficient evidence of

the fact.

  The magistrate, upon the encouragement of so learned a coadjutor,

and upon the violent intercession of the squire, was at length

prevailed upon to seat himself in the chair of justice, where being

placed, upon viewing the muff which Jones still held in his hand,

and upon the parson's swearing it to be the property of Mr. Western,

he desired Mr. Fitzpatrick to draw up a commitment, which he said he

would sign.

  Jones now desired to be heard, which was at last, with difficulty,

granted him. He then produced the evidence of Mr. Partridge, as to the

finding it; but, what was still more, Susan deposed that Sophia

herself had delivered the muff to her, and had ordered her to convey

it into the chamber where Mr. Jones had found it.

  Whether a natural love of justice, or the extraordinary comeliness

of Jones, had wrought on Susan to make the discovery, I will not

determine; but such were the effects of her evidence, that the

magistrate, throwing himself back in his chair, declared that the

matter was now altogether as clear on the side of the prisoner as it

had before been against him. with which the parson concurred,

saying, the Lord forbid he should be instrumental in committing an

innocent person to durance. The justice then arose, acquitted the

prisoner, and broke up the court.

  Mr. Western now gave every one present a hearty curse, and,

immediately ordering his horses, departed in pursuit of his

daughter, without taking the least notice of his nephew Fitzpatrick,

or returning any answer to his claim of kindred, notwithstanding all

the obligations he had just received from that gentleman. In the

violence, moreover, of his hurry, and of his passion, he luckily

forgot to demand the muff of Jones: I say luckily; for he would have

died on the spot rather than have parted with it.

  Jones likewise, with his friend Partridge, set forward the moment he

had paid his reckoning, in quest of his lovely Sophia, whom he now

resolved never more to abandon the pursuit of. Nor could he bring

himself even to take leave of Mrs. Waters; of whom he detested the

very thoughts, as she had been, though not designedly, the occasion of

his missing the happiest interview with Sophia. to whom he now vowed

eternal constancy.

  As for Mrs. Waters, she took the opportunity of the coach which

was going to Bath; for which place she set out in company with the two

Irish gentlemen, the landlady kindly lending her her cloaths; in

return for which she was contented only to receive about double

their value, as a recompence for the loan. Upon the road she was

perfectly reconciled to Mr. Fitzpatrick, who was a very handsome

fellow, and indeed did all she could to console him in the absence

of his wife.

  Thus ended the many odd adventures which Mr. Jones encountered at

his inn at Upton, where they talk, to this day, of the beauty and

lovely behaviour of the charming Sophia, by the name of the

Somersetshire angel.





                                Chapter 8



  In which the history goes backward



  Before we proceed any farther in our history, it may be proper to

look a little back, in order to account for the extraordinary

appearance of Sophia and her father at the inn at Upton.

  The reader may be pleased to remember that, in the ninth chapter

of the seventh book of our history, we left Sophia, after a long

debate between love and duty, deciding the cause, as it usually, I

believe, happens, in favour of the former.

  This debate had arisen, as we have there shown, from a visit which

her father had just before made her, in order to force her consent

to a marriage with Blifil; and which he had understood to be fully

implied in her acknowledgment "that she neither must nor could

refuse any absolute command of his."

  Now from this visit the squire retired to his evening potation,

overjoyed at the success he had gained with his daughter; and, as he

was of a social disposition, and willing to have partakers in his

happiness, the beer was ordered to flow very liberally into the

kitchen; so that before eleven in the evening there was not a single

person sober in the house except only Mrs. Western herself and the

charming Sophia.

  Early in the morning a messenger was despatched to summon Mr.

Blifil; for, though the squire imagined that young gentleman had

been much less acquainted than he really was with the former

aversion of his daughter, as he had not, however, yet received her

consent, he longed impatiently to communicate it to him, not

doubting but that the intended bride herself would confirm it with her

lips. As to the wedding, it had the evening before been fixed, by

the male parties, to be celebrated on the next morning save one.

  Breakfast was now set forth in the parlour, where Mr. Blifil

attended, and where the squire and his sister likewise were assembled;

and now Sophia was ordered to be called.

  O, Shakespear! had I thy pen! O, Hogarth! had I thy pencil! then

would I draw the picture of the poor serving-man, who, with pale

countenance, staring eyes, chattering teeth, faultering tongue, and

trembling limbs,



     (E'en such a man, so faint, so spiritless,

     So dull, so dead in look, so woe-begone,

     Drew Priam's curtains in the dead of night,

     And would have told him, half his Troy was burn'd)



entered the room, and declared- That Madam Sophia was not to be found.

  "Not to be found!" cries the squire, starting from his chair;

"Zounds and d--nation! Blood and fury! Where, when, how, what- Not to

be found! Where?"

  "La! brother," said Mrs. Western, with true political coldness, "you

are always throwing yourself into such violent passions for nothing.

My niece, I suppose, is only walked out into the garden. I protest you

are grown so unreasonable, that it is impossible to live in the

house with you."

  "Nay, nay," answered the squire, returning as suddenly to himself,

as he had gone from himself; "if that be all the matter, it

signifies not much; but, upon my soul, my mind misgave me when the

fellow said she was not to be found." He then gave orders for the bell

to be rung in the garden, and sat himself contentedly down.

  No two things could be more the reverse of each other than were

the brother and sister in most instances; particularly in this, That

as the brother never foresaw anything at a distance, but was most

sagacious in immediately seeing everything the moment it had happened;

so the sister eternally foresaw at a distance, but was not so

quick-sighted to objects before her eyes. Of both these the reader may

have observed examples: and, indeed, both their several talents were

excessive; for, as the sister often foresaw what never came to pass,

so the brother often saw much more than was actually the truth.

  This was not however the case at present. The same report was

brought from the garden as before had been brought from the chamber,

that Madam Sophia was not to be found.

  The squire himself now sallied forth, and began to roar forth the

name of Sophia as loudly, and in as hoarse a voice, as whilome did

Hercules that of Hylas; and, as the poet tells us that the whole shore

echoed back the name of that beautiful youth, so did the house, the

garden, and all the neighbouring fields resound nothing but the name

of Sophia, in the hoarse voices of the men, and in the shrill pipes of

the women; while echo seemed so pleased to repeat the beloved sound,

that, if there is really such a person, I believe Ovid hath belied her

sex.

  Nothing reigned for a long time but confusion; till at last the

squire, having sufficiently spent his breath, returned to the parlour,

where he found Mrs. Western and Mr. Blifil, and threw himself, with

the utmost dejection in his countenance, into a great chair.

  Here Mrs. Western began to apply the following consolation:

  "Brother, I am sorry for what hath happened; and that my niece

should have behaved herself in a manner so unbecoming her family;

but it is all your own doings, and you have nobody to thank but

yourself. You know she hath been educated always in a manner

directly contrary to my advice, and now you see the consequence.

Have I not a thousand times argued with you about giving my niece

own will? But you know I never could prevail upon you; and when I

had taken so much pains to eradicate her headstrong opinions, and to

rectify your errors in policy, you know she was taken out of my hands;

so that I have nothing to answer for. Had I been trusted entirely with

the care of her education, no such accident as this had ever

befallen you; so that you must comfort yourself by thinking it was all

your own doing; and, indeed, what else could be expected from such

indulgence?"--

  "Zounds! sister," answered he, "you are enough to make one mad. Have

I indulged her? Have I given her her will?-- It was no longer ago than

last night that I threatened, if she disobeyed me, to confine her to

her chamber upon bread and water as long as she lived.-You would

provoke the patience of job."

  "Did ever mortal hear the like?" replied she. "Brother, if I had not

the patience of fifty jobs, you would make me forget all decency and

decorum. Why would you interfere? Did I not beg you, did I not intreat

you, to leave the whole conduct to me? You have defeated all the

operations of the campaign by one false step. Would any man in his

senses have provoked a daughter by such threats as these? How often

have I told you that English women are not to be treated like

Ciracessian* slaves? We have the protection of the world; we are to be

won by gentle means only, and not to be hectored, and bullied, and

beat into compliance. I thank Heaven no Salique law governs here.

Brother, you have a roughness in your manner which no woman but myself

would bear. I do not wonder my niece was frightened and terrified into

taking this measure; and, to speak honestly, I think my niece will

be justified to the world for what she hath done. I repeat it to you

again, brother, you must comfort yourself by rememb'ring that it is

all your own fault. How often have I advised-" Here Western rose

hastily from his chair, and venting two or three horrid

imprecations, ran out of the room.



  *Possibly Circassian.



  When he was departed, his sister expressed more bitterness (if

possible) against him than she had done while he was present; for

the truth of which she appealed to Mr. Blifil, who, with great

complacence, acquiesced entirely in all she said; but excused all

the faults of Mr. Western, "as they must be considered," he said,

"to have proceeded from the too inordinate fondness of a father, which

must be allowed the name of an amiable weakness." "So much the more

inexcuseable," answered the lady; "for whom doth he ruin by his

fondness but his own child?" To which Blifil immediately agreed.

  Mrs. Western then began to express great confusion on the account of

Mr. Blifil, and of the usage which he had received from a family to

which he intended so much honour. On this subject she treated the

folly of her niece with great severity; but concluded with throwing

the whole on her brother, who, she said, was inexcuseable to have

proceeded so far without better assurances of his daughter's

consent: "But he was (says she) always of a violent, headstrong

temper; and I can scarce forgive myself for all the advice I have

thrown away upon him."

  After much of this kind of conversation, which, perhaps, would not

greatly entertain the reader, was it here particularly related, Mr.

Blifil took his leave and returned home, not highly pleased with his

disappointment: which, however, the philosophy which he had acquired

from Square, and the religion infused into him by Thwackum, together

with somewhat else, taught him to bear rather better than more

passionate lovers bear these kinds of evils.





                                Chapter 9



  The escape of Sophia



  It is now time to look after Sophia; whom the reader, if he loves

her half so well as I do, will rejoice to find escaped from the

clutches of her passionate father, and from those of her dispassionate

lover.

  Twelve times did the iron register of time beat on the sonorous

bell-metal, summoning the ghosts to rise and walk their nightly

round.-- In plainer language, it was twelve o'clock, and all the

family, as we have said, lay buried in drink and sleep, except only

Mrs. Western, who was deeply engaged in reading a political pamphlet,

and except our heroine, who now softly stole downstairs, and, having

unbarred and unlocked one of the house-doors, sallied forth, and

hastened to the place of appointment.

  Notwithstanding the many pretty arts which ladies sometimes

practise, to display their fears on every little occasion (almost as

many as the other sex uses to conceal theirs), certainly there is a

degree of courage which not only becomes a woman, but is often

necessary to enable her to discharge her duty. It is, indeed, the idea

of fierceness, and not of bravery, which destroys the female

character; for who can read the story of the justly celebrated Arria

without conceiving as high an opinion of her gentleness and tenderness

as of her fortitude? At the same time, perhaps, many a woman who

shrieks at a mouse, or a rat, may be capable of poisoning a husband;

or, what is worse, of driving him to poison himself.

  Sophia, with all the gentleness which a woman can have, had all

the spirit which she ought to have. When, therefore, she came to the

place of appointment, and, instead of meeting her maid, as was agreed,

saw a man ride directly up to her, she neither screamed out nor

fainted away: not that her pulse then beat with its usual

regularity; for she was, at first, under some surprize and

apprehension: but these were relieved almost as soon as raised, when

the man, pulling off his hat, asked her, in a very submissive

manner, "If her ladyship did not expect to meet another lady?" and

then proceeded to inform her that he was sent to conduct her to that

lady.

  Sophia could have no possible suspicion of any falsehood in this

account: she therefore mounted resolutely behind the fellow, who

conveyed her safe to a town about five miles distant, where she had

the satisfaction of finding the good Mrs. Honour: for, as the soul

of the waiting-woman was wrapt up in those very habiliments which used

to enwrap her body, she could by no means bring herself to trust

them out of her sight. Upon these, therefore, she kept guard in

person, while she detached the aforesaid fellow after her mistress,

having given him all proper instructions.

  They now debated what course to take, in order to avoid the

pursuit of Mr. Western, who they knew would send after them in a few

hours. The London road had such charms for Honour, that she was

desirous of going on directly; alleging that, as Sophia could not be

missed till eight or nine the next morning, her pursuers would not

be able to overtake her, even though they knew which way she had gone.

But Sophia had too much at stake to venture anything to chance; nor

did she dare trust too much to her tender limbs, in a contest which

was to be decided only by swiftness. She resolved, therefore, to

travel across the country, for at least twenty or thirty miles, and

then to take the direct road to London. So, having hired horses to

go twenty miles one way, when she intended to go twenty miles the

other, she set forward with the same guide behind whom she had

ridden from her father's house; the guide having now taken up behind

him, in the room of Sophia, a much heavier, as well as much less

lovely burden; being, indeed, a huge portmanteau, well stuffed with

those outside ornaments, by means of which the fair Honour hoped to

gain many conquests, and, finally, to make her fortune in London city.

  When they had gone about two hundred paces from the inn on the

London road, Sophia rode up to the guide, and, with a voice much

fuller of honey than was ever that of Plato, though his mouth is

supposed to have been a bee-hive, begged him to take the first turning

which led towards Bristol.

  Reader, I am not superstitious, nor any great believer of modern

miracles. I do not, therefore, deliver the following as a certain

truth; for, indeed, I can scarce credit it myself: but the fidelity of

an historian obliges me to relate what hath been confidently asserted.

The horse, then, on which the guide rode, is reported to have been

so charmed by Sophia's voice, that he made a full stop, and

expressed an unwillingness to proceed any farther.

  Perhaps, however, the fact may be true, and less miraculous than

it hath been represented; since the natural cause seems adequate to

the effect: for, as the guide at that moment desisted from a

constant application of his armed right heel (for, like Hudibras, he

wore but one spur), it is more than possible that this omission

alone might occasion the beast to stop, especially as this was very

frequent with him at other times.

  But if the voice of Sophia had really an effect on the horse, it had

very little on the rider. He answered somewhat surlily, "That

measter had ordered him to go a different way, and that he should lose

his place if he went any other than that he was ordered."

  Sophia, finding all her persuasions had no effect, began now to

add irresistible charms to her voice; charms which, according to the

proverb, makes the old mare trot, instead of standing still; charms to

which modern ages have attributed all that irresistible force which

the antients imputed to perfect oratory. In a word, she promised she

would reward him to his utmost expectation.

  The lad was not totally deaf to these promises; but he disliked

their being indefinite; for, though perhaps he had never heard that

word, yet that, in fact, was his objection. He said, "Gentlevolks

did not consider the case of poor volks; that he had like to have been

turned away the other day, for riding about the country with a

gentleman from Squire Allworthy's, who did not reward him as he should

have done."

  "With whom?" says Sophia eagerly. "With a gentleman from Squire

Allworthy's," repeated the lad; "the squire's son, I think they call

'un."- "Whither? which way did he go?" says Sophia.- "Why, a little o'

one side o' Bristol, about twenty miles off," answered the lad. "Guide

me," says Sophia, "to the same place, and I'll give thee a guinea,

or two, if one is not sufficient."- "To be certain," said the boy,

"it is honestly worth two, when your ladyship considers what a risk

I run; but, however, if your ladyship will promise me the two guineas,

I'll e'en venture: to be certain it is a sinful thing to ride about my

measter's horses; but one comfort is, I can only be turned away, and

two guineas will partly make me amends."

  The bargain being thus struck, the lad turned aside into the Bristol

road, and Sophia set forward in pursuit of Jones, highly contrary to

the remonstrances of Mrs. Honour, who had much more desire to see

London than to see Mr. Jones: for indeed she was not his friend with

her mistress, as he had been guilty of some neglect in certain

pecuniary civilities, which are by custom due to the

waiting-gentlewoman in all love affairs, and more especially in

those of a clandestine kind. This we impute rather to the carelessness

of his temper than to any want of generosity; but perhaps she

derived it from the latter motive. Certain it is that she hated him

very bitterly on that account, and resolved to take every

opportunity of injuring him with her mistress. It was therefore highly

unlucky for her, that she had gone to the very same town and inn

whence Jones had started, and still more unlucky was she in having

stumbled on the same guide, and on this accidental discovery which

Sophia had made.

  Our travellers arrived at Hambrook* at the break of day, where

Honour was against her will charged to enquire the route which Mr.

Jones had taken. Of this, indeed, the guide himself could have

informed them; but Sophia, I know not for what reason, never asked him

the question.



  *This was the village where Jones met the Quaker.



  When Mrs. Honour had made her report from the landlord, Sophia, with

much difficulty, procured some indifferent horses, which brought her

to the inn where Jones had been confined rather by the misfortune of

meeting with a surgeon than by having met with a broken head.

  Here Honour, being again charged with a commission of enquiry, had

no sooner applied herself to the landlady, and had described the

person of Mr. Jones, than that sagacious woman began, in the vulgar

phrase, to smell a rat. When Sophia therefore entered the room,

instead of answering the maid, the landlady, addressing herself to the

mistress, began the following speech: "Good lack-a-day! why there now,

who would have thought it? I protest the loveliest couple that ever

eye beheld. I-fackins, madam, it is no wonder the squire run on so

about your ladyship. He told me indeed you was the finest lady in

the world, and to be sure so you be. Mercy on him, poor heart! I

bepitied him, so I did, when he used to hug his pillow, and call it

his dear Madam Sophia. I did all I could to dissuade him from going to

the wars: I told him there were men enow that were good for nothing

else but to be killed, that had not the love of such fine ladies."

"Sure," says Sophia, "the good woman is distracted." "No, no," cries

the landlady, "I am not distracted. What, doth your ladyship think I

don't know then? I assure you he told me all." "What saucy fellow,"

cries Honour, "told you anything of my lady?" "No saucy fellow,"

answered the landlady, "but the young gentleman you enquired after,

and a very pretty young gentleman he is, and he loves Madam Sophia

Western to the bottom of his soul." "He love my lady! I'd have you

to know, woman, she is meat for his master."- "Nay, Honour," said

Sophia, interrupting her, "don't be angry with the good woman; she

intends no harm." "No, marry, don't I," answered the landlady,

emboldened by the soft accents of Sophia; and then launched into a

long narrative too tedious to be here set down, in which some passages

dropt that gave a little offence to Sophia, and much more to her

waiting-woman, who hence took occasion to abuse poor Jones to her

mistress the moment they were alone together, saying, "that he must be

a very pitiful fellow, and could have no love for a lady, whose name

he would thus prostitute in an ale house."

  Sophia did not see his behaviour in so very disadvantageous a light,

and was perhaps more pleased with the violent raptures of his love

(which the landlady exaggerated as much as she had done every other

circumstance) than she was offended with the rest; and indeed she

imputed the whole to the extravagance, or rather ebullience, of his

passion, and to the openness of his heart.

  This incident, however, being afterwards revived in her mind, and

placed in the most odious colours by Honour, served to heighten and

give credit to those unlucky occurrences at Upton, and assisted the

waiting-woman in her endeavours to make her mistress depart from

that inn without seeing Jones.

  The landlady finding Sophia intended to stay no longer than till her

horses were ready, and that without either eating or drinking, soon

withdrew; when Honour began to take her mistress to task (for indeed

she used great freedom), and after a long harangue, in which she

reminded her of her intention to go to London, and gave frequent hints

of the impropriety of pursuing a young fellow, she at last concluded

with this serious exhortation: "For heaven's sake, madam, consider

what you are about, and whither you are going."

  This advice to a lady who had already rode near forty miles, and

in no very agreeable season, may seem foolish enough. It may be

supposed she had well considered and resolved this already; nay,

Mrs. Honour, by the hints she threw out, seemed to think so; and

this I doubt not is the opinion of many readers, who have, I make no

doubt, been long since well convinced of the purpose of our heroine,

and have heartily condemned her for it as a wanton baggage.

  But in reality this was not the case. Sophia had been lately so

distracted between hope and fear, her duty and love to her father, her

hatred to Blifil, her compassion, and (why should we not confess the

truth?) her love for Jones; which last the behaviour of her father, of

her aunt, of every one else, and more particularly of Jones himself,

had blown into a flame, that her mind was in that confused state which

may be truly said to make us ignorant of what we do, or whither we go,

or rather, indeed, indifferent as to the consequence of either.

  The prudent and sage advice of her maid produced, however, some cool

reflection; and she at length determined to go to Gloucester, and

thence to proceed directly to London.

  But, unluckily, a few miles before she entered that town, she met

the hack-attorney, who, as is before mentioned, had dined there with

Mr. Jones. This fellow, being well known to Mrs. Honour, stopt and

spoke to her; of which Sophia at that time took little notice, more

than to enquire who he was.

  But, having had a more particular account from Honour of this man

afterwards at Gloucester, and hearing of the great expedition he

usually made in travelling, for which (as hath been before observed)

he was particularly famous; recollecting, likewise, that she had

overheard Mrs. Honour inform him that they were going to Gloucester,

she began to fear lest her father might, by this fellow's means, be

able to trace her to that city; wherefore, if she should there

strike into the London road, she apprehended he would certainly be

able to overtake her. She therefore altered her resolution; and,

having hired horses to go a week's journey a way which she did not

intend to travel, she again set forward after a light refreshment,

contrary to the desire and earnest entreaties of her maid, and to

the no less vehement remonstrances of Mrs. Whitefield, who, from

good breeding, or perhaps from good nature (for the poor young lady

appeared much fatigued), pressed her very heartily to stay that

evening at Gloucester.

  Having refreshed herself only with some tea, and with lying about

two hours the bed, while her horses were getting ready, she resolutely

left Mrs. Whitefield's about eleven at night, and, striking directly

into the Worcester road, within less than four hours arrived at that

very inn where we last saw her.

  Having thus traced our heroine very particularly back from her

departure, till her arrival at Upton, we shall in a very few words

bring her father to the same place; who, having received the first

scent from the post-boy, who conducted his daughter to Hambrook,

very easily traced her afterwards to Gloucester; whence he pursued her

to Upton, as he had learned Mr. Jones had taken that route (for

Partridge, to use the squire's expression, left everywhere a strong

scent behind him), and he doubted not in the least but Sophia

travelled, or, as he phrased it, ran, the same way. He used indeed a

very coarse expression, which need not be here inserted; as

fox-hunters, who alone will understand it, will easily suggest it to

themselves.
