



                                   BOOK XVII

                             CONTAINING THREE DAYS




                                Chapter 1



  Containing a portion of introductory writing



  When a comic writer hath made his principal characters as happy as

he can, or when a tragic writer hath brought them to the highest pitch

of human misery, they both conclude their business to be done, and

that their work is come to a period.

  Had we been of the tragic complexion, the reader must now allow we

were nearly arrived at this period, since it would be difficult for

the devil, or any of his representatives on earth, to have contrived

much greater torments for poor Jones than those in which we left him

in the last chapter; and as for Sophia, a good-natured woman would

hardly wish more uneasiness to a rival than what she must at present

be supposed to feel. What then remains to complete the tragedy but a

murder or two, and a few moral sentences!

  But to bring our favourites out of their present anguish and

distress, and to land them at last on the shore of happiness, seems

a much harder task; a task, indeed, so hard that we do not undertake

to execute it. In regard to Sophia, it is more than probable that we

shall somewhere or other provide a good husband for her in the end-

either Blifil, or my lord, or somebody else; but as to poor Jones,

such are the calamities in which he is at present involved, owing to

his imprudence, by which, if a man doth not become felon to the world,

he is at least a felo de se*; so destitute is he now of friends, and

so persecuted by enemies, that we almost despair of bringing him to

any good; and if our reader delights in seeing executions, I think

he ought not to lose any time in taking a first row at Tyburn.



  *A suicide.



  This I faithfully promise, that, notwithstanding any affection which

we may be supposed to have for this rogue, whom we have

unfortunately made our heroe, we will lend him none of that

supernatural assistance with which we are entrusted, upon condition

that we use it only on very important occasions. If he doth not,

therefore, find some natural means of fairly extricating himself

from all his distresses, we will do no violence to the truth and

dignity of history for his sake; for we had rather relate that he

was hanged at Tyburn (which may very probably be the case) than

forfeit our integrity, or shock the faith of our reader.

  In this the antients had a great advantage over the moderns. Their

mythology, which was at that time more firmly believed by the vulgar

than any religion is at present, gave them always an opportunity of

delivering a favourite heroe. Their deities were always ready at the

writer's elbow, to execute any of his purposes; and the more

extraordinary the invention was, the greater was the surprize and

delight of the credulous reader. Those writers could with greater ease

have conveyed a heroe from one country to another, nay from one

world to another, and have brought him back again, than a poor

circumscribed modern can deliver him from a jail.

  The Arabians and Persians had an equal advantage in writing their

tales from the genii and fairies, which they believe in as an

article of their faith, upon the authority of the Koran itself. But we

have none of these helps. To natural means alone we are confined;

let us try therefore what, by these means, may be done for poor Jones;

though, to confess the truth, something whispers me in the ear, that

he doth not yet know the worst of his fortune; and that a more

shocking piece of news than any he hath yet heard remains for him in

the unopened leaves of fate.





                                Chapter 2



  The generous and grateful behaviour of Mrs. Miller



  Mr. Allworthy and Mrs. Miller were just sat down to breakfast,

when Blifil, who had gone out very early that morning, returned to

make one of the company.

  He had not been long seated before he began as follows: "Good

Lord! my dear uncle, what do you think hath happened? I vow I am

afraid of telling it you, for fear of shocking you with the

remembrance of ever having shewn any kindness to such a villain."

"What is the matter, child?" said the uncle. "I fear I have shown

kindness in my life to the unworthy more than once. But charity doth

not adopt the vices of its objects." "O, sir! " returned Blifil, "it

is not without the secret direction of Providence that you mention the

word adoption. Your adopted son, sir, that Jones, that wretch whom you

nourished in your bosom, hath proved one of the greatest villains upon

earth." "By all that's sacred, 'tis false," cries Mrs. Miller. "Mr.

Jones is no villain. He is one of the worthiest creatures breathing;

and if any other person had called him villain, I would have thrown

all this boiling water in his face." Mr. Allworthy looked very much

amazed at this behaviour. But she did not give him leave to speak,

before, turning to him, she cried, "I hope you will not be angry

with me; I would not offend you, sir, for the world; but, indeed, I

could not bear to hear him called so." "I must own, madam," said

Allworthy, very gravely, "I am a little surprized to hear you so

warmly defend a fellow you do not know." "O! I do know him, Mr.

Allworthy," said she, "indeed I do; I should be the most ungrateful of

all wretches if I denied it. O! he hath preserved me and my little

family; we have all reason to bless him while we live.- And I pray

Heaven to bless him, and turn the hearts of his malicious enemies. I

know, I find, I see, he hath such." "You surprize me, madam, still

more," said Allworthy; "sure you must mean some other. It is

impossible you should have any such obligations to the man my nephew

mentions." "Too surely," answered she, "I have obligations to him of

the greatest and tenderest kind. He hath been the preserver of me

and mine. Believe me, sir, he hath been abused, grossly abused to you;

I know he hath, or you, whom I know to be all goodness and honour,

would not, after the many kind and tender things I have heard you

say of this poor helpless child, have so disdainfully called him

fellow.- Indeed, my best of friends, he deserves a kinder appellation

from you, had you heard the good, the kind, the grateful things

which I have heard him utter of you. He never mentions your name but

with a sort of adoration. In this very room I have seen him on his

knees, imploring all the blessings of heaven upon your head. I do

not love that child there better than he loves you."

  "I see, sir, now," said Blifil, with one of those grinning sneers

with which the devil marks his best beloved, "Mrs. Miller really

doth know him. I suppose you will find she is not the only one of your

acquaintance to whom he hath exposed you. As for my character, I

perceive, by some hints she hath thrown out, he hath been very free

with it, but I forgive him." "And the Lord forgive you, sir!" said

Mrs. Miller; "we have all sins enough to stand in need of his

forgiveness."

  "Upon my word, Mrs. Miller," said Allworthy, "I do not take this

behaviour of yours to my nephew kindly; and I do assure you, as any

reflections which you cast upon him must come only from that wickedest

of men, they would only serve, if that were possible, to heighten my

resentment against him: for I must tell you, Mrs. Miller, the young

man who now stands before you hath ever been the warmest advocate

for the ungrateful wretch whose cause you espouse. This, I think, when

you hear it from my own mouth, will make you wonder at so much

baseness and ingratitude."

  "You are deceived, sir," answered Mrs. Miller; "if they were the

last words which were to issue from my lips, I would say you were

deceived; and I once more repeat it, the Lord forgive those who have

deceived you! I do not pretend to say the young man is without faults;

but they are all the faults of wildness and of youth; faults which

he may, nay, which I am certain he will, relinquish, and, if he should

not, they are vastly overbalanced by one of the most humane, tender,

honest hearts that ever man was blest with."

  "Indeed, Mrs. Miller," said Allworthy, "had this been related of

you, I should not have believed it." "Indeed, sir," answered she, "you

will believe everything I have said, I am sure you will: and when

you have heard the story which I shall tell you (for I will tell you

all), you will be so far from being offended, that you will own (I

know your justice so well), that I must have been the most

despicable and most ungrateful of wretches if I had acted any other

part than I have."

  "Well, madam," said Allworthy, "I shall be very glad to hear any

good excuse for a behaviour which, I must confess, I think wants an

excuse. And now, madam, will you be pleased to let my nephew proceed

in his story without interruption. He would not have introduced a

matter of slight consequence with such a preface. Perhaps even this

story will cure you of your mistake."

  Mrs. Miller gave tokens of submission, and then Mr. Blifil began

thus: "I am sure, sir, if you don't think proper to resent the

ill-usage of Mrs. Miller, I shall easily forgive what affects me only.

I think your goodness hath not deserved this indignity at her

hands." "Well, child," said Allworthy, "but what is this new instance?

What hath he done of late?" "What," cries Blifil, "notwithstanding all

Mrs. Miller hath said, I am very sorry to relate, and what you

should never have heard from me, had it not been a matter impossible

to conceal from the whole world. In short, he hath killed a man; I

will not say murdered- for perhaps it may not be so construed in law,

and I hope the best for his sake."

  Allworthy looked shocked, and blessed himself; and then, turning

to Mrs. Miller, he cried, "Well, madam, what say you now?"

  "Why, I say, sir," answered she, "that never was more concerned at

anything in my life; but, if the fact be true, I am convinced the man,

whoever he is, was in fault. Heaven knows there are many villains in

this town who make it their business to provoke young gentlemen.

Nothing but the greatest provocation could have tempted him; for of

all the gentlemen I ever had in my house, I never saw one so gentle or

so sweet-tempered. He was beloved by everyone in the house, and

every one who came near it."

  While she was thus running on, a violent knocking at the door

interrupted their conversation, and prevented her from proceeding

further, or from receiving any answer; for, as she concluded this

was a visitor to Mr. Allworthy, she hastily retired, taking with her

her little girl, whose eyes were all over blubbered at the

melancholy news she heard of Jones, who used to call her his little

wife, and not only gave her many playthings, but spent whole hours

in playing with her himself.

  Some readers may, perhaps, be pleased with these minute

circumstances, in relating of which we follow the example of Plutarch,

one of the best of our brother historians; and others, to whom they

may appear trivial, will, we hope, at least pardon them, as we are

never prolix on such occasions.





                                Chapter 3



  The arrival of Mr. Western, with some matters concerning the

paternal authority



  Mrs. Miller had not long left the room when Mr. Western entered; but

not before a small wrangling bout had passed between him and his

chairmen; for the fellows, who had taken up their burden at the

Hercules Pillars, had conceived no hopes of having any future good

customer in the squire; and they were moreover farther encouraged by

his generosity (for he had given them of his own accord sixpence

more than their fare); they therefore very boldly demanded another

shilling, which so provoked the squire, that he not only bestowed many

hearty curses on them at the door, but retained his anger after he

came into the room; swearing that all the Londoners were like the

court, and thought of nothing but plundering country gentlemen. "D--n

me," says he, "if I won't walk in the rain rather than get into one of

their hand-barrows again. They have jolted me more in a mile than

Brown Bess would in a long fox-chase."

  When his wrath on this occasion was a little appeased, he resumed

the same passionate tone on another. "There," says he, "there is

fine business forwards now. The hounds have changed at last; and

when we imagined we had a fox to deal with, od-rat it, it turns out to

be a badger at last!

  "Pray, my good neighbour," said Allworthy, "drop your metaphors, and

speak a little plainer." "Why, then," says the squire, "to tell you

plainly, we have been all this time afraid of a son of a whore of a

bastard of somebody's, I don't know whose, not I. And now here's a

confounded son of a whore of a lord, who may be a bastard too for what

I know or care, for he shall never have a daughter of mine by my

consent. They have beggared the nation, but they shall never beggar

me. My land shall never be sent over to Hanover."

  "You surprize me much, my good friend," said Allworthy. "Why,

zounds! I am surprized myself," answered the squire. "I went to zee

sister Western last night, according to her own appointment, and there

I was had into a whole room full of women. There was my lady cousin

Bellaston, and my Lady Betty, and my Lady Catherine, and my lady I

don't know who; d--n me, if ever you catch me among such a kennel of

hoop-petticoat b-s! D--n me, I'd rather be run by my own dogs, as one

Acton was, that the story-book says was turned into a hare, and his

own dogs killed un and eat un. Odrabbit it, no mortal was ever run

in such a manner; if I dodged one way, one had me; if I offered to

clap back, another snapped me. 'O! certainly one of the greatest

matches in England,' says one cousin (here he attempted to mimic

them); 'A very advantageous offer indeed,' cries another cousin (for

you must know they be all my cousins, thof I never zeed half o' um

before). 'Surely,' says that fat a-se b--, my Lady Bellaston,

'cousin, you must be out of your wits to think of refusing such an

offer.'"

  "Now I begin to understand," says Allworthy; "some person hath

made proposals to Miss Western, which the ladies of the family

approve, but is not to your liking."

  "My liking!" said Western, "how the devil should it? I tell you it

is a lord, and those are always volks whom you know I always

resolved to have nothing to do with. Did unt I refuse a matter of

vorty years' purchase now for a bit of land, which one o' um had a

mind to put into a park, only because I would have no dealings with

lords, and dost think I would marry my daughter zu? Besides, ben't I

engaged to you, and did I ever go off any bargain when I had

promised?"

  "As to that point, neighbour," said Allworthy, "I entirely release

you from any engagement. No contract can be binding between parties

who have not a full power to make it at the time, nor ever

afterwards acquire the power of fulfilling it."

  "Slud! then," answered Western, "I tell you I have power, and I will

fulfil it. Come along with me directly to Doctors' Commons, I will get

a licence; and I will go to sister and take away the wench by force,

and she shall ha un, or I will lock her up, and keep her upon bread

and water as long as she lives."

  "Mr. Western," said Allworthy, "shall I beg you will hear my full

sentiments on this matter?"- "Hear thee; ay, to be sure I will,"

answered he. "Why, then, sir," cries Allworthy, "I can truly say,

without a compliment either to you or the young lady, that when this

match was proposed, I embraced it very readily and heartily, from my

regard to you both. An alliance between two families so nearly

neighbours, and between whom there had always existed so mutual an

intercourse and good harmony, I thought a most desirable event; and

with regard to the young lady, not only the concurrent opinion of

all who knew her, but my own observation assured me that she would

be an inestimable treasure to a good husband. I shall say nothing of

her personal qualifications, which certainly are admirable; her good

nature, her charitable disposition, her modesty, are too well known to

need any panegyric: but she hath one quality which existed in a high

degree in that best of women, who is now one of the first of angels,

which, as it is not of a glaring kind, more commonly escapes

observation; so little indeed is it remarked, that I want a word to

express it. I must use negatives on this occasion. I never heard

anything of pertness, or what is called repartee, out of her mouth; no

pretence to wit, much less to that kind of wisdom which is the

result only of great learning and experience, the affectation of

which, in a young woman, is as absurd as any of the affectations of an

ape. No dictatorial sentiments, no judicial opinions, no profound

criticisms. Whenever I have seen her in the company of men, she hath

been all attention, with the modesty of a learner, not the forwardness

of a teacher. You'll pardon me for it, but I once, to try her only,

desired her opinion on a point which was controverted between Mr.

Thwackum and Mr. Square. To which she answered, with much sweetness,

'You will pardon me, good Mr. Allworthy; I am sure you cannot in

earnest think me capable of deciding any point in which two such

gentlemen disagree.' Thwackum and Square, who both alike thought

themselves sure of a favourable decision, seconded my request. She

answered with the same good humour, 'I must absolutely be excused: for

I will affront neither so much as to give my judgment on his side.'

Indeed, she always shewed the highest deference to the

understandings of men; a quality absolutely essential to the making

a good wife. I shall only add, that as she is most apparently void

of all affectation, this deference must be certainly real."

  Here Blifil sighed bitterly; upon which Western, whose eyes were

full of tears at the praise of Sophia, blubbered out, "Don't be

chicken-hearted, for shat ha her, d--n me, shat ha her, if she was

twenty times as good."

  "Remember your promise, sir," cried Allworthy, "I was not to be

interrupted." "Well, shat unt," answered the squire; "I won't speak

another word."

  "Now, my good friend," continued Allworthy, "I have dwelt so long on

the merit of this young lady, partly as I really am in love with her

character, and partly that fortune (for the match in that light is

really advantageous on my nephew's side) might not be imagined to be

my principal view in having so eagerly embraced the proposal.

Indeed, I heartily wished to receive so great a jewel into my

family; but though I may wish for many good things, I would not,

therefore, steal them, or be guilty of any violence or injustice to

possess myself of them. Now to force a woman into a marriage

contrary to her consent or approbation, is an act of such injustice

and oppression, that I wish the laws of our country could restrain it;

but a good conscience is, never lawless in the worst regulated

state, and will provide those laws for itself, which the neglect of

legislators hath forgotten to supply. This is surely a case of that

kind; for, is it not cruel, nay, impious, to force a woman into that

state against her will; for her behaviour in which she is to be

accountable to the highest and most dreadful court of judicature,

and to answer at the peril of her soul? To discharge the matrimonial

duties in an adequate manner is no easy task; and shall we lay this

burthen upon a woman, while we at the same time deprive her of all

that assistance which may enable her to undergo it? Shall we tear

her very heart from her, while we enjoin her duties to which a whole

heart is scarce equal? I must speak very plainly here. I think parents

who act in this manner are accessories to all the guilt which their

children afterwards incur, and of course must, before a just judge,

expect to partake of their punishment; but if they could avoid this,

good heaven! is there a soul who can bear the thought of having

contributed to the damnation of his child?

  "For these reasons, my best neighbour, as I see the inclinations

of this young lady are most unhappily averse to my nephew, I must

decline any further thoughts of the honour you intended him, though

I assure you I shall always retain the most grateful sense of it."

  "Well, sir," said Western (the froth bursting forth from his lips

the moment they were uncorked), "you cannot say but I have heard you

out, and now I expect you'll hear me; and if I don't answer every word

on't, why then I'll consent to gee the matter up. First then, I desire

you to answer me one question- Did not I beget her? did not I beget

her? answer me that. They say, indeed, it is a wise father that

knows his own child; but I am sure I have the best title to her, for I

bred her up. But I believe you will allow me to be her father, and

if I be, am I not to govern my own child? I ask you that, am I not

to govern my own child? and if I am to govern her in other matters,

surely I am to govern her in this, which concerns her most. And what

am I desiring all this while? Am I desiring her to do anything for me:

to give me anything?- Zu much on t'other side, that I am only

desiring her to take away half my estate now, and t'other half when

I die. Well, and what is it all vor? Why, is unt it to make her happy?

It's enough to make one mad to hear volks talk; if I was going to

marry myself, then she would ha reason to cry and to blubber; but,

on the contrary, han't I offered to bind down my land in such a

manner, that I could not marry if I would, seeing as narro' woman upon

earth would ha me. What the devil in hell can I do more? I

contribute to her damnation!- Zounds! I'd zee all the world d--n'd

bevore her little vinger should be hurt. Indeed, Mr. Allworthy, you

must excuse me, but I am surprized to hear you talk in zuch a

manner, and I must say, take it how you will, that I thought you had

more sense."

  Allworthy resented this reflection only with a smile; nor could

he, if he would have endeavoured it, have conveyed into that smile any

mixture of malice or contempt. His smiles at folly were indeed such as

we may suppose the angels bestow on the absurdities of mankind.

  Blifil now desired to be permitted to speak a few words. "As to

using any violence on the young lady, I am sure I shall never

consent to it. My conscience will not permit me to use violence on any

one, much less on a lady for whom, however cruel she is to me, I shall

always preserve the purest and sincerest affection; but yet I have

read that women are seldom proof against perseverance. Why may I not

hope then by such perseverance at last to gain those inclinations,

in which for the future I shall, perhaps, have no rival; for as for

this lord, Mr. Western is so kind to prefer me to him; and sure,

sir, you will not deny but that a parent hath at least a negative

voice in these matters; nay, I have heard this very young lady herself

say so more than once, and declare that she thought children

inexcusable who married in direct opposition to the will of their

parents. Besides, though the other ladies of the family seem to favour

the pretensions of my lord, I do not find the lady herself is inclined

to give him any countenance; alas! I am too well assured she is not; I

am too sensible that wickedest of men remains uppermost in her heart."

  "Ay, ay, so he does," cries Western.

  "But surely," says Blifil, "when she hears of this murder which he

hath committed, if the law should spare his life--"

  "What's that?" cries Western. "Murder! hath he committed a murder,

and is there any hopes of seeing him hanged?-Tol de rol, tol lol de

rol." Here he fell a singing and capering about the room.

  "Child," says Allworthy, "this unhappy passion of yours distresses

me beyond measure. I heartily pity you, and would do every fair

thing to promote your success."

  "I desire no more," cries Blifil; "I am convinced my dear uncle hath

a better opinion of me than to think that I myself would accept of

more."

  "Lookee," says Allworthy, "you have my leave to write, to visit,

if she will permit it- but I insist on no thoughts of violence. I

will have no confinement, nothing of that kind attempted."

  "Well, well," cries the squire, "nothing of that kind shall be

attempted; we will try a little longer what fair means will effect;

and if this fellow be but hanged out of the way- Tol lol de rol! I

never heard better news in my life- I warrant everything goes to my

mind.- Do, prithee, dear Allworthy, come and dine with me at the

Hercules Pillars: I have bespoke a shoulder of mutton roasted, and a

spare-rib of pork, and a fowl and egg-sauce. There will be nobody

but ourselves, unless we have a mind to have the landlord; for I

have sent Parson Supple down to Basingstoke after my tobacco-box,

which I left at an inn there, and I would not lose it for the world;

for it is an old acquaintance of above twenty years' standing. I can

tell you landlord is a vast comical bitch, you will like un hugely."

  Mr. Allworthy at last agreed to this invitation, and soon after

the squire went off, singing and capering at the hopes of seeing the

speedy tragical end of poor Jones.

  When he was gone, Mr. Allworthy resumed the aforesaid subject with

much gravity. He told his nephew, "He wished with all his heart he

would endeavour to conquer a passion, in which I cannot," says he,

"flatter you with any hopes of succeeding. It is certainly a vulgar

error, that aversion in a woman may be conquered by perseverance.

Indifference may, perhaps, sometimes yield to it; but the usual

triumphs gained by perseverence in a lover are over caprice, prudence,

affectation, and often an exorbitant degree of levity, which excites

women not over-warm in their constitutions to indulge their vanity

by prolonging the time of courtship, even when they are well enough

pleased with the object, and resolve (if they ever resolve at all)

to make him a very pitiful amends in the end. But a fixed dislike,

as I am afraid this is, will rather gather strength than be

conquered by time. Besides, my dear, I have another apprehension which

you must excuse. I am afraid this passion which you have for this fine

young creature hath her beautiful person too much for its object,

and is unworthy of the name of that love which is the only

foundation of matrimonial felicity. To admire, to like, and to long

for the possession of a beautiful woman, without any regard to her

sentiments towards us, is, I am afraid, too natural; but love, I

believe, is the child of love only; at least, I am pretty confident

that to love the creature who we are assured hates us is not in

human nature. Examine your heart, therefore, thoroughly, my good

boy, and if, upon examination, you have but the least suspicion of

this kind, I am sure your own virtue and religion will impel you to

drive so vicious a passion from your heart, and your good sense will

soon enable you to do it without pain."

  The reader may pretty well guess Blifil's answer; but, if he

should be at a loss, we are not at present at leisure to satisfy

him, as our history now hastens on to matters of higher importance,

and we can no longer bear to be absent from Sophia.





                                Chapter 4



  An extraordinary scene between Sophia and her aunt



  The lowing heifer and the bleating ewe, in herds and flocks, may

ramble safe and unregarded through the pastures. These are, indeed,

hereafter doomed to be the prey of man; yet many years are they

suffered to enjoy their liberty undisturbed. But if a plump doe be

discovered to have escaped from the forest, and to repose herself in

some field or grove, the whole parish is presently alarmed, every

man is ready to set dogs after her; and, if she is preserved from

the rest by the good squire, it is only that he may secure her for his

own eating.

  I have often considered a very fine young woman of fortune and

fashion, when first found strayed from the pale of her nursery, to

be in pretty much the same situation with this doe. The town is

immediately in an uproar; she is hunted from park to play, from

court to assembly, from assembly to her own chamber, and rarely

escapes a single season from the jaws of some devourer or other;

for, if her friends protect her from some, it is only to deliver her

over to one of their own chusing, of more disagreeable to her than any

of the rest; while whole herds or flocks of other women securely,

and scarce regarded, traverse the park, the play, the opera, and the

assembly; and though, for the most part at least, they are at last

devoured, yet for a long time do they wanton in liberty, without

disturbance or controul.

  Of all these paragons none ever tasted more of this persecution than

poor Sophia. Her ill stars were not contented with all that she had

suffered on account of Blifil, they now raised her another pursuer,

who seemed likely to torment her no less than the other had done.

For though her aunt was less violent, she was no less assiduous in

teizing her, than her father had been before.

  The servants were no sooner departed after dinner, than Mrs.

Western, who had opened the matter to Sophia, informed her, "That

she expected his lordship that very afternoon, and intended to take

the first opportunity of leaving her alone with him." "If you do,

madam," answered Sophia, with some spirit, "I shall take the first

opportunity of leaving him by himself." "How! madam!" cries the

aunt; "is this the return you make me for my kindness in relieving you

from your confinement at your father's?" "You know, madam," said

Sophia, "the cause of that confinement was a refusal to comply with my

father in accepting a man I detested, and will my dear aunt, who

hath relieved me from that distress, involve me in another equally

bad?" "And do you think then, madam," answered Mrs. Western, that

there is no difference between my Lord Fellamar and Mr. Blifil?" "Very

little, in my opinion," cries Sophia; "and, if I must be condemned

to one, I would certainly have the merit of sacrificing myself to my

father's pleasure." "Then my pleasure, I find," said the aunt, "hath

very little weight with you; but that consideration shall not move me.

I act from nobler motives. The view of aggrandizing my family, of

ennobling yourself, is what I proceed upon. Have you no sense of

ambition? Are there no charms in the thoughts of having a coronet on

your coach?" "None, upon my honour," said Sophia. "A pincushion upon

my coach would please me just as well." "Never mention honour,"

cries the aunt. "It becomes not the mouth of such a wretch. I am

sorry, niece, you force me to use these words, but I cannot bear

your groveling temper; you have none of the blood of the Westerns in

you. But, however mean and base your own ideas are, you shall bring no

imputation on mine. I will never suffer the world to say of me that

I encouraged you in refusing one of the best matches in England; a

match which, besides its advantage in fortune, would do honour to

almost any family, and hath, indeed, in title, the advantage of ours."

"Surely," says Sophia, "I am born deficient, and have not the senses

with which other people are blessed; there must be certainly some

sense which can relish the delights of sound and show, which I have

not; for surely mankind would not labour so much, nor sacrifice so

much for the obtaining, nor would they be so elate and proud with

possessing, what appeared to them, as it doth to me, the most

insignificant of all trifles."

  "No, no, miss," cries the aunt; "you are born with as many senses as

other people; but I assure you, you are not born with a sufficient

understanding to make a fool of me, or to expose my conduct to the

world; so I declare this to you, upon my word, and you know, I

believe, how fixed my resolutions are, unless you agree to see his

lordship this afternoon, I will, with my own hands, deliver you

to-morrow morning to my brother, and will never henceforth interfere

with you, nor see your face again." Sophia stood a few moments

silent after this speech, which was uttered in a most angry and

peremptory tone; and then, bursting into tears, she cryed, "Do with

me, madam, whatever you please; I am the most miserable undone

wretch upon earth; if my dear aunt forsakes me, where shall I look for

a protector?" "My dear niece," cries she, "you will have a very good

protector in his lordship; a protector whom nothing but a hankering

after that vile fellow Jones can make you decline." "Indeed, madam,"

said Sophia, "you wrong me. How can you imagine, after what you have

shewn me, if I had ever any such thoughts, that I should not banish

them for ever? If it will satisfy you, I will receive the sacrament

upon it never to see his face again." "But, child, dear child," said

the aunt, "be reasonable; can you invent a single objection?" "I

have already, I think, told you a sufficient objection answered

Sophia. "What?" cries the aunt; "I remember none." "Sure, madam," said

Sophia, "I told you he had used me in the rudest and vilest manner."

"Indeed, child," answered she, "I never heard you, or did not

understand you:- but what do you mean by this rude, vile manner?"

"Indeed, madam, said Sophia, "I am almost ashamed to tell you. He

caught me in his arms, pulled me down upon the settee, and thrust

his hand into my bosom, and kissed it with such violence that I have

the mark upon my left breast at this moment." "Indeed!" said Mrs.

Western. "Yes, indeed, madam," answered Sophia; "my father luckily

came in at that instant, or Heaven knows what rudeness he intended

to have proceeded to." "I am astonished and confounded," cries the

aunt. "No woman of the name of Western hath been ever treated so since

we were a family. I would have torn the eyes of a prince out, if he

had attempted such freedoms with me. It is impossible! sure, Sophia,

you must invent this to raise my indignation against him." "I hope,

madam," said Sophia, "you have too good an opinion of me to imagine me

capable of telling an untruth. Upon my soul it is true." "I should

have stabbed him to the heart, had I been present," returned the aunt.

"Yet surely he could have no dishonourable design; it is impossible!

he durst not: besides, his proposals shew he hath not; for they are

not only honourable, but generous. I don't know; the age allows too

great freedoms. A distant salute is all I would have allowed before

the ceremony. I have had lovers formerly, not so long ago neither;

several lovers, though I never would consent to marriage, and I

never encouraged the least freedom. It is a foolish custom, and what I

never would agree to. No man kissed more of me than my cheek. It is as

much as one can bring oneself to give lips up to a husband; and,

indeed, could I ever have been persuaded to marry, I believe I

should not have soon been brought to endure so much." "You will pardon

me, dear madam," said Sophia, "if I make one observation: you own

you have had many lovers, and the world knows it, even if you should

deny it. You refused them all, and, I am convinced, one coronet at

least among them." "You say true, dear Sophy," answered she; "I had

once the offer of a title." "Why, then," said Sophia, "will you not

suffer me to refuse this once?" "It is true, child, said she, "I

have refused the offer of a title; but it was not so good an offer;

that is, not so very, very good an offer."- "Yes, madam," said

Sophia; "but you have had very great proposals from men of vast

fortunes. It was not the first, nor the second, nor the third

advantageous match that offered itself." "I own it was not," said she.

"Well, madam," continued Sophia, "and why may not I expect to have a

second, perhaps, better than this? You are now but a young woman,

and I am convinced would not promise to yield to the first lover of

fortune, nay, or of title too. I am a very young woman, and sure I

need not despair." "Well, my dear, dear Sophy," cries the aunt,

"what would you have me say?" "Why, I only beg that I may not be

left alone, at least this evening; grant me that, and I will submit,

if you think, after what is past, I ought to see him in your company."

"Well, I will grant it," cries the aunt. "Sophy, you know I love

you, and can deny you nothing. You know the easiness of my nature; I

have not always been so easy. I have been formerly thought cruel; by

the men, I mean. I was called the cruel Parthenissa. I have broke many

a window that has had verses to the cruel Parthenissa in it. Sophy,

I was never so handsome as you, and yet I had something you

formerly. I am a little altered. Kingdoms and states, as Tully

Cicero says in his epistles, undergo alterations, and so must the

human form." Thus run she on for near half an hour upon herself, and

her conquests, and her cruelty, till the arrival of my lord, who,

after a most tedious visit, during which Mrs. Western never once

offered to leave the room, retired, not much more satisfied with the

aunt than with the niece; for Sophia had brought her aunt into so

excellent a temper, that she consented to almost everything her

niece said; and agreed that a little distant behaviour might not be

improper to so forward a lover.

  Thus Sophia, by a little well-directed flattery, for which surely

none will blame her, obtained a little ease for herself, and, at

least, put off the evil day. And now we have seen our heroine in a

better situation than she hath been for a long time before, we will

look a little after Mr. Jones, whom we left in the most deplorable

situation that can be well imagined.





                                Chapter 5



  Mrs. Miller and Mr. Nightingale visit Jones in the prison



  When Mr. Allworthy and his nephew went to meet Mr. Western, Mrs.

Miller set forwards to her son-in-law's lodgings, in order to acquaint

him with the accident which had befallen his friend Jones; but he

had known it long before from Partridge (for Jones, when he left

Mrs. Miller, had been furnished with a room in the same house with Mr.

Nightingale). The good woman found her daughter under great affliction

on account of Mr. Jones, whom having comforted as well as she could,

she set forwards to the Gatehouse, where she heard he was, and where

Mr. Nightingale was arrived before her.

  The firmness and constancy of a true friend is a circumstance so

extremely delightful to persons in any kind of distress, that the

distress itself, if it be only temporary, and admits of relief, is

more than compensated by bringing this comfort with it. Nor are

instances of this kind so rare as some superficial and inaccurate

observers have reported. To say the truth, want of compassion is not

to be numbered among our general faults. The black ingredient which

fouls our disposition is envy. Hence our eye is seldom, I am afraid,

turned upward to those who are manifestly greater, better, wiser, or

happier than ourselves, without some degree of malignity; while we

commonly look downwards on the mean and miserable with sufficient

benevolence and pity. In fact, I have remarked, that most of the

defects which have discovered themselves in the friendships within

my observation, have arisen from envy only: a hellish vice; and yet

one from which I have known very few absolutely exempt. But enough

of a subject which, if pursued, would lead me too far.

  Whether it was that Fortune was apprehensive lest Jones should

sink under the weight of his adversity, and that she might thus lose

any future opportunity of tormenting him, or whether she really abated

somewhat of her severity towards him, she seemed a little to relax her

persecution, by sending him the company of two such faithful

friends, and what is perhaps more rare, a faithful servant. For

Partridge, though he had many imperfections, wanted not fidelity;

and though fear would not suffer him to be hanged for his master,

yet the world, I believe, could not have bribed him to desert his

cause.

  While Jones was expressing great satisfaction in the presence of his

friends, Partridge brought an account that Mr. Fitzpatrick was still

alive, though the surgeon declared that he had very little hopes. Upon

which, Jones fetching a deep sigh, Nightingale said to him, "My dear

Tom, why should you afflict yourself so upon an accident, which,

whatever be the consequence, can be attended with no danger to you,

and in which your conscience cannot accuse you of having been the

least to blame? If the fellow should die, what have you done more than

taken away the life of a ruffian in your own defence? So will the

coroner's inquest certainly find it; and then you will be easily

admitted to bail; and, though you must undergo the form of a trial,

yet it is a trial which many men would stand for you for a

shilling." "Come, come, Mr. Jones," says Mrs. Miller, "chear

yourself up. I knew you could not be the aggressor, and so I told

Mr. Allworthy, and so he shall acknowledge too, before I have done

with him."

  Jones gravely answered, "That whatever might be his fate, he

should always lament the having shed the blood of one of his

fellow-creatures, as one of the highest misfortunes which could have

befallen him. But I have another misfortune of the tenderest kind-- O!

Mrs. Miller, I have lost what I held most dear upon earth." "That must

be a mistress," said Mrs. Miller; "but come, come; I know more than

you imagine" (for indeed Partridge had blabbed all); "and I have heard

more than you know. Matters go better, I promise you, than you

think; and I would not give Blifil sixpence for all the chance which

he hath of the lady."

  "Indeed, my dear friend, indeed," answered Jones, "you are an entire

stranger to the cause of my grief. If you was acquainted with the

story, you would allow my case admitted of no comfort. I apprehend

no danger from Blifil. I have undone myself." "Don't despair," replied

Mrs. Miller; "you know not what a woman can do; and if anything be

in my power, I promise you I will do it to serve you. It is my duty.

My son, my dear Mr. Nightingale, who is so kind to tell me he hath

obligations to you on the same account, knows it is my duty. Shall I

go to the lady myself? I will say anything to her you would have me

say."

  "Thou best of women," cries Jones, taking her by the hand, "talk not

of obligations to me;-- but as you have been so kind to mention it,

there is a favour which, perhaps, may be in your power. I see you

are acquainted with the lady (how you came by your information I

know not), who sits, indeed, very near my heart. If you could contrive

to deliver this (giving her a paper from his pocket), I shall for ever

acknowledge your goodness."

  "Give it me," said Mrs. Miller. "If I see it not in her own

possession before I sleep, may my next sleep be my last! Comfort

yourself, my good young man! be wise enough to take warning from

past follies, and I warrant all shall be well, and I shall yet see you

happy with the most charming young lady in the world; for I so hear

from every one she is."

  "Believe me, madam," said he, "I do not speak the common cant of one

in my unhappy situation. Before this dreadful accident happened, I had

resolved to quit a life of which I was become sensible of the

wickedness as well as folly. I do assure you, notwithstanding the

disturbances I have unfortunately occasioned in your house, for

which I heartily ask your pardon, I am not an abandoned profligate.

Though I have been hurried into vices, I do not approve a vicious

character, nor will I ever, from this moment, deserve it."

  Mrs. Miller expressed great satisfaction in these declarations, in

the sincerity of which she averred she had an entire faith; and now

the remainder of the conversation past in the joint attempts of that

good woman and Mr. Nightingale to cheer the dejected spirits of Mr.

Jones, in which they so far succeeded as to leave him much better

comforted and satisfied than they found him; to which happy alteration

nothing so much contributed as the kind undertaking of Mrs. Miller

to deliver his letter to Sophia, which he despaired of finding any

means to accomplish; for when Black George produced the last from

Sophia, he informed Partridge that she had strictly charged him, on

pain of having it communicated to her father, not to bring her any

answer. He was, moreover, not a little pleased to find he had so

warm an advocate to Mr. Allworthy himself in this good woman, who was,

in reality, one of the worthiest creatures in the world.

  After about an hour's visit from the lady (for Nightingale had

been with him much longer), they both took their leave, promising to

return to him soon; during which Mrs. Miller said she hoped to bring

him some good news from his mistress, and Mr. Nightingale promised

to enquire into the state of Mr. Fitzpatrick's wound, and likewise

to find out some of the persons who were present at the rencounter.

  The former of these went directly in quest of Sophia, whither we

likewise shall now attend her.





                                Chapter 6



  In which Mrs. Miller pays a visit to Sophia



  Access to the young lady was by no means difficult; for, as she

lived now on a perfect friendly footing with her aunt, she was at full

liberty to receive what visitants she pleased.

  Sophia was dressing, when she was acquainted that there was a

gentlewoman below to wait on her. As she was neither afraid, nor

ashamed, to see any of her own sex, Mrs. Miller was immediately

admitted.

  Curtsies and the usual ceremonials between women who are strangers

to each other, being past, Sophia said, "I have not the pleasure to

know you, madam." "No, madam," answered Mrs. Miller, "and I must beg

pardon for intruding upon you. But when you know what has induced me

to give you this trouble, I hope--" "Pray, what is your business,

madam?" said Sophia, with a little emotion. "Madam, we are not alone,"

replied Mrs. Miller, in a low voice. "Go out, Betty," said Sophia.

  When Betty was departed, Mrs. Miller said, "I was desired, madam, by

a very unhappy young gentleman, to deliver you this letter." Sophia

changed colour when she saw the direction, well knowing the hand,

and after some hesitation, said- "I could not conceive, madam, from

your appearance, that your business had been of such a nature.-

Whomever you brought this letter from, I shall not open it. I should

be sorry to entertain an unjust suspicion of any one; but you are an

utter stranger to me."

  "If you will have patience, madam, " answered Mrs. Miller, "I will

acquaint you who I am, and how I came by that letter." "I have no

curiosity, madam, to know anything," cries Sophia; "but I must

insist on your delivering that letter back to the person who gave it

you."

  Mrs. Miller then fell upon her knees, and in the most passionate

terms implored her compassion; to which Sophia answered: "Sure, madam,

it is surprizing you should be so very strongly interested in the

behalf of this person. I would not think, madam"- "No, madam." says

Mrs. Miller, "you shall not think anything but the truth. I will

tell you all, and you will not wonder that I am interested. He is

the best-natured creature that ever was born."-- She then began and

related the story of Mr. Anderson.-- After this she cried, "This

madam, this is his goodness; but I have much more tender obligations

to him. He hath preserved my child."-- Here, after shedding some

tears, she related everything concerning that fact, suppressing only

those circumstances which would have most reflected on her daughter,

and concluded with saying, "Now, madam, you shall judge whether I

can ever do enough for so kind, so good, so generous a young man;

and sure he is the best and worthiest of all human beings."

  The alterations in the countenance of Sophia had hitherto been

chiefly to her disadvantage, and had inclined her complexion to too

great paleness; but she now waxed redder, if possible, than vermilion,

and cried, "I know not what to say; certainly what arises from

gratitude cannot be blamed-- But what service can my reading this

letter do your friend, since I am resolved never--" Mrs. Miller fell

again to her entreaties, and begged to be forgiven, but she could not,

she said, carry it back. "Well, madam," says Sophia, "I cannot help

it, if you will force it upon me.- Certainly you may leave it, whether

I will or no." What Sophia meant, or whether she meant anything, I

will not presume to determine; but Mrs. Miller actually understood

this as a hint, and presently laying the letter down on the table,

took her leave, having first begged permission to wait again on

Sophia; which request had neither assent nor denial.

  The letter lay upon the table no longer than till Mrs. Miller was

out of sight; for then Sophia opened and read it.

  This letter did very little service to his cause; for it consisted

of little more than confessions of his own unworthiness, and bitter

lamentations of despair, together with the most solemn protestations

of his unalterable fidelity to Sophia, of which, he said, he hoped

to convince her, if he had ever more the honour of being admitted to

her presence; and that he could account for the letter to Lady

Bellaston in such a manner, that, though it would not entitle him to

her forgiveness, he hoped at least to obtain it from her mercy. And

concluded with vowing that nothing was ever less in his thoughts

than to marry Lady Bellaston.

  Though Sophia read the letter twice over with great attention, his

meaning still remained a riddle to her; nor could her invention

suggest to her any means to excuse Jones. She certainly remained

very angry with him, though indeed Lady Bellaston took up so much of

her resentment, that her gentle mind had but little left to bestow

on any other person.

  That lady was most unluckily to dine this very day with her aunt

Western, and in the afternoon they were all three, by appointment,

to go together to the opera, and thence to Lady Thomas Hatchet's drum.

Sophia would have gladly been excused from all, but would not

disoblige her aunt; and as to the arts of counterfeiting illness,

she was so entirely a stranger to them, that it never once entered

into her head. When she was drest, therefore, down she went,

resolved to encounter all the horrors of the day, and a most

disagreeable one it proved; for Lady Bellaston took every

opportunity very civilly and slily to insult her; to all which her

dejection of spirits disabled her from making any return; and, indeed,

to confess the truth, she was at the very best but an indifferent

mistress of repartee.

  Another misfortune which befel poor Sophia, was the company of

Lord Fellamar, whom she met at the opera, and who attended her to

the drum. And though both places were too publick to admit of any

particularities, and she was farther relieved by the musick at the one

place, and by the cards at the other, she could not, however, enjoy

herself in his company; for there is something of delicacy in women,

which will not suffer them to be even easy in the presence of a man

whom they know to have pretensions to them, which they are disinclined

to favour.

  Having in this chapter twice mentioned a drum, a word which our

posterity, it is hoped, will not understand in the sense it is here

applied, we shall, notwithstanding our present haste, stop a moment to

describe the entertainment here meant, and the rather as we can in a

moment describe it.

  A drum, then, is an assembly of well-dressed persons of both

sexes, most of whom play at cards, and the rest do nothing at all;

while the mistress of the house performs the part of the landlady at

an inn, and like the landlady of an inn prides herself in the number

of her guests, though she doth not always, like her, get anything by

it.

  No wonder then, as so much spirits must be required to support any

vivacity in these scenes of dulness, that we hear persons of fashion

eternally complaining of the want of them; a complaint confined

entirely to upper life. How insupportable must we imagine this round

of impertinence to have been to Sophia at this time; how difficult

must she have found it to force the appearance of gaiety into her

looks, when her mind dictated nothing but the tenderest sorrow, and

when every thought was charged with tormenting ideas!

  Night, however, at last restored her to her pillow, where we will

leave her to soothe her melancholy at least, though incapable, we

fear, of rest, and shall pursue our history, which, something whispers

us, is now arrived at the eve of some great event.





                                Chapter 7



  A pathetic scene between Mr. Allworthy and Mrs. Miller



  Mrs. Miller had a long discourse with Mr. Allworthy, at his return

from dinner, in which she acquainted him with Jones's having

unfortunately lost all which he was pleased to bestow on him at

their separation; and with the distresses to which that loss had

subjected him; of all which she had received a full account from the

faithful retailer Partridge. She then explained the obligations she

had to Jones; not that she was entirely explicit with regard to her

daughter; for though she had the utmost confidence in Mr. Allworthy,

and though there could be no hopes of keeping an affair secret which

was unhappily known to more than half a dozen, yet she could not

prevail with herself to mention those circumstances which reflected

most on the chastity of poor Nancy, but smothered that part of her

evidence as cautiously as if she had been before a judge, and the girl

was now on her trial for the murder of a bastard.

  Allworthy said, there were few characters so absolutely vicious as

not to have the least mixture of good in them. "However," says he,

"I cannot deny but that you have some obligations to the fellow, bad

as he is, and I shall therefore excuse what hath past already, but

must insist you never mention his name to me more; for, I promise you,

it was upon the fullest and plainest evidence that I resolved to

take the measures I have taken." "Well, sir," says she, "I make not

the least doubt but time will shew all matters in their true and

natural colours, and that you will be convinced this poor young man

deserves better of you than some other folks that shall be nameless."

  "Madam," cries Allworthy, a little ruffied, "I will not hear any

reflections on my nephew; and if ever you say a word more of that

kind, I will depart from your house that instant. He is the

worthiest and best of men; and I once more repeat it to you, he hath

carried his friendship to this man to a blameable length, by too

long concealing facts of the blackest die. The ingratitude of the

wretch to this good young man is what I most resent; for, madam, I

have the greatest reason to imagine he had laid a plot to supplant

my nephew in my favour, and to have disinherited him."

  "I am sure, sir," answered Mrs. Miller, a little frightened (for,

though Mr. Allworthy had the utmost sweetness and benevolence in his

smiles, he had great terror in his frowns), "I shall never speak

against any gentleman you are pleased to think well of. I am sure,

sir, such behaviour would very little become me, especially when the

gentleman is your nearest relation; but, sir, you must not be angry

with me, you must not indeed, for my good wishes to this poor

wretch. Sure I may call him so now, though once you would have been

angry with me if I had spoke of him with the least disrespect. How

often have I heard you call him your son? How often have you

prattled to me of him with all the fondness of a parent? Nay, sir, I

cannot forget the many tender expressions, the many good things you

have told me of his beauty, and his parts, and his virtues; of his

good-nature and generosity. I am sure, sir, I cannot forget them,

for I find them all true. I have experienced them in my own cause.

They have preserved my family. You must pardon my tears, sir, indeed

you must. When I consider the cruel reverse of fortune which this poor

youth, to whom I am so much obliged, hath suffered; when I consider

the loss of your favour, which I know he valued more than his life,

I must, I must lament him. If you had a dagger in your hand, ready

to plunge into my heart, I must lament the misery of one whom you have

loved, and I shall ever love."

  Allworthy was pretty much moved with this speech, but it seemed

not to be with anger; for, after a short silence, taking Mrs. Miller

by the hand, he said very affectionately to her, "Come, madam, let

us consider a little about your daughter. I cannot blame you for

rejoicing in a match which promises to be advantageous to her, but you

know this advantage, in a great measure, depends on the father's

reconciliation. I know Mr. Nightingale very well, and have formerly

had concerns with him; I will make him a visit, and endeavour to serve

you in this matter. I believe he is a worldly man; but as this is an

only son, and the thing is now irretrievable, perhaps he may in time

be brought to reason. I promise you I will do all I can for you."

  Many were the acknowledgments which the poor woman made to Allworthy

for this kind and generous offer, nor could she refrain from taking

this occasion again to express her gratitude towards Jones, "to whom,"

said she, "I owe the opportunity of giving you, sir, this present

trouble." Allworthy gently stopped her; but he was too good a man to

be really offended with the effects of so noble a principle as now

actuated Mrs. Miller; and indeed, had not this new affair inflamed his

former anger against Jones, it is possible he might have been a little

softened towards him, by the report of an action which malice itself

could not have derived from an evil motive.

  Mr. Allworthy and Mrs. Miller had been above an hour together,

when their conversation was put an end to by the arrival of Blifil and

another person,which other person no less than Mr. Dowling, the

attorney, who was now become a great favourite with Mr. Blifil, and

whom Mr. Allworthy, at the desire of his nephew, had made his steward;

and had likewise recommended him to Mr. Western, from whom the

attorney received a promise of being promoted to the same office

upon the first vacancy; and, in the meantime, was employed in

transacting some affairs which the squire then had in London in

relation to a mortgage.

  This was the principal affair which then brought Mr. Dowling to

town; therefore he took the same opportunity to charge himself with

some money for Mr. Allworthy, and to make a report to him of some

other business; in all which, as it was of much too dull a nature to

find any place in this history, we will leave the uncle, nephew, and

their lawyer concerned, and resort to other matters.





                                Chapter 8



  Containing various matters



  Before we return to Mr. Jones, we will take one more view of Sophia.

  Though that young lady had brought her aunt into great good humour

by those soothing methods which we have before related, she had not

brought her in the least to abate of her zeal for the match with

Lord Fellamar. This zeal was now inflamed by Lady Bellaston, who had

told her the preceding evening, that she was well satisfied from the

conduct of Sophia, and from her carriage to his lordship, that all

delays would be dangerous, and that the only way to succeed was to

press the match forward with such rapidity that the young lady

should have no time to reflect, and be obliged to consent while she

scarce knew what she did; in which manner, she said, one-half of the

marriages among people of condition were brought about. A fact very

probably true, and to which, I suppose, is owing the mutual tenderness

which afterwards exists among so many happy couples.

  A hint of the same kind was given by the same lady to Lord Fellamar;

and both these so readily embraced the advice, that the very next

day was, at his lordship's request, appointed by Mrs. Western for a

private interview between the young parties. This was communicated

to Sophia by her aunt, and insisted upon in such high terms, that,

after having urged everything she possibly could invent against it

without the least effect, she at last agreed to give the highest

instance of complacence which any young lady can give, and consented

to see his lordship.

  As conversations of this kind afford no great entertainment, we

shall be excused from reciting the whole that past at this

interview; in which, after his lordship had made many declarations

of the most pure and ardent passion to the silent blushing Sophia, she

at last collected all the spirits she could raise, and with a

trembling low voice said, "My lord, you must be yourself conscious

whether your former behaviour to me hath been consistent with the

professions you now make." "Is there," answered he, "no way by which I

can atone for madness? what I did, I am afraid, must have too

plainly convinced you, that the violence of love had deprived me of my

senses." "Indeed, my lord," said she, "it is in your power to give

me a proof of an affection which I much rather wish to encourage,

and to which I should think myself more beholden." "Name it, madam,"

said my lord, very warmly. "My lord," says she, looking down upon

her fan, "I know you must be sensible how uneasy this pretended

passion of yours hath made me." "Can you be so cruel to call it

pretended?" says he. "Yes, my lord," answered Sophia, "all professions

of love to those whom we persecute are most insulting pretences.

This pursuit of yours is to me a most cruel persecution: nay, it is

taking a most ungenerous advantage of my unhappy situation." "Most

lovely, most adorable charmer, do not accuse me," cries he, "of taking

an ungenerous advantage, while I have no thoughts but what are

directed to your honour and interest, and while I have no view, no

hope, no ambition, but to throw myself, honour, fortune, everything at

your feet." "My lord," says she, "it is that fortune and those honours

which gave you the advantage of which I complain. These are the charms

which have seduced my relations, but to me they are things

indifferent. If your lordship will merit my gratitude, there is but

one way." "Pardon me, divine creature," said he, "there can be none.

All I can do for you is so much your due, and will give me so much

pleasure, that there is no room for your gratitude." "Indeed, my

lord," answered she, "you may obtain my gratitude, my good opinion,

every kind thought and wish which it is in my power to bestow; nay,

you may obtain them with ease, for sure to a generous mind it must

be easy to grant my request. Let me beseech you, then, to cease a

pursuit in which you can never have any success. For your own sake

as well as mine, I entreat this favour; for sure you are too noble

to have any pleasure in tormenting an unhappy creature. What can

your lordship propose but uneasiness to yourself by a perseverance,

which, upon my honour, upon my soul, cannot, shall not prevail with

me, whatever distresses you may drive me to." Here my lord fetched a

deep sigh, and then said- "Is it then, madam, that I am so unhappy to

be the object of your dislike and scorn; or will you pardon me if I

suspect there is some other?" Here he hesitated, and Sophia answered

with some spirit, "My lord, I shall not be accountable to you for

the reasons of my conduct. I am obliged to your lordship for the

generous offer you have made; I own it is beyond either my deserts

or expectations; yet I hope, my lord, you will not insist on my

reasons, when I declare I cannot accept it." Lord Fellamar returned

much to this, which we do not perfectly understand, and perhaps it

could not all be strictly reconciled either to sense or grammar; but

he concluded his ranting speech with saying, "That if she had

pre-engaged herself to any gentleman, however unhappy it would make

him, he should think himself bound in honour to desist." Perhaps my

lord laid too much emphasis on the word gentleman; for we cannot

else well account for the indignation with which he inspired Sophia,

who, in her answer, seemed greatly to resent some affront he had given

her.

  While she speaking, with her voice more raised than usual, Mrs.

Western came into the room, the fire glaring in her cheeks, and the

flames bursting from her eyes. "I am ashamed," says she, "my lord,

of the reception which you have met with. I assure your lordship, we

are all sensible of the honour done us; and I must tell you, Miss

Western, the family expect a different behaviour from you." Here my

lord interfered on behalf of the young lady, but to no purpose; the

aunt proceeded till Sophia pulled her handkerchief, threw herself into

a chair, and burst into a violent fit of tears.

  The remainder of the conversation between Mrs. Western and his

lordship, till the latter withdrew, consisted of bitter lamentations

on his side, and on hers of the strongest assurances that her niece

should and would consent to all he wished. "Indeed, my lord," says

she, "the girl hath had a foolish education, neither adapted to her

fortune nor her family. Her father, I am sorry to say it, is to

blame for everything. The girl hath silly country notions of

bashfulness. Nothing else, my lord, upon my honour; I am convinced she

hath a good understanding at the bottom, and will be brought to

reason."

  This last speech was made in the absence of Sophia; for she had some

time before left the room, with more appearance of passion than she

had ever shown on any occasion; and now his lordship, after many

expressions of thanks to Mrs. Western, many ardent professions of

passion which nothing could conquer, and many assurances of

perseverance, which Mrs. Western highly encouraged, took his leave for

this time.

  Before we relate what now passed between Mrs. Western and Sophia, it

may be proper to mention an unfortunate accident which had happened,

and which had occasioned the return of Mrs. Western with so much fury,

as we have seen.

  The reader then must know, that the maid who at present attended

on Sophia was recommended by Lady Bellaston, with whom she had lived

for some time in the capacity of a comb-brush: she was a very sensible

girl, and had received the strictest instructions to watch her young

lady very carefully. These instructions, we are sorry to say, were

communicated to her by Mrs. Honour, into whose favour Lady Bellaston

had now so ingratiated herself, that the violent affection which the

good waiting-woman had formerly borne to Sophia was entirely

obliterated by that great attachment which she had to her new

mistress.

  Now, when Mrs. Miller was departed, Betty (for that was the name

of the girl), returning to her young lady, found her very

attentively engaged in reading a long letter, and the visible emotions

which she betrayed on that occasion might have well accounted for some

suspicions which the girl entertained; but in, deed they had yet a

stronger foundation, for she had overheard the whole scene which

passed between Sophia and Mrs. Miller.

  Mrs. Western was acquainted with all this matter by Betty, who,

after receiving many commendations and some rewards for her

fidelity, was ordered, that, if the woman who brought the letter

came again, she should introduce her to Mrs. Western herself.

  Unluckily, Mrs. Miller returned at the very time when Sophia was

engaged with his lordship. Betty, according to order, sent her

directly to the aunt; who, being mistress of so many circumstances

relating to what had past the day before, easily imposed upon the poor

 woman to believe that Sophia had communicated the whole affair; and

so pumped everything out of her which she knew relating to the

letter and relating to Jones.

  This poor creature might, indeed, be called simplicity itself. She

was one of that order of mortals who are apt to believe everything

which is said to them; to whom nature hath neither indulged the

offensive nor defensive weapons of deceit, and who are consequently

liable to be imposed upon by any one who will only be at the expense

of a little falsehood for that purpose. Mrs. Western, having drained

Mrs. Miller of all she knew, which, indeed, was but little, but

which was sufficient to make the aunt suspect a great deal,

dismissed her with assurances that Sophia would not see her, that

she would send no answer to the letter, nor ever receive another;

nor did she suffer her to depart without a handsome lecture on the

merits of an office to which she could afford no better name than that

of procuress.- This discovery had greatly discomposed her temper,

when, coming into the apartment next to that in which the lovers were,

she overheard Sophia very warmly protesting against his lordship's

addresses. At which the rage already kindled burst forth, and she

rushed in upon her niece in a most furious manner, as we have

already described, together with what past at that time till his

lordship's departure.

  No sooner was Lord Fellamar gone, than Mrs. Western returned to

Sophia, whom she upbraided in the most bitter terms for the ill use

she had made of the confidence reposed in her; and for her treachery

in conversing with a man with whom she had offered but the day

before to bind herself in the most solemn oath never more to have

any conversation. Sophia protested she had maintained no such

conversation. "How, how! Miss Western," said the aunt; "will you

deny your receiving a letter from him yesterday?" "A letter, madam!"

answered Sophia, somewhat surprized. "It is not very well bred, miss,"

replies the aunt, "to repeat my words. I say a letter, and I insist

upon your showing it me immediately." "I scorn a lie, madam," said

Sophia; "I did receive a letter, but it was without my desire, and,

indeed, I may say, against my consent." "Indeed, indeed, miss,"

cries the aunt, "you ought to be ashamed of owning you had received it

at all; but where is the letter? for I will see it."

  To this peremptory demand, Sophia paused some time before she

returned an answer; and at last only excused herself by declaring

she had not the letter in her pocket, which was, indeed, true; upon

which her aunt, losing all manner of patience, asked her niece this

short question, whether she would resolve to marry Lord Fellamar, or

no? to which she received the strongest negative. Mrs. Western then

replied with an oath, or something very like one, that she would early

the next morning deliver her back into her father's hand.

  Sophia then began to reason with her aunt in the following

manner:- "Why, madam, must I of necessity be forced to marry at all?

Consider how cruel you would have thought it in your own case, and how

much kinder your parents were in leaving you to your liberty. What

have I done to forfeit this liberty? I will never marry contrary to my

father's consent, nor without asking yours-- And when I ask the

consent of either improperly, it will be then time enough to force

some other marriage upon me. "Can I bear to hear this," cries Mrs.

Western, "from a girl who hath now a letter from a murderer in her

pocket?" "I have no such letter, I promise you," answered Sophia;

"and, if he be a murderer, he will soon be in no condition to give you

any further disturbance." "How, Miss Western!" said the aunt, "have

you the assurance to speak of him in this manner; to own your

affection for such a villain to my face?" "Sure, madam," said

Sophia, "you put a very strange construction on my words." "Indeed,

Miss Western," cries the lady, "I shall not bear this usage; you

have learnt of your father this manner of treating me; he hath

taught you to give me the lie. He hath totally ruined you by this

false system of education; and, please heaven, he shall have the

comfort of its fruits; for once more I declare to you, that

to-morrow morning I will carry you back. I will withdraw all my forces

from the field, and remain henceforth, like the wise king of

Prussia, in a state of perfect neutrality. You are both too wise to be

regulated by my measures; so prepare yourself, for to-morrow morning

you shall evacuate this house."

  Sophia remonstrated all she could; but her aunt was deaf to all

she said. In this resolution therefore we must at present leave her,

as there seems to be no hopes of bringing her to change it.





                                Chapter 9



  What happened to Mr. Jones in the prison



  Mr. Jones passed about twenty-four melancholy hours by himself,

unless when relieved by the company of Partridge, before Mr.

Nightingale returned; not that this worthy young man had deserted or

forgot his friend; for, indeed, he had been much the greatest part

of the time employed in his service.

  He had heard, upon enquiry, that the only persons who had seen the

beginning of the unfortunate rencounter were a crew belonging to a

man-of-war which then lay at Deptford. To Deptford therefore he went

in search of this crew, where he was informed that the men he sought

after were all gone ashore. He then traced them from place to place,

till at last he found two of them drinking together, with third

person, at a hedge-tavern near Aldersgate.

  Nightingale desired to speak with Jones by himself (for Partridge

was in the room when he came in). As soon as they were alone,

Nightingale, taking Jones by the hand, cried, "Come, my brave

friend, be not too much dejected at what I am going to tell you-- I am

sorry I am the messenger of bad news; but I think it my duty to tell

you." "I guess already what that bad news is," cries Jones. "The

poor gentleman then is dead."-- "I hope not," answered Nightingale.

"He was alive this morning; though I will not flatter you; I fear,

from the accounts I could get, that his wound is mortal. But if the

affair be exactly as you told it, your own remorse would be all you

would have reason to apprehend, let what would happen; but forgive me,

my dear Tom, if I entreat you to make the worst of your story to

your friends. If you disguise anything to us, you will only be an

enemy to yourself."

  "What reason, my dear Jack, have I ever given you," said Jones,

"to stab me with so cruel a suspicion?" "Have patience," cries

Nightingale," and I will tell you all. After the most diligent enquiry

I could make, I at last met with two of the fellows who were present

at this unhappy accident, and I am sorry to say, they do not relate

the story so much in your favour as you yourself have told it."

"Why, what do they say?" cries Jones. "Indeed what I am sorry to

repeat, as I am afraid of the consequence of it to you. They say

that they were at too great a distance to overhear any words that

passed between you: but they both agree that the first blow was

given by you." "Then, upon my soul," answered Jones, "they injure

me. He not only struck me first, but struck me without the least

provocation. What should induce those villains to accuse me

falsely?" "Nay, that I cannot guess," said Nightingale, "and if you

yourself, and I, who am so heartily your friend, cannot conceive a

reason why they should belie you, what reason will an indifferent

court of justice be able to assign why they should not believe them? I

repeated the question to them several times, and so did another

gentleman who was present, who, I believe, is a seafaring man, and who

really acted a very friendly part by you; for he begged them often to

consider that there was the life of a man in the case; and asked

them over and over, if they were certain; to which they both answered,

that they were, and would abide by their evidence upon oath. For

heaven's sake, my dear friend, recollect yourself; for, if this should

appear to be the fact, it will be your business to think in time of

making the best of your interest. I would not shock you; but you know,

I believe, the severity of the law, whatever verbal provocations may

have been given you." "Alas! my friend," cries Jones, "what interest

hath such a wretch as I? Besides, do you think I would even wish to

live with the reputation of a murderer? If I had any friends (as,

alas! I have none), could I have the confidence to solicit them to

speak in the behalf of a man condemned for the blackest crime in human

nature? Believe me, I have no such hope; but I have some reliance on a

throne still greatly superior; which will, I am certain, afford me all

the protection I merit."

  He then concluded with many solemn and vehement protestations of the

truth of what he had at first asserted.

  The faith of Nightingale was now again staggered, and began to

incline to credit his friend, when Mrs. Miller appeared, and made a

sorrowful report of the success of her embassy; which when Jones had

heard, he cried out most heroically, "Well, my friend, I am now

indifferent as to what shall happen, at least with regard to my

life; and if it be the will of Heaven that I shall make an atonement

with that for the blood I have spilt, I hope the Divine Goodness

will one day suffer my honour to be cleared, and that the words of a

dying man, at least, will be believed, so far as to justify his

character."

  A very mournful scene now past between the prisoner and his friends,

at which, as few readers would have been pleased to be present, so

few, I believe, will desire to hear it particularly related. We

will, therefore, pass on to the entrance of the turnkey, who

acquainted Jones that there was a lady without who desired to speak

with him when he was at leisure.

  Jones declared his surprize at this message. He said, "He knew no

lady in the world whom he could possibly expect to see there."

However, as he saw no reason to decline seeing any person, Mrs. Miller

and Mr. Nightingale presently took their leave, and he gave orders

to have the lady admitted.

  If Jones was surprized at the news of a visit from a lady, how

greatly was he astonished when he discovered this lady to be no

other than Mrs. Waters! In this astonishment then we shall leave him

awhile, in order to cure the surprize of the reader, who will

likewise, probably, not a little wonder at the arrival of this lady.

  Who this Mrs. Waters was, the reader pretty well knows; what she

was, he must be perfectly satisfied. He will therefore be pleased to

remember that this lady departed from Upton in the same coach with Mr.

Fitzpatrick and the other Irish gentleman, and in their company

travelled to Bath.

  Now there was a certain office in the gift of Mr. Fitzpatrick at

that time vacant, namely that of a wife: for the lady who had lately

filled that office had resigned, or at least deserted her duty. Mr.

Fitzpatrick therefore, having thoroughly examined Mrs. Waters on the

road, found her extremely fit for the place, which, on their arrival

at Bath, he presently conferred upon her, and she without any

scruple accepted. As husband and wife this gentleman and lady

continued together all the time they stayed at Bath, and as husband

and wife they arrived together in town.

  Whether Mr. Fitzpatrick was so wise a man as not to part with one

good thing till he had secured another, which he had at present only a

prospect or whether Mrs. Waters had so well discharged her office,

that he intended still to retain her as principal, and to make his

wife (as is often the case) only her deputy, I will not say; but

certain it is, he never mentioned his wife to her, never

communicated to her the letter given him by Mrs. Western, nor ever

once hinted his purpose of repossessing his wife; much less did he

ever mention the name of Jones. For, though he intended to fight

with him wherever he met him, he did not imitate those prudent persons

who think a wife, a mother, a sister, or sometimes a whole family, the

safest seconds on these occasions. The first account, therefore, which

she had of all this was delivered to her from his lips, after he was

brought home from the tavern where his wound had been drest.

  As Mr. Fitzpatrick, however, had not the clearest way of telling a

story at any time, and was now, perhaps, a little more confused than

usual, it was some time before she discovered that the gentleman who

had given him this wound was the very same person from whom her

heart had received a wound, which, though not of a mortal kind, was

yet so deep that it had left a considerable scar behind it. But no

sooner was she acquainted that Mr. Jones himself was the man who had

been committed to the Gatehouse for this supposed murder, than she

took the first opportunity of committing Mr. Fitzpatrick to the care

of his nurse, and hastened away to visit the conqueror.

  She now entered the room with an air of gaiety, which received an

immediate check from the melancholy aspect of poor Jones, who

started and blessed himself when he saw her. Upon which she said,

"Nay, I do not wonder at your surprize; I believe you did not expect

to see me; for few gentlemen are troubled here with visits from any

lady, unless a wife. You see the power you have over me, Mr. Jones.

Indeed, I little thought, when we parted at Upton, that our next

meeting would have been in such a place." "Indeed, madam," says Jones,

"I must look upon this visit as kind; few will follow the miserable,

especially to such dismal habitations." "I protest, Mr. Jones," says

she, "I can hardly persuade myself you are the same agreeable fellow I

saw at Upton. Why, your face is more miserable than any dungeon in the

universe. What can be the matter with you?" "I thought, madam," said

Jones, "as you knew of my being here, you knew the unhappy reason."

"Pugh!" says she, "you have pinked a man in a duel, that's all." Jones

exprest some indignation at this levity, and spoke with the utmost

contrition for what had happened. To which she answered, "Well,

then, sir, if you take it so much to heart, I will relieve you; the

gentleman is not dead, and, I am pretty confident, is in no danger

of dying. The surgeon, indeed who first dressed him was a young

fellow, and seemed desirous of representing his case to be as bad as

possible, that he might have the more honour from curing him: but

the king's surgeon hath seen him since, and says, unless from a fever,

of which there are at present no symptoms, he apprehends not the least

danger of life." Jones shewed great satisfaction at this report;

upon which she affirmed the truth of it, adding, "By the most

extraordinary accident in the world I lodge at the same house; and

have seen the gentleman, and I promise you he doth you justice, and

says, whatever be the consequence, that he was entirely the aggressor,

and that you was not in the least to blame."

  Jones expressed the utmost satisfaction at the account which Mrs.

Waters brought him. He then informed her of many things which she well

knew before, as who Mr. Fitzpatrick was, the occasion of his

resentment, &c. He likewise told her several facts of which she was

ignorant, as the adventure of the muff, and other particulars,

concealing only the name of Sophia. He then lamented the follies and

vices of which he had been guilty; every one of which, he said, had

been attended with such ill consequences, that he should be

unpardonable if he did not take warning, and quit those vicious

courses for the future. He lastly concluded with assuring her of his

resolution to sin no more, lest a worse thing should happen to him.

  Mrs. Waters with great pleasantry ridiculed all this, as the effects

of low spirits and confinement. She repeated some witticisms about the

devil when he was sick, and told him, "She doubted not but shortly

to see him at liberty, and as lively a fellow as ever; and then," says

she, "I don't question but your conscience will be safely delivered of

all these qualms that it is now so sick in breeding."

  Many more things of this kind she uttered, some of which it would do

her no great honour, in the opinion of some readers, to remember;

nor are we quite certain but that the answers made by Jones would be

treated with ridicule by others. We shall therefore suppress the

rest of this conversation, and only observe that it ended at last with

perfect innocence, and much more to the satisfaction of Jones than

of the lady; for the former was greatly transported with the news

she had brought him; but the latter was not altogether so pleased with

the penitential behaviour of a man whom she had, at her first

interview, conceived. a very different opinion of from what she now

entertained of him.

  Thus the melancholy occasioned by the report of Mr. Nightingale

was pretty well effaced; but the dejection into which Mrs. Miller

had thrown him still continued. The account she gave so well tallied

with the words of Sophia herself in her letter, that he made not the

least doubt but that she had disclosed his letter to her aunt, and had

taken a fixed resolution to abandon him. The torments this thought

gave him were to be equalled only by a piece of news which fortune had

yet in store for him, and which we shall communicate in the second

chapter of the ensuing book.
