



                                    BOOK XV

                  IN WHICH THE HISTORY ADVANCES ABOUT TWO DAYS




                                Chapter 1



  Too short to need a preface



  There are a set of religious, or rather moral writers, who teach

that virtue is the certain road to happiness, and vice to misery, in

this world. A very wholesome and comfortable doctrine, and to which we

have but one objection, namely, that it is not true.

  Indeed, if by virtue these writers mean the exercise of those

cardinal virtues, which like good housewives stay at home, and mind

only the business of their own family, I shall very readily concede

the point; for so surely do all these contribute and lead to

happiness, that I could almost wish, in violation of all the antient

and modern sages, to call them rather by the name of wisdom, than by

that of virtue; for, with regard to this life, no system, I

conceive, was ever wiser than that of the antient Epicureans, who held

this wisdom to constitute the chief good; nor foolisher than that of

their opposites, those modern epicures, who place all felicity in

the abundant gratification of every sensual appetite.

  But if by virtue is meant (as I almost think it ought) a certain

relative quality, which is always busying itself without-doors, and

seems as much interested in pursuing the good of others as its own;

I cannot so easily agree that this is the surest way to human

happiness; because I am afraid we must then include poverty and

contempt, with all the mischiefs which backbiting, envy, and

ingratitude, can bring on mankind, in our idea of happiness; nay,

sometimes perhaps we shall be obliged to wait upon the said

happiness to a jail; since many by the above virtue have brought

themselves thither.

  I have not now leisure to enter upon so large a field of

speculation, as here seems opening upon me; my design was to wipe

off a doctrine that lay in my way; since, while Mr. Jones was acting

the most virtuous part imaginable, in labouring to preserve his

fellow-creatures from destruction, the devil, or some other evil

spirit, one perhaps cloathed in human flesh, was hard at work to

make him completely miserable in the ruin of his Sophia.

  This, therefore, would seem an exception to the above rule, if

indeed it was a rule; but as we have in our voyage through life seen

so many other exceptions to it, we chuse to dispute the doctrine on

which it is founded, which we don't apprehend to be Christian, which

we are convinced is not true, and which is indeed destructive of one

of the noblest arguments that reason alone can furnish for the

belief of immortality.

  But as the reader's curiosity (if he hath any) must be now awake,

and hungry, we shall provide to feed it as fast as we can.





                                Chapter 2



  In which is opened a very black design against Sophia



  I remember a wise old gentleman who used to say, "When children

are doing nothing, they are doing mischief." I will not enlarge this

quaint saying to the most beautiful part of the creation in general;

but so far I may be allowed, that when the effects of female

jealousy do not appear openly in their proper colours of rage and

fury, we may suspect that mischievous passion to be at work privately,

and attempting to undermine, what it doth not attack above-ground.

  This was exemplified in the conduct of Lady Bellaston, who, under

all the smiles which she wore in her countenance, concealed much

indignation against Sophia; and as she plainly saw that this young

lady stood between her and the full indulgence of her desires, she

resolved to get rid of her by some means other; nor was it long before

a very favourable opportunity of accomplishing this presented itself

to her.

  The reader may be pleased to remember, that when Sophia was thrown

into that consternation at the playhouse, by the wit and humour of a

set of young gentlemen who call themselves the town, we informed

him, that she had put herself under the protection of a young

nobleman, who had very safely conducted her to her chair.

  This nobleman, who frequently visited Lady Bellaston, had more

than once seen Sophia there, since her arrival in town, and had

conceived a very great liking to her; which liking, as beauty never

looks more amiable than in distress, Sophia had in this fright so

encreased, that he might now, without any great impropriety, be said

to be actually in love with her.

  It may easily be believed, that he would not suffer so handsome an

occasion of improving his acquaintance with the beloved object as

now offered itself to elapse, when even good breeding alone might have

prompted him to pay her a visit.

  The next morning therefore, after this accident, he waited on

Sophia, with the usual compliments, and hopes that she had received no

harm from her last night's adventure.

  As love, like fire, when once thoroughly kindled, is soon blown into

a flame, Sophia in a very short time compleated her conquest. Time now

flew away unperceived, and the noble lord had been two hours in

company with the lady, before it entered into his head that he had

made too long a visit. Though this circumstance alone would have

alarmed Sophia, who was somewhat more a mistress of computation at

present; she had indeed much more pregnant evidence from the eyes of

her lover of what past within his bosom; nay, though he did not make

any open declaration of his passion, yet many of his expressions

were rather too warm, and too tender, to have been imputed to

complacence, even in the age when such complacence was in fashion; the

very reverse of which is well known to be the reigning mode at

present.

  Lady Bellaston had been apprized of his lordship's visit at his

first arrival; and the length of it very well satisfied her, that

things went as she wished, and as indeed she had suspected the

second time she saw this young couple together. This business, she

rightly, I think, concluded, that she should by no means 'forward by

mixing in the company while they were together; she therefore

ordered her servants, that when my lord was going, they should tell

him she desired to speak with him; and employed the intermediate

time in meditating how best to accomplish a scheme, which she made

no doubt but his lordship would very readily embrace the execution of.

  Lord Fellamar (for that was the title of this young nobleman) was no

sooner introduced to her ladyship, than she attacked him in the

following strain: "Bless me, my lord, are you here yet? I thought my

servants had made a mistake, and let you go away; and I wanted to

see you about an affair of some importance."-- "Indeed, Lady

Bellaston," said he, "I don't wonder you are astonished at the length

of my visit; for I have staid above two hours, and I did not think I

had staid above half-a-one."-- "What am I to conclude from thence, my

lord?" said she. "The company must be very agreeable which can make

time slide away so very deceitfully."-- "Upon my honour," said he,

"the most agreeable I ever saw. Pray tell me, Lady Bellaston, who is

this blazing star which you have produced among us all of a sudden?"--

"What blazing star, my lord?" said she, affecting a surprize. "I

mean," said he, "the lady I saw here the other day, whom I had last

night in my arms at the playhouse, and to whom I have been making that

unreasonable visit."-- "O, my cousin Western!" said she; "why, that

blazing star, my lord, is the daughter of a country booby squire,

and hath been in town about a fortnight, for the first time."-- "Upon

my soul," said he, "I should swear she had been bred up in a court;

for besides her beauty, I never saw anything so genteel, so sensible,

so polite."--"O brave!" cries the lady, "my cousin hath you, I

find."-- "Upon my honour," answered he, "I wish she had; for I am in

love with her to distraction."-- "Nay, my lord," said she, "it is not

wishing yourself very ill neither, for she is a very great fortune:

I assure you she is an only child, and her father's estate is a good

L3000 a-year." "Then I can assure you, madam," answered the lord, "I

think her the best match in England." "Indeed, my lord," replied

she, "if you like her, I heartily wish you had her." "If you think

so kindly of me, madam," said he, "as she is a relation of yours, will

you do me the honour to propose it to her father?" "And are you really

then in earnest?" cries the lady, with an affected gravity. "I hope,

madam," answered he, "you have a better opinion of me, than to imagine

I would jest with your ladyship in an affair of this kind." "Indeed,

then," said the lady, "I will most readily propose your lordship to

her father; and I can, I believe, assure you of his joyful

acceptance of the proposal; but there is a bar, which I am almost

ashamed to mention; and yet it is one you will never be able to

conquer. You have a rival, my lord, and a rival who, though I blush to

name him, neither you, nor all the world, will ever be able to

conquer." "Upon my word, Lady Bellaston," cries he, "you have struck a

damp to my heart, which hath almost deprived me of being." "Fie, my

lord," said she, "I should rather hope I had struck fire into you. A

lover, and talk of damps in your heart! I rather imagined you would

have asked your rival's name, that you might have immediately

entered the lists with him." "I promise you, madam," answered he,

"there are very few things I would not undertake for your charming

cousin; but pray, who is this happy man?"- "Why, he is," said she,

"what I am sorry to say most happy men with us are, one of the

lowest fellows in the world. He is a beggar, a bastard, a foundling, a

fellow in meaner circumstances than one of your lordship's footmen."

"And is it possible," cried he, "that a young creature with such

perfections should think of bestowing herself so unworthily?" "Alas!

my lord," answered she, "consider the country- the bane of all young

women is the country. There they learn a set of romantic notions of

love, and I know not what folly, which this town and good company

can scarce eradicate in a whole winter." "Indeed, madam," replied my

lord, "your cousin is of too immense a value to be thrown away; such

ruin as this must be prevented." "Alas!" cries she, "my lord, how

can it be prevented? The family have already done all in their

power; but the girl is, I think, intoxicated, and nothing less than

ruin will content her. And to deal more openly with you, I expect

every day to hear she is run away with him." "What you tell me, Lady

Bellaston," answered his lordship, "affects me most tenderly, and only

raises my compassion, instead of lessening my adoration of your

cousin. Some means must be found to preserve so inestimable a jewel.

Hath your ladyship endeavoured to reason with her?" Here the lady

affected a laugh, and cried, "My dear lord, sure you know us better

than to talk of reasoning a young woman out of her inclinations? These

inestimable jewels are as deaf as the jewels they wear: time, my lord,

time is the only medicine to cure their folly; but this is a

medicine which I am certain she will not take; nay, I live in hourly

horrors on her account. In short, nothing but violent methods will

do." "What is to be done?" cries my lord; "what methods are to be

taken?- Is there any method upon earth?- Oh! Lady Bellaston! there is

nothing which I would not undertake for such a reward."-- "I really

know not," answered the lady, after a pause; and then pausing again,

she cried out- "Upon my soul, I am at my wit's end on this girl's

account.- If she can be preserved, something must be done

immediately; and, as I say, nothing but violent methods will do.- If

your lordship hath really this attachment to my cousin (and to do

her justice, except in this silly inclination, of which she will

soon see her folly, she is every way deserving), I think there may

be one way, indeed it is a very disagreeable one, and what I am almost

afraid to think of.- It requires a great spirit, I promise you." "I

am not conscious, madam," said he, "of any defect there; nor am I, I

hope, suspected of any such. It must be an egregious defect indeed,

which could make me backward on this occasion." "Nay, my lord,"

answered she, "I am so far from doubting you, I am much more

inclined to doubt my own courage; for I must run a monstrous risque.

In short, I must place such a confidence in your honour as a wise

woman will scarce ever place in a man on any consideration." In this

point likewise my lord very well satisfied her; for his reputation was

extremely clear, and common fame did him no more than justice, in

speaking well of him. "Well, then," said she, "my lord,- I- I vow, I

can't bear the apprehension of it.- No, it must not be.-- At least

every other method shall be tried. Can you get rid of your

engagements, and dine here to-day? Your lordship will have an

opportunity of seeing a little more of Miss Western.- I promise you

we have no time to lose. Here will be nobody but Lady Betty, and

Miss Eagle, and Colonel Hampsted, and Tom Edwards; they will all go

soon-and I shall be at home to nobody. Then your lordship may be a

little more explicit. Nay, I will contrive some method to convince you

of her attachment to this fellow." My lord made proper compliments,

accepted the invitation, and then they parted to dress, it being now

past three in in the morning, or to reckon by the old style, in the

afternoon.





                                Chapter 3



  A further explanation of the foregoing design



  Though the reader may have long since concluded Lady Bellaston to be

a member (and no inconsiderable one) of the great world; she was in

reality a very considerable member of the little world; by which

appellation was distinguished a very worthy and honourable society

which not long since flourished in this kingdom.

  Among other good principles upon which this society was founded,

there was one very remarkable; for, as it was a rule of an

honourable club of heroes, who assembled at the close of the late war,

that all the members should every day fight once at least; so 'twas in

this, that every member should, within the twenty-four hours, tell

at least one merry fib, which was to be propagated by all the brethren

and sisterhood.

  Many idle stories were told about this society, which from a certain

quality may be, perhaps not unjustly, supposed to have come from the

society themselves. As, that the devil was the president; and that

he sat in person in an elbow-chair at the upper end of the table; but,

upon very strict inquiry, I find there is not the least truth in any

of those tales, and that the assembly consisted in reality of a set of

very good sort of people, and the fibs which they propagated were of a

harmless kind, and tended only to produce mirth and good humour.

  Edwards was likewise a member of this comical society. To him

therefore Lady Bellaston applied as a proper instrument for her

purpose, and furnished him with a fib, which he was to vent whenever

the lady gave him her cue; and this was not to be till the evening,

when all the company but Lord Fellamar and himself were gone, and

while they were engaged in a rubbers at whist.

  To this time then, which was between seven and eight in the evening,

we will convey our reader; when Lady Bellaston, Lord Fellamar, Miss

Western, and Tom, being engaged at whist, and in the last game of

their rubbers, Tom received his cue from Lady Bellaston, which was, "I

protest, Tom, you are grown intolerable lately; you used to tell us

all the news of the town, and now you know no more of the world than

if you lived out of it."

  Mr. Edwards then began as follows: "The fault is not mine, madam: it

lies in the dulness of the age, that doth nothing worth talking

of.-- O la! though now I think on't, there hath a terrible accident

befallen poor Colonel Wilcox.-- Poor Ned.-- You know him, my lord,

everybody knows him; faith! I am very much concerned for him."

  "What is it, pray?" says Lady Bellaston.

  "Why, he hath killed a man this morning in a duel, that's all."

  His lordship, who was not in the secret, asked gravely, whom he

had killed? To which Edwards answered, "A young fellow we none of us

know; a Somersetshire lad just came to town, one Jones his name is;

a near relation of one Mr. Allworthy, of whom your lordship I

believe hath heard. I saw the lad lie dead in a coffee-house.- Upon

my soul, he is one of the finest corpses I ever saw in my life!"

  Sophia, who had just began to deal as Tom had mentioned that a man

was killed, stopt her hand, and listened with attention (for all

stories of that kind affected her), but no sooner had he arrived at

the latter part of the story than she began to deal again; and

having dealt three cards to one, and seven to another, and ten to a

third, at last dropt the rest from her hand, and fell back in her

chair.

  The company behaved as usually on these occasions. The usual

disturbance ensued, the usual assistance was summoned, and Sophia at

last, as it is usual, returned again to life, and was soon after, at

her earnest desire, led to her own apartment; where, at my lord's

request, Lady Bellaston acquainted her with the truth, attempted to

carry it off as a jest of her own, and comforted her with repeated

assurances, that neither his lordship nor Tom, though she had taught

him the story, were in the true secret of the affair.

  There was no farther evidence necessary to convince Lord Fellamar

how justly the case had been represented to him by Lady Bellaston; and

now, at her return into the room, a scheme was laid between these

two noble persons, which, though it appeared in no very heinous

light to his lordship (as he faithfully promised, and faithfully

resolved too, to make the lady all the subsequent amends in his

power by marriage), yet many of our readers, we doubt not, will see

with just detestation.

  The next evening at seven was appointed for the fatal purpose,

when Lady Bellaston undertook that Sophia should be alone, and his

lordship should be introduced to her. The whole family were to be

regulated for the purpose, most of the servants dispatched out of

the house; and for Mrs. Honour, who, to prevent suspicion, was to be

left with her mistress till his lordship's arrival, Lady Bellaston

herself was to engage her in an apartment as distant as possible

from the scene of the intended mischief, and out of the hearing of

Sophia.

  Matters being thus agreed on, his lordship took his leave, and her

ladyship retired to rest, highly pleased with a project, of which

she had no reason to doubt the success, and which promised so

effectually to remove Sophia from being any further obstruction to her

amour with Jones, by a means of which she should never appear to be

guilty, even if the fact appeared to the world; but this she made no

doubt of preventing by huddling up a marriage, to which she thought

the ravished Sophia would easily be brought to consent, and at which

all the rest of her family would rejoice.

  But affairs were not in so quiet a situation in the bosom of the

other conspirator; his mind was tost in all the distracting anxiety so

nobly described by Shakespear-



     Between the acting of a dreadful thing,

     And the first motion, all the interim is

     Like a phantasma, or a hideous dream;

     The genius and the mortal instruments

     Are then in council; and the state of man,

     Like to a little kingdom, suffers then

     The nature of an insurrection.--



  Though the violence of his passion had made him eagerly embrace

the first hint of this design, especially as it came from a relation

of the lady, yet when that friend to reflection, a pillow, had

placed the action itself in all its natural black colours before his

eyes, with all the consequences which must, and those which might

probably attend it, his resolution began to abate, or rather indeed to

go over to the other side; and after a long conflict, which lasted a

whole night, between honour and appetite, the former at length

prevailed, and he determined to wait on Lady Bellaston, and to

relinquish the design.

  Lady Bellaston was in bed, though very late in the morning, and

Sophia sitting by her bedside, when the servant acquainted her that

Lord Fellamar was below in the parlour; upon which her ladyship

desired him to stay, and that she would see him presently; but the

servant was no sooner departed than poor Sophia began to intreat her

cousin not to encourage the visits of that odious lord (so she

called him, though a little unjustly) upon her account. "I see his

design," said she; "for he made downright love to me yesterday

morning; but as I am resolved never to admit it, I beg your ladyship

not to leave us alone together any more, and to order the servants

that, if he inquires for me, I may be always denied to him."

  "La! child," says Lady Bellaston, "you country girls have nothing

but sweethearts in your head; you fancy every man who is civil to

you is making love. He is one of the most gallant young fellows

about town, and I am convinced means no more than a little

gallantry. Make love to you indeed! I wish with all my heart he would,

and you must be an arrant mad woman to refuse him."

  "But I shall certainly be that mad woman," cries Sophia, "I hope his

visits shall not be intruded upon me."

  "O child!" said Lady Bellaston, "you need not be so fearful; if

you resolve to run away with that Jones, I know no person who can

hinder you."

  "Upon my honour, madam," cries Sophia, "your ladyship injures me.

I will never run away with any man; nor will I ever marry contrary

to my father's inclinations."

  "Well, Miss Western," said the lady, "if you are not in a humour

to see company this morning, you may retire to your own apartment; for

I am not frightened at his lordship, and must send for him up into

my dressing-room."

  Sophia thanked her ladyship, and withdrew; and presently

afterwards Fellamar was admitted upstairs.





                                Chapter 4



  By which it will appear how dangerous an advocate a lady is when she

applies her eloquence to an ill purpose



  When Lady Bellaston heard the young lord's scruples, she treated

them with the same disdain with which one of those sages of the law,

called Newgate solicitors, treats the qualms of conscience in a

young witness. "My dear lord," said she, "you certainly want a

cordial. I must send to Lady Edgely for one of her best drams. Fie

upon it! have more resolution. Are you frightened by the word rape? Or

are you apprehensive--? Well! if the story of Helen was modern, I

should think it unnatural. I mean the behaviour of Paris, not the

fondness of the lady; for all women love a man of spirit. There is

another story of the Sabine ladies- and that too, I thank heaven, is

very antient. Your lordship, perhaps, will admire my reading; but I

think Mr. Hook tells us, they made tolerable good wives afterwards.

I fancy few of my married acquaintance were ravished by their

husbands." "Nay, dear Lady Bellaston," cried he, "don't ridicule me in

this manner." "Why, my good lord," answered she, "do you think woman

in England would not laugh at you in her heart, whatever prudery she

might wear in her countenance?-- You force me to use a strange kind of

language, and to betray my sex most abominably; but I am contented

with knowing my intentions are good, and that I am endeavouring to

serve my cousin; for I think you will make her a husband

notwithstanding this; or, upon my soul, I would not even persuade

her to fling herself away upon an empty title. She should not

upbraid me hereafter with having lost a man of spirit; for that his

enemies allow this poor young fellow to be."

  Let those who have had the satisfaction of hearing reflections of

this kind from a wife or a mistress, declare whether they are at all

sweetened by coming from a female tongue. Certain it is, they sunk

deeper into his lordship than anything which Demosthenes or Cicero

could have said on the occasion.

  Lady Bellaston, perceiving she had fired the young lord's pride,

began now, like a true orator, to rouse other passions to its

assistance. "My Lord," says she, in a graver voice, "you will be

pleased to remember, you mentioned this matter to me first; for I

would not appear to you in the light of one who is endeavouring to put

off my cousin upon you. Fourscore thousand pounds do not stand in need

of an advocate to recommend them." "Nor doth Miss Western," said he,

"require any recommendation from her fortune; for, in my opinion, no

woman ever had half her charms." "Yes, yes, my lord," replied the

lady, looking in the glass, there have been women with more than

half her charms, I assure you; not that I need lessen her on that

account: she is a most delicious girl, that's certain; and within

these few hours she will be in the arms of one, who surely doth not

deserve her, though I will give him his due, I believe he is truly a

man of spirit."

  "I hope so, madam," said my lord; "though I must own he doth not

deserve her; for, unless heaven or your ladyship disappoint me, she

shall within that time be in mine."

  "Well spoken, my lord," answered the lady; "I promise you no

disappointment shall happen from my side; and within this week I am

convinced I shall call your lordship my cousin in public."

  The remainder of this scene consisted entirely of raptures, excuses,

and compliments, very pleasant to have heard from the parties; but

rather dull when related at second hand. Here, therefore, shall put an

end to this dialogue, and hasten to the fatal hour when everything was

prepared for the destruction of poor Sophia.

  But this being the most tragical matter in our whole history, we

shall treat it in a chapter by itself.





                                Chapter 5



  Containing some matters which may affect, and others which may

surprize, the reader



  The clock had now struck seven, and poor Sophia, alone and

melancholy, sat reading a tragedy. It was the Fatal Marriage; and

she was now come to that part where the poor distrest Isabella

disposes of her wedding-ring.

  Here the book dropt from her hand, and a shower of tears ran down

into her bosom. In this situation she had continued a minute, when the

door opened, and in came Lord Fellamar. Sophia started from her

chair at his entrance; and his lordship advancing forwards, and making

a low bow, said, "I am afraid, Miss Western, I break in upon you

abruptly." "Indeed, my lord," says she, "I must own myself a little

surprized at this unexpected visit." "If this visit be unexpected,

madam," answered Lord Fellamar, "my eyes must have been very faithless

interpreters of my heart, when last I had the honour of seeing you;

for surely you could not otherwise have hoped to detain my heart in

your possession, without receiving a visit from its owner." Sophia,

confused as she was, answered this bombast (and very properly I think)

with a look of inconceivable disdain. My lord then made another and

a longer speech of the same sort. Upon which Sophia, trembling,

said, "Am I really to conceive your lordship to be out of your senses?

Sure, my lord, there is no other excuse for such behaviour." "I am,

indeed, madam, in the situation you suppose," cries his lordship; "and

sure you will pardon the effects of a frenzy which you yourself have

occasioned; for love hath so totally deprived me of reason, that I

am scarce accountable for any of my actions." "Upon my word, my lord,"

said Sophia, "I neither understand your words nor your behaviour."

"Suffer me then, madam," cries he, "at your feet to explain both, by

laying open my soul to you, and declaring that I doat on you to the

highest degree of distraction. O most adorable, most divine

creature! what language can express the sentiments of my heart?" "I do

assure you, my lord," said Sophia, "I shall not stay to hear any

more of this." "Do not," cries he, "think of leaving me thus

cruelly; could you know half the torments which I feel, that tender

bosom must pity what those eyes have caused." Then fetching a deep

sigh, and laying hold of her hand, he ran on for some minutes in a

strain which would be little more pleasing to the reader than it was

to the lady; and at last concluded with a declaration, "That if he was

master of the world, he would lay it her feet." Sophia then,

forcibly pulling away her hand from his, answered with much spirit, "I

promise you, sir, your world and its master I should spurn from me

with equal contempt." She then offered to go; and Lord Fellamar, again

laying hold of her hand, said, "Pardon me, my beloved angel,

freedoms which nothing but despair could have tempted me to

take.-- Believe me, could I have had any hope that my title and

fortune, neither of them inconsiderable, unless when compared with

your worth, would have been accepted, I had, in the humblest manner,

presented them to your acceptance.- But I cannot lose you.- By heaven,

I will sooner part with my soul!- You are, you must, you shall be only

mine." "My lord," says she, "I intreat you to desist from a vain

pursuit; for, upon my honour, I will never hear you on this subject.

Let go my hand, my lord; for I am resolved to go from you this moment;

nor will I ever see you more." "Then, madam," cries his lordship, "I

must make the best use of this moment; for I cannot live, nor will I

live without you."-- "What do you mean, my lord?" said Sophia; "I will

raise the family." "I have no fear, madam," answered he, "but of

losing you, and that I am resolved to prevent, the only way which

despair points to me."- He then caught her in his arms: upon which

she screamed so loud, that she must have alarmed some one to her

assistance, had not Lady Bellaston taken care to remove all ears.

  But a more lucky circumstance happened for poor Sophia; another

noise now broke forth, which almost drowned her cries; for now the

whole house rang with, "Where is she? D--n me, I'll unkennel her this

instant. Show me her chamber, I say. Where is my daughter? I know

she's in the house, and I'll see her if she's above-ground. Show me

where she is."- At which last words the door flew open, and in came

Squire Western, with his parson and a set of myrmidons at his heels.

  How miserable must have been the condition of poor Sophia, when

the enraged voice of her father was welcome to her ears! Welcome

indeed it was, and luckily did he come; for it was the only accident

upon earth which could have preserved the peace of her mind from being

for ever destroyed.

  Sophia, notwithstanding her fright, presently knew her father's

voice; and his lordship, notwithstanding his passion, knew the voice

of reason, which peremptorily assured him, it was not now a time for

the perpetration of his villany. Hearing, therefore, the voice

approach, and hearing likewise whose it was (for as the squire more

than once roared forth the word daughter, so Sophia, in the midst of

her struggling, cried out upon her father), he thought proper to

relinquish his prey, having only disordered her handkerchief, and with

his rude lips committed violence on her lovely neck.

  If the reader's imagination doth not assist me, I shall never be

able to describe the situation of these two persons when Western

came into the room. Sophia tottered into a chair, where she sat

disordered, pale, breathless, bursting with indignation at Lord

Fellamar; affrighted, and yet more rejoiced, at the arrival of her

father.

  His lordship sat down near her, the bag of his wig hanging over

one of his shoulders, the rest of his dress being somewhat disordered,

and rather a greater proportion of linen than is usual appearing at

his bosom. As to the rest, he was amazed, affrighted, vexed, and

ashamed.

  As to Squire Western, he happened at this time to be overtaken by an

enemy, which very frequently pursues, and seldom fails to overtake,

most of the country gentlemen in this kingdom. He was, literally

speaking, drunk; which circumstance, together with his natural

impetuosity, could produce no other effect than his running

immediately up to his daughter, upon whom he fell foul with his tongue

in the most inveterate manner; nay, he had probably committed violence

with his hands, had not the parson interposed, saying, "For heaven's

sake, sir, animadvert that you are in the house of a great lady. Let

me beg you to mitigate your wrath; it should minister a fulness of

satisfaction that you have found your daughter; for as to revenge,

it belongeth not unto us. I discern great contrition in the

countenance of the young lady. I stand assured, if you will forgive

her, she will repent her of all past offences, and return unto her

duty."

  The strength of the parson's arms had at first been of more

service than the strength of his rhetoric. However, his last words

wrought some effect, and the squire answered, "I'll forgee her if

she wull ha' un. If wot ha' un, Sophy, I'll forgee thee all. Why

dost unt speak? Shat ha' un! d--n me, shat ha' un! Why dost unt

answer? Was ever such a stubborn tuoad?"

  "Let me intreat you, sir, to be a little more moderate," said the

parson; "you frighten the young lady so, that you deprive her of all

power of utterance."

  "Power of mine a--," answered the squire. "You take her part then,

you do? A pretty parson, truly, to side with an undutiful child!

Yes, yes, I will gee you a living with a pox. I'll gee un to the devil

sooner."

  "I humbly crave your pardon," said the parson; "I assure your

worship I meant no such matter."

  My Lady Bellaston now entered the room, and came up to the squire,

who no sooner saw her, than, resolving to follow the instructions of

his sister, he made her a very civil bow, in the rural manner, and

paid her some of his best compliments. He then immediately proceeded

to his complaints, and said, "There, my lady cousin; there stands

the most undutiful child in the world; she hankers after a beggarly

rascal, and won't marry one of the greatest matches in all England,

that we have provided for her."

  "Indeed, cousin Western," answered the lady, "I am persuaded you

wrong my cousin. I am sure she hath a better understanding. I am

convinced she will not refuse what she must be sensible is so much

to her advantage."

  This was a wilful mistake in Lady Bellaston, for she well knew

whom Mr. Western meant; though perhaps she thought he would easily

be reconciled to his lordship's proposals.

  "Do you hear there," quoth the squire, "what her ladyship say? All

your family are for the match. Come, Sophy, be a good girl, and be

dutiful, and make your father happy."

  "If my death will make you happy, sir," answered Sophia, "you will

shortly be so."

  "It's a lye, Sophy; it's a d--n'd lye, and you know it," said the

squire.

  "Indeed, Miss Western"' said Lady Bellaston, "you injure your

father; he hath nothing in view but your interest in this match; and I

and all your friends must acknowledge the highest honour done to

your family in the proposal."

  "Ay, all of us," quoth the squire; "nay, it was no proposal of mine.

She knows it was her aunt proposed it to me first.- Come, Sophy, once

more let me beg you to be a good girl, and gee me your consent

before your cousin."

  "Let me give him your hand, cousin," said the lady. "It is the

fashion now-a-days to dispense with time and long courtships."

  "Pugh!" said the squire, "what signifies time; won't they have

time enough to court afterwards? People may court very well after they

have been a-bed together."

  As Lord Fellamar was very well assured that he was meant by Lady

Bellaston, so, never having heard nor suspected a word of Blifil, he

made no doubt of his being meant by the father. Coming up,

therefore, to the squire, he said, "Though I have not the honour, sir,

of being personally known to you, yet, as I find I have the

happiness to have my proposals accepted, let me intercede, sir, in

behalf of the young lady, that she may not be more solicited at this

time."

  "You intercede, sir!" said the squire; "why, who the devil are you?"

  "Sir, I am Lord Fellamar," answered he, "and am the happy man whom I

hope you have done the honour of accepting for a son-in-law."

  "You are a son of a b--," replied the squire, "for all your laced

coat. You my son-in-law, and be d--n'd to you!"

  "I shall take more from you, sir, than from any man," answered the

lord; "but I must inform you that I am not used to hear such

language without resentment."

  "Resent my a--," quoth the squire. "Don't think I am afraid of such

a fellow as thee art! because hast got a spit there dangling at thy

side. Lay by your spit, and I'll give thee enough of meddling with

what doth not belong to thee. I'll teach you to father-in-law me. I'll

lick thy jacket."

  "It's very well, sir," said my lord, "I shall make no disturbance

before the ladies. I am very well satisfied. Your humble servant, sir;

Lady Bellaston, your most obedient."

  His lordship was no sooner gone, than Lady Bellaston, coming up to

Mr. Western, said, "Bless me, sir, what have you done? You know not

whom you have affronted; he is a nobleman of the first rank and

fortune, and yesterday made proposals to your daughter; and such as

I am sure you must accept with the highest pleasure."

  "Answer for yourself, lady cousin," said the squire, "I will have

nothing to do with any of your lords. My daughter shall have an honest

country gentleman; I have pitched upon one for her- and she shall ha'

un.- I am sorry for the trouble she hath given your ladyship with all

my heart." Lady Bellaston made a civil speech upon the word trouble;

to which the squire answered- "Why, that's kind- and I would do as

much for your ladyship. To be sure relations should do for one

another. So I wish your ladyship a good night.- Come, madam, you must

go along with me by fair means, or I'll have you carried down to the

coach."

  Sophia said she would attend him without force; but begged to go

in a chair, for she said she should not be able to ride any other way.

  "Prithee," cries the squire, "wout unt persuade me canst not ride in

a coach, wouldst? That's a pretty thing surely! No, no, I'll never let

thee out of my sight any more till art married, that I promise

thee." Sophia told him, she saw he was resolved to break her heart. "O

break thy heart and be d--n'd," quoth he, "if a good husband will

break it. I don't value a brass varden, not a halfpenny, of any

undutiful b-- upon earth." He then took a violent hold of her hand;

upon which the parson once more interfered, begging him to use gentle

methods. At that the squire thundered out a curse, and bid the parson

hold his tongue, saying, "At'nt in pulpit now? when art a got up there

I never mind what dost say; but I won't be priest-ridden, nor taught

how to behave myself by thee. I wish your ladyship a good night. Come

along, Sophy; be a good girl, and all shall be well. Shat ha' un,

d--n me, shat ha' un!"

  Mrs. Honour appeared below-stairs, and with a low curtesy to the

squire offered to attend her mistress; but he pushed her away, saying,

"Hold, madam, hold, you come no more near my house." "And will you

take my maid away from me?" said Sophia. "Yes, indeed, madam, will I,"

cries the squire: "you need not fear being without a servant; I will

get you another maid, and a better maid than this, who, I'd lay five

pounds to a crown, is no more a maid than my grannum. No, no, Sophy,

she shall contrive no more escapes, I promise you." He then packed

up his daughter and the parson into the hackney coach, after which

he mounted himself, and ordered it to drive to his lodgings. In the

way thither he suffered Sophia to be quiet, and entertained himself

with reading a lecture to the parson on good manners, and a proper

behaviour to his betters.

  It is possible he might not so easily have carried off his

daughter from Lady Bellaston, had that good lady desired to have

detained her; but, in reality, she was not a little pleased with the

confinement into which Sophia was going; and as her project with

Lord Fellamar had failed of success, she was well contented that other

violent methods were now going to be used in favour of another man.





                                Chapter 6



  By what means the squire came to discover his daughter



  Though the reader, in many histories, is obliged to digest much more

unaccountable appearances than this of Mr. Western, without any

satisfaction at all; yet, as we dearly love to oblige him whenever

it is in our power, we shall now proceed to show by what method the

squire discovered where his daughter was.

  In the third chapter, then, of the preceding book, we gave a hint

(for it is not our custom to unfold at any time more than is necessary

for the occasion) that Mrs. Fitzpatrick, who was very desirous of

reconciling her uncle and aunt Western, thought she had a probable

opportunity, by the service of preserving Sophia from committing the

same crime which had drawn on herself the anger of her family. After

much deliberation, therefore, she resolved to inform her aunt

Western where her cousin was, and accordingly she writ the following

letter, which we shall give the reader at length, for more reasons

than one.



  HONOURED MADAM,

  The occasion of my writing this will perhaps make a letter of mine

agreeable to my dear aunt, for the sake of one of her nieces, though I

have little reason to hope it will be so on the account of another.

  Without more apology, as I was coming to throw my unhappy self at

your feet, I met, by the strangest accident in the world, my cousin

Sophy, whose history you are better acquainted with than myself,

though, alas! I know infinitely too much; enough indeed to satisfy me,

that unless she is immediately prevented, she is in danger of

running into the same fatal mischief which, by foolishly and

ignorantly refusing your most wise and prudent advice, I have

unfortunately brought on myself.

  In short, I have seen the man, nay, I was most Part of yesterday

in his company, and a charming young fellow I promise you he is. By

what accident he came acquainted with me is too tedious to tell you

now; but I have this morning changed my lodgings to avoid him, lest he

should by my means discover my cousin; for he doth not yet know

where she is, and it is adviseable he should not, till my uncle hath

secured her.-- No time therefore is to be lost; and I need only inform

you, that she is now with Lady Bellaston, whom I have seen, and who

hath, I find, a design of concealing her from her family. You know,

madam, she is a strange woman; but nothing could misbecome me more,

than to presume to give any hint to one of your great understanding

and great knowledge of the world, besides barely informing you of

the matter of fact.

  I hope, madam, the care which I have shewn on this occasion for

the good of my family, will recommend me again to the favour of a lady

who hath always exerted so much zeal for the honour and true

interest of us all; and that it may be a means of restoring me to your

friendship, which hath made so great a part of my former, and is so

necessary to my future happiness.

                 I am,

                     with the utmost respect,

                        honoured madam,

                           your most dutiful obliged niece,

                              and most obedient humble

                                 servant,

                                        HARRIET FITZPATRICK



  Mrs. Western was now at her brother's house, where she had resided

ever since the flight of Sophia, in order to administer comfort to the

poor squire in his affliction. Of this comfort, which she doled out to

him in daily portions, we have formerly given a specimen.

  She was now standing with her back to the fire, and, with a pinch of

snuff in her hand, dealing forth this daily allowance of comfort to

the squire, while he smoaked his afternoon pipe, when she received the

above letter; which she had no sooner read than she delivered it to

him, saying, "There, sir, there is an account of your lost sheep.

Fortune hath again restored her to you, and if you will be governed by

my advice, it is possible you may yet preserve her."

  The squire had no sooner read the letter than he leaped from his

chair, threw his pipe into the fire, and gave a loud huzza for joy. He

then summoned his servants, called for his boots, and ordered the

Chevalier and several other horses to be saddled, and that parson

Supple should be immediately sent for. Having done this, he turned

to his sister, caught her in his arms, and gave her a close embrace,

saying, "Zounds! you don't seem pleased; one would imagine you was

sorry I have found the girl."

  "Brother," answered she, "the deepest politicians, who see to the

bottom, discover often a very different aspect of affairs, from what

swims on the surface. It is true, indeed, things do look rather less

desperate than they did formerly in Holland, when Lewis the Fourteenth

was at the gates of Amsterdam; but there is a delicacy required in

this matter, which you will pardon me, brother, if I suspect you want.

There is a decorum to be used with a woman of figure, such as Lady

Bellaston, brother, which requires a knowledge of the world, superior,

I am afraid, to yours."

  "Sister," cries the squire, "I know you have no opinion of my parts;

but I'll shew you on this occasion who is a fool. Knowledge, quotha! I

have not been in the country so long without having some knowledge

of warrants and the law of the land. I know I may take my own wherever

I can find it. Shew me my own daughter, and if I don't know how to

come at her, I'll suffer you to call me a fool as long as I live.

There be justices of peace in London, as well as in other places."

  "I protest," cries she, "you make me tremble for the event of this

matter, which, if you will proceed by my advice, you may bring to so

good an issue. Do you really imagine, brother, that the house of a

woman of figure is to be attacked by warrants and brutal justices of

the peace? I will inform you how to proceed. As soon as you arrive

in town, and have got yourself into a decent dress (for indeed,

brother, you have none at present fit to appear in), you must send

your compliments to Lady Bellaston, and desire leave to wait on her.

When you are admitted to her presence, as you certainly will be, and

have told her your story, and have made proper use of my name (for I

think you just know one another only by sight, though you are

relations), I am confident she will withdraw her protection from my

niece, who hath certainly imposed upon her. This is the only

method.- Justices of peace, indeed! do you imagine any such event can

arrive to a woman of figure in a civilised nation?"

  "D--n their figures," cries the squire; "a pretty civilised nation,

truly, where women are above the law. And what must I stand sending

a parcel of compliments to a confounded whore, that keeps away a

daughter from her own natural father? I tell you, sister, I am not

so ignorant as you think me-- I know you would have women above the

law, but it is all a lye; I heard his lordship say at size, that no

one is above the law. But this of yours is Hanover law, I suppose."

  "Mr. Western," said she, "I think you daily improve in

ignorance.-- I protest you are grown an arrant bear."

  "No more a bear than yourself, sister Western," said the

squire.- "Pox! you may talk of your civility an you will, I am sure

you never show any to me. I am no bear, no, nor no dog neither, though

I know somebody, that is something that begins with a b; but pox! I

will show you I have got more good manners than some folks."

  "Mr. Western," answered the lady, "you may say what you please, je

vous mesprise de tout mon coeur.* I shall not therefore be

angry.-- Besides, as my cousin, with that odious Irish name, justly

says, I have that regard for the honour and true interest of my

family, and that concern for my niece, who is a part of it, that I

have resolved to go to town myself upon this occasion; for indeed,

indeed, brother you are not a fit minister to be employed at a

polite court.- Greenland- Greenland should always be the scene of the

tramontane negociation."



  *I despise you with all my heart.



  "I thank Heaven," cries the squire, "I don't understand you now. You

are got to your Hanoverian linguo. However, I'll shew you I scorn to

be behindhand in civility with you; and as you are not angry for

what I have said, so I am not angry for what you have said. Indeed,

I have always thought it a folly for relations to quarrel; and if they

do now and then give a hasty word, why, people should give and take;

for my part, I never bear malice; and I take it very kind of you to go

up to London; for I never was there but twice in my life, and then I

did not stay above a fortnight at a time, and to be sure I can't be

expected to know much of the streets and the folks in that time. I

never denied that you know'd all these matters better than I. For me

to dispute that would be all as one as for you to dispute the

management of a pack of dogs, or the finding a hare sitting, with

me."- "Which I promise you," says she, "I never will."- "Well, and I

promise you," returned he, "that I never will dispute the t'other."

  Here then a league was struck (to borrow a phrase from the lady)

between the contending parties; and now the parson arriving, and the

horses being ready, the squire departed, having promised his sister to

follow her advice, and she prepared to follow him the next day.

  But having communicated these matters to the parson on the road,

they both agreed that the prescribed formalities might very well be

dispensed with; and the squire, having changed his mind, proceeded

in the manner we have already seen.





                                Chapter 7



  In which various misfortunes befel poor Jones



  Affairs were in the aforesaid situation, when Mrs. Honour arrived at

Mrs. Miller's, and called Jones out from the company, as we have

before seen, with whom, when she found herself alone, she began as

follows:-

  "O, my dear sir! how shall I get spirits to tell you; you are

undone, sir, and my poor lady's undone, and I am undone." "Hath

anything happened to Sophia?" cries Jones, staring like a madman. "All

that is bad," cries Honour: "Oh, I shall never get such another

lady! Oh that I should ever live to see this day!" At these words

Jones turned pale as ashes, trembled, and stammered; but Honour went

on- "O! Mr. Jones, I have lost my lady for ever." "How? what! for

Heaven's sake, tell me. O, my dear Sophia!" "You may well call her

so," said Honour; "she was the dearest lady to me. I shall never

have such another place."-- "D--n your place!" cries Jones; "where

is- what- what is become of my Sophia?" "Ay, to be sure," cries she,

"servants may be d--n'd. It signifies nothing what becomes of them,

though they are turned away, and ruined ever so much. To be sure

they are not flesh and blood like other people. No, to be sure, it

signifies nothing what becomes of them." "If you have any pity, and

compassion," cries Jones, "I beg you will instantly tell me what

hath happened to Sophia?" "To be sure, I have more pity for you than

you have for me," answered Honour; "I don't d--n you because you have

lost the sweetest lady in the world. To be sure, you are worthy to

be pitied, and I am worthy to be pitied too: for, to be sure, if

ever there was a good mistress--" "What hath happened?" cries Jones,

in almost a raving fit. "What?- What?" said Honour: "Why, the worst

that could have happened both for you and for me.- Her father is come

to town, and hath carried ied away from us both." Here Jones fell on

his knees in thanksgiving that it was no worse. "No worse!" repeated

Honour; "what could be worse for either of us? He carried her off,

swearing she should marry Mr. Blifil; that's for your comfort; and,

for poor me, I am turned out of doors." "Indeed, Mrs. Honour,"

answered Jones, "you frightened me out of my wits. I imagined some

most dreadful sudden accident had happened to Sophia; something,

compared to which, even seeing her married to Blifil would be a

trifle; but while there is life there are hopes, my dear Honour.

Women, in this land of liberty, cannot be married by actual brutal

force." "To be sure, sir," said she, that's true. There may be some

hopes for you; but alack-a-day! what hopes are there for poor me?

And to be sure, sir, you must be sensible I suffer all this upon

your account. All the quarrel the squire hath to me is for taking your

part, as I have done, against Mr. Blifil." "Indeed, Mrs. Honour,"

answered he, "I am sensible of my obligations to you, and will leave

nothing in my power undone to make you amends." "Alas! sir," said she,

"what can make a servant amends for the loss of one place but the

getting another altogether as good?" "Do not despair, Mrs. Honour,"

said Jones, "I hope to reinstate you again in the same."

"Alack-a-day, sir," said she, "how can I flatter myself with such

hopes when I know it is a thing impossible? for the squire is so set

against me: and yet, if you should ever have my lady, as to be sure I

now hopes heartily you will; for you are a generous, good-natured

gentleman; and I am sure you loves her, and to be sure she loves you

as dearly as her own soul; it is a matter in vain to deny it;

because as why, everybody, that is in the least acquainted with my

lady, must see it; for, poor dear lady, she can't dissemble: and if

two people who loves one another a'n't happy, why who should be so?

Happiness don't always depend upon what people has; besides, my lady

has enough for both. To be sure, therefore, as one may say, it would

be all the pity in the world to keep two such loviers asunder; nay,

I am convinced, for my part, you will meet together at last; for, if

it is to be, there is no preventing it. If a marriage is made in

heaven, all the justices of peace upon earth can't break it off. To be

sure I wishes that parson Supple had but a little more spirit, to tell

the squire of his wickedness in endeavouring to force his daughter

contrary to her liking; but then his whole dependance is on the

squire; and so the poor gentleman, though he is a very religious

good sort of man, and talks of the badness of such doings behind the

squire's back, yet he dares not say his soul is his own to his face.

To be sure I never saw him make so bold as just now; I was afeard

the squire would have struck him. I would not have your honour be

melancholy, sir, nor despair; things may go better, as long as you are

sure of my lady, and that I am certain you may be; for she never

will be brought to consent to marry any other man. Indeed, I am

terribly afeared the squire will do her a mischief in his passion, for

he is a prodigious passionate gentleman; and I am afeared too the poor

lady will be brought to break her heart, for she is as

tender-hearted as a chicken. It is pity, methinks, she had not a

little of my courage. If I was in love with a young man, and my father

offered to lock me up, I'd tear his eyes out but I'd come at him;

but then there's a great fortune in the case, which it is in her

father's power either to give her or not; that, to be sure, may make

some difference."

  Whether Jones gave strict attention to all the foregoing harangue,

or whether it was for want of any vacancy in the discourse, I cannot

determine; but he never once attempted to answer, nor did she once

stop till Partridge came running into the room, and informed him

that the great lady was upon the stairs.

  Nothing could equal the dilemma to which Jones was now reduced.

Honour knew nothing of any acquaintance that subsisted between him and

Lady Bellaston, and she was almost the last person in the world to

whom he would have communicated it. In this hurry and distress, he

took (as is common enough) the worst course, and, instead of

exposing her to the lady, which would have been of little consequence,

he chose to expose the lady to her; he therefore resolved to hide

Honour, whom he had but just time to convey behind the bed, and to

draw the curtains.

  The hurry in which Jones had been all day engaged on account of

his poor landlady and her family, the terrors occasioned by Mrs.

Honour, and the confusion into which he was thrown by the sudden

arrival of Lady Bellaston, had altogether driven former thoughts out

of his head; so that it never once occurred to his memory to act the

part of a sick man; which, indeed, neither the gaiety of his dress,

nor the freshness of his countenance, would have at all supported.

  He received her ladyship, therefore, rather agreeably to her desires

than to her expectations, with all the good humour he could muster

in his countenance, and without any real or affected appearance of the

least disorder.

  Lady Bellaston no sooner entered the room, than she squatted herself

down on the bed: "So, my dear Jones," said she, "you find nothing

can detain me long from you. Perhaps I ought to be angry with you,

that I have neither seen nor heard from you all day; for I perceive

your distemper would have suffered you to come abroad: nay, I

suppose you have not sat in your chamber all day drest up like a

fine lady to see company after a lying-in; but, however, don't think I

intend to scold you; for I never will give you an excuse for the

cold behaviour of a husband, by putting on the ill-humour of a wife."

  "Nay, Lady Bellaston," said Jones, "I am sure your ladyship will not

upbraid me with neglect of duty, when I only waited for orders. Who,

my dear creature, hath reason to complain? Who missed an

appointment, last night, and left an unhappy man to expect, and

wish, and sigh, and languish?"

  "Do not mention it, my dear Mr. Jones," cried she. "If you knew

the occasion, you would pity me. In short, it is impossible to

conceive what women of condition are obliged to suffer from the

impertinence of fools, in order to keep up the farce of the world. I

am glad, however, all your languishing and wishing have done you no

harm; for you never looked better in your life. Upon my faith!

Jones, you might at this instant sit for the picture of Adonis."

  There are certain words of provocation which men of honour hold

can properly be answered only by a blow. Among lovers possibly there

may be some expressions which can be answered only by a kiss. Now

the compliment which Lady Bellaston now made Jones seems to be of this

kind, especially as it was attended with a look, in which the lady

conveyed more soft ideas than it was possible to express with her

tongue.

  Jones was certainly at this instant in one of the most

disagreeable and distressed situations imaginable; for, to carry on

the comparison we made use of before, though the provocation was given

by the lady, Jones could not receive satisfaction, nor so much as

offer to ask it, in the presence of a third person; seconds in this

kind of duels not being according to the law of arms. As this

objection did not occur to Lady Bellaston, who was ignorant of any

other woman being there but herself, she waited some time in great

astonishment for an answer from Jones, who, conscious of the

ridiculous figure he made, stood at a distance, and, not daring to

give the proper answer, gave none at all. Nothing can be imagined more

comic, nor yet more tragical, than this scene would have been if it

had lasted much longer. The lady had already changed colour two or

three times; had got up from the bed and sat down again, while Jones

was wishing the ground to sink under him, or the house to fall on

his head, when an odd accident freed him from an embarrassment, out of

which neither the eloquence of a Cicero, nor the politics of a

Machiavel, could have delivered him, without utter disgrace.

  This was no other than the arrival of young Nightingale, dead drunk;

or rather in that state of drunkenness which deprives men of the use

of their reason, without depriving them of the use of their limbs.

  Mrs. Miller and her daughters were in bed, and Partridge was

smoaking his pipe by the kitchen fire; so that he arrived at Mr.

Jones's chamber-door without any interruption. This he burst open, and

was entering without any ceremony, when Jones started from his scat

and ran to oppose him, which he did so effectually, that Nightingale

never came far enough within the door to see who was sitting on the

bed.

  Nightingale had in reality mistaken Jones's apartment for that in

which himself had lodged; he therefore strongly insisted on coming in,

often swearing that he would not be kept from his own bed. Jones,

however, prevailed over him, and delivered him into the hands of

Partridge, whom the noise on the stairs soon summoned to his

master's assistance.

  And now Jones was unwillingly obliged to return to his own

apartment, where at the very instant of his entrance he heard Lady

Bellaston venting an exclamation, though not a very loud one; and at

the same time saw her flinging herself into a chair in a vast

agitation, which in a lady of tender constitution would have been an

hysteric fit.

  In reality the lady, frightened with the struggle between the two

men, of which she did not know what would be the issue, as she heard

Nightingale swear many oaths he would come to his own bed, attempted

to retire to her known place of hiding, which to her great confusion

she found already occupied by another.

  "Is this usage to be borne, Mr. Jones?" cries the lady.- "Basest of

men!-- What wretch is this to whom you have exposed me?" "Wretch!"

cries Honour, bursting in a violent rage from her place of

concealment-- "Marry come up!-- Wretch forsooth?-- as poor a wretch as

I am, I am honest; this is more than some folks who are richer can

say."

  Jones, instead of applying himself directly to take off the edge

of Mrs. Honour's resentment, as a more experienced gallant would

have done, fell to cursing his stars, and lamenting himself as the

most unfortunate man in the world; and presently after, addressing

himself to Lady Bellaston, he fell to some very absurd protestations

of innocence. By this time the lady, having recovered the use of her

reason, which she had as ready as any woman in the world, especially

on such occasions, calmly replied: "Sir, you need make no apologies, I

see now who the person is; I did not at first know Mrs. Honour: but

now I do, I can suspect nothing wrong between her and you; and I am

sure she is a woman of too good sense to put any wrong constructions

upon my visit to you; I have been always her friend, and it may be

in my power to be much more hereafter."

  Mrs. Honour was altogether as placable as she was passionate.

Hearing, therefore, Lady Bellaston assume the soft tone, she

likewise softened hers.--"I'm sure, madam," says she, "I have been

always ready to acknowledge your ladyship's friendships to me; sure

I never had so good a friend as your ladyship-- and to be sure, now I

see it is your ladyship that I spoke to, I could almost bite my tongue

off for very mad.- I constructions upon your ladyship-to be sure it

doth not become a servant as I am to think about such a great lady- I

mean I was a servant: for indeed I am nobody's servant now, the more

miserable wretch is me.- I have lost the best mistress--" Here Honour

thought fit to produce a shower of tears.- "Don't cry, child," says

the good lady; "ways perhaps may be found to make you amends. Come to

me to-morrow morning." She then took up her fan which lay on the

ground, and without even looking at Jones, walked very majestically

out of the room; there being a kind of dignity in the impudence of

women of quality, which their inferiors vainly aspire to attain to in

circumstances of this nature.

  Jones followed her downstairs, often offering her his hand, which

she absolutely refused him, and got into her chair without taking

any notice of him, as he stood bowing before her.

  At his return upstairs, a long dialogue past between him and Mrs.

Honour, while she was adjusting herself after the discomposure she had

undergone. The subject of this was his infidelity to her young lady;

on which she enlarged with great bitterness; but Jones at last found

means to reconcile her, and not only so, but to obtain a promise of

most inviolable secrecy, and that she would the next morning endeavour

to find out Sophia, and bring him a further account of the proceedings

of the squire.

  Thus ended this unfortunate adventure to the satisfaction only of

Mrs. Honour; for a secret (as some of my readers will perhaps

acknowledge from experience) is often a very valuable possession:

and that not only to those who faithfully keep it, but sometimes to

such as whisper it about till it come to the ears of every one, except

the ignorant person who pays for the supposed concealing of what is

publickly known.





                                Chapter 8



  Short and sweet



  Nothwithstanding all the obligations she had received from Jones,

Mrs. Miller could not forbear in the morning some gentle for the

hurricane which had happened the preceding night in his chamber. These

were, however, so gentle and so friendly, professing, and indeed

truly, to aim at nothing more than the real good of Mr. Jones himself,

that he, far from being offended, thankfully received the admonition

of the good woman, expressed much concern for what had past, excused

it aswell as he could, and promised never more to bring the same

disturbances into the house.

  But though Mrs. Miller did not refrain from a short expostulation in

private at their first meeting, yet the occasion of his being summoned

downstairs that morning was of a more agreeable kind, being indeed

to perform the office of a father to Miss Nancy, and to give her in

wedlock to Mr. Nightingale, who was now ready drest, and full as sober

as many of my readers will think a man ought to be who receives a wife

in so imprudent a manner.

  And here perhaps it may be proper to account for the escape which

this young gentleman had made from his uncle, and for his appearance

in the condition in which we have seen him the night before.

  Now when the uncle had arrived at his lodgings with his nephew,

partly to indulge his own inclinations (for he dearly loved his

bottle), and partly to disqualify his nephew from the immediate

execution of his purpose, he ordered wine to be set on the table; with

which he so briskly plyed the young gentleman, that this latter,

who, though not much used to drinking, did not detest it so as to be

guilty of disobedience or want of complacence by refusing, was soon

completely finished.

  Just as the uncle had obtained this victory, and was preparing a bed

for his nephew, a messenger arrived with a piece of news, which so

entirely disconcerted and shocked him, that he in a moment lost all

consideration for his nephew, and his whole mind became entirely taken

up with his own concerns.

  This sudden and afflicting news was no less than that his daughter

had taken the opportunity of almost the first moment of his absence,

and had gone off with a neighbouring young clergyman; against whom,

though her father could have had but one objection, namely, that he

was worth nothing, yet she had never thought proper to communicate her

amour even to that father; and so artfully had she managed, that it

had never been once suspected by any, till now that it was

consummated.

  Old Mr. Nightingale no sooner received this account, than in the

utmost confusion he ordered a post-chaise to be instantly got ready,

and, having recommended his nephew to the care of a servant, he

directly left the house, scarce knowing what he did, nor whither he

went.

  The uncle thus departed, when the servant came to attend the

nephew to bed, had waked him for that purpose, and had at last made

him sensible that his uncle was gone, he, instead of accepting the

kind offices tendered him, insisted on a chair being called; with this

the servant, who had received no strict orders to the contrary,

readily complied; and, thus being conducted back to the house of

Mrs. Miller, he had staggered up to Mr. Jones's chamber, as hath

been before recounted.

  This bar of the uncle being now removed (though young Nightingale

knew not as yet in what manner), and all parties being quickly

ready, the mother, Mr. Jones, Mr. Nightingale, and his love, stept

into a hackney-coach, which conveyed them to Doctors' Commons; where

Miss Nancy was, in vulgar language, soon made an honest woman, and the

poor mother became, in the purest sense of the word, one of the

happiest of all human beings.

  And now Mr. Jones, having seen his good offices to that poor woman

and her family brought to a happy conclusion, began to apply himself

to his own concerns; but here, lest many of my readers should

censure his folly for thus troubling himself with the affairs of

others, and lest some few should think he acted more disinterestedly

than indeed he did, we think proper to assure our reader, that he

was so far from being unconcerned in this matter, that he had indeed a

very considerable interest in bringing it to that final consummation.

  To explain this seeming paradox at once, he was one who could

truly say with him in Terence, Homo sum: humani nihil a me alienum

puto.* He was never an indifferent spectator of the misery or

happiness of any one; and he felt either the one or the other in

greater proportion as he himself contributed to either. He could

not, therefore, be the instrument of raising a whole family from the

lowest state of wretchedness to the highest pitch of joy without

conveying great felicity to himself; more, perhaps, than worldly men

often purchase to themselves by undergoing the most severe labour, and

often by wading through the deepest iniquity.



  *I am a man; I hold as indifferent nothing that concerns man.



  Those readers who are of the same complexion with him will, perhaps,

think this short chapter contains abundance of matter; while others

may probably wish, short as it is, that it had been totally spared

as impertinent to the main design, which I suppose they conclude is to

bring Mr. Jones to the gallows, or, if possible, to a more

deplorable catastrophe.





                                Chapter 9



  Containing love-letters of several sorts



  Mr. Jones, at his return home, found the following letters lying

on his table, which he luckily opened in the order they were sent.



                                 LETTER I

  Surely I am under some strange infatuation; I cannot keep my

resolutions a moment, however strong made or justly founded. Last

night I resolved never to see you more; this morning I am willing to

hear if you can, as you say, clear up this affair. And yet I know that

to be impossible. I have said everything to myself which you can

invent.-- Perhaps not. Perhaps your invention is stronger. Come to me,

therefore, the moment you receive this. If you can forge an excuse,

I almost promise you to believe it. Betrayed too- I will think no

more.-- Come to me directly.-- This is the third letter I have writ,

the two former are burnt-- I am almost inclined to burn this too-I

wish I may preserve senses.-- Come to me presently.



                                LETTER II

  If you ever expect to be forgiven, or even suffered within my doors,

come to me this instant.



                                LETTER III

  I now find you was not at home when my notes came to your

lodgings. The moment you receive this let me see you;-- I shall not

stir out; nor shall anybody be let in but yourself. Sure nothing can

detain you long.



  Jones had just read over these three billets, when Mr. Nightingale

came into the room. "Well, Tom," said he, "any news from Lady

Bellaston, after last night's adventure?" (for it was now no secret to

any one in that house who the lady was). "The Lady Bellaston?"

answered Jones very gravely.-- "Nay, dear Tom," cries Nightingale,

"don't be so reserved to your friends. Though I was too drunk to see

her last night, I saw her at the masquerade. Do you think I am

ignorant who the queen of the fairies is?" "And did you really then

know the lady at the masquerade?" said Jones. "Yes, upon my soul,

did I," said Nightingale, "and have given you twenty hints of it

since, though you seemed always so tender on that point, that I

would not speak plainly. I fancy, my friend, by your extreme nicety in

this matter, you are not so well acquainted with the character of

the lady as with her person. Don't be angry, Tom, but upon my

honour, you are not the first young fellow she hath debauched. Her

reputation is in no danger, believe me."

  Though Jones had no reason to imagine the lady to have been of the

vestal kind when his amour began; yet, as he was thoroughly ignorant

of the town, and had very little acquaintance in it, he had no

knowledge of that character which is vulgarly called a demirep; that

is to say, a woman who intrigues with every man she likes, under the

name and appearance of virtue; and who, though some overnice ladies

will not be seen with her, is visited (as they term it) by the whole

town, in short, whom everybody knows to be what nobody calls her.

  When he found, therefore, that Nightingale was perfectly

acquainted with his intrigue, and began to suspect that so

scrupulous a delicacy as he had hitherto observed was not quite

necessary on the occasion, he gave a latitude to his friend's

tongue, and desired him to speak plainly what he knew, or had ever

heard of the lady.

  Nightingale, who, in many other instances, was rather too effeminate

in his disposition, had a pretty strong inclination to

tittle-tattle. He had no sooner, therefore, received a full liberty of

speaking from Jones, than he entered upon a long narrative

concerning the lady; which, as it contained many particulars highly to

her dishonour, we have too great a tenderness for all women of

condition to repeat. We would cautiously avoid giving an opportunity

to the future commentators on our works, of making any malicious

application, and of forcing us to be, against our will, the author

of scandal, which never entered into our head.

  Jones, having very attentively heard all that Nightingale had to

say, fetched a deep sigh; which the other, observing, cried,

"Heyday! why, thou art not in love, I hope! Had I imagined my

stories would have affected you, I promise you should never have heard

them." "O my dear friend!" cries Jones, "I am so entangled with this

woman, that I know not how to extricate myself. In love, indeed! no,

my friend, but I am under obligations to her, and very great ones.

Since you know so much, I will be very explicit with you. It is owing,

perhaps, solely to her, that I have not, before this, wanted a bit

of bread. How can I possibly desert such a woman? and yet I must

desert her, or be guilty of the blackest treachery to one who deserves

infinitely better of me than she can; a woman, my Nightingale, for

whom I have a passion which few can have an idea of. I am half

distracted with doubts how to act." "And is this other, pray, an

honourable mistress?" cries Nightingale. "Honourable!" answered Jones;

"no breath ever yet durst sully her reputation. The sweetest air is

not purer, the limpid stream not clearer, than her honour. She is

all over, both in mind and body, consummate perfection. She is the

most beautiful creature in the universe: and yet she is mistress of

such noble elevated qualities, that, though she is never from my

thoughts, I scarce ever think of her beauty but when I see it."- "And

can you, my good friend," cries Nightingale, "with such an

engagement as this upon your hands, hesitate a moment about quitting

such a-" "Hold," said Jones, "no more abuse of her: I detest the

thought of ingratitude." "Pooh!" answered the other, "you are not

the first upon whom she hath conferred obligations of this kind. She

is remarkably liberal where she likes; though, let me tell you, her

favours are so prudently bestowed, that they should rather raise a

man's vanity than his gratitude." In short, Nightingale proceeded so

far on this head, and told his friend so many stories of the lady,

which he swore to the truth of, that he entirely removed all esteem

for her from the breast of Jones; and his gratitude was lessened in

proportion. Indeed, he began to look on all the favours he had

received rather as wages than benefits, which depreciated not only

her, but himself too in his own conceit, and put him quite out of

humour with both. From this digust, his mind, by a natural transition,

turned towards Sophia; her virtue, her purity, her love to him, her

sufferings on his account, filled all his thoughts, and made his

commerce with Lady Bellaston appear still more odious. The result of

all was, that, though his turning himself out of her service, in which

light he now saw his affair with her, would be the loss of his

bread; yet he determined to quit her, if he could but find a

handsome pretence: which being communicated to his friend, Nightingale

considered a little, and then said, "I have it, my boy! I have found

out a sure method; propose marriage to her, and I would venture

hanging upon the success." "Marriage?" cries Jones. "Ay, propose

marriage," answered Nightingale, "and she will declare off in a

moment. I knew a young fellow whom she kept formerly, who made the

offer to her in earnest, and was presently turned off for his pains."

  Jones declared he could not venture the experiment. "Perhaps,"

said he, "she may be less shocked at this proposal from one man than

from another. And if she should take me at my word, where am I then?

caught in my own trap, and undone for ever." "No," answered

Nightingale, "not if I can give you an expedient by which you may at

any time get out of the trap."-- "What expedient can that be?" replied

Jones. "This," answered Nightingale. "The young fellow I mentioned,

who is one of the most intimate acquaintances I have in the world,

is so angry with her for some ill offices she hath since done him,

that I am sure he would, without any difficulty, give you a sight of

her letters; upon which you may decently break with her; and declare

off before the knot is tied, if she should really be willing to tie

it, which I am convinced she will not."

  After some hesitation, Jones, upon the strength of this assurance,

consented; but, as he swore he wanted the confidence to propose the

matter to her face, he wrote the following letter, which Nightingale

dictated:-



  MADAM,

  I am extremely concerned, that, by an unfortunate engagement abroad,

I should have missed receiving the honour of your ladyship's

commands the moment they came; and the delay which I must now suffer

of vindicating myself to your ladyship greatly adds to this

misfortune. O, Lady Bellaston! what a terror have I been in, for

fear your reputation should be exposed by these perverse accidents!

There is one only way to secure it. I need not name what that is. Only

permit me to say, that as your honour is as dear to me as my own, so

my sole ambition is to have the glory of laying my liberty at your

feet; and believe me when I assure you, I can never be made completely

happy, without you generously bestow on me a legal right of calling

you mine for ever.- I am,

                                    madam,

                            with most profound respect,

                               your ladyship's most obliged,

                                  obedient, humble servant,

                                                   THOMAS JONES



  To this she presently returned the following answer:



  SIR,

  When I read over your serious epistle, I could, from its coldness

and formality, have sworn that you already had the legal right you

mention; nay, that we had for many years composed that monstrous

animal a husband and wife. Do you really then imagine me a fool? or do

you fancy yourself capable of so entirely persuading me out of my

senses, that I should deliver my whole fortune into your power, in

order to enable you to support your pleasures at my expense? Are these

the proofs of love which I expected? Is this the return for--? but I

scorn to upbraid you, and am in great admiration of your Profound

respect.

  P.S. I am prevented from revising:-- Perhaps I have said more than I

meant.-- Come to me at eight this evening.



  Jones, by the advice of his privy-council, replied:



  MADAM,

  It is impossible to express how much I am shocked at the suspicion

you entertain of me. Can Lady Bellaston have conferred favours on a

man whom she could believe capable of so base a design? or can she

treat the most solemn tie of love with contempt? Can you imagine,

madam, that if the violence of my passion, in an unguarded moment,

overcame the tenderness which I have for your honour, I would think of

indulging myself in the continuance of an intercourse which could

not possibly escape long the notice of the world; and which, when

discovered, must prove so fatal to your reputation? If such be your

opinion of me, I must pray for a sudden opportunity of returning those

pecuniary obligations, which I have been so unfortunate to receive

at your hands; and for those of a more tender kind, I shall ever

remain, &c. And so concluded in the very words with which he had

concluded the former letter.



  The lady answered as follows:



  I see you are a villain! and I despise you from my soul. If you come

here I shall not be at home.



  Though Jones was well satisfied with his deliverance from a thraldom

which those who have ever experienced it will, I apprehend, allow to

be none of the lightest, he was not, however, perfectly easy in his

mind. There was in this scheme too much of fallacy to satisfy one

who utterly detested every species of falshood or dishonesty: nor

would he, indeed, have submitted to put it in practice, had he not

been involved in a distressful situation, where he was obliged to be

guilty of some dishonour, either to the one lady or the other; and

surely the reader will allow, that every good principle, as well as

love, pleaded strongly in favour of Sophia.

  Nightingale highly exulted in the success of his stratagem, upon

which he received many thanks and much applause from his friend. He

answered, "Dear Tom, we have conferred very different obligations on

each other. To me you owe the regaining your liberty; to you I owe the

loss of mine. But if you are as happy in the one instance as I am in

the other, I promise you we are the two happiest fellows in England."

  The two gentlemen were now summoned down to dinner, where Mrs.

Miller, who performed herself the office of cook, had exerted her best

talents to celebrate the wedding of her daughter. This joyful

circumstance she ascribed principally to the friendly behaviour of

Jones; her whole soul was fired with gratitude towards him, and all

her looks, words, and actions, were so busied in expressing it, that

her daughter, and even her new son-in-law, were very little objects of

her consideration.

  Dinner was just ended when Mrs. Miller received a letter; but as

we have had letters enow in this chapter, we shall communicate its

contents in our next.





                                Chapter 10



  Consisting partly of facts, and partly of observations upon them



  The letter, then, which arrived at the end of the preceding

chapter was from Mr. Allworthy, and the purport of it was, his

intention to come immediately to town, with his nephew Blifil, and a

desire to be accommodated with his usual lodgings, which were the

first floor for himself, and the second for his nephew.

  The chearfulness which had before displayed itself in the

countenance of the poor woman was a little clouded on his occasion.

This news did indeed a good deal disconcert her. To requite so

disinterested a match with her daughter, by presently turning her

new son-in-law out of doors, appeared to her very unjustifiable on the

one hand; and on the other, she could scarce bear the thoughts of

making any excuse to Mr. Allworthy, after all the obligations received

from him, for depriving him of lodgings which were indeed strictly his

due; for that gentleman, in conferring all his numberless benefits

on others, acted by a rule diametrically opposite to what is practised

by most generous people. He contrived, on all occasions, to hide his

beneficence, not only from the world, but even from the object of

it. He constantly used the words Lend and Pay, instead of Give; and by

every other method he could invent, always lessened with his tongue

the favours he conferred, while he was heaping them with both hands.

When he settled the annuity of L50 a year therefore on Mrs. Miller, he

told her, "it was in consideration of always having her first-floor

when he was in town (which he scarce ever intended to be), but that

she might let it at any other time, for that he would always send

her a month's warning." He was now, however, hurried to town so

suddenly, that he had no opportunity of giving such notice; and this

hurry probably prevented him, when he wrote for his lodgings,

adding, if they were then empty; for he would most certainly have been

well satisfied to have relinquished them, on a less sufficient

excuse than what Mrs. Miller could now have made.

  But there are a sort of persons, who, as Prior excellently well

remarks, direct their conduct by something



     Beyond the fix'd and settled rules

     Of vice and virtue in the schools,

     Beyond the letter of the law.



  To these it is so far from being sufficient that their defence would

acquit them at the Old Bailey, that they are not even contented,

though conscience, the severest of all judges, should discharge

them. Nothing short of the fair and honourable will satisfy the

delicacy of their minds; and if any of their actions fall short of

this mark, they mope and pine, are as uneasy and restless as a

murderer, who is afraid of a ghost, or of the hangman.

  Mrs. Miller was one of these. She could not conceal her uneasiness

at this letter; with the of which she had no sooner acquainted the

company, and given some hints of her distress, than Jones, her good

angel, presently relieved her anxiety. "As for myself, madam,' said

he, "my lodging is at your service at a moment's warning; and Mr.

Nightingale, I am sure, as he cannot yet prepare a house fit to

receive his lady, will consent to return to his new lodging, whither

Mrs. Nightingale will certainly consent to go." With which proposal

both husband and wife agreed.

  The reader will easily believe, that the cheeks of Mrs. Miller began

again to glow with additional gratitude to Jones; but, perhaps, it may

be more difficult to persuade him, that Mr. Jones having in his last

speech called her daughter Mrs. Nightingale (it being the first time

that agreeable sound had ever reached her ears), gave the fond

mother more satisfaction, and warmed her heart more towards Jones,

than his having dissipated her present anxiety.

  The next day was then appointed for the removal of the new-married

couple, and of Mr. Jones, who was likewise to be provided for in the

same house with his friend. And now the serenity of the company was

again restored, and they past the day in the utmost chearfulness,

all except Jones, who, though he outwardly accompanied the rest in

their mirth, felt many a bitter pang on the account of his Sophia,

which were not a little heightened by the news of Mr. Blifil's

coming to town for he clearly saw the intention of his journey); and

what greatly aggravated his concern was, that Mrs. Honour, who had

promised to inquire after Sophia, and to make her report to him

early the next evening, had disappointed him.

  In the situation that he and his mistress were in at this time,

there were scarce any grounds for him to hope that he should hear

any good news; yet he was as impatient to see Mrs. Honour as if he had

expected she would bring him a letter with an assignation in it from

Sophia, and bore the disappointment as ill. Whether this impatience

arose from that natural weakness of the human mind, which makes it

desirous to know the worst, and renders uncertainty the most

intolerable of pains; or whether he still flattered himself with

some secret hopes, we will not determine. But that it might be the

last, whoever has loved cannot but know. For of all the powers

exercised by this passion over our minds, one of the most wonderful is

that of supporting hope in the midst of despair. Difficulties,

improbabilities, nay, impossibilities, are quite overlooked by it;

so that to any man extremely in love, may be applied what Addison says

of Caesar,



     The Alps, and Pyrenaeans, sink before him!



Yet it is equally true, that the same passion will sometimes make

mountains of molehills, and produce despair in the midst of hope;

but these cold fits last not long in good constitutions. Which

temper Jones was now in, we leave the reader to guess, having no exact

information about it; but this is certain, that he had spent two hours

in expectation, when, being unable any longer to conceal his

uneasiness, he retired to his room; where his anxiety had almost

made him frantick, when the following letter was brought him from Mrs.

Honour, with which we shall present the reader verbatim et literatim.



  SIR,

  I shud sartenly haf kaled on you a cordin too mi prommiss haddunt

itt bin that hur lashipp prevent mee; for to bee sur, Sir, you nose

very well that evere persun must luk furst at ome, and sartenly such

anuther offar mite not have ever hapned, so as I shud ave bin justly

to blam, had I not excepted of it when her lashipp was so veri kind as

to offar to mak mee hur one uman without mi ever askin any such thing,

to be sur shee is won of thee best ladis in thee wurld, and pepil

who sase to the kontrari must bee veri wiket pepil in thare harts.

To bee sur if ever I ave sad any thing of that kine it as bin thru

ignorens, and I am hartili sorri for it. I nose your onur to be a

genteelman of more onur and onesty, if I ever said ani such thing,

to repete it to hurt a pore servant that as alwais add thee gratest

respect in thee wurld for ure onur. To be sur won shud kepe wons

tung within wons teeth, for no boddi nose what may hapen; and to bee

sur if ani boddi ad tolde mee yesterday, that I shud haf ben in so gud

a plase to day, I shud not haf beleeved it; for to be sur I never

was a dremd of an); such thing, nor shud I ever have soft after ani

other bodi's plase; but as her lashipp wass so kine of her one a

cord too give it mee without askin, to be sur Mrs. Etoff herself,

nor no other boddi can blam mee for exceptin such a thing when it fals

in mi waye. I beg ure Onur not to menshion ani thing of what I haf

sad, for I wish ure Onur all thee gud luk in the wurld; and I don't

cuestion butt thatt u will haf Madam Sofia in the end; butt ass to

miself ure onur nose I kant bee of ani farder sarvis to u in that

matar, nou bein under thee cumand off anuther parson, and note one

mistress, I begg ure Onur to say nothing of what past, and belive me

to be, sir, ure Onur's umble servant to cumand till deth,

                                                HONOUR BLACKMORE



  Various were the conjectures which Jones entertained on this step of

Lady Bellaston; who, in reality, had little farther design than to

secure within her own house the repository of a secret, which she

chose should make no farther progress than it had made already; but

mostly, she desired to keep it from the ears of Sophia; for though

that young lady was almost the only one who would never have

repeated it again, her ladyship could not persuade herself of this;

since, as she now hated poor Sophia with most implacable hatred, she

conceived a reciprocal hatred to herself to be lodged in the tender

breast of our heroine, where no such passion had ever yet found an

entrance.

  While Jones was terrifying himself with the apprehension of a

thousand dreadful machinations, and deep political designs, which he

imagined to be at the bottom of the promotion of Honour, Fortune,

who hitherto seems to have been an utter enemy to his match with

Sophia, tried a new method to put a final end to it, by throwing a

temptation in his way, which in his present desperate situation it

seemed unlikely he should be able to resist.





                                Chapter 11



  Containing curious, but not unprecedented matter



  There was a lady, one Mrs. Hunt, who had often seen Jones at the

house where he lodged, being intimately acquainted with the women

there, and indeed a very great friend to Mrs. Miller. Her age was

about thirty, for she owned six-and-twenty; her face and person very

good, only inclining a little too much to be fat. She had been married

young by her relations to an old Turkey merchant, who, having got a

great fortune, had left off trade. With him she lived without

reproach, but not without pain, in a state of great self-denial, for

about twelve years; and her virtue was rewarded by his dying and

leaving her very rich. The first year of her widowhood was just at

an end, and she had past it in a good deal of retirement, seeing

only a few particular friends, and dividing her time between her

devotions and novels, of which she was always extremely fond. Very

good health, a very warm constitution, and a good deal of religion,

made it absolutely necessary for her to marry again; and she

resolved to please herself in her second husband, as she had done

her friends in the first. From her the following billet was brought to

Jones:-



  SIR,

  From the first day I saw you, I doubt my eyes have told you too

plainly that you were not indifferent to me; but neither my tongue nor

my hand should have ever avowed it, had not the ladies of the family

where you are lodged given me such a character of you, and told me

such proofs of your virtue and goodness, as convince me you are not

only the most agreeable, but the most worthy of men. I have also the

satisfaction to hear from them, that neither my person, understanding,

or character, are disagreeable to you. I have a fortune sufficient

to make us both happy, but which cannot make me so without you. In

thus disposing of myself, I know I shall incur the censure of the

world; but if I did not love you more than I fear the world, I

should not be worthy of you. One only difficulty stops me; I am

informed you are engaged in a commerce of gallantry with a woman of

fashion. If you think it worth while to sacrifice that to the

possession of me, I am yours; if not, forget my weakness, and let this

remain an eternal secret between you and

                                                  ARABELLA HUNT



  At the reading of this, Jones was put into a violent flutter. His

fortune was then at a very low ebb, the source being stopt from

which hitherto he had been supplied. Of all he had received from

Lady Bellaston, not above five guineas remained; and that very morning

he had been dunned by a tradesman for twice that sum. His honourable

mistress was in the hands of her father, and he had scarce any hopes

ever to get her out of them again. To be subsisted at her expense,

from that little fortune she had independent of her father, went

much against the delicacy both of his pride and his love. This

lady's fortune would have been exceeding convenient to him, and he

could have no objection to her in any respect. On the contrary, he

liked her as well as he did any woman except Sophia. But to abandon

Sophia, and marry another, that was impossible; he could not think

of it upon any account. Yet why should he not, since it was plain

she could not be his? Would it not be kinder to her, than to

continue longer engaged to a hopeless passion for him? Ought he not to

do so in friendship to her? This notion prevailed some moments, and he

had almost determined to be false to her from a high point of

honour: but that refinement was not able to stand very long against

the voice of nature, which cried in his heart that such friendship was

treason to love. At last he called for pen, ink, and paper, and writ

as follows to Mrs. Hunt:-



  MADAM,

  It would be but a poor return to the favour have done me to

sacrifice any gallantry to the possession of you, and I would

certainly do it, though I were not disengaged, as at present I am,

from any affair of that kind. But I should not be the honest man you

think me, if I did not tell you that my affections are engaged to

another, who is a woman of virtue, and one that I never can leave,

though it is probable I shall never possess her. God forbid that, in

return of your kindness to me, I should do you such an injury as to

give you my hand when I cannot give my heart. No; I had much rather

starve than be guilty of that. Even though my mistress were married to

another, I would not marry you unless my heart had entirely effaced

all impressions of her. Be assured that your secret was not more

safe in your own breast, than in that of your most obliged, and

grateful humble servant,

                                               T. JONES



  When our heroe had finished and sent this letter, he went to his

scrutore, took out Miss Western's muff, kissed it several times, and

then strutted some turns about his room, with more satisfaction of

mind than ever any Irishman felt in carrying off a fortune of fifty

thousand pounds.





                                Chapter 12



  A discovery made by Partridge



  While Jones was exulting in the consciousness of his integrity,

Partridge came capering into the room, as was his custom when he

brought, or fancied he brought, any good tidings. He had been

dispatched that morning by his master, with orders to endeavour, by

the servants of Lady Bellaston, or by any other means, to discover

whither Sophia had been conveyed; and he now returned, and with a

joyful countenance told our heroe that he had found the lost bird.

"I have seen, sir," says he, "Black George, the gamekeeper, who is one

of the servants whom the squire hath brought with him to town. I

knew him presently, though I have not seen him these several years;

but you know, sir, he is a very remarkable man, or, to use a purer

phrase, he hath a most remarkable beard, the largest and blackest I

ever saw. It was some time, however, before Black George could

recollect me." "Well, but what is your good news?" cries Jones;

"what do you know of my Sophia?" "You shall know presently, sir,"

answered Partridge, "I am coming to it as fast as I can. You are so

impatient, sir, you would come at the infinitive mood before you can

get to the imperative. As I was saying, sir, it was some time before

he recollected my face."- "Confound your face!" cries Jones, "what of

my Sophia?" "Nay, sir," answered Partridge, "I know nothing more of

Madam Sophia than what I am going to tell you; and I should have

told you all before this if you had not interrupted me; but if you

look so angry at me, you will frighten all of it out of my head, or,

to use a purer phrase, out of my memory. I never saw you look so angry

since the day we left Upton, which I shall remember if I was to live a

thousand years."-- "Well, pray go on your own way," said Jones: "you

are resolved to make me mad, I find." "Not for the world," answered

Partridge, "I have suffered enough for that already; which, as I said,

I shall bear in my remembrance the longest day I have to live." "Well,

but Black George?" cries Jones. "Well, sir, as I was saying, it was

a long time before he could recollect me; for, indeed, I am very

much altered since I saw him. Non sum qualis eram.* I have had

troubles in the world, and nothing alters a man so much as grief. I

have heard it will change the colour of a man's hair in a night.

However, at last, know me he did, that's sure enough; for we are

both of an age, and were at the same charity school. George was a

great dunce, but no matter for that; all men do not thrive in the

world according to their learning. I am sure I have reason to say

so; but it will be all one a thousand years hence. Well, sir, where

was I?-- O- well, we no sooner knew each other, than, after many

hearty shakes by the hand, we agreed to go to an alehouse and take a

pot, and by good luck the beer was some of the best I have met with

since I have been in town. Now, sir, I am coming to the point; for no

sooner did I name you, and told him that you and I came to town

together, and had lived together ever since, than he called for

another pot, and swore he would drink to your health; and indeed he

drank your health so heartily that I was overjoyed to see there was so

much gratitude left in the world; and after we had emptied that pot I

said I would be my pot too, and so we drank another to your health;

and then I made haste home to tell you the news."



  *I am not as I was.



  "What news?" cries Jones, "yon have not mentioned a word of my

Sophia!" "Bless me! I had like to have forgot that. Indeed, we

mentioned a great deal about young Madam Western, and George told me

all; that Mr. Blifil. is coming to town in order to be married to her.

He had best make haste then, says I, or somebody will have her

before he comes; and, indeed, says I, Mr. Seagrim, it is a thousand

pities somebody should not have her; for he certainly loves her

above all the women in the world. I would have both you and she

know, that it is not for her fortune he follows her; for I can

assure you, as to matter of that, there is another lady, one of much

greater quality and fortune than she can pretend to, who is so fond of

somebody that she comes after him day and night."

  Here Jones fell into a passion with Partridge, for having, as he

said, betrayed him; but the poor fellow answered, he had mentioned

no name: "Besides, sir," said he, "I can assure you, George is

sincerely your friend, and wished Mr. Blifil at the devil more than

once; nay, he said he would do anything in his power upon earth to

serve you; and so I am convinced he will. Betray you, indeed! why, I

question whether you have a better friend than George upon earth,

except myself, or one that would go farther to serve you."

  "Well," says Jones, a little pacified, "you say this fellow, who,

I believe, indeed, is enough inclined to be my friend, lives in the

same house with Sophia?"

  "In the same house!" answered Partridge; "why, sir, he is one of the

servants of the family, and very well drest I promise you he is; if it

was not for black beard you would hardly know him."

  "One service then at least he may do me," says Jones: "sure he can

certainly convey a letter to my Sophia."

  "You have hit the nail ad unguem," cries Partridge; "how came I

not to think of it? I will engage he shall do it upon the very first

mentioning."

  "Well, then," said Jones, "do you leave me at present, and I will

write a letter, which you shall deliver to him to-morrow morning;

for I suppose you know where to find him." "O yes, sir," answered

Partridge, "I shall certainly find him again; there is no fear of

that. The liquor is too good for him to stay away long. I make no

doubt but he will be there every day he stays in town."

  "So you don't know the street then where my Sophia is lodged?" cries

Jones.

  "Indeed, sir, I do," says Partridge.

  "What is the name of the street?" cries Jones.

  "The name, sir? why, here, sir, just by," answered Partridge, "not

above a street or two off. I don't, indeed, know the very name; for,

as he never told me, if I had asked, you know, it might have put

some suspicion into his head. No, no, sir, let me alone for that. I am

too cunning for that, I promise you."

  "Thou art most wonderfully cunning, indeed," replied Jones;

"however, I will write to my charmer, since I believe you will be

cunning enough to find him to-morrow at the alehouse."

  And now, having dismissed the sagacious Partridge, Mr. Jones sat

himself down to write, in which employment we shall leave him for a

time. And here we put an end to the fifteenth book.
