



                                    BOOK IX

                            CONTAINING TWELVE HOURS





                                Chapter 1



  Of those who lawfully may, and of those who may not, write such

histories as this



  Among other good uses for which I have thought proper to institute

these several introductory chapters, I have considered them as a

kind of mark or stamp, which may hereafter enable a very indifferent

reader to distinguish what is true and genuine in this historic kind

of writing, from what is false and counterfeit. Indeed, it seems

likely that some such mark may shortly become necessary, since the

favourable reception which two or three authors have lately procured

for their works of this nature from the public, will probably serve as

an encouragement to many others to undertake the like. Thus a swarm of

foolish novels and monstrous romances will be produced, either to

the great impoverishing of book-sellers, or to the great loss of

time and depravation of morals in the reader; nay, often to the

spreading of scandal and calumny, and to the prejudice of the

characters of many worthy and honest people.

  I question not but the ingenious author of the Spectator was

principally induced to prefix Greek and Latin mottos to every paper,

from the same consideration of guarding against the pursuit of those

scribblers, who having no talents of a writer but what is taught by

the writing-master, are yet nowise afraid nor ashamed to assume the

same titles with the greatest genius, than their good brother in the

fable was of braying in the lion's skin.

  By the device therefore of his motto, it became impracticable for

any man to presume to imitate the Spectators, without understanding at

least one sentence in the learned languages. In the same manner I have

now secured myself from the imitation of those who are utterly

incapable of any degree of reflection, and whose learning is not equal

to an essay.

  I would not be here understood to insinuate, that the greatest merit

of such historical productions can ever lie in these introductory

chapters; but, in fact, those parts which contain mere narrative only,

afford much more encouragement to the pen of an imitator, than those

which are composed of observation and reflection. Here I mean such

imitators as Rowe was of Shakespear, or as Horace hints some of the

Romans were of Cato, by bare feet and sour faces.

  To invent good stories, and to tell them well, are possibly very

rare talents, and yet I have observed few persons who have scrupled to

aim at both: and if we examine the romances and novels with which

the world abounds, I think we may fairly conclude, that most of the

authors would not have attempted to show their teeth (if the

expression may be allowed me) in any other way of writing; nor could

indeed have strung together a dozen sentences on any other subject

whatever. Scribimus indocti doctique passim,* may be more truly said

of the historian and biographer, than of any other species of writing;

for all the arts and sciences (even criticism itself) require some

little degree of learning and knowledge. Poetry, indeed, may perhaps

be thought an exception; but then it demands numbers, or something

like numbers: whereas, to the composition of novels and romances,

nothing is necessary but paper, pens, and ink, with the manual

capacity of using them. This, I conceive, their productions show to be

the opinion of the authors themselves: and this must be the opinion of

their readers, if indeed there be any such.



  *--Each desperate blockhead dares to write:

   Verse is the trade of every living wight.- MR. FRANCIS



  Hence we are to derive that universal contempt which the world,

who always denominates the whole from the majority, have cast on all

historical writers who do not draw their materials from records. And

it is the apprehension of this contempt that hath made us so

cautiously avoid the term romance, a name with which we might

otherwise have been well enough contented. Though, as we hive good

authority for all our characters, no less indeed than the vast

authentic doomsday-book of nature, as is elsewhere hinted, our labours

have sufficient title to the name of history. Certainly they deserve

some distinction from those works, which one of the wittiest of men

regarded only as proceeding from a pruritus, or indeed rather from a

looseness of the brain.

  But besides the dishonour which is thus cast on one of the most

useful as well as entertaining of all kinds of writing, there is

just reason to apprehend, that by encouraging such authors we shall

propagate much dishonour of another kind; I mean to the characters

of many good and valuable members of society; for the dullest writers,

no more than the dullest companions, are always inoffensive. They have

both enough of language to be indecent and abusive. And surely if

the opinion just above cited be true, we cannot wonder that works so

nastily derived should be nasty themselves, or have a tendency to make

others so.

  To prevent therefore, for the future, such intemperate abuses of

leisure, of letters, and of the liberty of the press, especially as

the world seems at present to be more than usually threatened with

them, I shall here venture to mention some qualifications, every one

of which are in a pretty high degree necessary to this order of

historians.

  The first is, genius, without a full vein of which no study, says

Horace, can avail us. By genius I would understand that the power or

rather those powers of the mind, which are capable of penetrating into

all things within our reach and knowledge, and of distinguishing their

essential differences. These are no other than invention and judgment;

and they are both called by the collective name of genius, as they are

of those gifts of nature which we bring with us into the world.

Concerning each of which many seem to have fallen into very great

errors; for by invention, I believe, is generally understood a

creative faculty, which would indeed prove most romance writers to

have the highest pretensions to it; whereas by invention is really

meant no more (and so the word signifies) than discovery, finding out;

or to explain it at large, a quick and sagacious penetration into

the true essence of all the objects of our contemplation. This I

think, can rarely exist without the concomitancy of judgment; for

how we can be said to have discovered the true essence of two

things, without discerning their difference, seems to me hard to

conceive. Now this last is the undisputed province of judgment, and

yet some few men of wit have agreed with all the dull fellows in the

world in representing these two to have been seldom or never the

property of one and the same person.

  But though they should be so, they are not sufficient for our

purpose, without a good share of learning; for which I could again

cite the authority of Horace, and of many others, if any was necessary

to prove that tools are of no service to a workman, when they are

not sharpened by art, or when he wants rules to direct him in his

work, or hath no matter to work upon. All these uses are supplied by

learning; for nature can only furnish with capacity; or, as I have

chose to illustrate it, with the tools of our profession; learning

must fit them for use, must direct them in it, and lastly, must

contribute part at least of the materials. A competent knowledge of

history and of the belleslettres is here absolutely necessary; and

without this share of knowledge at least, to affect the character of

an historian, is as vain as to endeavour at building a house without

timber or mortar, or brick or stone. Homer and Milton, who, though

they added the ornament of numbers to their works, were both

historians of our order, were masters of all the learning of their

times.

  Again, there is another sort of knowledge, beyond the power of

learning to bestow, and this is to be had by conversation. So

necessary is this to the understanding the characters of men, that

none are more ignorant of them than those learned pedants whose

lives have been entirely consumed in colleges, and among books; for

however exquisitely human nature may have been described by writers,

the true practical system can be learnt only in the world. Indeed, the

like happens every other kind of knowledge. Neither physic nor law are

to be practically known from books. Nay, the farmer, the planter,

the gardener, must perfect by experience what he hath acquired the

rudiments of by reading. How accurately soever the ingenious Mr.

Miller may have described the plant, he himself would advise his

disciple to see it in the garden. As we must perceive, that after

the nicest strokes of a Shakespear or a Jonson, of a Wycherly or an

Otway, some touches of nature will escape the reader, which the

judicious action of a Garrick, of a Cibber, or a Clive,* can convey to

him; so, on the real stage, the character shows himself in a

stronger and bolder light than he can be described. And if this be the

case in those fine and nervous descriptions which great authors

themselves have taken from life, how much more strongly will it hold

when the writer himself takes his lines not from nature, but from

books? Such characters are only the faint copy of a copy, and can have

neither the justness nor spirit of an original.



  *There is a peculiar propriety in mentioning this great actor, and

these two most justly celebrated actresses, in this place, as they

have all formed themselves on the study of nature only, and not on the

imitation of their predecessors. Hence they have been able to excel

all who have gone before them; a degree of merit which the servile

herd of imitators can never possibly arrive at.



  Now this conversation in our historian must be universal, that is,

with all ranks and degrees of men; for the knowledge of what is called

high life will not instruct him in low; nor, e converso, will his

being acquainted with the inferior part of mankind teach him the

manners of the superior. And though it may be thought that the

knowledge of either may sufficiently enable him to describe at least

that in which he hath been conversant, yet he will even here fall

greatly short of perfection; for the follies of either rank do in

reality illustrate each other. For instance, the affectation of high

life appears more glaring and ridiculous from the simplicity of the

low; and again, the rudeness and barbarity of this latter, strikes

with much stronger ideas of absurdity, when contrasted with, and

opposed to, the politeness which controls the former. Besides, to

say the truth, the manners of our historian will be improved by both

these conversations; for in the one he will easily find examples of

plainness, honesty, and sincerity; in the other of refinement,

elegance, and a liberality of spirit; which last quality I myself have

scarce ever seen in men of low birth and education.

  Nor will all the qualities I have hitherto given my historian

avail him, unless he have what is generally meant by a good heart, and

be capable of feeling. The author who make me weep, says Horace,

must first weep himself. In reality, no man can paint a well which

he doth not feel while he is painting it; nor do I doubt, but that the

most pathetic and affecting scenes have been writ with tears. In the

same manner it is with the ridiculous. I am convinced I never make my

reader laugh heartily but where I have laughed before him; unless it

should happen at any time, that instead of laughing with me he

should be inclined to laugh at me. Perhaps this may have been the case

at some passages in this chapter, from which apprehension I will

here put an end to it.





                                Chapter 2



  Containing a very surprizing adventure indeed, which Mr. Jones met

with in his walk with the Man of the Hill



  Aurora now first opened her casement, Anglice the day began to

break, when walked forth in company with the stranger, and mounted

Mazard Hill; of which they had no sooner gained the summit than one of

the most noble prospects in the world presented itself to their

view, and which we would likewise present to the reader, but for two

reasons: we despair of making those who have seen this prospect admire

our description; secondly, we very much doubt whether who have not

seen it would understand it.

  Jones stood for some minutes fixed in one posture, and directing his

eyes towards the south; upon which the old gentleman asked, he was

looking at with so much attention? "Alas! sir," answered he with a

sigh, was endeavouring to trace out my own journey hither. Good

heavens! what a distance is Gloucester from us! What a vast track of

land be between me and my own home!"- "Ay, ay, young gentleman,"

cries the other, "and your sighing, from what you love better your own

home, or I am mistaken. I perceive now the object of your

contemplation is not within your sight, and yet I fancy you have

pleasure in looking that way. "Jones answered with a smile, "I find,

old friend, you have not yet forgot the sensations of your youth. I my

thoughts were employed as you have guessed."

  They now walked to that part of the hill which looks to the

north-west, and which hangs a vast and extensive wood. Here they no

sooner arrived than they heard at a distance the most violent

screams of a woman, proceeding from the wood below them. Jones

listened a moment, and then, without saying a word to his companion

(for indeed the occasion seemed sufficiently pressing), ran, or rather

slid, down the hill, and without the least apprehension or concern for

his own safety, made directly to the thicket, whence the sound had

issued.

  He had not entered far into the wood before he beheld a most

shocking sight indeed, a woman stript half naked, under the hands of a

ruffian, who had put his garter round her neck, and was endeavouring

to draw her up to a tree. Jones asked no questions at this interval,

but fell instantly upon the villain, and made such good use of his

trusty oaken stick that he laid him sprawling on the ground before

he could defend himself, indeed almost before he knew he was attacked;

nor did he cease the prosecution of his blows till the woman herself

begged him to forbear, saying, she believed he had sufficiently done

his business.

  The poor wretch then fell upon her knees to Jones, and gave him a

thousand thanks for her deliverance. He presently lifted her up, and

told her he was highly pleased with the extraordinary accident which

had sent him thither for her relief, where it was so improbable she

should find any; adding, that Heaven seemed to have designed him as

the happy instrument of her protection. "Nay," answered she, "I

could almost conceive you to be some good angel; and, to say the

truth, you look more like an angel than a man in my eye." Indeed he

was a charming figure; and if a very fine person, and a most comely

set of features, adorned with youth, health, strength, freshness,

spirit, and good-nature, can make a man resemble an angel, he

certainly had that resemblance.

  The redeemed captive had not altogether so much of the human-angelic

species: she seemed to be at least of the middle age, nor had her face

much appearance of beauty; but her cloaths being torn from all the

upper part of her body, her breasts, which were well formed and

extremely white, attracted the eyes of her deliverer, and for a few

moments they stood silent, and gazing at each other; till the

ruffian on the ground beginning to move, Jones took the garter which

had been intended for another purpose, and bound both his hands behind

him. And now, on contemplating his face, he discovered, greatly to his

surprize, and perhaps not a little to his satisfaction, this very

person to be no other than ensign Northerton. Nor had the ensign

forgotten his former antagonist, whom he knew the moment he came to

himself. His surprize was equal to that of Jones; but I conceive his

pleasure was rather less on this occasion.

  Jones helped Northerton upon his legs, and then looking him

stedfastly in the face, "I fancy, sir," said he, "you did not expect

to meet me any more in this world, and I confess I had as little

expectation to find you here. However, fortune, I see, hath brought us

once more together, and hath given me satisfaction for the injury I

have received, even without my own knowledge."

  "It is very much like a man of honour, indeed," answered Northerton,

"to take satisfaction by knocking a man down behind his back.

Neither am I capable of giving you satisfaction here, as I have no

sword; but if you dare behave like a gentleman, let us go where I

can furnish myself with one, and I will do by you as a man of honour

ought."

  "Doth it become such a villain as you are," cries Jones, "to

contaminate the name of honour by assuming it? But I shall waste no

time in discourse with you. justice requires satisfaction of you

now, and shall have it." Then turning to the woman, he asked her, if

she was near her home; or if not, whether she was acquainted with

any house in the neighbourhood, where she might procure herself some

decent cloaths, in order to proceed to a justice of the peace.

  She answered she was an entire stranger in that part of the world.

Jones then recollecting himself, said, he had a friend near who

would direct them; indeed, he wondered at his not following; but, in

fact, the good Man of the Hill, when our heroe departed, sat himself

down on the brow, where, though he had a gun in his hand, he with

great patience and unconcern had attended the issue.

  Jones then stepping without the wood, perceived the old man

sitting as we have just described him; he presently exerted his utmost

agility, and with surprizing expedition ascended the hill.

  The old man advised him to carry the woman to Upton, which, he said,

was the nearest town, and there he would be sure of furnishing her

with all manner of conveniences. Jones having received his direction

to the place, took his leave of the Man of the Hill, and, desiring him

to direct Partridge the same way, returned hastily to the wood.

  Our heroe, at his departure to make this enquiry of his friend,

had considered, that as the ruffian's hands were tied behind him, he

was incapable of executing any wicked purposes on the poor woman.

Besides, he knew he should not be beyond the reach of her voice, and

could return soon enough to prevent any mischief. He had moreover

declared to the villain, that if he attempted the least insult, he

would be himself immediately the executioner of vengeance on him.

But Jones unluckily forgot, that though the hands of Northerton were

tied, his legs were at liberty; nor did he lay the least injunction on

the prisoner that he should not make what use of these he pleased.

Northerton therefore, having given no parole of that kind, thought

he might without any breach of honour depart; not being obliged, as he

imagined, by any rules, to wait for a formal discharge. He therefore

took up his legs, which were at liberty, and walked off through the

wood, which favoured his retreat; nor did the woman, whose eyes were

perhaps rather turned toward her deliverer, once think of his

escape, or give herself any concern or trouble to prevent it.

  Jones therefore, at his return, found the woman alone. He would have

spent some time in searching for Northerton, but she would not

permit him; earnestly entreating that he would accompany her to the

town whither they had been directed. "As to the fellow's escape," said

she, "it gives me no uneasiness; for philosophy and Christianity

both preach up forgiveness of injuries. But for you, sir, I am

concerned at the trouble I give you; nay, indeed, my nakedness may

well make me ashamed to look you in the face; and if it was not for

the sake of your protection, I should wish to go alone."

  Jones offered her his coat; but, I know not for what reason, she

absolutely refused the most earnest solicitations to accept it. He

then begged her to forget both the causes of her confusion. "With

regard to the former," says he, "I have done no more than my duty in

protecting you; and as for the latter, I will entirely remove it, by

walking before you all the way; for I would not have my eyes offend

you, and I could not answer for my power of resisting the attractive

charms of so much beauty."

  Thus our heroe and the redeemed lady walked in the same manner as

Orpheus and Eurydice marched heretofore; but though I cannot believe

that Jones was designedly tempted by his fair one to look behind

him, yet as she frequently wanted his assistance help her over stiles,

and had besides many trips and other accidents, he was often obliged

to turn about. However, he had better fortune than what attended

poor Orpheus, for he brought his companion, or rather follower, safe

into the famous town of Upton.





                                Chapter 3



  The arrival of Mr. Jones with his lady at inn; with a very full

description of the battle of Upton



  Though the reader, we doubt not, is very eager to know who this lady

was, and how she fell into the hands of Mr. Northerton, we must beg

him to suspend his curiosity for a short time, as we are obliged,

for some very good reasons which hereafter perhaps he may guess, to

delay his satisfaction a little longer.

  Mr. Jones and his fair companion no sooner entered the town, than

they went directly to that inn which in their eyes presented the

fairest appearance to the street. Here Jones, having ordered a servant

to show a room above stairs, was ascending, when the dishevelled fair,

hastily following, was laid hold on by the master of the house, who

cried, "Heyday, where is that beggar wench going? Stay below stairs,

desire you." But Jones at that instant thundered from above, "Let

the lady come up," in so authoritative a voice, that the good man

instantly withdrew his hands, and the lady made best of her way to the

chamber.

  Here Jones wished her joy of her safe arrival, and then departed, in

order, as he promised, to send the landlady up with some cloaths.

The poor woman thanked him heartily for his kindness, and said, she

hoped she should see him again soon, to thank him a thousand times

more. During this short conversation, she covered her white bosom as

well as she could possibly with her arms; for Jones could not avoid

stealing a sly peep or two, though he took all imaginable care to

avoid giving any offence.

  Our travellers had happened to take up their residence at a house of

exceeding good repute, whither Irish ladies of strict virtue, and many

northern lasses of the same predicament, were accustomed to resort

in their way to Bath. The landlady therefore would by no means have

admitted any conversation of a disreputable kind to pass under her

roof. Indeed, so foul and contagious are all such proceedings, that

they contaminate the very innocent scenes where they are committed,

and give the name of a bad house, or a house of ill repute, to all

those where they are suffered to be carried on.

  Not that I would intimate that such strict chastity as was preserved

in the temple of Vesta can possibly be maintained at a public inn.

My good landlady did not hope for such a blessing, nor would any of

the ladies I have spoken of, or indeed any others of the most rigid

note, have expected or insisted on any such thing. But to exclude

all vulgar concubinage, and to drive all whores in rags from within

the walls, is within the power of every one. This my landlady very

strictly adherred to, and this her virtuous guests, who did not travel

in rags, would very reasonably have expected of her.

  Now it required no very blameable degree of suspicion to imagine

that Mr. Jones and his ragged companion had certain purposes in

their intention, which, though tolerated in some Christian

countries, connived at in others, and practised in all, are however as

expressly forbidden as murder, or any other horrid vice, by that

religion which is universally believed in those countries. The

landlady, therefore, had no sooner received an intimation of the

entrance of the above-said persons than she began to meditate the most

expeditious means for their expulsion. In order to this, she had

provided herself with a long and deadly instrument, with which, in

times of peace, the chambermaid was wont to demolish the labours of

the industrious spider. In vulgar phrase, she had taken up the

broomstick, and was just about to sally from the kitchen, when Jones

accosted her with a demand of a gown and other vestments, to cover the

half-naked woman upstairs.

  Nothing can be more provoking to the human temper, nor more

dangerous to that cardinal virtue, patience, than solicitations of

extraordinary offices of kindness on behalf of those very persons with

whom we are highly incensed. For this reason Shakespear hath

artfully introduced his Desdemona soliciting favours for Cassio of her

husband, as the means of inflaming, not only his jealousy, but his

rage, to the highest pitch of madness; and we find the unfortunate

Moor less able to command his passion on this occasion, than even when

he beheld his valued present to his wife in the hands of his

supposed rival. In fact, we regard these efforts as insults on our

understanding, and to such the pride of man is very difficultly

brought to submit.

  My landlady, though a very good-tempered woman, had, I suppose, some

of this pride in her composition, for Jones had scarce ended his

request, when she fell upon him with a certain weapon, which, though

it be neither long, nor sharp, nor hard, nor indeed threatens from its

appearance with either death or wound, hath been however held in great

dread and abhorrence by many wise men- nay, by many brave ones;

insomuch, that some who have dared to look into the mouth of a

loaded cannon, have not dared to look into a mouth where this weapon

was brandished; and rather than run the hazard of its execution,

have contented themselves with making a most pitiful and sneaking

figure in the eyes of all their acquaintance.

  To confess the truth, I am afraid Mr. Jones was one of these; for

though he was attacked and violently belaboured with the aforesaid

weapon, he could not be provoked to make any resistance; but in a most

cowardly manner applied, with many entreaties, to his antagonist to

desist from pursuing her blows; in plain English, he only begged her

with the utmost earnestness to hear him; but before he could obtain

his request, my landlord himself entered into the fray, and embraced

that side of the cause which seemed to stand very little in need of

assistance.

  There are a sort of heroes who are supposed to be determined in

their chusing or avoiding a conflict by the character and behaviour of

the person whom they are to engage. These are said to know their

men, and Jones, I believe, knew his woman; for though he had been so

submissive to her, he was no sooner attacked by her husband, than he

demonstrated an immediate spirit of resentment, and enjoined him

silence under a very severe penalty; no less than that, I think, of

being converted into fuel for his own fire.

  The husband, with great indignation, but with a mixture of pity,

answered, "You must pray first to be made able. I believe I am a

better man than yourself; ay, every way, that I am;" and presently

proceeded to discharge half-a-dozen whores at the lady above stairs,

the last of which had scarce issued from his lips, when a swinging

blow from the cudgel that Jones carried in his hand assulted him

over the shoulders.

  It is a question whether the landlord or the landlady was the most

expeditious in returning this blow. My landlord, whose hands were

empty, fell to with his fist, and the good wife, uplifting her broom

and aiming at the head of Jones, had probably put an immediate end

to the fray, and to Jones likewise, had not the descent of this

broom been prevented- not by the miraculous intervention of any

heathen deity, but by a very natural though fortunate accident, viz.,

by the arrival of Partridge; who entered the house at that instant

(for fear had caused him to run every step from the hill), and who,

seeing the danger which threatened his master or companion (which

you chuse to call him), prevented so sad a catastrophe, by catching

hold of the landlady's arm, as it was brandished aloft in the air.

  The landlady soon perceived the impediment which prevented her blow;

and being unable to rescue her arm from the hands of Partridge, she

let fall the broom; and then leaving Jones to the discipline of her

husband, she fell with the utmost fury on that poor fellow, who had

already given some intimation of himself, by crying, "Zounds! do you

intend to kill my friend?"

  Partridge, though not much addicted to battle, would not however

stand still when his friend was attacked; nor was he much displeased

with that part of the combat which fell to his share; he therefore

returned my landlady's blows as soon as he received them: and now

the fight was obstinately maintained on all parts, and it seemed

doubtful to which side Fortune would incline, when the naked lady, who

had listened at the top of the stairs to the dialogue which preceded

the engagement, descended suddenly from above, and without weighing

the unfair inequality of two to one, fell upon the poor woman who

was boxing with Partridge; nor did that great champion desist, but

rather redoubled his fury, when he found fresh succours were arrived

to his assistance.

  Victory must now have fallen to the side of the travellers (for

the bravest troops must yield to numbers) had not Susan the

chambermaid come luckily to support her mistress. This Susan was as

two-handed a wench (according to the phrase) as any in the country,

and would, I believe, have beat the famed Thalestris herself, or any

of her subject Amazons; for her form was robust and man-like, and

every way made for such encounters. As her hands and arms were

formed to give blows with great mischief to an enemy, so was her

face as well contrived to receive blows without any great injury to

herself, her nose being already flat to her face; her lips were so

large, that no swelling could be perceived in them, and moreover

they were so hard, that a fist could hardly make any impression on

them. Lastly, her cheekbones stood out, as if nature had intended them

for two bastions to defend her eyes in those encounters for which

she seemed so well calculated, and to which she was most wonderfully

well inclined.

  This fair creature entering the field of battle, immediately filed

to that wing where her mistress maintained so unequal a fight with one

of either sex. Here she presently challenged Partridge to single

combat. He accepted the challenge, and a most desperate fight began

began between them.

  Now the dogs of war being let loose, began to lick their bloody

lips; now Victory, with golden wings, hung hovering in the air; now

Fortune, taking her scales from her shelf, began to weigh the fates of

Tom Jones, his female companion, and Partridge, against the

landlord, his wife, and maid; all which hung in exact balance before

her; when a good-natured accident put suddenly an end to the bloody

fray, with which half of the combatants had already sufficiently

feasted. This accident was the arrival of a coach and four; upon which

my landlord and landlady immediately desisted from fighting, and at

their entreaty obtained the same favour of their antagonists; but

Susan was not so kind to Partridge; for that Amazonian fair having

overthrown and bestrid her enemy, was now cuffing him lustily with

both her hands, without any regard to his request of a cessation of

arms, or to those loud exclamations of murder which he roared forth.

  No sooner, however, had Jones quitted the landlord, than he flew

to the rescue of his defeated companion, from whom he with much

difficulty drew off the enraged chambermaid: but Partridge was not

immediately sensible of his deliverance, for he still lay flat on

the floor, guarding his face with his hands; nor did he cease

roaring till Jones had forced him to look up, and to perceive that the

battle was at an end.

  The landlord, who had no visible hurt, and the landlady, hiding

her well-scratched face with her handkerchief, ran both hastily to the

door to attend the coach, from which a young lady and her maid now

alighted. These the landlady presently ushered into that room where

Mr. Jones had at first deposited his fair prize, as it was the best

apartment in the house. Hither they were obliged to pass through the

field of battle, which they did with the utmost haste, covering

their faces with their handkerchiefs, as desirous to avoid the

notice of any one. Indeed their caution was quite unnecessary; for the

poor unfortunate Helen, the fatal cause of all the bloodshed, was

entirely taken up in endeavouring to conceal her own face, and Jones

was no less occupied in rescuing Partridge from the fury of Susan;

which being happily effected, the poor fellow immediately departed

to the pump to wash his face, and to stop that bloody torrent which

Susan had plentifully set a-flowing from his nostrils.





                                Chapter 4



  In which the arrival of a man of war puts a final end to

hostilities, and causes the conclusion of a firm and lasting peace

between all parties



  A serjeant and a file of musqueteers, with a deserter in their

custody, arrived about this time. The serjeant presently enquired

for the principal magistrate of the town, and was informed by my

landlord, that he himself was vested in that office. He then

demanded his billets, together with a mug of beer, and complaining

it was cold, spread himself before the kitchen fire.

  Mr. Jones was at this time comforting the poor distressed lady,

who sat down at a table in the kitchen, and leaning her head upon

her arm, was bemoaning her misfortunes; but lest my fair readers

should be in pain concerning a particular circumstance, I think proper

here to acquaint them, that before she had quitted the room above

stairs, she had so well covered herself with a pillowbeer which she

there found, that her regard to decency was not in the least

violated by the presence of so many men as were now in the room.

  One of the soldiers now went up to the serjeant, and whispered

something in his ear; upon which he stedfastly fixed his eyes on the

lady, and having looked at her for near a minute, he came up to her,

saying, "I ask pardon, madam; but I am certain I am not deceived;

you can be no other person than Captain Waters's lady?"

  The poor woman, who in her present distress had very little regarded

the face of any person present, no sooner looked at the serjeant

than she presently recollected him, and calling him by his name,

answered, "That she was indeed the unhappy person he imagined her to

be;" but added, "I wonder any one should know me in this disguise." To

which the serjeant replied, "He was very much surprized to see her

ladyship in such a dress, and was afraid some accident had happened to

her."- "An accident hath happened to me, indeed," says she, "and I am

highly obliged to this gentleman" (Pointing to Jones) "that it was not

a fatal one, or that I am now living to mention it."- "Whatever the

gentleman hath done," cries the serjeant, "I am sure the captain

will make him amends for it; and if I can be of any service, your

ladyship may command me, and I shall think myself very happy to have

it in my power to serve your ladyship; and so indeed may any one,

for I know the captain will well reward them for it."

  The landlady, who heard from the stairs all that past between the

serjeant and Mrs. Waters, came hastily down, and running directly up

to her, began to ask pardon for the offences she had committed,

begging that all might be imputed to ignorance of her quality: for,

"Lud! madam," says she, "how should I have imagined that a lady of

your fashion would appear in such a dress? I am sure, madam, if I

had once suspected that your ladyship was your ladyship, I would

sooner have burnt my tongue out, than have said what I have said;

and I hope your ladyship will accept of a gown, till you can get

your own cloaths."

  "Prithee, woman," says Mrs. Waters, "cease your impertinence: how

can you imagine I should concern myself about anything which comes

from the lips of such low creatures as yourself? But I am surprized at

your assurance in thinking, after what is past, that I will condescend

to put on any of your dirty things. I would have you know, creature, I

have a spirit above that."

  Here Jones interfered, and begged Mrs. Waters to forgive the

landlady, and to accept her gown: "for I must confess," cries he, "our

appearance was a little suspicious when first we came in; and I am

well assured all this good woman did was, as she professed, out of

regard to the reputation of her house."

  "Yes, upon my truly was it," says she: "the gentleman speaks very

much like a gentleman, and I see very plainly is so; and to be certain

the house is well known to be a house of as good reputation as any

on the road, and though I say it, is frequented by gentry of the

best quality, both Irish and English. I defy anybody to say black is

my eye, for that matter. And, as I was saying, if I had known your

ladyship to be your ladyship, I would as soon have burnt my fingers as

have affronted your ladyship; but truly where gentry come and spend

their money, I am not willing that they should be scandalized by a set

of poor shabby vermin, that, wherever they go, leave more lice than

money behind them; such folks never raise my compassion, for to be

certain it is foolish to have any for them; and if our justices did as

they ought, they would be all whipt out of the kingdom, for to be

certain it is what is most fitting for them. But as for your ladyship,

I am heartily sorry your ladyship hath had a misfortune, and if your

ladyship will do me the honour to wear my cloaths till you can get

some of your ladyship's own, to be certain the best I have is at

your ladyship's service."

  Whether cold, shame, or the persuasions of Mr. Jones prevailed

most on Mrs. Waters, I will not determine, but she suffered herself to

be pacified by this speech of my landlady, and retired with that

good woman, in order to apparel herself in a decent manner.

  My landlord was likewise beginning his oration to Jones, but was

presently interrupted by that generous youth, who shook him heartily

by the hand, and assured him of entire forgiveness, saying, "If you

are satisfied, my worthy friend, I promise you I am;" and indeed, in

one sense, the landlord had the better reason to be satisfied; for

he had received a bellyfull of drubbing whereas Jones had scarce

felt a single blow.

  Partridge, who had been all this time washing his bloody nose at the

pump, returned into the kitchen at the instant when his master and the

landlord were shaking hands with each other. As he was of a

peaceable disposition, he was pleased with those symptoms of

reconciliation; and though his face bore some marks of Susan's fist,

and many more of her nails, he rather chose to be contented with his

fortune in the last battle than to endeavour at bettering it in

another.

  The heroic Susan was likewise well contented with her victory,

though it had cost her a black eye, which Partridge had given her at

the first onset. Between these two, therefore, a league was struck,

and those hands which had been the instruments of war became now the

mediators of peace.

  Matters were thus restored to a perfect calm; at which the serjeant,

though it may seem so contrary to the principles of his profession,

testified his approbation. "Why now, that's friendly," said he; "d--n

me, I hate to see two people bear ill-will to one another after they

have had a tussel. The only way when friends quarrel is to see it

out fairly in a friendly manner, as a man may call it, either with a

fist, or sword, or pistol, according as they like, and then let it

be all over; for my own part, d--n me if ever I love my friend better

than when I am fighting with him! To bear malice is more like a

Frenchman than an Englishman."

  He then proposed a libation as a necessary part of the ceremony at

all treaties of this kind. Perhaps the reader may here conclude that

he was well versed in antient history; but this, though highly

probable, as he cited no authority to support the custom, I will not

affirm with any confidence. Most likely indeed it is, that he

founded his opinion on very good authority, since he confirmed it with

many violent oaths.

  Jones no sooner heard the proposal than, immediately agreeing with

the learned serjeant, he ordered a bowl, or rather a large mug, filled

with the liquor used on these occasions, to be brought in, and then

began the ceremony himself. He placed his right hand in that of the

landlord, and, seizing the bowl with his left, uttered the usual

words, and then made his libation. After which, the same was

observed by present. Indeed, there is very little need of being

particular in describing the whole form, as it differed so little from

those libations of which so much is recorded in antient authors and

their modern transcribers. The principal difference lay in two

instances; for, first, the present company poured the liquor only down

their throats; and, secondly, the serjeant, who officiated as

priest, drank the last; but he preserved, I believe, the antient form,

in swallowing much the largest draught of the whole company, and in

being the only person present who contributed nothing towards the

libation besides his good offices in assisting at the performance.

  The good people now ranged themselves round the kitchen fire,

where good humour seemed to maintain an absolute dominion; and

Partridge not only forgot his shameful defeat, but converted hunger

into thirst, and soon became extremely facetious. We must however quit

this agreeable assembly for a while, and attend Mr. Jones to Mrs.

Waters's apartment, where the dinner which he had bespoke was now on

the table. Indeed, it took no long time in preparing, having been

all drest three days before, and required nothing more from the cook

than to warm it over again.





                                Chapter 5



  An apology for all heroes who have good stomachs, with a description

of a battle of the amorous kind



  Heroes, notwithstanding the high ideas which, by the means of

flatterers, they may entertain of themselves, or the world may

conceive of them, have certainly more of mortal than divine about

them. However elevated their minds may be, their bodies at least

(which is much the major part of most) are liable to the worst

infirmities, and subject to the vilest offices of human nature.

Among these latter, the act of eating, which hath by several wise

men been considered as extremely mean and derogatory from the

philosophic dignity, must be in some measure performed by the greatest

prince, heroe, or philosopher upon earth; nay, sometimes Nature hath

been so frolicsome as to exact of these dignified characters a much

more exorbitant share of this office than she hath obliged those of

the lowest order to perform.

  To say the truth, as no known inhabitant of this globe is really

more than man, so none need be ashamed of submitting to what the

necessities of man demand; but when those great personages I have just

mentioned condescend to aim at confining such low offices to

themselves- as when, by hoarding or destroying, they seem desirous to

prevent any others from eating- then they surely become very low and

despicable.

  Now, after this short preface, we think it no disparagement to our

heroe to mention the immoderate ardour with which he laid about him at

this season. Indeed, it may be doubted whether Ulysses, who by the way

seems to have had the best stomach of all the heroes in that eating

poem of the Odyssey, ever made a better meal. Three pounds at least of

that flesh which formerly had contributed to the composition of an

ox was now honoured with becoming part of the individual Mr. Jones.

  This particular we thought ourselves obliged to mention, as it may

account for our heroe's temporary neglect of his fair companion, who

eat but very little, and was indeed employed in considerations of a

very different nature, which passed unobserved by Jones, till he had

entirely satisfied that appetite which a fast of twenty-four hours had

procured him; but his dinner was no sooner ended than his attention to

other matters revived; with these matters therefore we shall proceed

to acquaint the reader.

  Mr. Jones, of whose personal accomplishments we have hitherto said

very little, was, in reality, one of the handsomest young fellows in

the world. His face, besides being the picture of health, had in it

the most apparent marks of sweetness and good-nature. These

qualities were indeed so characteristical in his countenance, that,

while the spirit and sensibility in his eyes, though they must have

been perceived by an accurate observer, might have escaped the

notice of the less discerning, so strongly was this good-nature

painted in his look, that it was remarked by almost every one who

saw him.

  It was, perhaps, as much owing to this as to a very fine

complexion that his face had a delicacy in it almost inexpressible,

and which might have given him an air rather too effeminate, had it

not been joined to a most masculine person and mien: which latter

had as much in them of the Hercules as the former had of the Adonis.

He was besides active, genteel, gay, and good-humoured; and had a flow

of animal spirits which enlivened every conversation where he was

present.

  When the reader hath duly reflected on these many charms which all

centered in our heroe, and considers at the same time the fresh

obligations which Mrs. Waters had to him, it will be a mark more of

prudery than candour to entertain a bad opinion of her because she

conceived a very good opinion of him.

  But, whatever censures may be passed upon her, it is my business

to relate matters of fact with veracity. Mrs. Waters had, in truth,

not only a good opinion of our heroe, but a very great affection for

him. To speak out boldly at once, she was in love, according to the

present universally-received sense of that phrase, by which love is

applied indiscriminately to the desirable objects of all our passions,

appetites, and senses, and is understood to be that preference which

we give to one kind of food rather than to another.

  But though the love to these several objects may possibly be one and

the same in all cases, its operations however must be allowed to be

different; for, how much soever we may be in love with an excellent

surloin of beef, or bottle of Burgundy; with a damask rose, or Cremona

fiddle; yet do we never simile, nor ogle, nor dress, nor flatter,

nor endeavour by any other arts or tricks to gain the affection of the

said beef, &c. Sigh indeed we sometimes may; but it is generally in

the absence, not in the presence, of the beloved object. For otherwise

we might possibly complain of their ingratitude and deafness, with the

same reason as Pasiphae doth of her bull, whom she endeavoured to

engage by all the coquetry practised with good success in the

drawing room on the much more sensible as well as tender hearts of the

fine gentlemen there.

  The contrary happens in that love which operates between persons

of the same species, but of different sexes. Here we are no sooner

in love than it becomes our principal care to engage the affection

of the object beloved. For what other purpose indeed are our youth

instructed in all the arts of rendering themselves agreeable? If it

was not with a view to this love, I question whether any of those

trades which deal in setting off and adorning the human person would

procure a livelihood. Nay, those great polishers of our manners, who

are by some thought to teach what principally distinguishes us from

the brute creation, even dancing-masters themselves, might possibly

find no place in society. In short, all the graces which young

ladies and young gentlemen too learn from others, and the many

improvements which, by the help of a looking-glass, they add of

their own, are in reality those very spicula et faces amoris so of

mentioned by Ovid; or, as they are sometimes called in our own

language, the whole artillery of love.

  Now Mrs. Waters and our heroe had no sooner sat down together than

the former began to play this artillery upon the latter. But here,

as we are about to attempt a description hitherto unassayed either

in prose or verse, we think proper to invoke the assistance of certain

aerial beings, who will, we doubt not, come kindly to our aid on

this occasion.

  "Say then, ye Graces! you that inhabit the heavenly mansions of

Seraphina's countenance; for you are truly divine, are always in her

presence, and well know all the arts of charming; say, what were the

weapons now used to captivate the heart of Mr. Jones."

  "First, from two lovely blue eyes, whose bright orbs flashed

lightning at their discharge, flew forth two pointed ogles; but,

happily for our heroe, hit only a vast piece of beef which he was then

conveying into his plate, and harmless spent their force. The fair

warrior perceived their miscarriage, and immediately from her fair

bosom drew forth a deadly sigh. A sigh which none could have heard

unmoved, and which was sufficient at once to have swept off a dozen

beaus; so soft, so sweet, so tender, that the insinuating air must

have found its subtle way to the heart of our heroe, had it not

luckily been driven from his ears by the coarse bubbling of some

bottled ale, which at that time he was pouring forth. Many other

weapons did she assay; but the god of eating (if there be any such

deity, for I do not confidently assert it) preserved his votary; or

perhaps it may not be dignus vindice nodus, and the present security

of Jones may be accounted for by natural means; for as love frequently

preserves from the attacks of hunger, so may hunger possibly, in

some cases, defend us against love.

  "The fair one, enraged at her frequent disappointments, determined

on a short cessation of arms. Which interval she employed in making

ready every engine of amorous warfare for the renewing of the attack

when dinner should be over.

  "No sooner then was the cloth removed than she again began her

operations. First, having planted her right eye sidewise against Mr.

Jones, she shot from its corner a most penetrating glance; which,

though great part of its force was spent before it reached our

heroe, did not vent itself absolutely without effect. This the fair

one perceiving, hastily withdrew her eyes, and levelled them

downwards, as if she was concerned for what she had done; though by

this means she designed only to draw him from his guard, and indeed to

open his eyes, through which she intended to surprise his heart. And

now, gently lifting up those two bright orbs which had already begun

to make an impression on poor Jones, she discharged a volley of

small charms at once from her whole countenance in a smile. Not a

smile of mirth, nor of joy; but a smile of affection, which most

ladies have always ready at their command, and which serves them to

show at once their good-humour, their pretty dimples, and their

white teeth.

  "This smile our heroe received full in his eyes, and was immediately

staggered with its force. He then began to see the designs of the

enemy, and indeed to feel their success. A parley now was set on

foot between the parties; during which the artful fair so slily and

imperceptibly carried on her attack, that she had almost subdued the

heart of our heroe before she again repaired to acts of hostility.

To confess the truth, I am afraid Mr. Jones maintained a kind of Dutch

defence, and treacherously delivered up the garrison, without duly

weighing his allegiance to the fair Sophia. In short, no sooner had

the amorous parley ended and the lady had unmasked the royal

battery, by carelessly letting her handkerchief drop from her neck,

than the heart of Mr. Jones was entirely taken, and the fair conquerer

enjoyed the usual fruits of her victory."

  Here the Graces think proper to end their description, and here we

think proper to end the chapter.





                                Chapter 6



  A friendly conversation in the kitchen, which had a very common,

though not very friendly, conclusion



  While our lovers were entertaining themselves in the manner which is

partly described in the foregoing chapter, they were likewise

furnishing out an entertainment for their good friends in the kitchen.

And this in a double sense, by affording them matter for their

conversation, and, at the same time, drink to enliven their spirits.

  There were now assembled round the kitchen fire, besides my landlord

and landlady, who occasionally went backward and forward, Mr.

Partridge, the serjeant, and the coachman who drove the young lady and

her maid.

  Partridge having acquainted the company with what he had learnt from

the Man of the Hill concerning the situation in which Mrs. Waters

had been found by Jones, the serjeant proceeded to that part of her

history which was known to him. He said she was the wife of Mr.

Waters, who was a captain in their regiment, and had often been with

him at quarters. "Some folks," says he, "used indeed to doubt

whether they were lawfully married in a church or no. But for my part,

that's no business of mine; I must own, if I was put to my corporal

oath, I believe she is little better than one of us; and I fancy the

captain may go to heaven when the sun shines upon a rainy day. But

if he does, that is neither here nor there; for he won't want company.

And the lady, to give the devil his due, is a very good sort of

lady, and loves the cloth, and is always desirous to do strict justice

to it; for she hath begged off many a poor soldier, and, by her

good-will, would never have any of them punished. But yet, to be sure,

Ensign Northerton and she were very well acquainted together at our

last quarters; that is the very right and truth of the matter. But the

captain he knows nothing about it; and as long as there is enough

for him too, what does it signify? He loves her not a bit the worse,

and I am certain would any man through the body that was to abuse her;

therefore I won't abuse her, for my part. I only repeat what other

folks say; and to be certain, what everybody says, there must be

some truth in."- "Ay, ay, a great deal of truth, I warrant you,"

cries Partridge; "Veritas odium parit."*- "All a parcel of scandalous

answered the mistress of the house. "I am sure, now she is drest,

she looks like a very good sort of lady, and she behaves herself

like one; she gave me a guinea for the use of my cloaths."- "A very

good lady indeed!" cries the "and if you had not been a little

hasty, you would not have quarrelled with her as you did at

first."- "You need mention that with my truly!" answered she: "if it

had not been for your nonsense, nothing had You must be meddling

with what did not belong to you, and throw in your fool's

discourse."- "Well, well," answered he; past cannot be mended, so

there's an end of the matter." "Yes," cries she, "for this but will it

be mended ever the more hereafter? This is not the first time I have

suffered for your numscull's pate. I wish you would always hold your

tongue in the house, and meddle only in matters without doors, which

concern you. Don't you remember what happened about seven years

ago?"- "Nay, my dear," returned he, "don't rip up old stories. Come,

come, all's well, and I am sorry for what I done." The landlady was

going to reply, was prevented by the peace-making sorely to the

displeasure of Partridge, who was a great lover of what is called fun,

and a great promoter of those harmless quarrels which tend rather to

the production of comical than tragical incidents.



  *The truth begets hatred.



  The serjeant asked Partridge whither he and his master were

travelling? "None of your magisters," answered Partridge; "I am no

man's servant, I assure you; for, though I have misfortunes in the

world, I write gentleman after my name; and, as poor and simple I

may appear now, I have taught grammar-school in my time; sed hei mihi!

non sum quod fui."*- "No offence, I hope, sir," said the serjeant;

"where, then, if I may venture to be so bold, may you and your

friend be travelling?"- "You have now denominated us right," says

Partridge. "Amicis sumus. And I promise you my friend is one of the

greatest gentlemen in the kingdom" (at which words both landlord and

landlady pricked up their ears). "He is the heir of Squire

Allworthy."- "What, the squire who doth so much good all over the

country?" cries my landlady. "Even he," answered Partridge.- "Then I

warrant," says she, "he'll have a swinging great estate hereafter."-

"Most certainly," answered Partridge.- "Well," replied the landlady,

"I thought the first moment I saw him he looked like a good sort of

gentleman; but my husband here, to be sure, is wiser than anybody."-

"I own, my dear," cries he, "it was a mistake."- "A mistake, indeed!"

answered she; "but when did you ever know me to make such mistakes?"-

"But how comes it, sir," cries the landlord, "that such a great

gentleman walks about the country afoot?"- "I don't know," returned

Partridge; "great gentlemen have humours sometimes. He hath now a

dozen horses and servants at Gloucester; and nothing would serve him,

but last night, it being very hot wheather, he must cool himself with

a walk to yon high hill, whither I likewise walked with him to bear

him company; but if ever you catch me there again: for I was never so

frightened in all my life. We met with the strangest man there."-

"I'll be hanged," cries the landlord, "if it was not the Man of the

Hill, as they call him; if indeed he be a man; but I know several

people who believe it is the devil that lives there."- "Nay, nay, like

enough," says Partridge; "and now you put me in the head of it, I

verily and sincerely believe it was the devil, though I could not

perceive his cloven foot: but perhaps he might have the power given

him to hide that, since evil spirits can appear in what shape they

please."- "And pray, sir," says the serjeant, "no offence, I hope; but

pray what sort of a gentleman is the devil? For I have heard some of

our officers say there is no such person; and that it is only a trick

of the parsons, to prevent their being broke; for, if it was publickly

known that there was no devil, the parsons would be of no more use

than we are in time of peace."- "Those officers," says Partridge, "are

very great scholars, I suppose."- "Not much of schollards neither,"

answered the serjeant; "they have not half your learning, sir, I

believe; and, to be sure, I thought there must be a devil,

notwithstanding what they said, though one of them was a captain; for

methought, thinks I to myself, if there be no devil, how can wicked

people be sent to him? and I have read all that upon a book."- "Some

of your officers," quoth the landlord, "will find there is a devil, to

their shame, I believe. I don't question but he'll pay off some old

scores upon my account. Here was one quartered upon me half a year,

who had the conscience to take up one of my best beds, though he

hardly spent a shilling a day in the house, and suffered his men to

roast cabbages at the kitchen fire, because I would not give them a

dinner on a Sunday. Every good Christian must desire there should be a

devil for the punishment of such wretches."- "Harkee, landlord," said

the serjeant, "don't abuse the cloth, for I won't take it."- "D--n the

cloth!" answered the landlord, "I have suffered enough by them."-

"Bear witness, gentlemen," says the serjeant, "he curses the king, and

that's high treason."- "I curse the king! you villain," said the

landlord. "Yes, you did," cries the serjeant; "you cursed the cloth,

and that's cursing the king. It's all one and the same; for every man

who curses the cloth would curse the king it he durst; so for matter

o' that, it's all one and the same thing."- "Excuse me there, Mr.

Serjeant," quoth Partridge, "that's a non sequitur."*(2) - "None of

your outlandish linguo," answered the serjeant, leaping from his seat;

"I will not sit still and hear the cloth abused."- "You mistake me,

friend," cries Partridge. "I did not mean to abuse the cloth; I only

said your conclusion was a non sequitur."*- "You are another," cries

the serjeant, "an you come to that. No more a sequitur than yourself.

You are a pack of rascals, and I'll prove it; for I will fight the

best man of you all for twenty pound." This challenge effectually

silenced Partridge, whose stomach for drubbing did not so soon return

after the hearty meal which he had lately been treated with; but the

coachman, whose bones were less sore, and whose appetite for fighting

was somewhat sharper, did not so easily brook the affront, of which he

conceived some part at least fell to his share. He started therefore

from his seat, and, advancing to the serjeant, swore he looked on

himself to be as good a man as any in the army, and offered to box for

a guinea. The military man accepted the combat, but refused the wager;

upon which both immediately stript and engaged, till the driver of

horses was so well mauled by the leader of men, that he was obliged to

exhaust his small remainder of breath in begging for quarter.



  *Alas! I am not what I was.

  *(2) This word, which the serjeant unhappily mistook for an effront,

is a term in logic, and means that the conclusion does not follow from

the premises.



  The young lady was now desirous to depart, and had given orders

for her coach to be prepared: but all in vain, for the coachman was

disabled from performing his office for that evening. An antient

heathen would perhaps have imputed this disability to the god of

drink, no less than to the god of war; for, in reality, both the

combatants had sacrificed as well to the former deity as to the

latter. To speak plainly, they were both dead drunk, nor was Partridge

in a much better situation. As for my landlord, drinking was his

trade; and the liquor had no more effect on him than it had on any

other vessel in his house.

  The mistress of the inn, being summoned to attend Mr. Jones and

his companion at their tea, gave a full relation of the latter part of

the foregoing scene; and at the same time expressed great concern

for the young lady, "who," she said, "was under the utmost

uneasiness at being prevented from pursuing her journey. She is a

sweet pretty creature," added she, "and I am certain I have seen

her face before. I fancy she is in love, and running away from her

friends. Who knows but some young gentleman or other may be

expecting her, with a heart as heavy as her own?"

  Jones fetched a heavy sigh at those words; of which, though Mrs.

Waters observed it, she took no notice while the landlady continued in

the room; but, after the departure of that good woman, she could not

forbear giving our heroe certain hints on her suspecting some very

dangerous rival in his affections. The aukward behaviour of Mr.

Jones on this occasion convinced her of the truth, without his

giving her a direct answer to any of her questions; but she was not

nice enough in her amours to be greatly concerned at the discovery.

The beauty of Jones highly charmed her eye; but as she could not see

his heart, she gave herself no concern about it. She could feast

heartily at the table of love, without reflecting that some other

already had been, or hereafter might be, feasted with the same repast.

A sentiment which, if it deals but little in refinement, deals,

however, much in substance; and is less capricious, and perhaps less

ill-natured and selfish, than the desires of those females who can

be contented enough to abstain from the possession of their lovers,

provided they are sufficiently satisfied that no one else possesses

them.





                                Chapter 7



  Containing a fuller account of Mrs. Waters, and by what means she

came into that distressful situation from which she was rescued by

Jones



  Though Nature hath by no means mixed up an equal share either of

curiosity or vanity in every human composition, there is perhaps no

individual to whom she hath not allotted such a proportion of both

as requires much arts, and pains too, to subdue and keep under;- a

conquest, however, absolutely necessary to every one who would in

any degree deserve the characters of wisdom or good breeding.

  As Jones, therefore, might very justly be called a well-bred man, he

had stifled all that curiosity which the extraordinary manner in which

he had found Mrs. Waters must be supposed to have occasioned. He

had, indeed, at first thrown out some few hints to the lady; but, when

he perceived her industriously avoiding any explanation, he was

contented to remain in ignorance, the rather as he was not without

suspicion that there were some circumstances which must have raised

her blushes, had she related the whole truth.

  Now since it is possible that some of our readers may not so

easily acquiesce under the same ignorance, and as we are very desirous

to satisfy them all, we have taken uncommon pains to inform

ourselves of the real fact, with the relation of which we shall

conclude this book.

  This lady, then, had lived some years with one Captain Waters, who

was a captain in the same regiment to which Mr. Northerton belonged.

She past for that gentleman's wife, and went by his name; and yet,

as the serjeant said, there were some doubts concerning the reality of

their marriage, which we shall not at present take upon us to resolve.

  Mrs. Waters, I am sorry to say it, had for some time contracted an

intimacy with the above-mentioned ensign, which did no great credit to

her reputation. That she had a remarkable fondness for that young

fellow is most certain; but whether she indulged this to any very

criminal lengths is not so extremely clear, unless we will suppose

that women never grant every favour to a man but one, without granting

him that one also.

  The division of the regiment to which Captain Waters belonged had

two days preceded the march of that company to which Mr. Northerton

was the ensign; so that the former had reached Worcester the very

day after the unfortunate re-encounter between Jones and Northerton

which we have before recorded.

  Now, it had been agreed between Mrs. Waters and the captain that she

would accompany him in his march as far as Worcester, where they

were to take their leave of each other, and she was thence to return

to Bath, where she was to stay till the end of the winter's campaign

against the rebels.

  With this agreement Mr. Northerton was made acquainted. To say the

truth, the lady had made him an assignation at this very place, and

promised to stay at Worcester till his division came thither; with

what view, and for what purpose, must be left to the reader's

divination; for, though we are obliged to relate facts, are not

obliged to do a violence to our nature by any comments to the

disadvantage of the loveliest part of the creation.

  Northerton no sooner obtained a release from his captivity, as we

have seen, than he hasted away to overtake Mrs. Waters; which, as he

was a very active nimble fellow, he did at the last-mentioned city,

some few hours after Captain Waters had left her. At his first arrival

he made no scruple of acquainting her with the unfortunate accident;

which he made appear very unfortunate indeed, for he totally extracted

every particle of what could be called fault, at least in a court of

honour, though he left some circumstances which might be

questionable in a court of law.

  Women, to their glory be it spoken, are more generally capable of

that violent and apparently disinterested passion of love, which seeks

only the good of its object, than men. Mrs. Waters, therefore, was

no sooner apprized of the danger to which her lover was exposed,

than she lost every consideration besides that of his safety; and this

being a matter equally agreeable to the gentleman, it became the

immediate subject of debate between them.

  After much consultation on this matter, it was at length agreed that

the ensign should go across the country to Hereford, whence he might

find some conveyance to one of the seaports in Wales, and thence might

make his escape abroad. In all which expedition Mrs. Waters declared

she would bear him company; and for which was able to furnish him with

money, a very material article to Mr. Northerton, she having then in

her pocket three banknotes to the amount of L90, besides some cash,

and a diamond ring of pretty considerable value on her finger. All

which she, with the utmost confidence, revealed to this wicked man,

little suspecting she should by these means inspire him with a

design of robbing her. Now, as they must, by taking horses from

Worcester, have furnished any pursuers with the means of hereafter

discovering their route, the ensign proposed, and the lady presently

agreed, to make their first stage on foot; for which purpose the

hardness of the frost was very seasonable.

  The main part of the lady's baggage was already at Bath, and she had

nothing with her at present besides a very small quantity of linen,

which the gallant undertook to carry in his own pockets. All things,

therefore, being settled in the evening, they arose early the next

morning, and at five o'clock departed from Worcester, it being then

above two hours before day, but the moon, which was then at the

full, gave them all the light she was capable of affording.

  Mrs. Waters was not of that delicate race of women who are obliged

to the invention of vehicles for the capacity of removing themselves

from one place to another, and with whom consequently a coach is

reckoned among the necessaries of life. Her limbs were indeed full

of strength and agility, and, as her mind was no less animated with

spirit, she was perfectly able to keep pace with her nimble lover.

  Having travelled on for some miles in a high road, which

Northerton said he was informed led to Hereford, they came at the

break of day to the side of a large wood, where he suddenly stopped,

and, affecting to meditate a moment with himself, expressed some

apprehensions from travelling any longer in so public a way. Upon

which he easily persuaded his fair companion to strike with him into a

path which seemed to lead directly through the wood, and which at

length brought them both to the bottom of Mazard Hill.

  Whether the execrable scheme which he now attempted to execute was

the effect of previous deliberation, or whether it now first came into

his head, I cannot determine. But being arrived in this lonely

place, where it was very improbable he should meet with any

interruption, he suddenly slipped his garter from his leg, and, laying

violent hands on the poor woman, endeavoured to perpetrate that

dreadful and detestable fact which we have before commemorated, and

which the providential appearance of Jones did so fortunately prevent.

  Happy was it for Mrs. Waters that she was not of the weakest order

of females; for no sooner did she perceive, by his tying a knot in his

garter, and by his declarations, what his hellish intentions were,

than she stood stoutly to her defence, and so strongly struggled

with her enemy, screaming all the while for assistance, that she

delayed the execution of the villain's purpose several minutes, by

which means Mr. Jones came to her relief at that very instant when her

strength failed and she was totally overpowered, and delivered her

from the ruffian's hands, with no other loss than that of her cloaths,

which were torn from her back, and of the diamond ring, which during

the contention either dropped from her finger, or was wrenched from it

by Northerton.

  Thus, reader, we have given thee the fruits of a very painful

enquiry which for thy satisfaction we have made into this matter.

And here we have opened to thee a scene of folly as well as villany,

which we could scarce have believed a human creature capable of

being guilty of, had we not remembered that this fellow was at that

time firmly persuaded that he had already committed a murder, and

had forfeited his life to the law. As he concluded therefore that

his only safety lay in flight, he thought the possessing himself of

this poor woman's money and ring would make him amends for the

additional burthen he was to lay on his conscience.

  And here, reader, we must strictly caution thee that thou dost not

take any occasion, from the misbehaviour of such a wretch as this,

to reflect on so worthy and honourable a body of men as are the

officers of our army in general. Thou wilt be pleased to consider that

this fellow, as we have already informed thee, had neither the birth

nor education of a gentleman, nor was a proper person to be enrolled

among the number of such. If, therefore, his baseness can justly

reflect on any besides himself, it must be only on those who gave

him his commission.
