





XXVIII



``EXTRA! EXTRA! EXTRA!''



It was raining in London--pouring.  It had been raining for two

weeks, more or less, generally more.  When the train from Dover

drew in at Charing Cross, the weather seemed suddenly to have

considered that it had so far been too lenient and must express

itself much more vigorously.  So it had gathered together its

resources and poured them forth in a deluge which surprised even

Londoners.



The rain so beat against and streamed down the windows of the

third-class carriage in which Marco and The Rat sat that they

could not see through them.



They had made their homeward journey much more rapidly than they

had made the one on which they had been outward  bound.  It had

of course taken them some time to tramp back to the frontier, but

there had been no reason for stopping anywhere after they had

once reached the railroads.  They had been tired sometimes, but

they had slept heavily on the wooden seats of the railway

carriages.  Their one desire was to get home.  No. 7 Philibert

Place rose before them in its noisy dinginess as the one

desirable spot on earth.  To Marco it held his father.  And it

was Loristan alone that The Rat saw when he thought of it. 

Loristan as he would look when he saw him come into the room with

Marco, and stand up and salute, and say:  ``I have brought him

back, sir.  He has carried out every single order you gave

him--every single one.  So have I.''  So he had.  He had been

sent as his companion and attendant, and he had been faithful in

every thought.  If Marco would have allowed him, he would have

waited upon him like a servant, and have been proud of the

service.  But Marco would never let him forget that they were

only two boys and that one was of no more importance than the

other.  He had secretly even felt this attitude to be a sort of

grievance.  It would have been more like a game if one of them

had been the mere servitor of the other, and if that other had

blustered a little, and issued commands, and demanded sacrifices. 

If the faithful vassal could have been wounded or cast into a

dungeon for his young commander's sake, the adventure would have

been more complete.  But though their journey had been full of

wonders and rich with beauties, though the memory of it hung in

The Rat's mind like a background of tapestry embroidered in all

the hues of the earth with all the splendors of it, there had

been no dungeons and no wounds.  After the adventure in Munich

their unimportant boyishness had not even been observed by such

perils as might have threatened them.  As The Rat had said, they

had ``blown like grains of dust'' through Europe and had been as

nothing.  And this was what Loristan had planned, this was what

his grave thought had wrought out.  If they had been men, they

would not have been so safe.



From the time they had left the old priest on the hillside to

begin their journey back to the frontier, they both had been

given to long silences as they tramped side by side or lay on the

moss in the forests.  Now that their work was done, a sort of

reaction had set  in.  There were no more plans to be made and no

more uncertainties to contemplate.  They were on their way back

to No. 7 Philibert Place--Marco to his father, The Rat to the man

he worshipped.  Each of them was thinking of many things.  Marco

was full of longing to see his father's face and hear his voice

again.  He wanted to feel the pressure of his hand on his

shoulder--to be sure that he was real and not a dream.  This last

was because during this homeward journey everything that had

happened often seemed to be a dream.  It had all been so

wonderful--the climber standing looking down at them the morning

they awakened on the Gaisburg; the mountaineer shoemaker

measuring his foot in the small shop; the old, old woman and her

noble lord; the Prince with his face turned upward as he stood on

the balcony looking at the moon; the old priest kneeling and

weeping for joy; the great cavern with the yellow light upon the

crowd of passionate faces; the curtain which fell apart and

showed the still eyes and the black hair with the halo about it! 

Now that they were left behind, they all seemed like things he

had dreamed.  But he had not dreamed them; he was going back to

tell his father about them.  And how GOOD it would be to feel his

hand on his shoulder!



The Rat gnawed his finger ends a great deal.  His thoughts were

more wild and feverish than Marco's.  They leaped forward in

spite of him.  It was no use to pull himself up and tell himself

that he was a fool.  Now that all was over, he had time to be as

great a fool as he was inclined to be.  But how he longed to

reach London and stand face to face with Loristan!  The sign was

given.  The Lamp was lighted.  What would happen next?  His

crutches were under his arms before the train drew up.



``We're there!  We're there!'' he cried restlessly to Marco. 

They had no luggage to delay them.  They took their bags and

followed the crowd along the platform.  The rain was rattling

like bullets against the high glassed roof.  People turned to

look at Marco, seeing the glow of exultant eagerness in his face. 

They thought he must be some boy coming home for the holidays and

going to make a visit at a place he delighted in.  The rain was

dancing on the pavements when they reached the entrance.



``A cab won't cost much,'' Marco said, ``and it will take us

quickly.''



They called one and got into it.  Each of them had flushed

cheeks, and Marco's eyes looked as if he were gazing at something

a long way off--gazing at it, and wondering.



``We've come back!'' said The Rat, in an unsteady voice.  ``We've

been--and we've come back!''  Then suddenly turning to look at

Marco, ``Does it ever seem to you as if, perhaps, it--it wasn't

true?''



``Yes,'' Marco answered, ``but it was true.  And it's done.'' 

Then he added after a second or so of silence, just what The Rat

had said to himself, ``What next?''  He said it very low.



The way to Philibert Place was not long.  When they turned into

the roaring, untidy road, where the busses and drays and carts

struggled past each other with their loads, and the tired-faced

people hurried in crowds along the pavement, they looked at them

all feeling that they had left their dream far behind indeed. 

But they were at home.



It was a good thing to see Lazarus open the door and stand

waiting before they had time to get out of the cab.  Cabs stopped

so seldom before houses in Philibert Place that the inmates were

always prompt to open their doors.  When Lazarus had seen this

one stop at the broken iron gate, he had known whom it brought. 

He had kept an eye on the windows faithfully for many a day--even

when he knew that it was too soon, even if all was well, for any

travelers to return.



He bore himself with an air more than usually military and his

salute when Marco crossed the threshold was formal stateliness

itself.  But his greeting burst from his heart.



``God be thanked!'' he said in his deep growl of joy.  ``God be

thanked!''



When Marco put forth his hand, he bent his grizzled head and

kissed it devoutly.



``God be thanked!'' he said again.



``My father?'' Marco began, ``my father is out?''  If he had been

in the house, he knew he would not have stayed in the back

sitting-room.



``Sir,'' said Lazarus, ``will you come with me into his room? 

You, too, sir,'' to The Rat.  He had never said ``sir'' to him

before.



He opened the door of the familiar room, and the boys entered. 

The room was empty.



Marco did not speak; neither did The Rat.  They both stood still

in the middle of the shabby carpet and looked up at the old

soldier.  Both had suddenly the same feeling that the earth had

dropped from beneath their feet.  Lazarus saw it and spoke fast

and with tremor.  He was almost as agitated as they were.



``He left me at your service--at your command''--he began.



``Left you?'' said Marco.



``He left us, all three, under orders--to WAIT,'' said Lazarus. 

``The Master has gone.''



The Rat felt something hot rush into his eyes.  He brushed it

away that he might look at Marco's face.  The shock had changed

it very much.  Its glowing eager joy had died out, it had turned

paler and his brows were drawn together.  For a few seconds he

did not speak at all, and, when he did speak, The Rat knew that

his voice was steady only because he willed that it should be so.



``If he has gone,'' he said, ``it is because he had a strong

reason.  It was because he also was under orders.''



``He said that you would know that,'' Lazarus answered.  ``He was

called in such haste that he had not a moment in which to do more

than write a few words.  He left them for you on his desk

there.''



Marco walked over to the desk and opened the envelope which was

lying there.  There were only a few lines on the sheet of paper

inside and they had evidently been written in the greatest haste. 

They were these:



``The Life of my life--for Samavia.''



``He was called--to Samavia,'' Marco said, and the thought sent

his blood rushing through his veins.  ``He has gone to Samavia!''



Lazarus drew his hand roughly across his eyes and his voice shook

and sounded hoarse.



``There has been great disaffection in the camps of the

Maranovitch,'' he said.  ``The remnant of the army has gone mad. 

Sir, silence is still the order, but who knows--who knows?  God

alone.''



He had not finished speaking before he turned his head as if

listening to sounds in the road.  They were the kind of sounds

which  had broken up The Squad, and sent it rushing down the

passage into the street to seize on a newspaper.  There was to be

heard a commotion of newsboys shouting riotously some startling

piece of news which had called out an ``Extra.''



The Rat heard it first and dashed to the front door.  As he

opened it a newsboy running by shouted at the topmost power of

his lungs the news he had to sell:  ``Assassination of King

Michael Maranovitch by his own soldiers!  Assassination of the

Maranovitch!  Extra! Extra!  Extra!''



When The Rat returned with a newspaper, Lazarus interposed

between him and Marco with great and respectful ceremony. 

``Sir,'' he said to Marco, ``I am at your command, but the Master

left me with an order which I was to repeat to you.  He requested

you NOT to read the newspapers until he himself could see you

again.''



Both boys fell back.



``Not read the papers!'' they exclaimed together.



Lazarus had never before been quite so reverential and

ceremonious.



``Your pardon, sir,'' he said.  ``I may read them at your orders,

and report such things as it is well that you should know.  There

have been dark tales told and there may be darker ones.  He asked

that you would not read for yourself.  If you meet again--when

you meet again''--he corrected himself hastily--``when you meet

again, he says you will understand.  I am your servant.  I will

read and answer all such questions as I can.''



The Rat handed him the paper and they returned to the back room

together.



``You shall tell us what he would wish us to hear,'' Marco said.



The news was soon told.  The story was not a long one as exact

details had not yet reached London.  It was briefly that the head

of the Maranovitch party had been put to death by infuriated

soldiers of his own army.  It was an army drawn chiefly from a

peasantry which did not love its leaders, or wish to fight, and

suffering and brutal treatment had at last roused it to furious

revolt.



``What next?'' said Marco.



``If I were a Samavian--'' began The Rat and then he stopped.



Lazarus stood biting his lips, but staring stonily at the carpet. 

Not The Rat alone but Marco also noted a grim change in him.  It

was grim because it suggested that he was holding himself under

an iron control.  It was as if while tortured by anxiety he had

sworn not to allow himself to look anxious and the resolve set

his jaw hard and carved new lines in his rugged face.  Each boy

thought this in secret, but did not wish to put it into words. 

If he was anxious, he could only be so for one reason, and each

realized what the reason must be.  Loristan had gone to

Samavia--to the torn and bleeding country filled with riot and

danger.  If he had gone, it could only have been because its

danger called him and he went to face it at its worst.  Lazarus

had been left behind to watch over them.  Silence was still the

order, and what he knew he could not tell them, and perhaps he

knew little more than that a great life might be lost.



Because his master was absent, the old soldier seemed to feel

that he must comfort himself with a greater ceremonial reverance

than he had ever shown before.  He held himself within call, and

at Marco's orders, as it had been his custom to hold himself with

regard to Loristan.  The ceremonious service even extended itself

to The Rat, who appeared to have taken a new place in his mind. 

He also seemed now to be a person to be waited upon and replied

to with dignity and formal respect.



When the evening meal was served, Lazarus drew out Loristan's

chair at the head of the table and stood behind it with a

majestic air.



``Sir,'' he said to Marco, ``the Master requested that you take

his seat at the table until--while he is not with you.''



Marco took the seat in silence.





At two o'clock in the morning, when the roaring road was still,

the light from the street lamp, shining into the small bedroom,

fell on two pale boy faces.  The Rat sat up on his sofa bed in

the old way with his hands clasped round his knees.  Marco lay

flat on his hard pillow.  Neither of them had been to sleep and

yet they had  not talked a great deal.  Each had secretly guessed

a good deal of what the other did not say.



``There is one thing we must remember,'' Marco had said, early in

the night.  ``We must not be afraid.''



``No,'' answered The Rat, almost fiercely, ``we must not be

afraid.''



``We are tired; we came back expecting to be able to tell it all

to him.  We have always been looking forward to that.  We never

thought once that he might be gone.  And he WAS gone.  Did you

feel as if--'' he turned towards the sofa, ``as if something had

struck you on the chest?''



``Yes,'' The Rat answered heavily.  ``Yes.''



``We weren't ready,'' said Marco.  ``He had never gone before;

but we ought to have known he might some day be--called.  He went

because he was called.  He told us to wait.  We don't know what

we are waiting for, but we know that we must not be afraid.  To

let ourselves be AFRAID would be breaking the Law.''



``The Law!'' groaned The Rat, dropping his head on his hands,

``I'd forgotten about it.''



``Let us remember it,'' said Marco.  ``This is the time.  `Hate

not.  FEAR not!' ''  He repeated the last words again and again. 

``Fear not!  Fear not,'' he said.  ``NOTHING can harm him.''



The Rat lifted his head, and looked at the bed sideways.



``Did you think--'' he said slowly--``did you EVER think that

perhaps HE knew where the descendant of the Lost Prince was?''



Marco answered even more slowly.



``If any one knew--surely he might.  He has known so much,'' he

said.



``Listen to this!'' broke forth The Rat.  ``I believe he has gone

to TELL the people.  If he does--if he could show them--all the

country would run mad with joy.  It wouldn't be only the Secret

Party.  All Samavia would rise and follow any flag he chose to

raise.  They've prayed for the Lost Prince for five hundred

years, and if they believed they'd got him once more, they'd

fight like madmen for him.  But there would not be any one to

fight.  They'd ALL want the same thing!  If they could see the

man with Ivor's blood in his veins, they'd feel he had come back

to them--risen from the dead.  They'd believe it!''



He beat his fists together in his frenzy of excitement.  ``It's

the time!  It's the time!'' he cried.  ``No man could let such a

chance go by! He MUST tell them--he MUST.  That MUST be what he's

gone for.  He knows --he knows--he's always known!''  And he

threw himself back on his sofa and flung his arms over his face,

lying there panting.



``If it is the time,'' said Marco in a low, strained voice--``if

it is, and he knows--he will tell them.''  And he threw his arms

up over his own face and lay quite still.



Neither of them said another word, and the street lamp shone in

on them as if it were waiting for something to happen.  But

nothing happened.  In time they were asleep.

