



THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF

BENJAMIN FRANKLIN






INTRODUCTORY NOTE





BENJAMIN FRANKLIN was born in Milk Street, Boston, on January

6, 1706.  His father, Josiah Franklin, was a tallow chandler who

married twice, and of his seventeen children Benjamin was the youngest

son.  His schooling ended at ten, and at twelve he was bound apprentice

to his brother James, a printer, who published the "New England

Courant." To this journal he became a contributor, and later was for

a time its nominal editor. But the brothers quarreled, and Benjamin

ran away, going first to New York, and thence to Philadelphia, where

he arrived in October, 1723.  He soon obtained work as a printer,

but after a few months he was induced by Governor Keith to go to

London, where, finding Keith's promises empty, he again worked as a

compositor till he was brought back to Philadelphia by a merchant

named  Denman, who gave him a position in his business. On Denman's

death he returned to his former trade, and shortly set up a printing

house of his own from which he published "The Pennsylvania Gazette,"

to which he contributed many essays, and which he made a medium for

agitating a variety of local reforms. In 1732 he began to issue his

famous "Poor Richard's Almanac" for the enrichment of which he borrowed

or composed those pithy utterances of worldly wisdom which are the

basis of a large part of his popular reputation.  In 1758, the year

in which he ceases writing for the Almanac, he printed in it "Father

Abraham's Sermon," now regarded as the most famous piece of literature

produced in Colonial America.



Meantime Franklin was concerning himself more and more with

public affairs.  He set forth a scheme for an Academy, which was

taken up later and finally developed into the University of Pennsylvania;

and he founded an "American Philosophical Society" for the purpose

of enabling scientific  men to communicate their discoveries to one

another.  He himself had already begun his electrical researches,

which, with other scientific inquiries, he called on in the intervals

of money-making and politics to the end of his life.  In 1748 he

sold his business in order to get leisure for study, having now

acquired comparative wealth; and in a few years he had made discoveries

that gave him a reputation with the learned throughout Europe.  In

politics he proved very able both as an administrator and as a

controversialist; but his record as an office-holder is stained by

the use he made of his position to advance his relatives.  His most

notable service in home politics was his reform of the postal system;

but his fame as a statesman rests chiefly on his services in connection

with the relations of the Colonies with Great Britain, and later with

France.  In 1757 he was sent to England to protest against the

influence of the Penns in the government of the colony, and for five

years he remained there, striving to enlighten the people and the

ministry of England as to Colonial conditions.  On his return to

America he played an honorable part in the Paxton affair, through

which he lost his seat in the Assembly; but in 1764 he was again

despatched to England as agent for the colony, this time to petition

the King to resume the government from the hands of the proprietors.

In London he actively opposed the proposed Stamp Act, but lost the

credit for this and much of his popularity through his securing for

a friend the office of stamp agent in America.  Even his effective

work in helping to obtain the repeal of the act left him still a

suspect; but he continued his efforts to present the case for the

Colonies as the troubles thickened toward the crisis of the Revolution.

In 1767 he crossed to France, where he was received with honor; but

before his return home in 1775 he lost his position as postmaster

through his share in divulging to Massachusetts the famous letter of

Hutchinson and Oliver.  On his arrival in Philadelphia he was chosen

a member of the Continental Congress and in 1777 he was despatched

to France as commissioner for the United States.  Here he remained

till 1785, the favorite of French society; and with such success did

he conduct the affairs of his country that when he finally returned

he received a place only second to that of Washington as the champion

of American independence.  He died on April 17, 1790.



The first five chapters of the Autobiography were composed in

England in 1771, continued in 1784-5, and again in 1788, at which

date he brought it down to 1757.  After a most extraordinary series

of adventures, the original form of the manuscript was finally printed

by Mr. John Bigelow, and is here reproduced in recognition of its

value as a picture of one of the most notable personalities of Colonial

times, and of its acknowledged rank as one of the great autobiographies

of the world.
