






I had made some courtship during this time to Miss Read.  I had a

great respect and affection for her, and had some reason to believe

she had the same for me; but, as I was about to take a long voyage,

and we were both very young, only a little above eighteen,

it was thought most prudent by her mother to prevent our going too

far at present, as a marriage, if it was to take place, would be

more convenient after my return, when I should be, as I expected,

set up in my business.  Perhaps, too, she thought my expectations

not so well founded as I imagined them to be.



My chief acquaintances at this time were Charles Osborne, Joseph Watson,

and James Ralph, all lovers of reading.  The two first were clerks

to an eminent scrivener or conveyancer in the town, Charles Brogden;

the other was clerk to a merchant.  Watson was a pious, sensible

young man, of great integrity; the others rather more lax in their

principles of religion, particularly Ralph, who, as well as Collins,

had been unsettled by me, for which they both made me suffer. 

Osborne was sensible, candid, frank; sincere and affectionate

to his friends; but, in literary matters, too fond of criticising. 

Ralph was ingenious, genteel in his manners, and extremely eloquent;

I think I never knew a prettier talker.  Both of them great

admirers of poetry, and began to try their hands in little pieces. 

Many pleasant walks we four had together on Sundays into the woods,

near Schuylkill, where we read to one another, and conferr'd on what

we read.



Ralph was inclin'd to pursue the study of poetry, not doubting

but he might become eminent in it, and make his fortune by it,

alleging that the best poets must, when they first began to write,

make as many faults as he did.  Osborne dissuaded him, assur'd him

he had no genius for poetry, and advis'd him to think of nothing

beyond the business he was bred to; that, in the mercantile way,

tho' he had no stock, he might, by his diligence and punctuality,

recommend himself to employment as a factor, and in time acquire

wherewith to trade on his own account.  I approv'd the amusing one's

self with poetry now and then, so far as to improve one's language,

but no farther.



On this it was propos'd that we should each of us, at our

next meeting, produce a piece of our own composing, in order to

improve by our mutual observations, criticisms, and corrections. 

As language and expression were what we had in view, we excluded

all considerations of invention by agreeing that the task

should be a version of the eighteenth Psalm, which describes

the descent of a Deity.  When the time of our meeting drew nigh,

Ralph called on me first, and let me know his piece was ready. 

I told him I had been busy, and, having little inclination,

had done nothing.  He then show'd me his piece for my opinion,

and I much approv'd it, as it appear'd to me to have great merit. 

"Now," says he, "Osborne never will allow the least merit in any

thing of mine, but makes 1000 criticisms out of mere envy.  He is

not so jealous of you; I wish, therefore, you would take this piece,

and produce it as yours; I will pretend not to have had time,

and so produce nothing.  We shall then see what he will say to it." 

It was agreed, and I immediately transcrib'd it, that it might appear

in my own hand.



We met; Watson's performance was read; there were some beauties

in it, but many defects.  Osborne's was read; it was much better;

Ralph did it justice; remarked some faults, but applauded

the beauties.  He himself had nothing to produce.  I was backward;

seemed desirous of being excused; had not had sufficient time

to correct, etc.; but no excuse could be admitted; produce I must. 

It was read and repeated; Watson and Osborne gave up the contest,

and join'd in applauding it.  Ralph only made some criticisms,

and propos'd some amendments; but I defended my text.  Osborne was

against Ralph, and told him he was no better a critic than poet,

so he dropt the argument.  As they two went home together,

Osborne expressed himself still more strongly in favor of what he

thought my production; having restrain'd himself before, as he said,

lest I should think it flattery.  "But who would have imagin'd,"

said he, "that Franklin had been capable of such a performance;

such painting, such force, such fire!  He has even improv'd the original. 

In his common conversation he seems to have no choice of words;

he hesitates and blunders; and yet, good God! how he writes!" 

When we next met, Ralph discovered the trick we had plaid him,

and Osborne was a little laught at.



This transaction fixed Ralph in his resolution of becoming a poet. 

I did all I could to dissuade him from it, but he continued

scribbling verses till Pope cured him.  He became, however, a pretty

good prose writer.  More of him hereafter.  But, as I may not have

occasion again to mention the other two, I shall just remark here,

that Watson died in my arms a few years after, much lamented,

being the best of our set.  Osborne went to the West Indies,

where he became an eminent lawyer and made money, but died young. 

He and I had made a serious agreement, that the one who happen'd

first to die should, if possible, make a friendly visit to the other,

and acquaint him how he found things in that separate state.  But he

never fulfill'd his promise.



The governor, seeming to like my company, had me frequently to his house,

and his setting me up was always mention'd as a fixed thing. 

I was to take with me letters recommendatory to a number of

his friends, besides the letter of credit to furnish me with the

necessary money for purchasing the press and types, paper, etc. 

For these letters I was appointed to call at different times,

when they were to be ready, but a future time was still named. 

Thus he went on till the ship, whose departure too had been several

times postponed, was on the point of sailing.  Then, when I call'd

to take my leave and receive the letters, his secretary, Dr. Bard,

came out to me and said the governor was extremely busy in writing,

but would be down at Newcastle before the ship, and there the letters

would be delivered to me.



Ralph, though married, and having one child, had determined to

accompany me in this voyage.  It was thought he intended to establish

a correspondence, and obtain goods to sell on commission; but I

found afterwards, that, thro' some discontent with his wife's relations,

he purposed to leave her on their hands, and never return again. 

Having taken leave of my friends, and interchang'd some promises

with Miss Read, I left Philadelphia in the ship, which anchor'd

at Newcastle.  The governor was there; but when I went to his lodging,

the secretary came to me from him with the civillest message in

the world, that he could not then see me, being engaged in business

of the utmost importance, but should send the letters to me on board,

wish'd me heartily a good voyage and a speedy return, etc. 

I returned on board a little puzzled, but still not doubting.



Mr. Andrew Hamilton, a famous lawyer of Philadelphia, had taken

passage in the same ship for himself and son, and with Mr. Denham,

a Quaker merchant, and Messrs.  Onion and Russel, masters of an

iron work in Maryland, had engag'd the great cabin; so that Ralph

and I were forced to take up with a berth in the steerage,

and none on board knowing us, were considered as ordinary persons. 

But Mr. Hamilton and his son (it was James, since governor)

return'd from Newcastle to Philadelphia, the father being recall'd

by a great fee to plead for a seized ship; and, just before we

sail'd, Colonel French coming on board, and showing me great respect,

I was more taken notice of, and, with my friend Ralph, invited by

the other gentlemen to come into the cabin, there being now room. 

Accordingly, we remov'd thither.



Understanding that Colonel French had brought on board the

governor's despatches, I ask'd the captain for those letters

that were to be under my care.  He said all were put into the bag

together and he could not then come at them; but, before we landed

in England, I should have an opportunity of picking them out;

so I was satisfied for the present, and we proceeded on our voyage. 

We had a sociable company in the cabin, and lived uncommonly well,

having the addition of all Mr. Hamilton's stores, who had laid

in plentifully.  In this passage Mr. Denham contracted a friendship

for me that continued during his life.  The voyage was otherwise

not a pleasant one, as we had a great deal of bad weather.



When we came into the Channel, the captain kept his word with me, and gave

me an opportunity of examining the bag for the governor's letters. 

I found none upon which my name was put as under my care.  I picked

out six or seven, that, by the handwriting, I thought might be the

promised letters, especially as one of them was directed to Basket,

the king's printer, and another to some stationer.  We arriv'd

in London the 24th of December, 1724.  I waited upon the stationer,

who came first in my way, delivering the letter as from Governor Keith. 

"I don't know such a person," says he; but, opening the letter, "O! this

is from Riddlesden.  I have lately found him to be a compleat rascal,

and I will have nothing to do with him, nor receive any letters

from him."  So, putting the letter into my hand, he turn'd on his

heel and left me to serve some customer.  I was surprized to find

these were not the governor's letters; and, after recollecting

and comparing circumstances, I began to doubt his sincerity. 

I found my friend Denham, and opened the whole affair to him. 

He let me into Keith's character; told me there was not the least

probability that he had written any letters for me; that no one,

who knew him, had the smallest dependence on him; and he laught at

the notion of the governor's giving me a letter of credit, having,

as he said, no credit to give.  On my expressing some concern

about what I should do, he advised me to endeavor getting some

employment in the way of my business.  "Among the printers here,"

said he, "you will improve yourself, and when you return to America,

you will set up to greater advantage."



We both of us happen'd to know, as well as the stationer,

that Riddlesden, the attorney, was a very knave.  He had half

ruin'd Miss Read's father by persuading him to be bound for him. 

By this letter it appear'd there was a secret scheme on foot to

the prejudice of Hamilton (suppos'd to be then coming over with us);

and that Keith was concerned in it with Riddlesden.  Denham, who was

a friend of Hamilton's thought he ought to be acquainted with it;

so, when he arriv'd in England, which was soon after, partly from

resentment and ill-will to Keith and Riddlesden, and partly from

good-will to him, I waited on him, and gave him the letter. 

He thank'd me cordially, the information being of importance to him;

and from that time he became my friend, greatly to my advantage

afterwards on many occasions.



But what shall we think of a governor's playing such pitiful tricks,

and imposing so grossly on a poor ignorant boy!  It was a habit he

had acquired.  He wish'd to please everybody; and, having little

to give, he gave expectations.  He was otherwise an ingenious,

sensible man, a pretty good writer, and a good governor for

the people, tho' not for his constituents, the proprietaries,

whose instructions he sometimes disregarded.  Several of our best

laws were of his planning and passed during his administration.



Ralph and I were inseparable companions.  We took lodgings

together in Little Britain at three shillings and sixpence a week--

as much as we could then afford.  He found some relations,

but they were poor, and unable to assist him.  He now let me know

his intentions of remaining in London, and that he never meant

to return to Philadelphia.  He had brought no money with him,

the whole he could muster having been expended in paying his passage. 

I had fifteen pistoles; so he borrowed occasionally of me to subsist,

while he was looking out for business.  He first endeavored to get

into the playhouse, believing himself qualify'd for an actor;

but Wilkes, to whom he apply'd, advis'd him candidly not to think

of that employment, as it was impossible be should succeed in it. 

Then he propos'd to Roberts, a publisher in Paternoster Row, to write

for him a weekly paper like the Spectator, on certain conditions,

which Roberts did not approve.  Then he endeavored to get employment

as a hackney writer, to copy for the stationers and lawyers about

the Temple, but could find no vacancy.



I immediately got into work at Palmer's, then a famous printing-house

in Bartholomew Close, and here I continu'd near a year.  I was

pretty diligent, but spent with Ralph a good deal of my earnings

in going to plays and other places of amusement.  We had together

consumed all my pistoles, and now just rubbed on from hand to mouth. 

He seem'd quite to forget his wife and child, and I, by degrees,

my engagements with Miss Read, to whom I never wrote more than

one letter, and that was to let her know I was not likely soon

to return.  This was another of the great errata of my life,

which I should wish to correct if I were to live it over again. 

In fact, by our expenses, I was constantly kept unable to pay

my passage.



At Palmer's I was employed in composing for the second edition

of Wollaston's "Religion of Nature."  Some of his reasonings

not appearing to me well founded, I wrote a little metaphysical

piece in which I made remarks on them.  It was entitled "A

Dissertation on Liberty and Necessity, Pleasure and Pain." 

I inscribed it to my friend Ralph; I printed a small number. 

It occasion'd my being more consider'd by Mr. Palmer as a young

man of some ingenuity, tho' he seriously expostulated with me upon

the principles of my pamphlet, which to him appear'd abominable. 

My printing this pamphlet was another erratum.  While I lodg'd in

Little Britain, I made an acquaintance with one Wilcox, a bookseller,

whose shop was at the next door.  He had an immense collection

of second-hand books.  Circulating libraries were not then in use;

but we agreed that, on certain reasonable terms, which I have

now forgotten, I might take, read, and return any of his books. 

This I esteem'd a great advantage, and I made as much use of it as

I could.



My pamphlet by some means falling into the hands of one Lyons, a surgeon,

author of a book entitled "The Infallibility of Human Judgment,"

it occasioned an acquaintance between us.  He took great notice

of me, called on me often to converse on those subjects, carried me

to the Horns, a pale alehouse in ---- Lane, Cheapside, and introduced

me to Dr. Mandeville, author of the "Fable of the Bees," who had

a club there, of which he was the soul, being a most facetious,

entertaining companion.  Lyons, too, introduced me to Dr. Pemberton,

at Batson's Coffee-house, who promis'd to give me an opportunity,

some time or other, of seeing Sir Isaac Newton, of which I was

extreamely desirous; but this never happened.



I had brought over a few curiosities, among which the principal

was a purse made of the asbestos, which purifies by fire. 

Sir Hans Sloane heard of it, came to see me, and invited me to his

house in Bloomsbury Square, where he show'd me all his curiosities,

and persuaded me to let him add that to the number, for which he

paid me handsomely.



In our house there lodg'd a young woman, a milliner, who, I think,

had a shop in the Cloisters.  She had been genteelly bred, was sensible

and lively, and of most pleasing conversation.  Ralph read plays

to her in the evenings, they grew intimate, she took another lodging,

and he followed her.  They liv'd together some time; but, he being

still out of business, and her income not sufficient to maintain

them with her child, he took a resolution of going from London,

to try for a country school, which he thought himself well qualified

to undertake, as he wrote an excellent hand, and was a master

of arithmetic and accounts.  This, however, he deemed a business

below him, and confident of future better fortune, when he should

be unwilling to have it known that he once was so meanly employed,

he changed his name, and did me the honor to assume mine; for I soon

after had a letter from him, acquainting me that he was settled

in a small village (in Berkshire, I think it was, where he taught

reading and writing to ten or a dozen boys, at sixpence each per

week), recommending Mrs. T---- to my care, and desiring me to write

to him, directing for Mr. Franklin, schoolmaster, at such a place.



He continued to write frequently, sending me large specimens

of an epic poem which he was then composing, and desiring my

remarks and corrections.  These I gave him from time to time,

but endeavor'd rather to discourage his proceeding.  One of Young's

Satires was then just published.  I copy'd and sent him a great

part of it, which set in a strong light the folly of pursuing

the Muses with any hope of advancement by them.  All was in vain;

sheets of the poem continued to come by every post.  In the mean time,

Mrs. T----, having on his account lost her friends and business,

was often in distresses, and us'd to send for me, and borrow

what I could spare to help her out of them.  I grew fond of

her company, and, being at that time under no religious restraint,

and presuming upon my importance to her, I attempted familiarities

(another erratum) which she repuls'd with a proper resentment,

and acquainted him with my behaviour.  This made a breach between us;

and, when he returned again to London, he let me know he thought

I had cancell'd all the obligations he had been under to me. 

So I found I was never to expect his repaying me what I lent to him,

or advanc'd for him.  This, however, was not then of much consequence,

as he was totally unable; and in the loss of his friendship I found

myself relieved from a burthen.  I now began to think of getting

a little money beforehand, and, expecting better work, I left Palmer's

to work at Watts's, near Lincoln's Inn Fields, a still greater

printing-house. Here I continued all the rest of my stay in London.



At my first admission into this printing-house I took to working

at press, imagining I felt a want of the bodily exercise I had been

us'd to in America, where presswork is mix'd with composing. 

I drank only water; the other workmen, near fifty in number,

were great guzzlers of beer.  On occasion, I carried up and down

stairs a large form of types in each hand, when others carried

but one in both hands.  They wondered to see, from this and

several instances, that the Water-American, as they called me,

was stronger than themselves, who drank strong beer!  We had an

alehouse boy who attended always in the house to supply the workmen. 

My companion at the press drank every day a pint before breakfast,

a pint at breakfast with his bread and cheese, a pint between

breakfast and dinner, a pint at dinner, a pint in the afternoon

about six o'clock, and another when he had done his day's work. 

I thought it a detestable custom; but it was necessary, he suppos'd,

to drink strong beer, that he might be strong to labor.  I endeavored

to convince him that the bodily strength afforded by beer could

only be in proportion to the grain or flour of the barley dissolved

in the water of which it was made; that there was more flour in a

pennyworth of bread; and therefore, if he would eat that with a pint

of water, it would give him more strength than a quart of beer. 

He drank on, however, and had four or five shillings to pay

out of his wages every Saturday night for that muddling liquor;

an expense I was free from.  And thus these poor devils keep

themselves always under.



Watts, after some weeks, desiring to have me in the composing-room, I left

the pressmen; a new bien venu or sum for drink, being five shillings,

was demanded of me by the compositors.  I thought it an imposition,

as I had paid below; the master thought so too, and forbad my paying it. 

I stood out two or three weeks, was accordingly considered as

an excommunicate, and bad so many little pieces of private mischief

done me, by mixing my sorts, transposing my pages, breaking my matter,

etc., etc., if I were ever so little out of the room, and all

ascribed to the chappel ghost, which they said ever haunted those not

regularly admitted, that, notwithstanding the master's protection,

I found myself oblig'd to comply and pay the money, convinc'd of the

folly of being on ill terms with those one is to live with continually.



I was now on a fair footing with them, and soon acquir'd

considerable influence.  I propos'd some reasonable alterations

in their chappel<4> laws, and carried them against all opposition. 

From my example, a great part of them left their muddling breakfast

of beer, and bread, and cheese, finding they could with me be

suppli'd from a neighboring house with a large porringer of hot

water-gruel, sprinkled with pepper, crumbl'd with bread, and a bit

of butter in it, for the price of a pint of beer, viz., three

half-pence. This was a more comfortable as well as cheaper breakfast,

and kept their heads clearer.  Those who continued sotting with beer

all day, were often, by not paying, out of credit at the alehouse,

and us'd to make interest with me to get beer; their light, as they

phrased it, being out.  I watch'd the pay-table on Saturday night,

and collected what I stood engag'd for them, having to pay sometimes

near thirty shillings a week on their account.  This, and my being

esteem'd a pretty good riggite, that is, a jocular verbal satirist,

supported my consequence in the society.  My constant attendance

(I never making a St. Monday) recommended me to the master;

and my uncommon quickness at composing occasioned my being put

upon all work of dispatch, which was generally better paid. 

So I went on now very agreeably.



     <4> "A printing-house is always called a chapel by the

         workmen, the origin of which appears to have been that

         printing was first carried on in England in an ancient

         chapel converted into a printing-house, and the title

         has been preserved by tradition.  The bien venu among

         the printers answers to the terms entrance and footing

         among mechanics; thus a journeyman, on entering a

         printing-house, was accustomed to pay one or more gallons

         of beer for the good of the chapel;  this custom was

         falling into disuse thirty years ago; it is very properly

         rejected entirely in the United States."--W. T. F.



My lodging in Little Britain being too remote, I found another

in Duke-street, opposite to the Romish Chapel.  It was two pair

of stairs backwards, at an Italian warehouse.  A widow lady kept

the house; she had a daughter, and a maid servant, and a journeyman

who attended the warehouse, but lodg'd abroad.  After sending to inquire

my character at the house where I last lodg'd she agreed to take

me in at the same rate, 3s.  6d.  per week; cheaper, as she said,

from the protection she expected in having a man lodge in the house. 

She was a widow, an elderly woman; had been bred a Protestant,

being a clergyman's daughter, but was converted to the Catholic

religion by her husband, whose memory she much revered; had lived much

among people of distinction, and knew a thousand anecdotes of them

as far back as the times of Charles the Second.  She was lame in her

knees with the gout, and, therefore, seldom stirred out of her room,

so sometimes wanted company; and hers was so highly amusing to me,

that I was sure to spend an evening with her whenever she desired it. 

Our supper was only half an anchovy each, on a very little strip

of bread and butter, and half a pint of ale between us; but the

entertainment was in her conversation.  My always keeping good hours,

and giving little trouble in the family, made her unwilling to part

with me; so that, when I talk'd of a lodging I had heard of,nearer

my business, for two shillings a week, which, intent as I now was

on saving money, made some difference, she bid me not think of it,

for she would abate me two shillings a week for the future; so I

remained with her at one shilling and sixpence as long as I staid

in London.



In a garret of her house there lived a maiden lady of seventy,

in the most retired manner, of whom my landlady gave me this account: 

that she was a Roman Catholic, had been sent abroad when young,

and lodg'd in a nunnery with an intent of becoming a nun; but,

the country not agreeing with her, she returned to England, where,

there being no nunnery, she had vow'd to lead the life of a nun,

as near as might be done in those circumstances.  Accordingly, she had

given all her estate to charitable uses, reserving only twelve

pounds a year to live on, and out of this sum she still gave a great

deal in charity, living herself on water-gruel only, and using

no fire but to boil it.  She had lived many years in that garret,

being permitted to remain there gratis by successive Catholic tenants

of the house below, as they deemed it a blessing to have her there. 

A priest visited her to confess her every day.  "I have ask'd her,"

says my landlady, "how she, as she liv'd, could possibly find so much

employment for a confessor?"  "Oh," said she, "it is impossible

to avoid vain thoughts."  I was permitted once to visit her, She was

chearful and polite, and convers'd pleasantly.  The room was clean,

but had no other furniture than a matras, a table with a crucifix

and book, a stool which she gave me to sit on, and a picture

over the chimney of Saint Veronica displaying her handkerchief,

with the miraculous figure of Christ's bleeding face on it,

which she explained to me with great seriousness.  She look'd pale,

but was never sick; and I give it as another instance on how small

an income life and health may be supported.



At Watts's printing-house I contracted an acquaintance with an ingenious

young man, one Wygate, who, having wealthy relations, had been better

educated than most printers; was a tolerable Latinist, spoke French,

and lov'd reading.  I taught him and a friend of his to swim at

twice going into the river, and they soon became good swimmers. 

They introduc'd me to some gentlemen from the country, who went to

Chelsea by water to see the College and Don Saltero's curiosities. 

In our return, at the request of the company, whose curiosity

Wygate had excited, I stripped and leaped into the river, and swam

from near Chelsea to Blackfryar's, performing on the way many feats

of activity, both upon and under water, that surpris'd and pleas'd

those to whom they were novelties.



I had from a child been ever delighted with this exercise, had studied

and practis'd all Thevenot's motions and positions, added some

of my own, aiming at the graceful and easy as well as the useful. 

All these I took this occasion of exhibiting to the company,

and was much flatter'd by their admiration; and Wygate, who was

desirous of becoming a master, grew more and more attach'd to me

on that account, as well as from the similarity of our studies. 

He at length proposed to me travelling all over Europe together,

supporting ourselves everywhere by working at our business.  I was

once inclined to it; but, mentioning it to my good friend Mr. Denham,

with whom I often spent an hour when I had leisure, he dissuaded me

from it, advising me to think only of returning to Pennsilvania,

which he was now about to do.



I must record one trait of this good man's character.  He had formerly

been in business at Bristol, but failed in debt to a number of people,

compounded and went to America.  There, by a close application to

business as a merchant, he acquir'd a plentiful fortune in a few years. 

Returning to England in the ship with me, he invited his old creditors

to an entertainment, at which he thank'd them for the easy composition

they had favored him with, and, when they expected nothing but the treat,

every man at the first remove found under his plate an order

on a banker for the full amount of the unpaid remainder with interest.



He now told me he was about to return to Philadelphia, and should

carry over a great quantity of goods in order to open a store there. 

He propos'd to take me over as his clerk, to keep his books,

in which he would instruct me, copy his letters, and attend

the store.  He added that, as soon as I should be acquainted

with mercantile business, he would promote me by sending me with

a cargo of flour and bread, etc., to the West Indies, and procure

me commissions from others which would be profitable; and, if I

manag'd well, would establish me handsomely.  The thing pleas'd me;

for I was grown tired of London, remembered with pleasure the happy

months I had spent in Pennsylvania, and wish'd again to see it;

therefore I immediately agreed on the terms of fifty pounds a year,

Pennsylvania money; less, indeed, than my present gettings as

a compositor, but affording a better prospect.



I now took leave of printing, as I thought, for ever, and was daily

employed in my new business, going about with Mr. Denham among

the tradesmen to purchase various articles, and seeing them pack'd up,

doing errands, calling upon workmen to dispatch, etc.; and, when all

was on board, I had a few days' leisure.  On one of these days,

I was, to my surprise, sent for by a great man I knew only by name,

a Sir William Wyndham, and I waited upon him.  He had heard by some

means or other of my swimming from Chelsea to Blackfriar's, and of

my teaching Wygate and another young man to swim in a few hours. 

He had two sons, about to set out on their travels; he wish'd to have

them first taught swimming, and proposed to gratify me handsomely

if I would teach them.  They were not yet come to town, and my stay

was uncertain, so I could not undertake it; but, from this incident,

I thought it likely that, if I were to remain in England and open

a swimming-school, I might get a good deal of money; and it struck me

so strongly, that, had the overture been sooner made me, probably I

should not so soon have returned to America.  After many years,

you and I had something of more importance to do with one of these

sons of Sir William Wyndham, become Earl of Egremont, which I shall

mention in its place.



Thus I spent about eighteen months in London; most part of the time

I work'd hard at my business, and spent but little upon myself

except in seeing plays and in books.  My friend Ralph had kept

me poor; he owed me about twenty-seven pounds, which I was now

never likely to receive; a great sum out of my small earnings! 

I lov'd him, notwithstanding, for he had many amiable qualities. 

I had by no means improv'd my fortune; but I had picked up some very

ingenious acquaintance, whose conversation was of great advantage to me;

and I had read considerably.



We sail'd from Gravesend on the 23d of July, 1726.  For the incidents

of the voyage, I refer you to my journal, where you will find them

all minutely related.  Perhaps the most important part of that

journal is the plan<5> to be found in it, which I formed at sea,

for regulating my future conduct in life.  It is the more remarkable,

as being formed when I was so young, and yet being pretty faithfully

adhered to quite thro' to old age.



     <5> The "Journal" was printed by Sparks, from a copy made

         at Reading in 1787.  But it does not contain the Plan.

         --Ed.



We landed in Philadelphia on the 11th of October, where I found

sundry alterations.  Keith was no longer governor, being superseded

by Major Gordon.  I met him walking the streets as a common citizen. 

He seem'd a little asham'd at seeing me, but pass'd without

saying anything.  I should have been as much asham'd at seeing

Miss Read, had not her friends, despairing with reason of my return

after the receipt of my letter, persuaded her to marry another,

one Rogers, a potter, which was done in my absence.  With him,

however, she was never happy, and soon parted from him, refusing to

cohabit with him or bear his name, it being now said that he bad

another wife.  He was a worthless fellow, tho' an excellent workman,

which was the temptation to her friends.  He got into debt,

ran away in 1727 or 1728, went to the West Indies, and died there. 

Keimer had got a better house, a shop well supply'd with stationery,

plenty of new types, a number of hands, tho' none good, and seem'd

to have a great deal of business.



Mr. Denham took a store in Water-street, where we open'd our goods;

I attended the business diligently, studied accounts, and grew,

in a little time, expert at selling.  We lodg'd and, boarded together;

he counsell'd me as a father, having a sincere regard for me. 

I respected and lov'd him, and we might have gone on together

very happy; but, in the beginning of February, 1726-7, when I

had just pass'd my twenty-first year, we both were taken ill. 

My distemper was a pleurisy, which very nearly carried me off. 

I suffered a good deal, gave up the point in my own mind, and was

rather disappointed when I found myself recovering, regretting,

in some degree, that I must now, some time or other, have all that

disagreeable work to do over again.  I forget what his distemper was;

it held him a long time, and at length carried him off.  He left me

a small legacy in a nuncupative will, as a token of his kindness

for me, and he left me once more to the wide world; for the store

was taken into the care of his executors, and my employment under

him ended.



My brother-in-law, Holmes, being now at Philadelphia, advised my return

to my business; and Keimer tempted me, with an offer of large wages

by the year, to come and take the management of his printing-house,

that he might better attend his stationer's shop.  I had heard a bad

character of him in London from his wife and her friends, and was

not fond of having any more to do with him.  I tri'd for farther

employment as a merchant's clerk; but, not readily meeting with any,

I clos'd again with Keimer.  I found in his house these hands: 

Hugh Meredith, a Welsh Pensilvanian, thirty years of age, bred to

country work; honest, sensible, had a great deal of solid observation,

was something of a reader, but given to drink.  Stephen Potts, a young

countryman of full age, bred to the same, of uncommon natural parts,

and great wit and humor, but a little idle.  These he had agreed

with at extream low wages per week, to be rais'd a shilling every

three months, as they would deserve by improving in their business;

and the expectation of these high wages, to come on hereafter,

was what he had drawn them in with.  Meredith was to work at press,

Potts at book-binding, which he, by agreement, was to teach them,

though he knew neither one nor t'other. John ----, a wild Irishman,

brought up to no business, whose service, for four years, Keimer had

purchased from the captain of a ship; he, too, was to be made

a pressman.  George Webb, an Oxford scholar, whose time for four

years he had likewise bought, intending him for a compositor,

of whom more presently; and David Harry, a country boy, whom he had

taken apprentice.



I soon perceiv'd that the intention of engaging me at wages so much

higher than he had been us'd to give, was, to have these raw,

cheap hands form'd thro' me; and, as soon as I had instructed them,

then they being all articled to him, he should be able to do without me. 

I went on, however, very cheerfully, put his printing-house in order,

which had been in great confusion, and brought his hands by degrees

to mind their business and to do it better.



It was an odd thing to find an Oxford scholar in the situation

of a bought servant.  He was not more than eighteen years of age,

and gave me this account of himself; that he was born in Gloucester,

educated at a grammar-school there, had been distinguish'd among

the scholars for some apparent superiority in performing his part,

when they exhibited plays; belong'd to the Witty Club there,

and had written some pieces in prose and verse, which were printed

in the Gloucester newspapers; thence he was sent to Oxford; where he

continued about a year, but not well satisfi'd, wishing of all

things to see London, and become a player.  At length, receiving his

quarterly allowance of fifteen guineas, instead of discharging

his debts he walk'd out of town, hid his gown in a furze bush,

and footed it to London, where, having no friend to advise him, he fell

into bad company, soon spent his guineas, found no means of being

introduc'd among the players, grew necessitous, pawn'd his cloaths,

and wanted bread.  Walking the street very hungry, and not knowing

what to do with himself, a crimp's bill was put into his hand,

offering immediate entertainment and encouragement to such as would

bind themselves to serve in America.



He went directly, sign'd the indentures, was put into the ship,

and came over, never writing a line to acquaint his friends what was

become of him.  He was lively, witty, good-natur'd, and a pleasant

companion, but idle, thoughtless, and imprudent to the last degree.



John, the Irishman, soon ran away; with the rest I began to live

very agreeably, for they all respected me the more, as they

found Keimer incapable of instructing them, and that from me

they learned something daily.  We never worked on Saturday,

that being Keimer's Sabbath, so I had two days for reading. 

My acquaintance with ingenious people in the town increased. 

Keimer himself treated me with great civility and apparent regard,

and nothing now made me uneasy but my debt to Vernon, which I

was yet unable to pay, being hitherto but a poor oeconomist. 

He, however, kindly made no demand of it.



Our printing-house often wanted sorts, and there was no letter-founder

in America; I had seen types cast at James's in London, but without

much attention to the manner; however, I now contrived a mould,

made use of the letters we had as puncheons, struck the matrices

in lead, And thus supply'd in a pretty tolerable way all deficiencies. 

I also engrav'd several things on occasion; I made the ink;

I was warehouseman, and everything, and, in short, quite a factotum.



But, however serviceable I might be, I found that my services

became every day of less importance, as the other hands improv'd

in the business; and, when Keimer paid my second quarter's wages,

he let me know that he felt them too heavy, and thought I should

make an abatement.  He grew by degrees less civil, put on more of

the master, frequently found fault, was captious, and seem'd ready for

an outbreaking.  I went on, nevertheless, with a good deal of patience,

thinking that his encumber'd circumstances were partly the cause. 

At length a trifle snapt our connections; for, a great noise happening

near the court-house, I put my head out of the window to see what

was the matter.  Keimer, being in the street, look'd up and saw me,

call'd out to me in a loud voice and angry tone to mind my business,

adding some reproachful words, that nettled me the more for

their publicity, all the neighbors who were looking out on the same

occasion being witnesses how I was treated.  He came up immediately

into the printing-house, continu'd the quarrel, high words pass'd

on both sides, he gave me the quarter's warning we had stipulated,

expressing a wish that he had not been oblig'd to so long a warning. 

I told him his wish was unnecessary, for I would leave him that instant;

and so, taking my hat, walk'd out of doors, desiring Meredith,

whom I saw below, to take care of some things I left, and bring

them to my lodgings.



Meredith came accordingly in the evening, when we talked my affair over. 

He had conceiv'd a great regard for me, and was very unwilling

that I should leave the house while he remain'd in it.  He dissuaded

me from returning to my native country, which I began to think of;

he reminded me that Keimer was in debt for all he possess'd;

that his creditors began to be uneasy; that he kept his shop miserably,

sold often without profit for ready money, and often trusted without

keeping accounts; that he must therefore fall, which would make

a vacancy I might profit of.  I objected my want of money.  He then

let me know that his father had a high opinion of me, and, from some

discourse that had pass'd between them, he was sure would advance

money to set us up, if I would enter into partnership with him. 

"My time," says he, "will be out with Keimer in the spring;

by that time we may have our press and types in from London. 

I am sensible I am no workman; if you like it, your skill in the

business shall be set against the stock I furnish, and we will share

the profits equally."



The proposal was agreeable, and I consented; his father was in town

and approv'd of it; the more as he saw I had great influence with

his son, had prevail'd on him to abstain long from dram-drinking,

and he hop'd might break him off that wretched habit entirely,

when we came to be so closely connected.  I gave an inventory to

the father, who carry'd it to a merchant; the things were sent for,

the secret was to be kept till they should arrive, and in the mean

time I was to get work, if I could, at the other printing-house. But I

found no vacancy there, and so remain'd idle a few days, when Keimer,

on a prospect of being employ'd to print some paper money in New Jersey,

which would require cuts and various types that I only could supply,

and apprehending Bradford might engage me and get the jobb from him,

sent me a very civil message, that old friends should not part for a

few words, the effect of sudden passion, and wishing me to return. 

Meredith persuaded me to comply, as it would give more opportunity

for his improvement under my daily instructions; so I return'd,

and we went on more smoothly than for some time before.  The New

jersey jobb was obtain'd, I contriv'd a copperplate press for it,

the first that had been seen in the country; I cut several ornaments

and checks for the bills.  We went together to Burlington, where I

executed the whole to satisfaction; and he received so large a sum

for the work as to be enabled thereby to keep his head much longer

above water.



At Burlington I made an acquaintance with many principal people

of the province.  Several of them had been appointed by the Assembly

a committee to attend the press, and take care that no more bills

were printed than the law directed.  They were therefore, by turns,

constantly with us, and generally he who attended, brought with him

a friend or two for company.  My mind having been much more improv'd

by reading than Keimer's, I suppose it was for that reason my

conversation seem'd to he more valu'd. They had me to their houses,

introduced me to their friends, and show'd me much civility;

while he, tho' the master, was a little neglected.  In truth,

he was an odd fish; ignorant of common life, fond of rudely opposing

receiv'd opinions, slovenly to extream dirtiness, enthusiastic in

some points of religion, and a little knavish withal.



We continu'd there near three months; and by that time I could

reckon among my acquired friends, Judge Allen, Samuel Bustill,

the secretary of the Province, Isaac Pearson, Joseph Cooper,

and several of the Smiths, members of Assembly, and Isaac Decow,

the surveyor-general. The latter was a shrewd, sagacious old man,

who told me that he began for himself, when young, by wheeling

clay for the brick-makers, learned to write after be was of age,

carri'd the chain for surveyors, who taught him surveying, and he

had now by his industry, acquir'd a good estate; and says he,

"I foresee that you will soon work this man out of business,

and make a fortune in it at Philadelphia."  He had not then

the least intimation of my intention to set up there or anywhere. 

These friends were afterwards of great use to me, as I occasionally

was to some of them.  They all continued their regard for me as long as

they lived.



Before I enter upon my public appearance in business, it may be well

to let you know the then state of my mind with regard to my principles

and morals, that you may see how far those influenc'd the future events

of my life.  My parents had early given me religious impressions,

and brought me through my childhood piously in the Dissenting way. 

But I was scarce fifteen, when, after doubting by turns of several

points, as I found them disputed in the different books I read,

I began to doubt of Revelation itself.  Some books against Deism

fell into my hands; they were said to be the substance of sermons

preached at Boyle's Lectures.  It happened that they wrought

an effect on me quite contrary to what was intended by them;

for the arguments of the Deists, which were quoted to be refuted,

appeared to me much stronger than the refutations; in short,

I soon became a thorough Deist.  My arguments perverted some others,

particularly Collins and Ralph; but, each of them having afterwards

wrong'd me greatly without the least compunction, and recollecting

Keith's conduct towards me (who was another freethinker), and my own

towards Vernon and Miss Read, which at times gave me great trouble,

I began to suspect that this doctrine, tho' it might be true,

was not very useful.  My London pamphlet, which had for its motto

these lines of Dryden:



          "Whatever is, is right.  Though purblind man

          Sees but a part o' the chain, the nearest link:

          His eyes not carrying to the equal beam,

          That poises all above;"



and from the attributes of God, his infinite wisdom, goodness and power,

concluded that nothing could possibly be wrong in the world, and that

vice and virtue were empty distinctions, no such things existing,

appear'd now not so clever a performance as I once thought it;

and I doubted whether some error had not insinuated itself unperceiv'd

into my argument, so as to infect all that follow'd, as is common

in metaphysical reasonings.



I grew convinc'd that truth, sincerity and integrity in dealings

between man and man were of the utmost importance to the felicity

of life; and I form'd written resolutions, which still remain

in my journal book, to practice them ever while I lived. 

Revelation had indeed no weight with me, as such; but I entertain'd

an opinion that, though certain actions might not be bad because they

were forbidden by it, or good because it commanded them, yet probably

these actions might be forbidden because they were bad for us,

or commanded because they were beneficial to us, in their own natures,

all the circumstances of things considered.  And this persuasion,

with the kind hand of Providence, or some guardian angel, or accidental

favorable circumstances and situations, or all together, preserved me,

thro' this dangerous time of youth, and the hazardous situations I

was sometimes in among strangers, remote from the eye and advice

of my father, without any willful gross immorality or injustice,

that might have been expected from my want of religion.  I say willful,

because the instances I have mentioned had something of necessity

in them, from my youth, inexperience, and the knavery of others. 

I had therefore a tolerable character to begin the world with;

I valued it properly, and determin'd to preserve it.



We had not been long return'd to Philadelphia before the new types

arriv'd from London.  We settled with Keimer, and left him by his consent

before he heard of it.  We found a house to hire near the market,

and took it.  To lessen the rent, which was then but twenty-four

pounds a year, tho' I have since known it to let for seventy,

we took in Thomas Godfrey, a glazier, and his family, who were to

pay a considerable part of it to us, and we to board with them. 

We had scarce opened our letters and put our press in order,

before George House, an acquaintance of mine, brought a countryman

to us, whom he had met in the street inquiring for a printer. 

All our cash was now expended in the variety of particulars we

had been obliged to procure, and this countryman's five shillings,

being our first-fruits, and coming so seasonably, gave me more pleasure

than any crown I have since earned; and the gratitude I felt toward

House has made me often more ready than perhaps I should otherwise

have been to assist young beginners.



There are croakers in every country, always boding its ruin. 

Such a one then lived in Philadelphia; a person of note, an elderly man,

with a wise look and a very grave manner of speaking; his name

was Samuel Mickle.  This gentleman, a stranger to me, stopt one day

at my door, and asked me if I was the young man who had lately

opened a new printing-house. Being answered in the affirmative,

he said he was sorry for me, because it was an expensive undertaking,

and the expense would be lost; for Philadelphia was a sinking place,

the people already half-bankrupts, or near being so; all appearances

to the contrary, such as new buildings and the rise of rents,

being to his certain knowledge fallacious; for they were, in fact,

among the things that would soon ruin us.  And he gave me such

a detail of misfortunes now existing, or that were soon to exist,

that he left me half melancholy.  Had I known him before I

engaged in this business, probably I never should have done it. 

This man continued to live in this decaying place, and to declaim

in the same strain, refusing for many years to buy a house there,

because all was going to destruction; and at last I had the pleasure

of seeing him give five times as much for one as he might have bought

it for when he first began his croaking.



I should have mentioned before, that, in the autumn of the preceding year,

I had form'd most of my ingenious acquaintance into a club of mutual

improvement, which we called the JUNTO; we met on Friday evenings. 

The rules that I drew up required that every member, in his turn,

should produce one or more queries on any point of Morals, Politics,

or Natural Philosophy, to be discuss'd by the company; and once

in three months produce and read an essay of his own writing,

on any subject he pleased.  Our debates were to be under the direction

of a president, and to be conducted in the sincere spirit of inquiry

after truth, without fondness for dispute, or desire of victory;

and, to prevent warmth, all expressions of positiveness in opinions,

or direct contradiction, were after some time made contraband,

and prohibited under small pecuniary penalties.



The first members were Joseph Breintnal, a copyer of deeds for

the scriveners, a good-natur'd, friendly, middle-ag'd man, a great

lover of poetry, reading all he could meet with, and writing some

that was tolerable; very ingenious in many little Nicknackeries,

and of sensible conversation.



Thomas Godfrey, a self-taught mathematician, great in his way,

and afterward inventor of what is now called Hadley's Quadrant. 

But he knew little out of his way, and was not a pleasing companion;

as, like most great mathematicians I have met with, he expected

universal precision in everything said, or was for ever denying or

distinguishing upon trifles, to the disturbance of all conversation. 

He soon left us.



Nicholas Scull, a surveyor, afterwards surveyor-general,

who lov'd books, and sometimes made a few verses.



William Parsons, bred a shoemaker, but loving reading, had acquir'd

a considerable share of mathematics, which he first studied

with a view to astrology, that he afterwards laught at it. 

He also became surveyor-general.



William Maugridge, a joiner, a most exquisite mechanic, and a solid,

sensible man.



Hugh Meredith, Stephen Potts, and George Webb I have characteriz'd before.



Robert Grace, a young gentleman of some fortune, generous, lively,

and witty; a lover of punning and of his friends.



And William Coleman, then a merchant's clerk, about my age, who had

the coolest, dearest head, the best heart, and the exactest morals

of almost any man I ever met with.  He became afterwards a merchant

of great note, and one of our provincial judges.  Our friendship

continued without interruption to his death, upward of forty years;

and the club continued almost as long, and was the best school

of philosophy, morality, and politics that then existed in the province;

for our queries, which were read the week preceding their discussion,

put us upon reading with attention upon the several subjects,

that we might speak more to the purpose; and here, too, we acquired

better habits of conversation, every thing being studied in our

rules which might prevent our disgusting each other.  From hence

the long continuance of the club, which I shall have frequent

occasion to speak further of hereafter.



But my giving this account of it here is to show something of the interest

I had, every one of these exerting themselves in recommending business

to us.  Breintnal particularly procur'd us from the Quakers the printing

forty sheets of their history, the rest being to be done by Keimer;

and upon this we work'd exceedingly hard, for the price was low. 

It was a folio, pro patria size, in pica, with long primer notes. 

I compos'd of it a sheet a day, and Meredith worked it off at press;

it was often eleven at night, and sometimes later, before I had

finished my distribution for the next day's work, for the little

jobbs sent in by our other friends now and then put us back. 

But so determin'd I was to continue doing a sheet a day of the folio,

that one night, when, having impos'd my forms, I thought my day's

work over, one of them by accident was broken, and two pages

reduced to pi, I immediately distributed and compos'd it over again

before I went to bed; and this industry, visible to our neighbors,

began to give us character and credit; particularly, I was told,

that mention being made of the new printing-office at the merchants'

Every-night club, the general opinion was that it must fail,

there being already two printers in the place, Keimer and Bradford;

but Dr. Baird (whom you and I saw many years after at his native place,

St. Andrew's in Scotland) gave a contrary opinion:  "For the industry

of that Franklin," says he, "is superior to any thing I ever saw

of the kind; I see him still at work when I go home from club,

and he is at work again before his neighbors are out of bed." 

This struck the rest, and we soon after had offers from one of them

to supply us with stationery; but as yet we did not chuse to engage in

shop business.



I mention this industry the more particularly and the more freely,

tho' it seems to be talking in my own praise, that those of

my posterity, who shall read it, may know the use of that virtue,

when they see its effects in my favour throughout this relation.

