






In 1737, Colonel Spotswood, late governor of Virginia, and then

postmaster-general, being dissatisfied with the conduct of his

deputy at Philadelphia, respecting some negligence in rendering,

and inexactitude of his accounts, took from him the commission and offered

it to me.  I accepted it readily, and found it of great advantage;

for, tho' the salary was small, it facilitated the correspondence

that improv'd my newspaper, increas'd the number demanded, as well

as the advertisements to be inserted, so that it came to afford

me a considerable income.  My old competitor's newspaper declin'd

proportionably, and I was satisfy'd without retaliating his refusal,

while postmaster, to permit my papers being carried by the riders. 

Thus he suffer'd greatly from his neglect in due accounting; and I

mention it as a lesson to those young men who may be employ'd in

managing affairs for others, that they should always render accounts,

and make remittances, with great clearness and punctuality. 

The character of observing such a conduct is the most powerful

of all recommendations to new employments and increase of business.



I began now to turn my thoughts a little to public affairs,

beginning, however, with small matters.  The city watch was

one of the first things that I conceiv'd to want regulation. 

It was managed by the constables of the respective wards in turn;

the constable warned a number of housekeepers to attend him for

the night.  Those who chose never to attend paid him six shillings

a year to be excus'd, which was suppos'd to be for hiring substitutes,

but was, in reality, much more than was necessary for that purpose,

and made the constableship a place of profit; and the constable,

for a little drink, often got such ragamuffins about him as a watch,

that respectable housekeepers did not choose to mix with. 

Walking the rounds, too, was often neglected, and most of the nights

spent in tippling.  I thereupon wrote a paper, to be read in Junto,

representing these irregularities, but insisting more particularly

on the inequality of this six-shilling tax of the constables,

respecting the circumstances of those who paid it, since a poor

widow housekeeper, all whose property to be guarded by the watch

did not perhaps exceed the value of fifty pounds, paid as much as

the wealthiest merchant, who had thousands of pounds worth of goods

in his stores.



On the whole, I proposed as a more effectual watch, the hiring

of proper men to serve constantly in that business; and as a more

equitable way of supporting the charge the levying a tax that

should be proportion'd to the property.  This idea, being approv'd

by the Junto, was communicated to the other clubs, but as arising

in each of them; and though the plan was not immediately carried

into execution, yet, by preparing the minds of people for the change,

it paved the way for the law obtained a few years after,

when the members of our clubs were grown into more influence.



About this time I wrote a paper (first to be read in Junto, but it

was afterward publish'd) on the different accidents and carelessnesses

by which houses were set on fire, with cautions against them,

and means proposed of avoiding them.  This was much spoken of as a

useful piece, and gave rise to a project, which soon followed it,

of forming a company for the more ready extinguishing of fires,

and mutual assistance in removing and securing the goods when in danger. 

Associates in this scheme were presently found, amounting to thirty. 

Our articles of agreement oblig'd every member to keep always in

good order, and fit for use, a certain number of leather buckets,

with strong bags and baskets (for packing and transporting of goods),

which were to be brought to every fire; and we agreed to meet once

a month and spend a social evening together, in discoursing and

communicating such ideas as occurred to us upon the subject of fires,

as might be useful in our conduct on such occasions.



The utility of this institution soon appeared, and many more desiring

to be admitted than we thought convenient for one company, they were

advised to form another, which was accordingly done; and this went on,

one new company being formed after another, till they became so numerous

as to include most of the inhabitants who were men of property;

and now, at the time of my writing this, tho' upward of fifty years

since its establishment, that which I first formed, called the Union

Fire Company, still subsists and flourishes, tho' the first members

are all deceas'd but myself and one, who is older by a year than I am. 

The small fines that have been paid by members for absence at the monthly

meetings have been apply'd to the purchase of fire-engines, ladders,

fire-hooks, and other useful implements for each company, so that I

question whether there is a city in the world better provided with

the means of putting a stop to beginning conflagrations; and, in fact,

since these institutions, the city has never lost by fire more

than one or two houses at a time, and the flames have often been

extinguished before the house in which they began has been half consumed.



In 1739 arrived among us from Ireland the Reverend Mr. Whitefield,

who had made himself remarkable there as an itinerant preacher. 

He was at first permitted to preach in some of our churches;

but the clergy, taking a dislike to him, soon refus'd him their pulpits,

and he was oblig'd to preach in the fields.  The multitudes of all

sects and denominations that attended his sermons were enormous,

and it was matter of speculation to me, who was one of the number,

to observe the extraordinary influence of his oratory on his hearers,

and bow much they admir'd and respected him, notwithstanding his

common abuse of them, by assuring them that they were naturally half

beasts and half devils.  It was wonderful to see the change soon

made in the manners of our inhabitants.  From being thoughtless

or indifferent about religion, it seem'd as if all the world

were growing religious, so that one could not walk thro' the town

in an evening without hearing psalms sung in different families of

every street.



And it being found inconvenient to assemble in the open air,

subject to its inclemencies, the building of a house to meet in was

no sooner propos'd, and persons appointed to receive contributions,

but sufficient sums were soon receiv'd to procure the ground and erect

the building, which was one hundred feet long and seventy broad,

about the size of Westminster Hall; and the work was carried on

with such spirit as to be finished in a much shorter time than could

have been expected.  Both house and ground were vested in trustees,

expressly for the use of any preacher of any religious persuasion

who might desire to say something to the people at Philadelphia;

the design in building not being to accommodate any particular sect,

but the inhabitants in general; so that even if the Mufti of

Constantinople were to send a missionary to preach Mohammedanism to us,

he would find a pulpit at his service.



Mr. Whitefield, in leaving us, went preaching all the way thro'

the colonies to Georgia.  The settlement of that province

had lately been begun, but, instead of being made with hardy,

industrious husbandmen, accustomed to labor, the only people fit

for such an enterprise, it was with families of broken shop-keepers

and other insolvent debtors, many of indolent and idle habits,

taken out of the jails, who, being set down in the woods, unqualified for

clearing land, and unable to endure the hardships of a new settlement,

perished in numbers, leaving many helpless children unprovided for. 

The sight of their miserable situation inspir'd the benevolent heart

of Mr. Whitefield with the idea of building an Orphan House there,

in which they might be supported and educated.  Returning northward,

he preach'd up this charity, and made large collections,

for his eloquence had a wonderful power over the hearts and purses

of his hearers, of which I myself was an instance.



I did not disapprove of the design, but, as Georgia was then

destitute of materials and workmen, and it was proposed to send

them from Philadelphia at a great expense, I thought it would have

been better to have built the house here, and brought the children

to it.  This I advis'd; but he was resolute in his first project,

rejected my counsel, and I therefore refus'd to contribute. 

I happened soon after to attend one of his sermons, in the course

of which I perceived he intended to finish with a collection,

and I silently resolved he should get nothing from me, I had in my

pocket a handful of copper money, three or four silver dollars,

and five pistoles in gold.  As he proceeded I began to soften,

and concluded to give the coppers.  Another stroke of his oratory

made me asham'd of that, and determin'd me to give the silver;

and he finish'd so admirably, that I empty'd my pocket wholly into

the collector's dish, gold and all.  At this sermon there was also

one of our club, who, being of my sentiments respecting the building

in Georgia, and suspecting a collection might be intended, had,

by precaution, emptied his pockets before he came from home. 

Towards the conclusion of the discourse, however, he felt a strong

desire to give, and apply'd to a neighbour, who stood near him,

to borrow some money for the purpose.  The application was

unfortunately [made] to perhaps the only man in the company who had

the firmness not to be affected by the preacher.  His answer was,

"At any other time, Friend Hopkinson, I would lend to thee freely;

but not now, for thee seems to be out of thy right senses."



Some of Mr. Whitefield's enemies affected to suppose that he would

apply these collections to his own private emolument; but I who was

intimately acquainted with him (being employed in printing his Sermons

and Journals, etc.), never had the least suspicion of his integrity,

but am to this day decidedly of opinion that he was in all his conduct

a perfectly honest man, and methinks my testimony in his favour

ought to have the more weight, as we had no religious connection. 

He us'd, indeed, sometimes to pray for my conversion, but never

had the satisfaction of believing that his prayers were heard. 

Ours was a mere civil friendship, sincere on both sides, and lasted

to his death.



The following instance will show something of the terms on which

we stood.  Upon one of his arrivals from England at Boston,

he wrote to me that he should come soon to Philadelphia,

but knew not where he could lodge when there, as he understood

his old friend and host, Mr. Benezet, was removed to Germantown. 

My answer was, "You know my house; if you can make shift with

its scanty accommodations, you will be most heartily welcome." 

He reply'd, that if I made that kind offer for Christ's sake,

I should not miss of a reward.  And I returned, "Don't let me

be mistaken; it was not for Christ's sake, but for your sake." 

One of our common acquaintance jocosely remark'd, that, knowing it

to be the custom of the saints, when they received any favour,

to shift the burden of the obligation from off their own shoulders,

and place it in heaven, I had contriv'd to fix it on earth.



The last time I saw Mr. Whitefield was in London, when he consulted

me about his Orphan House concern, and his purpose of appropriating

it to the establishment of a college.



He had a loud and clear voice, and articulated his words and

sentences so perfectly, that he might be heard and understood at

a great distance, especially as his auditories, however numerous,

observ'd the most exact silence.  He preach'd one evening from the top

of the Court-house steps, which are in the middle of Market-street,

and on the west side of Second-street, which crosses it at right angles. 

Both streets were fill'd with his hearers to a considerable distance. 

Being among the hindmost in Market-street, I had the curiosity

to learn how far he could be heard, by retiring backwards down

the street towards the river; and I found his voice distinct till I

came near Front-street, when some noise in that street obscur'd it. 

Imagining then a semi-circle, of which my distance should be the radius,

and that it were fill'd with auditors, to each of whom I allow'd

two square feet, I computed that he might well be heard by more

than thirty thousand.  This reconcil'd me to the newspaper accounts

of his having preach'd to twenty-five thousand people in the fields,

and to the antient histories of generals haranguing whole armies,

of which I had sometimes doubted.



By hearing him often, I came to distinguish easily between sermons

newly compos'd, and those which he had often preach'd in the course

of his travels.  His delivery of the latter was so improv'd by frequent

repetitions that every accent, every emphasis, every modulation

of voice, was so perfectly well turn'd and well plac'd, that,

without being interested in the subject, one could not help being

pleas'd with the discourse; a pleasure of much the same kind with that

receiv'd from an excellent piece of musick.  This is an advantage

itinerant preachers have over those who are stationary, as the latter

can not well improve their delivery of a sermon by so many rehearsals.



His writing and printing from time to time gave great advantage

to his enemies; unguarded expressions, and even erroneous opinions,

delivered in preaching, might have been afterwards explain'd

or qualifi'd by supposing others that might have accompani'd them,

or they might have been deny'd; but litera scripta monet. 

Critics attack'd his writings violently, and with so much appearance

of reason as to diminish the number of his votaries and prevent

their encrease; so that I am of opinion if he had never written

any thing, he would have left behind him a much more numerous

and important sect, and his reputation might in that case have been

still growing, even after his death, as there being nothing of his

writing on which to found a censure and give him a lower character,

his proselytes would be left at liberty to feign for him as great

a variety of excellence as their enthusiastic admiration might wish

him to have possessed.



My business was now continually augmenting, and my circumstances growing

daily easier, my newspaper having become very profitable, as being

for a time almost the only one in this and the neighbouring provinces. 

I experienced, too, the truth of the observation, "that after

getting the first hundred pound, it is more easy to get the second,"

money itself being of a prolific nature.



The partnership at Carolina having succeeded, I was encourag'd

to engage in others, and to promote several of my workmen,

who had behaved well, by establishing them with printing-houses

in different colonies, on the same terms with that in Carolina. 

Most of them did well, being enabled at the end of our term, six years,

to purchase the types of me and go on working for themselves,

by which means several families were raised.  Partnerships often

finish in quarrels; but I was happy in this, that mine were all

carried on and ended amicably, owing, I think, a good deal to

the precaution of having very explicitly settled, in our articles,

every thing to be done by or expected from each partner, so that

there was nothing to dispute, which precaution I would therefore

recommend to all who enter into partnerships; for, whatever esteem

partners may have for, and confidence in each other at the time

of the contract, little jealousies and disgusts may arise, with ideas

of inequality in the care and burden of the business, etc., which

are attended often with breach of friendship and of the connection,

perhaps with lawsuits and other disagreeable consequences.



I had, on the whole, abundant reason to be satisfied with my being

established in Pennsylvania.  There were, however, two things

that I regretted, there being no provision for defense, nor for

a compleat education of youth; no militia, nor any college. 

I therefore, in 1743, drew up a proposal for establishing an academy;

and at that time, thinking the Reverend Mr. Peters, who was out

of employ, a fit person to superintend such an institution,

I communicated the project to him; but he, having more profitable

views in the service of the proprietaries, which succeeded,

declin'd the undertaking; and, not knowing another at that time

suitable for such a trust, I let the scheme lie a while dormant. 

I succeeded better the next year, 1744, in proposing and establishing

a Philosophical Society.  The paper I wrote for that purpose will

be found among my writings, when collected.



With respect to defense, Spain having been several years at war

against Great Britain, and being at length join'd by France,

which brought us into great danger; and the laboured and long-continued

endeavour of our governor, Thomas, to prevail with our Quaker Assembly

to pass a militia law, and make other provisions for the security

of the province, having proved abortive, I determined to try what might

be done by a voluntary association of the people.  To promote this,

I first wrote and published a pamphlet, entitled PLAIN TRUTH, in which I

stated our defenceless situation in strong lights, with the necessity

of union and discipline for our defense, and promis'd to propose in

a few days an association, to be generally signed for that purpose. 

The pamphlet had a sudden and surprising effect.  I was call'd upon

for the instrument of association, and having settled the draft

of it with a few friends, I appointed a meeting of the citizens

in the large building before mentioned.  The house was pretty full;

I had prepared a number of printed copies, and provided pens and ink

dispers'd all over the room.  I harangued them a little on the subject,

read the paper, and explained it, and then distributed the copies,

which were eagerly signed, not the least objection being made.



When the company separated, and the papers were collected, we found

above twelve hundred hands; and, other copies being dispersed

in the country, the subscribers amounted at length to upward

of ten thousand.  These all furnished themselves as soon as they

could with arms, formed themselves into companies and regiments,

chose their own officers, and met every week to be instructed

in the manual exercise, and other parts of military discipline. 

The women, by subscriptions among themselves, provided silk colors,

which they presented to the companies, painted with different devices

and mottos, which I supplied.



The officers of the companies composing the Philadelphia regiment,

being met, chose me for their colonel; but, conceiving myself unfit,

I declin'd that station, and recommended Mr. Lawrence, a fine

person, and man of influence, who was accordingly appointed. 

I then propos'd a lottery to defray the expense of building

a battery below the town, and furnishing it with cannon. 

It filled expeditiously, and the battery was soon erected, the merlons

being fram'd of logs and fill'd with earth.  We bought some old

cannon from Boston, but, these not being sufficient, we wrote to

England for more, soliciting, at the same time, our proprietaries

for some assistance, tho' without much expectation of obtaining it.



Meanwhile, Colonel Lawrence, William Allen, Abram Taylor,

Esqr., and myself were sent to New York by the associators,

commission'd to borrow some cannon of Governor Clinton.  He at first

refus'd us peremptorily; but at dinner with his council, where there

was great drinking of Madeira wine, as the custom of that place

then was, he softened by degrees, and said he would lend us six. 

After a few more bumpers he advanc'd to ten; and at length he

very good-naturedly conceded eighteen.  They were fine cannon,

eighteen-pounders, with their carriages, which we soon transported

and mounted on our battery, where the associators kept a nightly

guard while the war lasted, and among the rest I regularly took

my turn of duty there as a common soldier.



My activity in these operations was agreeable to the governor and council;

they took me into confidence, and I was consulted by them in every

measure wherein their concurrence was thought useful to the association. 

Calling in the aid of religion, I propos'd to them the proclaiming

a fast, to promote reformation, and implore the blessing of Heaven on

our undertaking.  They embrac'd the motion; but, as it was the first

fast ever thought of in the province, the secretary had no precedent

from which to draw the proclamation.  My education in New England,

where a fast is proclaimed every year, was here of some advantage: 

I drew it in the accustomed stile, it was translated into German,

printed in both languages, and divulg'd thro' the province.  This gave

the clergy of the different sects an opportunity of influencing their

congregations to join in the association, and it would probably have

been general among all but Quakers if the peace had not soon interven'd.



It was thought by some of my friends that, by my activity in

these affairs, I should offend that sect, and thereby lose my interest

in the Assembly of the province, where they formed a great majority. 

A young gentleman who had likewise some friends in the House,

and wished to succeed me as their clerk, acquainted me that it

was decided to displace me at the next election; and he, therefore,

in good will, advis'd me to resign, as more consistent with my honour

than being turn'd out.  My answer to him was, that I had read or heard

of some public man who made it a rule never to ask for an office,

and never to refuse one when offer'd to him.  "I approve,"

says I, "of his rule, and will practice it with a small addition;

I shall never ask, never refuse, nor ever resign an office. 

If they will have my office of clerk to dispose of to another,

they shall take it from me.  I will not, by giving it up, lose my

right of some time or other making reprisals on my adversaries." 

I heard, however, no more of this; I was chosen again unanimously

as usual at the next election.  Possibly, as they dislik'd my late

intimacy with the members of council, who had join'd the governors

in all the disputes about military preparations, with which the House

had long been harass'd, they might have been pleas'd if I would

voluntarily have left them; but they did not care to displace me

on account merely of my zeal for the association, and they could

not well give another reason.



Indeed I had some cause to believe that the defense of the country

was not disagreeable to any of them, provided they were not requir'd

to assist in it.  And I found that a much greater number of them

than I could have imagined, tho' against offensive war, were clearly

for the defensive.  Many pamphlets pro and con were publish'd

on the subject, and some by good Quakers, in favour of defense,

which I believe convinc'd most of their younger people.



A transaction in our fire company gave me some insight into their

prevailing sentiments.  It had been propos'd that we should encourage

the scheme for building a battery by laying out the present stock,

then about sixty pounds, in tickets of the lottery.  By our rules,

no money could be dispos'd of till the next meeting after the proposal. 

The company consisted of thirty members, of which twenty-two

were Quakers, and eight only of other persuasions.  We eight

punctually attended the meeting; but, tho' we thought that some of

the Quakers would join us, we were by no means sure of a majority. 

Only one Quaker, Mr. James Morris, appear'd to oppose the measure. 

He expressed much sorrow that it had ever been propos'd, as he said

Friends were all against it, and it would create such discord as might

break up the company.  We told him that we saw no reason for that;

we were the minority, and if Friends were against the measure,

and outvoted us, we must and should, agreeably to the usage

of all societies, submit.  When the hour for business arriv'd

it was mov'd to put the vote; he allow'd we might then do it

by the rules, but, as he could assure us that a number of members

intended to be present for the purpose of opposing it, it would

be but candid to allow a little time for their appearing.



While we were disputing this, a waiter came to tell me two gentlemen

below desir'd to speak with me.  I went down, and found they were two

of our Quaker members.  They told me there were eight of them assembled

at a tavern just by; that they were determin'd to come and vote with us

if there should be occasion, which they hop'd would not be the case,

and desir'd we would not call for their assistance if we could do

without it, as their voting for such a measure might embroil them

with their elders and friends.  Being thus secure of a majority,

I went up, and after a little seeming hesitation, agreed to a delay

of another hour.  This Mr. Morris allow'd to be extreamly fair. 

Not one of his opposing friends appear'd, at which he express'd

great surprize; and, at the expiration of the hour, we carry'd

the resolution eight to one; and as, of the twenty-two Quakers,

eight were ready to vote with us, and thirteen, by their absence,

manifested that they were not inclin'd to oppose the measure,

I afterward estimated the proportion of Quakers sincerely against

defense as one to twenty-one only; for these were all regular members

of that society, and in good reputation among them, and had due

notice of what was propos'd at that meeting.



The honorable and learned Mr. Logan, who had always been of that sect,

was one who wrote an address to them, declaring his approbation of

defensive war, and supporting his opinion by many strong arguments. 

He put into my hands sixty pounds to be laid out in lottery tickets

for the battery, with directions to apply what prizes might be drawn

wholly to that service.  He told me the following anecdote of his

old master, William Penn, respecting defense.  He came over from England,

when a young man, with that proprietary, and as his secretary. 

It was war-time, and their ship was chas'd by an armed vessel,

suppos'd to be an enemy.  Their captain prepar'd for defense;

but told William Penn and his company of Quakers, that he did

not expect their assistance, and they might retire into the cabin,

which they did, except James Logan, who chose to stay upon deck,

and was quarter'd to a gun.  The suppos'd enemy prov'd a friend,

so there was no fighting; but when the secretary went down to

communicate the intelligence, William Penn rebuk'd him severely for

staying upon deck, and undertaking to assist in defending the vessel,

contrary to the principles of Friends, especially as it had not been

required by the captain.  This reproof, being before all the company,

piqu'd the secretary, who answer'd, "I being thy servant, why did

thee not order me to come down?  But thee was willing enough that I

should stay and help to fight the ship when thee thought there

was danger."



My being many years in the Assembly, the majority of which were

constantly Quakers, gave me frequent opportunities of seeing

the embarrassment given them by their principle against war,

whenever application was made to them, by order of the crown,

to grant aids for military purposes.  They were unwilling to offend

government, on the one hand, by a direct refusal; and their friends,

the body of the Quakers, on the other, by a compliance contrary

to their principles; hence a variety of evasions to avoid complying,

and modes of disguising the compliance when it became unavoidable. 

The common mode at last was, to grant money under the phrase of its

being "for the king's use," and never to inquire how it was applied.



But, if the demand was not directly from the crown, that phrase was

found not so proper, and some other was to be invented.  As, when powder

was wanting (I think it was for the garrison at Louisburg), and the

government of New England solicited a grant of some from Pennsilvania,

which was much urg'd on the House by Governor Thomas, they could

not grant money to buy powder, because that was an ingredient of war;

but they voted an aid to New England of three thousand pounds,

to he put into the hands of the governor, and appropriated it

for the purchasing of bread, flour, wheat, or other grain.  Some of

the council, desirous of giving the House still further embarrassment,

advis'd the governor not to accept provision, as not being the thing

he had demanded; but be reply'd, "I shall take the money, for I

understand very well their meaning; other grain is gunpowder,"

which he accordingly bought, and they never objected to it.<10>



     <10> See the votes.--[Marg. note.]



It was in allusion to this fact that, when in our fire company we

feared the success of our proposal in favour of the lottery, and I

had said to my friend Mr. Syng, one of our members, "If we fail,

let us move the purchase of a fire-engine with the money; the Quakers

can have no objection to that; and then, if you nominate me and I

you as a committee for that purpose, we will buy a great gun,

which is certainly a fire-engine." "I see," says he, "you have

improv'd by being so long in the Assembly; your equivocal project

would be just a match for their wheat or other grain."



These embarrassments that the Quakers suffer'd from having

establish'd and published it as one of their principles that

no kind of war was lawful, and which, being once published,

they could not afterwards, however they might change their minds,

easily get rid of, reminds me of what I think a more prudent

conduct in another sect among us, that of the Dunkers.  I was

acquainted with one of its founders, Michael Welfare, soon after it

appear'd. He complain'd to me that they were grievously calumniated

by the zealots of other persuasions, and charg'd with abominable

principles and practices, to which they were utter strangers. 

I told him this had always been the case with new sects, and that,

to put a stop to such abuse, I imagin'd it might be well to publish

the articles of their belief, and the rules of their discipline. 

He said that it had been propos'd among them, but not agreed to,

for this reason:  "When we were first drawn together as a society,"

says he, "it had pleased God to enlighten our minds so far as to see

that some doctrines, which we once esteemed truths, were errors;

and that others, which we had esteemed errors, were real truths. 

From time to time He has been pleased to afford us farther light,

and our principles have been improving, and our errors diminishing. 

Now we are not sure that we are arrived at the end of this progression,

and at the perfection of spiritual or theological knowledge;

and we fear that, if we should once print our confession of faith,

we should feel ourselves as if bound and confin'd by it, and perhaps

be unwilling to receive farther improvement, and our successors still

more so, as conceiving what we their elders and founders had done, to be

something sacred, never to be departed from."



This modesty in a sect is perhaps a singular instance in the history

of mankind, every other sect supposing itself in possession

of all truth, and that those who differ are so far in the wrong;

like a man traveling in foggy weather, those at some distance

before him on the road he sees wrapped up in the fog, as well as

those behind him, and also the people in the fields on each side,

but near him all appears clear, tho' in truth he is as much

in the fog as any of them.  To avoid this kind of embarrassment,

the Quakers have of late years been gradually declining the public

service in the Assembly and in the magistracy, choosing rather

to quit their power than their principle.



In order of time, I should have mentioned before, that having, in 1742,

invented an open stove for the better warming of rooms, and at the same

time saving fuel, as the fresh air admitted was warmed in entering,

I made a present of the model to Mr. Robert Grace, one of my early

friends, who, having an iron-furnace, found the casting of the plates

for these stoves a profitable thing, as they were growing in demand. 

To promote that demand, I wrote and published a pamphlet, entitled "An

Account of the new-invented Pennsylvania Fireplaces; wherein their

Construction and Manner of Operation is particularly explained;

their Advantages above every other Method of warming Rooms demonstrated;

and all Objections that have been raised against the Use of them

answered and obviated," etc.  This pamphlet had a good effect. 

Gov'r. Thomas was so pleas'd with the construction of this stove,

as described in it, that he offered to give me a patent for the sole

vending of them for a term of years; but I declin'd it from a principle

which has ever weighed with me on such occasions, viz., That, as we

enjoy great advantages from the inventions of others, we should be

glad of an opportunity to serve others by any invention of ours;

and this we should do freely and generously.



An ironmonger in London however, assuming a good deal of my pamphlet,

and working it up into his own, and making some small changes

in the machine, which rather hurt its operation, got a patent

for it there, and made, as I was told, a little fortune by it. 

And this is not the only instance of patents taken out for my

inventions by others, tho' not always with the same success, which I

never contested, as having no desire of profiting by patents myself,

and hating disputes.  The use of these fireplaces in very many houses,

both of this and the neighbouring colonies, has been, and is,

a great saving of wood to the inhabitants.



Peace being concluded, and the association business therefore at

an end, I turn'd my thoughts again to the affair of establishing

an academy.  The first step I took was to associate in the design

a number of active friends, of whom the Junto furnished a good part;

the next was to write and publish a pamphlet, entitled Proposals

Relating to the Education of Youth in Pennsylvania.  This I

distributed among the principal inhabitants gratis; and as soon

as I could suppose their minds a little prepared by the perusal

of it, I set on foot a subscription for opening and supporting

an academy; it was to be paid in quotas yearly for five years;

by so dividing it, I judg'd the subscription might be larger,

and I believe it was so, amounting to no less, if I remember right,

than five thousand pounds.



In the introduction to these proposals, I stated their publication,

not as an act of mine, but of some publick-spirited gentlemen,

avoiding as much as I could, according to my usual rule, the presenting

myself to the publick as the author of any scheme for their benefit.



The subscribers, to carry the project into immediate execution,

chose out of their number twenty-four trustees, and appointed

Mr. Francis, then attorney-general, and myself to draw up constitutions

for the government of the academy; which being done and signed,

a house was hired, masters engag'd, and the schools opened, I think,

in the same year, 1749.



The scholars increasing fast, the house was soon found too small,

and we were looking out for a piece of ground, properly situated,

with intention to build, when Providence threw into our way a large

house ready built, which, with a few alterations, might well

serve our purpose.  This was the building before mentioned,

erected by the hearers of Mr. Whitefield, and was obtained for us

in the following manner.



It is to be noted that the contributions to this building being

made by people of different sects, care was taken in the nomination

of trustees, in whom the building and ground was to be vested,

that a predominancy should not be given to any sect, lest in time that

predominancy might be a means of appropriating the whole to the use

of such sect, contrary to the original intention.  It was therefore

that one of each sect was appointed, viz., one Church-of-England man,

one Presbyterian, one Baptist, one Moravian, etc., those, in case

of vacancy by death, were to fill it by election from among

the contributors.  The Moravian happen'd not to please his colleagues,

and on his death they resolved to have no other of that sect. 

The difficulty then was, how to avoid having two of some other sect,

by means of the new choice.



Several persons were named, and for that reason not agreed to. 

At length one mention'd me, with the observation that I was merely

an honest man, and of no sect at all, which prevail'd with them

to chuse me.  The enthusiasm which existed when the house was built

had long since abated, and its trustees had not been able to procure

fresh contributions for paying the ground-rent, and discharging

some other debts the building had occasion'd, which embarrass'd

them greatly.  Being now a member of both setts of trustees,

that for the building and that for the Academy, I had a good

opportunity of negotiating with both, and brought them finally

to an agreement, by which the trustees for the building were to cede

it to those of the academy, the latter undertaking to discharge

the debt, to keep for ever open in the building a large hall

for occasional preachers, according to the original intention,

and maintain a free- school for the instruction of poor children. 

Writings were accordingly drawn, and on paying the debts the

trustees of the academy were put in possession of the premises;

and by dividing the great and lofty hall into stories, and different

rooms above and below for the several schools, and purchasing some

additional ground, the whole was soon made fit for our purpose,

and the scholars remov'd into the building.  The care and trouble

of agreeing with the workmen, purchasing materials, and superintending

the work, fell upon me; and I went thro' it the more cheerfully,

as it did not then interfere with my private business, having the

year before taken a very able, industrious, and honest partner,

Mr. David Hall, with whose character I was well acquainted, as he

had work'd for me four years.  He took off my hands all care of

the printing-office, paying me punctually my share of the profits. 

This partnership continued eighteen years, successfully for us both.



The trustees of the academy, after a while, were incorporated

by a charter from the governor; their funds were increas'd by

contributions in Britain and grants of land from the proprietaries,

to which the Assembly has since made considerable addition;

and thus was established the present University of Philadelphia. 

I have been continued one of its trustees from the beginning,

now near forty years, and have had the very great pleasure of seeing

a number of the youth who have receiv'd their education in it,

distinguish'd by their improv'd abilities, serviceable in public

stations and ornaments to their country.



When I disengaged myself, as above mentioned, from private business,

I flatter'd myself that, by the sufficient tho' moderate fortune

I had acquir'd, I had secured leisure during the rest of my life

for philosophical studies and amusements.  I purchased all

Dr. Spence's apparatus, who had come from England to lecture here,

and I proceeded in my electrical experiments with great alacrity;

but the publick, now considering me as a man of leisure, laid hold

of me for their purposes, every part of our civil government,

and almost at the same time, imposing some duty upon me. 

The governor put me into the commission of the peace; the corporation

of the city chose me of the common council, and soon after an alderman;

and the citizens at large chose me a burgess to represent them

in Assembly.  This latter station was the more agreeable to me,

as I was at length tired with sitting there to hear debates,

in which, as clerk, I could take no part, and which were often

so unentertaining that I was induc'd to amuse myself with making

magic squares or circles, or any thing to avoid weariness; and I

conceiv'd my becoming a member would enlarge my power of doing good. 

I would not, however, insinuate that my ambition was not flatter'd by all

these promotions; it certainly was; for, considering my low beginning,

they were great things to me; and they were still more pleasing,

as being so many spontaneous testimonies of the public good opinion,

and by me entirely unsolicited.



The office of justice of the peace I try'd a little, by attending

a few courts, and sitting on the bench to hear causes; but finding

that more knowledge of the common law than I possess'd was necessary

to act in that station with credit, I gradually withdrew from it,

excusing myself by my being oblig'd to attend the higher duties

of a legislator in the Assembly.  My election to this trust was

repeated every year for ten years, without my ever asking any

elector for his vote, or signifying, either directly or indirectly,

any desire of being chosen.  On taking my seat in the House,

my son was appointed their clerk.



The year following, a treaty being to be held with the Indians

at Carlisle, the governor sent a message to the House, proposing that

they should nominate some of their members, to be join'd with some

members of council, as commissioners for that purpose.<11> The House

named the speaker (Mr. Norris) and myself; and, being commission'd,

we went to Carlisle, and met the Indians accordingly.



     <11> See the votes to have this more correctly.

          --[Marg. note.]



As those people are extreamly apt to get drunk, and, when so,

are very quarrelsome and disorderly, we strictly forbad the selling

any liquor to them; and when they complain'd of this restriction,

we told them that if they would continue sober during the treaty,

we would give them plenty of rum when business was over. 

They promis'd this, and they kept their promise, because they could get

no liquor, and the treaty was conducted very orderly, and concluded

to mutual satisfaction.  They then claim'd and receiv'd the rum; this was

in the afternoon; they were near one hundred men, women, and children,

and were lodg'd in temporary cabins, built in the form of a square,

just without the town.  In the evening, hearing a great noise

among them, the commissioners walk'd out to see what was the matter. 

We found they had made a great bonfire in the middle of the square;

they were all drunk, men and women, quarreling and fighting. 

Their dark-colour'd bodies, half naked, seen only by the gloomy light

of the bonfire, running after and beating one another with firebrands,

accompanied by their horrid yellings, form'd a scene the most

resembling our ideas of hell that could well be imagin'd; there was

no appeasing the tumult, and we retired to our lodging.  At midnight

a number of them came thundering at our door, demanding more rum,

of which we took no notice.



The next day, sensible they had misbehav'd in giving us that disturbance,

they sent three of their old counselors to make their apology. 

The orator acknowledg'd the fault, but laid it upon the rum;

and then endeavored to excuse the rum by saying, "The Great Spirit,

who made all things, made every thing for some use, and whatever use

he design'd any thing for, that use it should always be put to. 

Now, when he made rum, he said 'Let this be for the Indians to get

drunk with,' and it must be so."  And, indeed, if it be the design

of Providence to extirpate these savages in order to make room

for cultivators of the earth, it seems not improbable that rum may

be the appointed means.  It has already annihilated all the tribes

who formerly inhabited the sea-coast.
