







Tho' I seldom attended any public worship, I had still an opinion

of its propriety, and of its utility when rightly conducted,

and I regularly paid my annual subscription for the support of

the only Presbyterian minister or meeting we had in Philadelphia. 

He us'd to visit me sometimes as a friend, and admonish me

to attend his administrations, and I was now and then prevail'd

on to do so, once for five Sundays successively.  Had he been

in my opinion a good preacher, perhaps I might have continued,

notwithstanding the occasion I had for the Sunday's leisure in my

course of study; but his discourses were chiefly either polemic

arguments, or explications of the peculiar doctrines of our sect,

and were all to me very dry, uninteresting, and unedifying,

since not a single moral principle was inculcated or enforc'd, their

aim seeming to be rather to make us Presbyterians than good citizens.



At length he took for his text that verse of the fourth chapter

of Philippians, "Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true,

honest, just, pure, lovely, or of good report, if there be any virtue,

or any praise, think on these things."  And I imagin'd, in a sermon

on such a text, we could not miss of having some morality. 

But he confin'd himself to five points only, as meant by the apostle,

viz.: 1.  Keeping holy the Sabbath day.  2.  Being diligent in reading

the holy Scriptures.  3.  Attending duly the publick worship. 

4.  Partaking of the Sacrament.  5.  Paying a due respect to

God's ministers.  These might be all good things; but, as they

were not the kind of good things that I expected from that text,

I despaired of ever meeting with them from any other, was disgusted,

and attended his preaching no more.  I had some years before compos'd

a little Liturgy, or form of prayer, for my own private use (viz.,

in 1728), entitled, Articles of Belief and Acts of Religion. 

I return'd to the use of this, and went no more to the public assemblies. 

My conduct might be blameable, but I leave it, without attempting

further to excuse it; my present purpose being to relate facts,

and not to make apologies for them.



It was about this time I conceiv'd the bold and arduous project

of arriving at moral perfection.  I wish'd to live without

committing any fault at any time; I would conquer all that either

natural inclination, custom, or company might lead me into.  As I knew,

or thought I knew, what was right and wrong, I did not see why I

might not always do the one and avoid the other.  But I soon found

I had undertaken a task of more difficulty than I bad imagined. 

While my care was employ'd in guarding against one fault, I was

often surprised by another; habit took the advantage of inattention;

inclination was sometimes too strong for reason.  I concluded, at length,

that the mere speculative conviction that it was our interest to be

completely virtuous, was not sufficient to prevent our slipping;

and that the contrary habits must be broken, and good ones acquired

and established, before we can have any dependence on a steady,

uniform rectitude of conduct.  For this purpose I therefore contrived

the following method.



In the various enumerations of the moral virtues I had met

with in my reading, I found the catalogue more or less numerous,

as different writers included more or fewer ideas under the same name. 

Temperance, for example, was by some confined to eating and drinking,

while by others it was extended to mean the moderating every

other pleasure, appetite, inclination, or passion, bodily or mental,

even to our avarice and ambition.  I propos'd to myself, for the sake

of clearness, to use rather more names, with fewer ideas annex'd

to each, than a few names with more ideas; and I included under

thirteen names of virtues all that at that time occurr'd to me

as necessary or desirable, and annexed to each a short precept,

which fully express'd the extent I gave to its meaning.



These names of virtues, with their precepts, were:



1.  TEMPERANCE.  Eat not to dullness; drink not to elevation.



2.  SILENCE.  Speak not but what may benefit others or yourself;

avoid trifling conversation.



3.  ORDER.  Let all your things have their places; let each part

of your business have its time.



4.  RESOLUTION.  Resolve to perform what you ought; perform without

fail what you resolve.



5.  FRUGALITY.  Make no expense but to do good to others or yourself;

i.e., waste nothing.



6.  INDUSTRY.  Lose no time; be always employ'd in something useful;

cut off all unnecessary actions.



7.  SINCERITY.  Use no hurtful deceit; think innocently and justly,

and, if you speak, speak accordingly.



8.  JUSTICE.  Wrong none by doing injuries, or omitting the benefits

that are your duty.



9.  MODERATION.  Avoid extreams; forbear resenting injuries so much

as you think they deserve.



10.  CLEANLINESS.  Tolerate no uncleanliness in body, cloaths,

or habitation.



11.  TRANQUILLITY.  Be not disturbed at trifles, or at accidents

common or unavoidable.



12.  CHASTITY.  Rarely use venery but for health or offspring,

never to dulness, weakness, or the injury of your own or another's

peace or reputation.



13.  HUMILITY.  Imitate Jesus and Socrates.



My intention being to acquire the habitude of all these virtues,

I judg'd it would be well not to distract my attention by attempting

the whole at once, but to fix it on one of them at a time; and, when I

should be master of that, then to proceed to another, and so on,

till I should have gone thro' the thirteen; and, as the previous

acquisition of some might facilitate the acquisition of certain others,

I arrang'd them with that view, as they stand above.  Temperance first,

as it tends to procure that coolness and clearness of head, which is

so necessary where constant vigilance was to be kept up, and guard

maintained against the unremitting attraction of ancient habits,

and the force of perpetual temptations.  This being acquir'd

and establish'd, Silence would be more easy; and my desire being

to gain knowledge at the same time that I improv'd in virtue,

and considering that in conversation it was obtain'd rather by the use

of the ears than of the tongue, and therefore wishing to break

a habit I was getting into of prattling, punning, and joking,

which only made me acceptable to trifling company, I gave Silence

the second place.  This and the next, Order, I expected would

allow me more time for attending to my project and my studies. 

Resolution, once become habitual, would keep me firm in my endeavors

to obtain all the subsequent virtues; Frugality and Industry freeing

me from my remaining debt, and producing affluence and independence,

would make more easy the practice of Sincerity and Justice, etc., etc. 

Conceiving then, that, agreeably to the advice of Pythagoras

in his Golden Verses, daily examination would be necessary,

I contrived the following method for conducting that examination.



I made a little book, in which I allotted a page for each of the virtues. 

I rul'd each page with red ink, so as to have seven columns,

one for each day of the week, marking each column with a letter

for the day.  I cross'd these columns with thirteen red lines,

marking the beginning of each line with the first letter of one of

the virtues, on which line, and in its proper column, I might mark,

by a little black spot, every fault I found upon examination

to have been committed respecting that virtue upon that day.



Form of the pages.



           +-------------------------------+

           |              TEMPERANCE.      |

           +-------------------------------+

           |       EAT NOT TO DULNESS;     |

           |     DRINK NOT TO ELEVATION.   |

           +-------------------------------+

           |   | S.| M.| T.| W.| T.| F.| S.|

           +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+

           | T.|   |   |   |   |   |   |   |

           +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+

           | S.| * | * |   | * |   | * |   |

           +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+

           | O.| **| * | * |   | * | * | * |

           +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+

           | R.|   |   | * |   |   | * |   |

           +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+

           | F.|   | * |   |   | * |   |   |

           +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+

           | I.|   |   | * |   |   |   |   |

           +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+

           | S.|   |   |   |   |   |   |   |

           +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+

           | J.|   |   |   |   |   |   |   |

           +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+

           | M.|   |   |   |   |   |   |   |

           +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+

           | C.|   |   |   |   |   |   |   |

           +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+

           | T.|   |   |   |   |   |   |   |

           +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+

           | C.|   |   |   |   |   |   |   |

           +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+

           | H.|   |   |   |   |   |   |   |

           +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+



I determined to give a week's strict attention to each of

the virtues successively.  Thus, in the first week, my great

guard was to avoid every the least offence against Temperance,

leaving the other virtues to their ordinary chance, only marking

every evening the faults of the day.  Thus, if in the first week

I could keep my first line, marked T, clear of spots, I suppos'd

the habit of that virtue so much strengthen'd and its opposite

weaken'd, that I might venture extending my attention to include

the next, and for the following week keep both lines clear of spots. 

Proceeding thus to the last, I could go thro' a course compleat

in thirteen weeks, and four courses in a year.  And like him who,

having a garden to weed, does not attempt to eradicate all the bad

herbs at once, which would exceed his reach and his strength, but works

on one of the beds at a time, and, having accomplish'd the first,

proceeds to a second, so I should have, I hoped, the encouraging

pleasure of seeing on my pages the progress I made in virtue,

by clearing successively my lines of their spots, till in the end,

by a number of courses, I should he happy in viewing a clean book,

after a thirteen weeks' daily examination.



This my little book had for its motto these lines from Addison's Cato:



          "Here will I hold.  If there's a power above us

          (And that there is all nature cries aloud

          Thro' all her works), He must delight in virtue;

          And that which he delights in must be happy."



Another from Cicero,



          "O vitae Philosophia dux! O virtutum indagatrix

          expultrixque vitiorum! Unus dies, bene et ex praeceptis

          tuis actus, peccanti immortalitati est anteponendus."



Another from the Proverbs of Solomon, speaking of wisdom or virtue:



          "Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand

          riches and honour.  Her ways are ways of pleasantness,

          and all her paths are peace." iii. 16, 17.



And conceiving God to be the fountain of wisdom, I thought it

right and necessary to solicit his assistance for obtaining it;

to this end I formed the following little prayer, which was prefix'd

to my tables of examination, for daily use.



"O powerful Goodness! bountiful Father! merciful Guide!

increase in me that wisdom which discovers my truest interest. 

strengthen my resolutions to perform what that wisdom dictates. 

Accept my kind offices to thy other children as the only return

in my power for thy continual favors to me."



I used also sometimes a little prayer which I took from Thomson's Poems,

viz.:



          "Father of light and life, thou Good Supreme!

          O teach me what is good; teach me Thyself!

          Save me from folly, vanity, and vice,

          From every low pursuit; and fill my soul

          With knowledge, conscious peace, and virtue pure;

          Sacred, substantial, never-fading bliss!"



The precept of Order requiring that every part of my business should

have its allotted time, one page in my little book contain'd the

following scheme of employment for the twenty-four hours of a natural day:



     THE MORNING.            {  5 } Rise, wash, and address

                             {    } Powerful Goodness!  Contrive

Question.  What good  shall  {  6 } day's business, and take the

I do this day?               {    } resolution of the day; prose-

                             {  7 } cute the present study, and

                             {    } breakfast.

                                8 }

                                9 } Work.

                               10 }

                               11 }



     NOON.                   { 12 } Read, or overlook my ac-

                             {  1 } counts, and dine.

                                2 }

                                3 } Work.

                                4 }

                                5 }



     EVENING.                {  6 } Put things in their places.

                             {  7 } Supper.  Music or diversion,

Question.  What good have    {  8 } or conversation.  Examination

I done to-day?               {  9 } of the day.

                             { 10 }

                             { 11 }

                             { 12 }



     NIGHT.                  {  1 } Sleep.

                             {  2 }

                             {  3 }

                             {  4 }



I enter'd upon the execution of this plan for self-examination,

and continu'd it with occasional intermissions for some time. 

I was surpris'd to find myself so much fuller of faults than I

had imagined; but I had the satisfaction of seeing them diminish. 

To avoid the trouble of renewing now and then my little book, which,

by scraping out the marks on the paper of old faults to make room

for new ones in a new course, became full of holes, I transferr'd

my tables and precepts to the ivory leaves of a memorandum book,

on which the lines were drawn with red ink, that made a durable stain,

and on those lines I mark'd my faults with a black-lead pencil,

which marks I could easily wipe out with a wet sponge.  After a

while I went thro' one course only in a year, and afterward only

one in several years, till at length I omitted them entirely,

being employ'd in voyages and business abroad, with a multiplicity

of affairs that interfered; but I always carried my little book

with me.



My scheme of ORDER gave me the most trouble; and I found that, tho'

it might be practicable where a man's business was such as to leave

him the disposition of his time, that of a journeyman printer,

for instance, it was not possible to be exactly observed by a master,

who must mix with the world, and often receive people of business

at their own hours.  Order, too, with regard to places for things,

papers, etc., I found extreamly difficult to acquire.  I had not

been early accustomed to it, and, having an exceeding good memory,

I was not so sensible of the inconvenience attending want of method. 

This article, therefore, cost me so much painful attention, and my faults

in it vexed me so much, and I made so little progress in amendment,

and had such frequent relapses, that I was almost ready to give up

the attempt, and content myself with a faulty character in that respect,

like the man who, in buying an ax of a smith, my neighbour,

desired to have the whole of its surface as bright as the edge. 

The smith consented to grind it bright for him if he would turn

the wheel; he turn'd, while the smith press'd the broad face of

the ax hard and heavily on the stone, which made the turning of it

very fatiguing.  The man came every now and then from the wheel to see

how the work went on, and at length would take his ax as it was,

without farther grinding.  "No," said the smith, "turn on, turn on;

we shall have it bright by-and-by; as yet, it is only speckled." 

"Yes," said the man, "but I think I like a speckled ax best." 

And I believe this may have been the case with many, who, having,

for want of some such means as I employ'd, found the difficulty

of obtaining good and breaking bad habits in other points of vice

and virtue, have given up the struggle, and concluded that "a

speckled ax was best"; for something, that pretended to be reason,

was every now and then suggesting to me that such extream nicety as I

exacted of myself might be a kind of foppery in morals, which, if it

were known, would make me ridiculous; that a perfect character

might be attended with the inconvenience of being envied and hated;

and that a benevolent man should allow a few faults in himself,

to keep his friends in countenance.



In truth, I found myself incorrigible with respect to Order;

and now I am grown old, and my memory bad, I feel very sensibly

the want of it.  But, on the whole, tho' I never arrived at

the perfection I had been so ambitious of obtaining, but fell far

short of it, yet I was, by the endeavour, a better and a happier

man than I otherwise should have been if I had not attempted it;

as those who aim at perfect writing by imitating the engraved copies,

tho' they never reach the wish'd-for excellence of those copies,

their hand is mended by the endeavor, and is tolerable while it

continues fair and legible.



It may be well my posterity should be informed that to this

little artifice, with the blessing of God, their ancestor ow'd the

constant felicity of his life, down to his 79th year, in which this

is written.  What reverses may attend the remainder is in the hand

of Providence; but, if they arrive, the reflection on past happiness

enjoy'd ought to help his bearing them with more resignation. 

To Temperance he ascribes his long-continued health, and what is

still left to him of a good constitution; to Industry and Frugality,

the early easiness of his circumstances and acquisition of his fortune,

with all that knowledge that enabled him to be a useful citizen,

and obtained for him some degree of reputation among the learned;

to Sincerity and Justice, the confidence of his country,

and the honorable employs it conferred upon him; and to the joint

influence of the whole mass of the virtues, even in the imperfect

state he was able to acquire them, all that evenness of temper,

and that cheerfulness in conversation, which makes his company

still sought for, and agreeable even to his younger acquaintance. 

I hope, therefore, that some of my descendants may follow the example

and reap the benefit.



It will be remark'd that, tho' my scheme was not wholly without religion,

there was in it no mark of any of the distingishing tenets of any

particular sect.  I had purposely avoided them; for, being fully

persuaded of the utility and excellency of my method, and that it

might be serviceable to people in all religions, and intending

some time or other to publish it, I would not have any thing

in it that should prejudice any one, of any sect, against it. 

I purposed writing a little comment on each virtue, in which I

would have shown the advantages of possessing it, and the mischiefs

attending its opposite vice; and I should have called my book THE

ART OF VIRTUE,<7> because it would have shown the means and manner

of obtaining virtue, which would have distinguished it from the mere

exhortation to be good, that does not instruct and indicate the means,

but is like the apostle's man of verbal charity, who only without

showing to the naked and hungry how or where they might get clothes

or victuals, exhorted them to be fed and clothed.--James ii.  15, 16.



     <7> Nothing so likely to make a man's fortune as virtue.

         --[Marg. note.]



But it so happened that my intention of writing and publishing this

comment was never fulfilled.  I did, indeed, from time to time,

put down short hints of the sentiments, reasonings, etc., to be made

use of in it, some of which I have still by me; but the necessary

close attention to private business in the earlier part of thy life,

and public business since, have occasioned my postponing it; for,

it being connected in my mind with a great and extensive project,

that required the whole man to execute, and which an unforeseen

succession of employs prevented my attending to, it has hitherto

remain'd unfinish'd.



In this piece it was my design to explain and enforce this doctrine,

that vicious actions are not hurtful because they are forbidden,

but forbidden because they are hurtful, the nature of man

alone considered; that it was, therefore, every one's interest to be

virtuous who wish'd to be happy even in this world; and I should,

from this circumstance (there being always in the world a number

of rich merchants, nobility, states, and princes, who have need

of honest instruments for the management of their affairs,

and such being so rare), have endeavored to convince young persons

that no qualities were so likely to make a poor man's fortune

as those of probity and integrity.



My list of virtues contain'd at first but twelve; but a Quaker

friend having kindly informed me that I was generally thought proud;

that my pride show'd itself frequently in conversation; that I

was not content with being in the right when discussing any point,

but was overbearing, and rather insolent, of which he convinc'd

me by mentioning several instances; I determined endeavouring

to cure myself, if I could, of this vice or folly among the rest,

and I added Humility to my list) giving an extensive meaning to

the word.



I cannot boast of much success in acquiring the reality of this virtue,

but I had a good deal with regard to the appearance of it. 

I made it a rule to forbear all direct contradiction to the

sentiments of others, and all positive assertion of my own. 

I even forbid myself, agreeably to the old laws of our Junto,

the use of every word or expression in the language that imported

a fix'd opinion, such as certainly, undoubtedly, etc., and I adopted,

instead of them, I conceive, I apprehend, or I imagine a thing to be

so or so; or it so appears to me at present.  When another asserted

something that I thought an error, I deny'd myself the pleasure

of contradicting him abruptly, and of showing immediately some

absurdity in his proposition; and in answering I began by observing

that in certain cases or circumstances his opinion would be right,

but in the present case there appear'd or seem'd to me some difference,

etc.  I soon found the advantage of this change in my manner;

the conversations I engag'd in went on more pleasantly.  The modest

way in which I propos'd my opinions procur'd them a readier recep tion

and less contradiction; I had less mortification when I was found

to be in the wrong, and I more easily prevail'd with others to give

up their mistakes and join with me when I happened to be in the right.



And this mode, which I at first put on with some violence to

natural inclination, became at length so easy, and so habitual

to me, that perhaps for these fifty years past no one has ever

heard a dogmatical expression escape me.  And to this habit (after

my character of integrity) I think it principally owing that I

had early so much weight with my fellow-citizens when I proposed

new institutions, or alterations in the old, and so much influence

in public councils when I became a member; for I was but a bad speaker,

never eloquent, subject to much hesitation in my choice of words,

hardly correct in language, and yet I generally carried my points.



In reality, there is, perhaps, no one of our natural passions

so hard to subdue as pride.  Disguise it, struggle with it,

beat it down, stifle it, mortify it as much as one pleases, it is

still alive, and will every now and then peep out and show itself;

you will see it, perhaps, often in this history; for, even if I

could conceive that I had compleatly overcome it, I should probably

be proud of my humility.



[Thus far written at Passy, 1741.]



["I am now about to write at home, August, 1788, but can not have

the help expected from my papers, many of them being lost in the war. 

I have, however, found the following."]<8>



     <8>This is a marginal memorandum.--B.



HAVING mentioned a great and extensive project which I had

conceiv'd, it seems proper that some account should be here

given of that project and its object.  Its first rise in my

mind appears in the following little paper, accidentally preserv'd, viz.:



Observations on my reading history, in Library, May 19th, 1731.



"That the great affairs of the world, the wars, revolutions,

etc., are carried on and affected by parties.



"That the view of these parties is their present general interest,

or what they take to be such.



"That the different views of these different parties occasion

all confusion.



"That while a party is carrying on a general design, each man has

his particular private interest in view.



"That as soon as a party has gain'd its general point, each member

becomes intent upon his particular interest; which, thwarting others,

breaks that party into divisions, and occasions more confusion.



"That few in public affairs act from a meer view of the good of

their country, whatever they may pretend; and, tho' their actings

bring real good to their country, yet men primarily considered

that their own and their country's interest was united, and did

not act from a principle of benevolence.



"That fewer still, in public affairs, act with a view to the good

of mankind.



"There seems to me at present to be great occasion for raising

a United Party for Virtue, by forming the virtuous and good men

of all nations into a regular body, to be govern'd by suitable

good and wise rules, which good and wise men may probably be more

unanimous in their obedience to, than common people are to common laws.



"I at present think that whoever attempts this aright, and is

well qualified, can not fail of pleasing God, and of meeting

with success.  B. F."



Revolving this project in my mind, as to be undertaken hereafter,

when my circumstances should afford me the necessary leisure,

I put down from time to time, on pieces of paper, such thoughts

as occurr'd to me respecting it.  Most of these are lost; but I find

one purporting to be the substance of an intended creed) containing,

as I thought, the essentials of every known religion, and being free

of every thing that might shock the professors of any religion. 

It is express'd in these words, viz.:



"That there is one God, who made all things.



"That he governs the world by his providence.



"That he ought to be worshiped by adoration, prayer, and thanksgiving.



"But that the most acceptable service of God is doing good to man.



"That the soul is immortal.



"And that God will certainly reward virtue and punish vice either

here or hereafter."<9>



     <9> In the Middle Ages, Franklin, if such a phenomenon as

         Franklin were possible in the Middle Ages, would

         probably have been the founder of a monastic order.--B.



My ideas at that time were, that the sect should be begun and

spread at first among young and single men only; that each person

to be initiated should not only declare his assent to such creed,

but should have exercised himself with the thirteen weeks'

examination and practice of the virtues) as in the before-mention'd model;

that the existence of such a society should he kept a secret,

till it was become considerable, to prevent solicitations

for the admission of improper persons, but that the members

should each of them search among his acquaintance for ingenuous,

well-disposed youths, to whom, with prudent caution, the scheme

should be grad ually communicated; that the members should engage

to afford their advice, assistance, and support to each other

in promoting one another's interests, business, and advancement

in life; that, for distinction, we should be call'd The Society of

the Free and Easy:  free, as being, by the general practice and habit

of the virtues, free from the dominion of vice; and particularly

by the practice of industry and frugality, free from debt, which

exposes a man to confinement, and a species of slavery to his creditors.



This is as much as I can now recollect of the project,

except that I communicated it in part to two young men, who adopted

it with some enthusiasm; but my then narrow circumstances,

and the necessity I was under of sticking close to my business,

occasion'd my postponing the further prosecution of it at that time;

and my multifarious occupations, public and private, induc'd me

to continue postponing, so that it has been omitted till I have no

longer strength or activity left sufficient for such an enterprise;

tho' I am still of opinion that it was a practicable scheme,

and might have been very useful, by forming a great number of

good citizens; and I was not discourag'd by the seeming magnitude

of the undertaking, as I have always thought that one man of tolerable

abilities may work great changes, and accomplish great affairs

among mankind, if he first forms a good plan, and, cutting off all

amusements or other employments that would divert his attention,

makes the execution of that same plan his sole study and business.



In 1732 I first publish'd my Almanack, under the name of Richard Saunders;

it was continu'd by me about twenty-five years, commonly call'd

Poor Richard's Almanac.  I endeavor'd to make it both entertaining

and useful, and it accordingly came to be in such demand, that I reap'd

considerable profit from it, vending annually near ten thousand. 

And observing that it was generally read, scarce any neighborhood

in the province being without it, I consider'd it as a proper vehicle

for conveying instruction among the common people, who bought scarcely

any other books; I therefore filled all the little spaces that occurr'd

between the remarkable days in the calendar with proverbial sentences,

chiefly such as inculcated industry and frugality, as the means

of procuring wealth, and thereby securing virtue; it being more

difficult for a man in want, to act always honestly, as, to use

here one of those proverbs, it is hard for an empty sack to stand up-right.



These proverbs, which contained the wisdom of many ages and nations,

I assembled and form'd into a connected discourse prefix'd to the

Almanack of 1757, as the harangue of a wise old man to the people

attending an auction.  The bringing all these scatter'd counsels

thus into a focus enabled them to make greater impression. 

The piece, being universally approved, was copied in all the

newspapers of the Continent; reprinted in Britain on a broad side,

to be stuck up in houses; two translations were made of it in French,

and great numbers bought by the clergy and gentry, to distribute

gratis among their poor parishioners and tenants.  In Pennsylvania,

as it discouraged useless expense in foreign superfluities, some thought

it had its share of influence in producing that growing plenty

of money which was observable for several years after its publication.



I considered my newspaper, also, as another means of communicating

instruction, and in that view frequently reprinted in it extracts

from the Spectator, and other moral writers; and sometimes publish'd

little pieces of my own, which had been first compos'd for reading

in our Junto.  Of these are a Socratic dialogue, tending to prove that,

whatever might be his parts and abilities, a vicious man could not

properly be called a man of sense; and a discourse on self-denial,

showing that virtue was not secure till its practice became a habitude,

and was free from the opposition of contrary inclinations. 

These may be found in the papers about the beginning Of 1735.



In the conduct of my newspaper, I carefully excluded all libelling

and personal abuse, which is of late years become so disgraceful

to our country.  Whenever I was solicited to insert anything

of that kind, and the writers pleaded, as they generally did,

the liberty of the press, and that a newspaper was like a stagecoach,

in which any one who would pay had a right to a place, my answer was,

that I would print the piece separately if desired, and the author

might have as many copies as he pleased to distribute himself,

but that I would not take upon me to spread his detraction;

and that, having contracted with my subscribers to furnish them

with what might be either useful or entertaining, I could not fill

their papers with private altercation, in which they had no concern,

without doing them manifest injustice.  Now, many of our printers make

no scruple of gratifying the malice of individuals by false accusations

of the fairest characters among ourselves, augmenting animosity

even to the producing of duels; and are, moreover, so indiscreet

as to print scurrilous reflections on the government of neighboring

states, and even on the conduct of our best national allies,

which may be attended with the most pernicious consequences. 

These things I mention as a caution to young printers, and that

they may be encouraged not to pollute their presses and disgrace

their profession by such infamous practices, but refuse steadily,

as they may see by my example that such a course of conduct will not,

on the whole, be injurious to their interests.



In 1733 I sent one of my journeymen to Charleston, South Carolina,

where a printer was wanting.  I furnish'd him with a press and letters,

on an agreement of partnership, by which I was to receive one-third

of the profits of the business, paying one-third of the expense. 

He was a man of learning, and honest but ignorant in matters

of account; and, tho' he sometimes made me remittances, I could get

no account from him, nor any satisfactory state of our partnership

while he lived.  On his decease, the business was continued by

his widow, who, being born and bred in Holland, where, as I have been

inform'd, the knowledge of accounts makes a part of female education,

she not only sent me as clear a state as she could find of the

transactions past, but continued to account with the greatest

regularity and exactness every quarter afterwards, and managed

the business with such success, that she not only brought up reputably

a family of children, but, at the expiration of the term, was able

to purchase of me the printing-house, and establish her son in it.



I mention this affair chiefly for the sake of recommending that branch

of education for our young females, as likely to be of more use

to them and their children, in case of widowhood, than either music

or dancing, by preserving them from losses by imposition of crafty men,

and enabling them to continue, perhaps, a profitable mercantile house,

with establish'd correspondence, till a son is grown up fit to undertake

and go on with it, to the lasting advantage and enriching of the family.



About the year 1734 there arrived among us from Ireland a young

Presbyterian preacher, named Hemphill, who delivered with a

good voice, and apparently extempore, most excellent discourses,

which drew together considerable numbers of different persuasion,

who join'd in admiring them.  Among the rest, I became one of his

constant hearers, his sermons pleasing me, as they had little

of the dogmatical kind, but inculcated strongly the practice

of virtue, or what in the religious stile are called good works. 

Those, however, of our congregation, who considered themselves

as orthodox Presbyterians, disapprov'd his doctrine, and were join'd

by most of the old clergy, who arraign'd him of heterodoxy before

the synod, in order to have him silenc'd. I became his zealous partisan,

and contributed all I could to raise a party in his favour, and we

combated for him a while with some hopes of success.  There was much

scribbling pro and con upon the occasion; and finding that, tho'

an elegant preacher, he was but a poor writer, I lent him my pen

and wrote for him two or three pamphlets, and one piece in the Gazette

of April, 1735.  Those pamphlets, as is generally the case with

controversial writings, tho' eagerly read at the time, were soon

out of vogue, and I question whether a single copy of them now exists.



During the contest an unlucky occurrence hurt his cause exceedingly. 

One of our adversaries having heard him preach a sermon that was

much admired, thought he had somewhere read the sermon before,

or at least a part of it.  On search he found that part quoted

at length, in one of the British Reviews, from a discourse

of Dr. Foster's. This detection gave many of our party disgust,

who accordingly abandoned his cause, and occasion'd our more speedy

discomfiture in the synod.  I stuck by him, however, as I rather

approv'd his giving us good sermons compos'd by others, than bad

ones of his own manufacture, tho' the latter was the practice

of our common teachers.  He afterward acknowledg'd to me that none

of those he preach'd were his own; adding, that his memory was such

as enabled him to retain and repeat any sermon after one reading only. 

On our defeat, he left us in search elsewhere of better fortune,

and I quitted the congregation, never joining it after, tho' I continu'd

many years my subscription for the support of its ministers.



I had begun in 1733 to study languages; I soon made myself so much

a master of the French as to be able to read the books with ease. 

I then undertook the Italian.  An acquaintance, who was also

learning it, us'd often to tempt me to play chess with him. 

Finding this took up too much of the time I had to spare for study,

I at length refus'd to play any more, unless on this condition,

that the victor in every game should have a right to impose a task,

either in parts of the grammar to be got by heart, or in translations,

etc., which tasks the vanquish'd was to perform upon honour,

before our next meeting.  As we play'd pretty equally, we thus beat

one another into that language.  I afterwards with a little painstaking,

acquir'd as much of the Spanish as to read their books also.



I have already mention'd that I had only one year's instruction

in a Latin school, and that when very young, after which I neglected

that language entirely.  But, when I had attained an acquaintance

with the French, Italian, and Spanish, I was surpriz'd to find,

on looking over a Latin Testament, that I understood so much more

of that language than I had imagined, which encouraged me to apply

myself again to the study of it, and I met with more success,

as those preceding languages had greatly smooth'd my way.



From these circumstances, I have thought that there is some inconsistency

in our common mode of teaching languages.  We are told that it is

proper to begin first with the Latin, and, having acquir'd that,

it will be more easy to attain those modern languages which are

deriv'd from it; and yet we do not begin with the Greek, in order

more easily to acquire the Latin.  It is true that, if you can

clamber and get to the top of a staircase without using the steps,

you will more easily gain them in descending; but certainly, if you

begin with the lowest you will with more ease ascend to the top;

and I would therefore offer it to the consideration of those who

superintend the education of our youth, whether, since many of

those who begin with the Latin quit the same after spending some

years without having made any great proficiency, and what they have

learnt becomes almost useless, so that their time has been lost,

it would not have been better to have begun with the French,

proceeding to the Italian, etc.; for, tho', after spending the same time,

they should quit the study of languages and never arrive at

the Latin, they would, however, have acquired another tongue or two,

that, being in modern use, might be serviceable to them in common life.



After ten years' absence from Boston, and having become easy in

my circumstances, I made a journey thither to visit my relations,

which I could not sooner well afford.  In returning, I call'd at Newport

to see my brother, then settled there with his printing-house. Our

former differences were forgotten, and our meeting was very cordial

and affectionate.  He was fast declining in his health, and requested

of me that, in case of his death, which he apprehended not far distant,

I would take home his son, then but ten years of age, and bring him

up to the printing business.  This I accordingly perform'd, sending

him a few years to school before I took him into the office. 

His mother carried on the business till he was grown up, when I

assisted him with an assortment of new types, those of his father

being in a manner worn out.  Thus it was that I made my brother ample

amends for the service I had depriv'd him of by leaving him so early.



In 1736 I lost one of my sons, a fine boy of four years old,

by the small-pox, taken in the common way.  I long regretted bitterly,

and still regret that I had not given it to him by inoculation. 

This I mention for the sake of parents who omit that operation,

on the supposition that they should never forgive themselves

if a child died under it; my example showing that the regret

may be the same either way, and that, therefore, the safer should

be chosen.



Our club, the Junto, was found so useful, and afforded such satisfaction

to the members, that several were desirous of introducing their friends,

which could not well be done without exceeding what we had settled

as a convenient number, viz., twelve.  We had from the beginning

made it a rule to keep our institution a secret, which was pretty

well observ'd; the intention was to avoid applications of improper

persons for admittance, some of whom, perhaps, we might find

it difficult to refuse.  I was one of those who were against

any addition to our number, but, instead of it, made in writing

a proposal, that every member separately should endeavor to form

a subordinate club, with the same rules respecting queries,

etc., and without informing them of the connection with the Junto. 

The advantages proposed were, the improvement of so many more young

citizens by the use of our institutions; our better acquaintance

with the general sentiments of the inhabitants on any occasion,

as the Junto member might propose what queries we should desire,

and was to report to the Junto what pass'd in his separate club;

the promotion of our particular interests in business by more

extensive recommendation, and the increase of our influence

in public affairs, and our power of doing good by spreading thro'

the several clubs the sentiments of the Junto.



The project was approv'd, and every member undertook to form his club,

but they did not all succeed.  Five or six only were compleated,

which were called by different names, as the Vine, the Union,

the Band, etc.  They were useful to themselves, and afforded us a good

deal of amusement, information, and instruction, besides answering,

in some considerable degree, our views of influencing the public

opinion on particular occasions, of which I shall give some instances

in course of time as they happened.



My first promotion was my being chosen, in 1736, clerk of the

General Assembly.  The choice was made that year without opposition;

but the year following, when I was again propos'd (the choice,

like that of the members, being annual), a new member made a long

speech against me, in order to favour some other candidate. 

I was, however, chosen, which was the more agreeable to me, as,

besides the pay for the immediate service as clerk, the place gave

me a better opportunity of keeping up an interest among the members,

which secur'd to me the business of printing the votes, laws, paper money,

and other occasional jobbs for the public, that, on the whole,

were very profitable.



I therefore did not like the opposition of this new member, who was

a gentleman of fortune and education, with talents that were likely

to give him, in time, great influence in the House, which, indeed,

afterwards happened.  I did not, however, aim at gaining his

favour by paying any servile respect to him, but, after some time,

took this other method.  Having heard that he had in his library

a certain very scarce and curious book, I wrote a note to him,

expressing my desire of perusing that book, and requesting he

would do me the favour of lending it to me for a few days. 

He sent it immediately, and I return'd it in about a week

with another note, expressing strongly my sense of the favour. 

When we next met in the House, he spoke to me (which he had

never done before), and with great civility; and he ever after

manifested a readiness to serve me on all occasions, so that we

became great friends, and our friendship continued to his death. 

This is another instance of the truth of an old maxim I had learned,

which says, "He that has once done you a kindness will be more

ready to do you another, than he whom you yourself have obliged." 

And it shows how much more profitable it is prudently to remove,

than to resent, return, and continue inimical proceedings.



