







In 1751, Dr. Thomas Bond, a particular friend of mine, conceived the idea

of establishing a hospital in Philadelphia (a very beneficent design,

which has been ascrib'd to me, but was originally his), for the reception

and cure of poor sick persons, whether inhabitants of the province

or strangers.  He was zealous and active in endeavouring to procure

subscriptions for it, but the proposal being a novelty in America,

and at first not well understood, he met with but small success.



At length he came to me with the compliment that he found there

was no such thing as carrying a public-spirited project through

without my being concern'd in it.  "For," says he, "I am often

ask'd by those to whom I propose subscribing, Have you consulted

Franklin upon this business?  And what does he think of it? 

And when I tell them that I have not (supposing it rather out of your

line), they do not subscribe, but say they will consider of it." 

I enquired into the nature and probable utility of his scheme,

and receiving from him a very satisfactory explanation, I not only

subscrib'd to it myself, but engag'd heartily in the design of procuring

subscriptions from others.  Previously, however, to the solicitation,

I endeavoured to prepare the minds of the people by writing on the

subject in the newspapers, which was my usual custom in such cases,

but which he had omitted.



The subscriptions afterwards were more free and generous;

but, beginning to flag, I saw they would be insufficient without

some assistance from the Assembly, and therefore propos'd to

petition for it, which was done.  The country members did not at

first relish the project; they objected that it could only be

serviceable to the city, and therefore the citizens alone should

be at the expense of it; and they doubted whether the citizens

themselves generally approv'd of it.  My allegation on the contrary,

that it met with such approbation as to leave no doubt of our

being able to raise two thousand pounds by voluntary donations,

they considered as a most extravagant supposition, and utterly impossible.



On this I form'd my plan; and asking leave to bring in a bill for

incorporating the contributors according to the prayer of their petition,

and granting them a blank sum of money, which leave was obtained

chiefly on the consideration that the House could throw the bill out

if they did not like it, I drew it so as to make the important clause

a conditional one, viz., "And be it enacted, by the authority aforesaid,

that when the said contributors shall have met and chosen their

managers and treasurer, and shall have raised by their contributions

a capital stock of ----- value (the yearly interest of which is to be

applied to the accommodating of the sick poor in the said hospital,

free of charge for diet, attendance, advice, and medicines), and

shall make the same appear to the satisfaction of the speaker of

the Assembly for the time being, that then it shall and may be lawful

for the said speaker, and be is hereby required, to sign an order

on the provincial treasurer for the payment of two thousand pounds,

in two yearly payments, to the treasurer of the said hospital,

to be applied to the founding, building, and finishing of the same."



This condition carried the bill through; for the members, who had

oppos'd the grant, and now conceiv'd they might have the credit

of being charitable without the expence, agreed to its passage;

and then, in soliciting subscriptions among the people, we urg'd

the conditional promise of the law as an additional motive to give,

since every man's donation would be doubled; thus the clause

work'd both ways.  The subscriptions accordingly soon exceeded

the requisite sum, and we claim'd and receiv'd the public gift,

which enabled us to carry the design into execution.  A convenient

and handsome building was soon erected; the institution has

by constant experience been found useful, and flourishes to

this day; and I do not remember any of my political manoeuvres,

the success of which gave me at the time more pleasure, or wherein,

after thinking of it, I more easily excus'd myself for having made

some use of cunning.



It was about this time that another projector, the Rev. Gilbert Tennent,

came to me with a request that I would assist him in procuring

a subscription for erecting a new meeting-house. It was to he for

the use of a congregation he had gathered among the Presbyterians,

who were originally disciples of Mr. Whitefield.  Unwilling to

make myself disagreeable to my fellow-citizens by too frequently

soliciting their contributions, I absolutely refus'd. He then

desired I would furnish him with a list of the names of persons I

knew by experience to be generous and public-spirited. I thought

it would be unbecoming in me, after their kind compliance with

my solicitations, to mark them out to be worried by other beggars,

and therefore refus'd also to give such a list.  He then desir'd I

would at least give him my advice.  "That I will readily do," said I;

"and, in the first place, I advise you to apply to all those whom

you know will give something; next, to those whom you are uncertain

whether they will give any thing or not, and show them the list

of those who have given; and, lastly, do not neglect those who you

are sure will give nothing, for in some of them you may be mistaken." 

He laugh'd and thank'd me, and said he would take my advice. 

He did so, for he ask'd of everybody, and he obtained a much

larger sum than he expected, with which he erected the capacious

and very elegant meeting-house that stands in Arch-street.



Our city, tho' laid out with a beautiful regularity, the streets large,

strait, and crossing each other at right angles, had the disgrace

of suffering those streets to remain long unpav'd, and in wet

weather the wheels of heavy carriages plough'd them into a quagmire,

so that it was difficult to cross them; and in dry weather the dust

was offensive.  I had liv'd near what was call'd the Jersey Market,

and saw with pain the inhabitants wading in mud while purchasing

their provisions.  A strip of ground down the middle of that

market was at length pav'd with brick, so that, being once

in the market, they had firm footing, but were often over shoes

in dirt to get there.  By talking and writing on the subject,

I was at length instrumental in getting the street pav'd with stone

between the market and the brick'd foot-pavement, that was on each

side next the houses.  This, for some time, gave an easy access

to the market dry-shod; but, the rest of the street not being

pav'd, whenever a carriage came out of the mud upon this pavement,

it shook off and left its dirt upon it, and it was soon cover'd

with mire, which was not remov'd, the city as yet having no scavengers.



After some inquiry I found a poor industrious man, who was willing

to undertake keeping the pavement clean, by sweeping it twice

a week, carrying off the dirt from before all the neighbours'

doors, for the sum of sixpence per month, to be paid by each house. 

I then wrote and printed a paper setting forth the advantages

to the neighbourhood that might be obtain'd by this small expense;

the greater ease in keeping our houses clean, so much dirt not being

brought in by people's feet; the benefit to the shops by more custom,

etc., etc., as buyers could more easily get at them; and by not having,

in windy weather, the dust blown in upon their goods, etc., etc. 

I sent one of these papers to each house, and in a day or two went

round to see who would subscribe an agreement to pay these sixpences;

it was unanimously sign'd, and for a time well executed. 

All the inhabitants of the city were delighted with the cleanliness

of the pavement that surrounded the market, it being a convenience

to all, and this rais'd a general desire to have all the streets paved,

and made the people more willing to submit to a tax for that purpose.



After some time I drew a bill for paving the city, and brought it

into the Assembly.  It was just before I went to England, in 1757,

and did not pass till I was gone.<12> and then with an alteration

in the mode of assessment, which I thought not for the better,

but with an additional provision for lighting as well as paving

the streets, which was a great improvement.  It was by a private person,

the late Mr. John Clifton, his giving a sample of the utility of lamps,

by placing one at his door, that the people were first impress'd

with the idea of enlighting all the city.  The honour of this

public benefit has also been ascrib'd to me but it belongs truly

to that gentleman.  I did but follow his example, and have only

some merit to claim respecting the form of our lamps, as differing

from the globe lamps we were at first supply'd with from London. 

Those we found inconvenient in these respects:  they admitted

no air below; the smoke, therefore, did not readily go out above,

but circulated in the globe, lodg'd on its inside, and soon

obstructed the light they were intended to afford; giving, besides,

the daily trouble of wiping them clean; and an accidental stroke

on one of them would demolish it, and render it totally useless. 

I therefore suggested the composing them of four flat panes,

with a long funnel above to draw up the smoke, and crevices

admitting air below, to facilitate the ascent of the smoke; by this

means they were kept clean, and did not grow dark in a few hours,

as the London lamps do, but continu'd bright till morning,

and an accidental stroke would generally break but a single pane,

easily repair'd.



     <12> See votes.



I have sometimes wonder'd that the Londoners did not, from the

effect holes in the bottom of the globe lamps us'd at Vauxhall

have in keeping them clean, learn to have such holes in their

street lamps.  But, these holes being made for another purpose,

viz., to communicate flame more suddenly to the wick by a little

flax hanging down thro' them, the other use, of letting in air,

seems not to have been thought of; and therefore, after the lamps have

been lit a few hours, the streets of London are very poorly illuminated.



The mention of these improvements puts me in mind of one I propos'd, when

in London, to Dr. Fothergill, who was among the best men I have known,

and a great promoter of useful projects.  I had observ'd that the streets,

when dry, were never swept, and the light dust carried away;

but it was suffer'd to accumulate till wet weather reduc'd it to mud,

and then, after lying some days so deep on the pavement that there

was no crossing but in paths kept clean by poor people with brooms,

it was with great labour rak'd together and thrown up into carts

open above, the sides of which suffer'd some of the slush at every

jolt on the pavement to shake out and fall, sometimes to the annoyance

of foot-passengers. The reason given for not sweeping the dusty

streets was, that the dust would fly into the windows of shops and houses.



An accidental occurrence had instructed me how much sweeping might

be done in a little time.  I found at my door in Craven-street,

one morning, a poor woman sweeping my pavement with a birch broom;

she appeared very pale and feeble, as just come out of a fit

of sickness.  I ask'd who employ'd her to sweep there; she said,

"Nobody, but I am very poor and in distress, and I sweeps before

gentlefolkses doors, and hopes they will give me something."  I bid

her sweep the whole street clean, and I would give her a shilling;

this was at nine o'clock; at 12 she came for the shilling. 

From the slowness I saw at first in her working, I could scarce believe

that the work was done so soon, and sent my servant to examine it,

who reported that the whole street was swept perfectly clean,

and all the dust plac'd in the gutter, which was in the middle;

and the next rain wash'd it quite away, so that the pavement and even

the kennel were perfectly clean.



I then judg'd that, if that feeble woman could sweep such a street in

three hours, a strong, active man might have done it in half the time. 

And here let me remark the convenience of having but one gutter

in such a narrow street, running down its middle, instead of two,

one on each side, near the footway; for where all the rain that

falls on a street runs from the sides and meets in the middle,

it forms there a current strong enough to wash away all the mud it

meets with; but when divided into two channels, it is often too weak

to cleanse either, and only makes the mud it finds more fluid,

so that the wheels of carriages and feet of horses throw and dash it

upon the foot-pavement, which is thereby rendered foul and slippery,

and sometimes splash it upon those who are walking.  My proposal,

communicated to the good doctor, was as follows:



"For the more effectual cleaning and keeping clean the streets of

London and Westminster, it is proposed that the several watchmen be

contracted with to have the dust swept up in dry seasons, and the mud

rak'd up at other times, each in the several streets and lanes

of his round; that they be furnish'd with brooms and other proper

instruments for these purposes, to be kept at their respective stands,

ready to furnish the poor people they may employ in the service.



"That in the dry summer months the dust be all swept up into heaps

at proper distances, before the shops and windows of houses are

usually opened, when the scavengers, with close-covered carts,

shall also carry it all away.



"That the mud, when rak'd up, be not left in heaps to be spread

abroad again by the wheels of carriages and trampling of horses,

but that the scavengers be provided with bodies of carts, not plac'd

high upon wheels, but low upon sliders, with lattice bottoms, which,

being cover'd with straw, will retain the mud thrown into them,

and permit the water to drain from it, whereby it will become

much lighter, water making the greatest part of its weight;

these bodies of carts to be plac'd at convenient distances, and the

mud brought to them in wheel-barrows; they remaining where plac'd

till the mud is drain'd, and then horses brought to draw them away."



I have since had doubts of the practicability of the latter part

of this proposal, on account of the narrowness of some streets,

and the difficulty of placing the draining-sleds so as not to encumber

too much the passage; but I am still of opinion that the former,

requiring the dust to be swept up and carry'd away before the shops

are open, is very practicable in the summer, when the days are long;

for, in walking thro' the Strand and Fleet-street one morning at

seven o'clock, I observ'd there was not one shop open, tho' it had

been daylight and the sun up above three hours; the inhabitants

of London chusing voluntarily to live much by candle-light,

and sleep by sunshine, and yet often complain, a little absurdly,

of the duty on candles and the high price of tallow.



Some may think these trifling matters not worth minding or relating;

but when they consider that tho' dust blown into the eyes

of a single person, or into a single shop on a windy day,

is but of small importance, yet the great number of the instances

in a populous city, and its frequent repetitions give it weight

and consequence, perhaps they will not censure very severely those

who bestow some attention to affairs of this seemingly low nature. 

Human felicity is produc'd not so much by great pieces of good

fortune that seldom happen, as by little advantages that occur

every day.  Thus, if you teach a poor young man to shave himself,

and keep his razor in order, you may contribute more to the happiness

of his life than in giving him a thousand guineas.  The money may be

soon spent, the regret only remaining of having foolishly consumed it;

but in the other case, he escapes the frequent vexation of waiting

for barbers, and of their sometimes dirty fingers, offensive breaths,

and dull razors; he shaves when most convenient to him, and enjoys

daily the pleasure of its being done with a good instrument. 

With these sentiments I have hazarded the few preceding pages,

hoping they may afford hints which some time or other may be useful

to a city I love, having lived many years in it very happily,

and perhaps to some of our towns in America.



Having been for some time employed by the postmaster-general

of America as his comptroller in regulating several offices,

and bringing the officers to account, I was, upon his death

in 1753, appointed, jointly with Mr. William Hunter, to succeed him,

by a commission from the postmaster-general in England.  The American

office never had hitherto paid any thing to that of Britain. 

We were to have six hundred pounds a year between us, if we could make

that sum out of the profits of the office.  To do this, a variety

of improvements were necessary; some of these were inevitably at

first expensive, so that in the first four years the office became

above nine hundred pounds in debt to us.  But it soon after began

to repay us; and before I was displac'd by a freak of the ministers,

of which I shall speak hereafter, we had brought it to yield three times

as much clear revenue to the crown as the postoffice of Ireland. 

Since that imprudent transaction, they have receiv'd from it--

not one farthing!



The business of the postoffice occasion'd my taking a journey this

year to New England, where the College of Cambridge, of their

own motion, presented me with the degree of Master of Arts. 

Yale College, in Connecticut, had before made me a similar compliment. 

Thus, without studying in any college, I came to partake

of their honours.  They were conferr'd in consideration of my

improvements and discoveries in the electric branch of natural philosophy.



In 1754, war with France being again apprehended, a congress

of commissioners from the different colonies was, by an order

of the Lords of Trade, to be assembled at Albany, there to confer

with the chiefs of the Six Nations concerning the means of defending

both their country and ours.  Governor Hamilton, having receiv'd

this order, acquainted the House with it, requesting they would

furnish proper presents for the Indians, to be given on this occasion;

and naming the speaker (Mr. Norris) and myself to join Mr. Thomas Penn

and Mr. Secretary Peters as commissioners to act for Pennsylvania. 

The House approv'd the nomination, and provided the goods for the present,

and tho' they did not much like treating out of the provinces;

and we met the other commissioners at Albany about the middle of June.



In our way thither, I projected and drew a plan for the union

of all the colonies under one government, so far as might be

necessary for defense, and other important general purposes. 

As we pass'd thro' New York, I had there shown my project to Mr. James

Alexander and Mr. Kennedy, two gentlemen of great knowledge

in public affairs, and, being fortified by their approbation,

I ventur'd to lay it before the Congress.  It then appeared that

several of the commissioners had form'd plans of the same kind. 

A previous question was first taken, whether a union should

be established, which pass'd in the affirmative unanimously. 

A committee was then appointed, one member from each colony,

to consider the several plans and report.  Mine happen'd

to be preferr'd, and, with a few amendments, was accordingly reported.



By this plan the general government was to be administered by a

president-general, appointed and supported by the crown, and a grand

council was to be chosen by the representatives of the people

of the several colonies, met in their respective assemblies. 

The debates upon it in Congress went on daily, hand in hand with

the Indian business.  Many objections and difficulties were started,

but at length they were all overcome, and the plan was unanimously

agreed to, and copies ordered to be transmitted to the Board

of Trade and to the assemblies of the several provinces. 

Its fate was singular:  the assemblies did not adopt it, as they

all thought there was too much prerogative in it, and in England

it was judg'd to have too much of the democratic.



The Board of Trade therefore did not approve of it, nor recommend it

for the approbation of his majesty; but another scheme was form'd,

supposed to answer the same purpose better, whereby the governors

of the provinces, with some members of their respective councils,

were to meet and order the raising of troops, building of forts,

etc., and to draw on the treasury of Great Britain for the expense,

which was afterwards to be refunded by an act of Parliament laying

a tax on America.  My plan, with my reasons in support of it,

is to be found among my political papers that are printed.



Being the winter following in Boston, I had much conversation with

Governor Shirley upon both the plans.  Part of what passed between us

on the occasion may also be seen among those papers.  The different

and contrary reasons of dislike to my plan makes me suspect that it

was really the true medium; and I am still of opinion it would

have been happy for both sides the water if it had been adopted. 

The colonies, so united, would have been sufficiently strong to have

defended themselves; there would then have been no need of troops

from England; of course, the subsequent pretence for taxing America,

and the bloody contest it occasioned, would have been avoided. 

But such mistakes are not new; history is full of the errors of states

and princes.



          Look round the habitable world, how few

          Know their own good, or, knowing it, pursue!



Those who govern, having much business on their hands, do not

generally like to take the trouble of considering and carrying into

execution new projects.  The best public measures are therefore

seldom adopted from previous wisdom, but forc'd by the occasion.



The Governor of Pennsylvania, in sending it down to the Assembly,

express'd his approbation of the plan, "as appearing to him

to be drawn up with great clearness and strength of judgment,

and therefore recommended it as well worthy of their closest and

most serious attention."  The House, however, by the management

of a certain member, took it up when I happen'd to be absent,

which I thought not very fair, and reprobated it without paying

any attention to it at all, to my no small mortification.



In my journey to Boston this year, I met at New York with our

new governor, Mr. Morris, just arriv'd there from England, with whom

I had been before intimately acquainted.  He brought a commission

to supersede Mr. Hamilton, who, tir'd with the disputes his proprietary

instructions subjected him to, had resign'd. Mr. Morris ask'd me

if I thought he must expect as uncomfortable an administration. 

I said, "No; you may, on the contrary, have a very comfortable one,

if you will only take care not to enter into any dispute with

the Assembly."  "My dear friend," says he, pleasantly, "how can

you advise my avoiding disputes?  You know I love disputing;

it is one of my greatest pleasures; however, to show the regard

I have for your counsel, I promise you I will, if possible,

avoid them."  He had some reason for loving to dispute, being eloquent,

an acute sophister, and, therefore, generally successful in

argumentative conversation.  He had been brought up to it from a boy,

his father, as I have heard, accustoming his children to dispute with

one another for his diversion, while sitting at table after dinner;

but I think the practice was not wise; for, in the course of

my observation, these disputing, contradicting, and confuting people

are generally unfortunate in their affairs.  They get victory sometimes,

but they never get good will, which would be of more use to them. 

We parted, he going to Philadelphia, and I to Boston.



In returning, I met at New York with the votes of the Assembly,

by which it appear'd that, notwithstanding his promise to me,

he and the House were already in high contention; and it was a

continual battle between them as long as he retain'd the government. 

I had my share of it; for, as soon as I got back to my seat in

the Assembly, I was put on every committee for answering his speeches

and messages, and by the committees always desired to make the drafts. 

Our answers, as well as his messages, were often tart, and sometimes

indecently abusive; and, as he knew I wrote for the Assembly,

one might have imagined that, when we met, we could hardly avoid

cutting throats; but he was so good-natur'd a man that no personal

difference between him and me was occasion'd by the contest, and we

often din'd together.



One afternoon, in the height of this public quarrel, we met in

the street.  "Franklin," says he, "you must go home with me and spend

the evening; I am to have some company that you will like;" and,

taking me by the arm, he led me to his house.  In gay conversation

over our wine, after supper, he told us, jokingly, that he much

admir'd the idea of Sancho Panza, who, when it was proposed to give

him a government, requested it might be a government of blacks,

as then, if he could not agree with his people, he might sell them. 

One of his friends, who sat next to me, says, "Franklin, why

do you continue to side with these damn'd Quakers?  Had not you

better sell them?  The proprietor would give you a good price." 

"The governor," says I, "has not yet blacked them enough." 

He, indeed, had labored hard to blacken the Assembly in all

his messages, but they wip'd off his coloring as fast as he

laid it on, and plac'd it, in return, thick upon his own face;

so that, finding he was likely to be negrofied himself, he, as well

as Mr. Hamilton, grew tir'd of the contest, and quitted the government.



<13>These public quarrels were all at bottom owing to the proprietaries,

our hereditary governors, who, when any expense was to be incurred

for the defense of their province, with incredible meanness instructed

their deputies to pass no act for levying the necessary taxes,

unless their vast estates were in the same act expressly excused;

and they had even taken bonds of these deputies to observe

such instructions.  The Assemblies for three years held out against

this injustice, tho' constrained to bend at last.  At length

Captain Denny, who was Governor Morris's successor, ventured to disobey

those instructions; how that was brought about I shall show hereafter.



     <13> My acts in Morris's time, military, etc.--[Marg. note.]



But I am got forward too fast with my story:  there are still some

transactions to be mention'd that happened during the administration

of Governor Morris.



War being in a manner commenced with France, the government of

Massachusetts Bay projected an attack upon Crown Point, and sent

Mr. Quincy to Pennsylvania, and Mr. Pownall, afterward Governor Pownall,

to New York, to solicit assistance.  As I was in the Assembly,

knew its temper, and was Mr. Quincy's countryman, he appli'd to me

for my influence and assistance.  I dictated his address to them,

which was well receiv'd. They voted an aid of ten thousand pounds,

to be laid out in provisions.  But the governor refusing his

assent to their bill (which included this with other sums granted

for the use of the crown), unless a clause were inserted exempting

the proprietary estate from bearing any part of the tax that would

be necessary, the Assembly, tho' very desirous of making their grant

to New England effectual, were at a loss how to accomplish it. 

Mr. Quincy labored hard with the governor to obtain his assent,

but he was obstinate.



I then suggested a method of doing the business without the governor,

by orders on the trustees of the Loan Office, which, by law,

the Assembly had the right of drawing.  There was, indeed, little or

no money at that time in the office, and therefore I propos'd that

the orders should be payable in a year, and to bear an interest

of five per cent.  With these orders I suppos'd the provisions might

easily be purchas'd. The Assembly, with very little hesitation,

adopted the proposal.  The orders were immediately printed, and I

was one of the committee directed to sign and dispose of them. 

The fund for paying them was the interest of all the paper currency

then extant in the province upon loan, together with the revenue

arising from the excise, which being known to be more than sufficient,

they obtain'd instant credit, and were not only receiv'd in payment

for the provisions, but many money'd people, who had cash lying by them,

vested it in those orders, which they found advantageous, as they bore

interest while upon hand, and might on any occasion be used as money;

so that they were eagerly all bought up, and in a few weeks none of them

were to be seen.  Thus this important affair was by my means compleated. 

My Quincy return'd thanks to the Assembly in a handsome memorial,

went home highly pleas'd with the success of his embassy, and ever

after bore for me the most cordial and affectionate friendship.



The British government, not chusing to permit the union of the colonies

as propos'd at Albany, and to trust that union with their defense,

lest they should thereby grow too military, and feel their own strength,

suspicions and jealousies at this time being entertain'd of them,

sent over General Braddock with two regiments of regular English

troops for that purpose.  He landed at Alexandria, in Virginia,

and thence march'd to Frederictown, in Maryland, where he halted

for carriages.  Our Assembly apprehending, from some information,

that he had conceived violent prejudices against them, as averse

to the service, wish'd me to wait upon him, not as from them,

but as postmaster-general, under the guise of proposing to settle

with him the mode of conducting with most celerity and certainty

the despatches between him and the governors of the several provinces,

with whom he must necessarily have continual correspondence, and of

which they propos'd to pay the expense.  My son accompanied me on

this journey.



We found the general at Frederictown, waiting impatiently for

the return of those he had sent thro' the back parts of Maryland

and Virginia to collect waggons.  I stayed with him several days,

din'd with him daily, and had full opportunity of removing

all his prejudices, by the information of what the Assembly had

before his arrival actually done, and were still willing to do,

to facilitate his operations.  When I was about to depart, the returns

of waggons to be obtained were brought in, by which it appear'd

that they amounted only to twenty-five, and not all of those were

in serviceable condition.  The general and all the officers were

surpris'd, declar'd the expedition was then at an end, being impossible,

and exclaim'd against the ministers for ignorantly landing them in a

country destitute of the means of conveying their stores, baggage,

etc., not less than one hundred and fifty waggons being necessary.



I happened to say I thought it was a pity they had not been landed

rather in Pennsylvania, as in that country almost every farmer had

his waggon.  The general eagerly laid hold of my words, and said,

"Then you, sir, who are a man of interest there, can probably

procure them for us; and I beg you will undertake it."  I ask'd

what terms were to be offer'd the owners of the waggons; and I was

desir'd to put on paper the terms that appeared to me necessary. 

This I did, and they were agreed to, and a commission and instructions

accordingly prepar'd immediately.  What those terms were will appear

in the advertisement I publish'd as soon as I arriv'd at Lancaster,

which being, from the great and sudden effect it produc'd, a piece

of some curiosity, I shall insert it at length, as follows:



               "ADVERTISEMENT.

                        "LANCASTER, April 26, 1755.



"Whereas, one hundred and fifty waggons, with four horses to each waggon,

and fifteen hundred saddle or pack horses, are wanted for the service

of his majesty's forces now about to rendezvous at Will's Creek,

and his excellency General Braddock having been pleased to empower

me to contract for the hire of the same, I hereby give notice

that I shall attend for that purpose at Lancaster from this day

to next Wednesday evening, and at York from next Thursday morning

till Friday evening, where I shall be ready to agree for waggons

and teams, or single horses, on the following terms, viz.: I. That

there shall be paid for each waggon, with four good horses and

a driver, fifteen shillings per diem; and for each able horse

with a pack-saddle, or other saddle and furniture, two shillings

per diem; and for each able horse without a saddle, eighteen pence

per diem.  2.  That the pay commence from the time of their joining

the forces at Will's Creek, which must be on or before the 20th

of May ensuing, and that a reasonable allowance be paid over and

above for the time necessary for their travelling to Will's Creek

and home again after their discharge.  3.  Each waggon and team,

and every saddle or pack horse, is to be valued by indifferent

persons chosen between me and the owner; and in case of the loss of

any waggon, team, or other horse in the service, the price according

to such valuation is to be allowed and paid.  4.  Seven days'

pay is to be advanced and paid in hand by me to the owner of each

waggon and team, or horse, at the time of contracting, if required,

and the remainder to be paid by General Braddock, or by the paymaster

of the army, at the time of their discharge, or from time to time,

as it shall be demanded.  5.  No drivers of waggons, or persons

taking care of the hired horses, are on any account to be called

upon to do the duty of soldiers, or be otherwise employed than in

conducting or taking care of their carriages or horses.  6.  All oats,

Indian corn, or other forage that waggons or horses bring to the camp,

more than is necessary for the subsistence of the horses, is to be

taken for the use of the army, and a reasonable price paid for the same.



"Note.--My son, William Franklin, is empowered to enter into like

contracts with any person in Cumberland county.

                                        "B. FRANKLIN."



     "To the inhabitants of the Counties of Lancaster,

                    York and Cumberland.



"Friends and Countrymen,



"Being occasionally at the camp at Frederic a few days since,

I found the general and officers extremely exasperated on account

of their not being supplied with horses and carriages, which had

been expected from this province, as most able to furnish them;

but, through the dissensions between our governor and Assembly,

money had not been provided, nor any steps taken for that purpose.



"It was proposed to send an armed force immediately into these counties,

to seize as many of the best carriages and horses as should be wanted,

and compel as many persons into the service as would be necessary

to drive and take care of them.



"I apprehended that the progress of British soldiers through these

counties on such an occasion, especially considering the temper

they are in, and their resentment against us, would be attended

with many and great inconveniences to the inhabitants, and therefore

more willingly took the trouble of trying first what might be done

by fair and equitable means.  The people of these back counties

have lately complained to the Assembly that a sufficient currency

was wanting; you have an opportunity of receiving and dividing

among you a very considerable sum; for, if the service of this

expedition should continue, as it is more than probable it will,

for one hundred and twenty days, the hire of these waggons

and horses will amount to upward of thirty thousand pounds,

which will be paid you in silver and gold of the king's money.



"The service will be light and easy, for the army will scarce march

above twelve miles per day, and the waggons and baggage-horses, as

they carry those things that are absolutely necessary to the welfare

of the army, must march with the army, and no faster; and are,

for the army's sake, always placed where they can be most secure,

whether in a march or in a camp.



"If you are really, as I believe you are, good and loyal subjects

to his majesty, you may now do a most acceptable service, and make it

easy to yourselves; for three or four of such as can not separately

spare from the business of their plantations a waggon and four

horses and a driver, may do it together, one furnishing the waggon,

another one or two horses, and another the driver, and divide the pay

proportionately between you; but if you do not this service to your

king and country voluntarily, when such good pay and reasonable

terms are offered to you, your loyalty will be strongly suspected. 

The king's business must be done; so many brave troops, come so far

for your defense, must not stand idle through your backwardness

to do what may be reasonably expected from you; waggons and horses

must be had; violent measures will probably be used, and you

will be left to seek for a recompense where you can find it,

and your case, perhaps, be little pitied or regarded.



"I have no particular interest in this affair, as, except the

satisfaction of endeavoring to do good, I shall have only my labour

for my pains.  If this method of obtaining the waggons and horses

is not likely to succeed, I am obliged to send word to the general

in fourteen days; and I suppose Sir John St. Clair, the hussar,

with a body of soldiers, will immediately enter the province

for the purpose, which I shall be sorry to hear, because I

am very sincerely and truly your friend and well-wisher, B. FRANKLIN."





I received of the general about eight hundred pounds, to be

disbursed in advance-money to the waggon owners, etc.; but, that sum

being insufficient, I advanc'd upward of two hundred pounds more,

and in two weeks the one hundred and fifty waggons, with two hundred

and fifty-nine carrying horses, were on their march for the camp. 

The advertisement promised payment according to the valuation,

in case any waggon or horse should be lost.  The owners, however,

alleging they did not know General Braddock, or what dependence

might be had on his promise, insisted on my bond for the performance,

which I accordingly gave them.



While I was at the camp, supping one evening with the officers

of Colonel Dunbar's regiment, he represented to me his concern

for the subalterns, who, he said, were generally not in affluence,

and could ill afford, in this dear country, to lay in the stores

that might be necessary in so long a march, thro' a wilderness,

where nothing was to be purchas'd. I commiserated their case,

and resolved to endeavor procuring them some relief.  I said nothing,

however, to him of my intention, but wrote the next morning to the

committee of the Assembly, who had the disposition of some public money,

warmly recommending the case of these officers to their consideration,

and proposing that a present should be sent them of necessaries

and refreshments.  My son, who had some experience of a camp life,

and of its wants, drew up a list for me, which I enclos'd in my letter. 

The committee approv'd, and used such diligence that, conducted by

my son, the stores arrived at the camp as soon as the waggons. 

They consisted of twenty parcels, each containing



6 lbs. loaf sugar.                1 Gloucester cheese.

6 lbs. good Muscovado do.         1 kegg containing 20 lbs. good

1 lb. good green tea.             butter.

1 lb. good bohea do.              2 doz. old Madeira wine.

6 lbs. good ground coffee.        2 gallons Jamaica spirits.

6 lbs. chocolate.                 1 bottle flour of mustard.

1-2 cwt. best white biscuit.      2 well-cur'd hams.

1-2 lb. pepper.                   1-2 dozen dry'd tongues.

1 quart best white wine vinegar   6 lbs. rice.

                                  6 lbs. raisins.



These twenty parcels, well pack'd, were placed on as many horses,

each parcel, with the horse, being intended as a present for

one officer.  They were very thankfully receiv'd, and the kindness

acknowledg'd by letters to me from the colonels of both regiments,

in the most grateful terms.  The general, too, was highly satisfied

with my conduct in procuring him the waggons, etc., and readily

paid my account of disbursements, thanking me repeatedly,

and requesting my farther assistance in sending provisions after him. 

I undertook this also, and was busily employ'd in it till we heard

of his defeat, advancing for the service of my own money, upwards of

one thousand pounds sterling, of which I sent him an account. 

It came to his hands, luckily for me, a few days before the battle,

and he return'd me immediately an order on the paymaster for the round

sum of one thousand pounds, leaving the remainder to the next account. 

I consider this payment as good luck, having never been able

to obtain that remainder, of which more hereafter.



This general was, I think, a brave man, and might probably have

made a figure as a good officer in some European war.  But he had

too much self-confidence, too high an opinion of the validity of

regular troops, and too mean a one of both Americans and Indians. 

George Croghan, our Indian interpreter, join'd him on his march

with one hundred of those people, who might have been of great use

to his army as guides, scouts, etc., if he had treated them kindly;

but he slighted and neglected them, and they gradually left him.



In conversation with him one day, he was giving me some account

of his intended progress.  "After taking Fort Duquesne," says he,

"I am to proceed to Niagara; and, having taken that, to Frontenac,

if the season will allow time; and I suppose it will, for Duquesne

can hardly detain me above three or four days; and then I see nothing

that can obstruct my march to Niagara."  Having before revolv'd

in my mind the long line his army must make in their march by a

very narrow road, to be cut for them thro' the woods and bushes,

and also what I had read of a former defeat of fifteen hundred French,

who invaded the Iroquois country, I had conceiv'd some doubts and some

fears for the event of the campaign.  But I ventur'd only to say,

"To be sure, sir, if you arrive well before Duquesne, with these

fine troops, so well provided with artillery, that place not yet

compleatly fortified, and as we hear with no very strong garrison,

can probably make but a short resistance.  The only danger I apprehend

of obstruction to your march is from ambuscades of Indians, who,

by constant practice, are dexterous in laying and executing them;

and the slender line, near four miles long, which your army must make,

may expose it to be attack'd by surprise in its flanks, and to be

cut like a thread into several pieces, which, from their distance,

can not come up in time to support each other."



He smil'd at my ignorance, and reply'd, "These savages may, indeed,

be a formidable enemy to your raw American militia, but upon

the king's regular and disciplin'd troops, sir, it is impossible

they should make any impression."  I was conscious of an impropriety

in my disputing with a military man in matters of his profession,

and said no more.  The enemy, however, did not take the advantage

of his army which I apprehended its long line of march expos'd it to,

but let it advance without interruption till within nine miles

of the place; and then, when more in a body (for it had just passed

a river, where the front had halted till all were come over), and

in a more open part of the woods than any it had pass'd, attack'd

its advanced guard by a heavy fire from behind trees and bushes,

which was the first intelligence the general had of an enemy's

being near him.  This guard being disordered, the general hurried

the troops up to their assistance, which was done in great confusion,

thro' waggons, baggage, and cattle; and presently the fire came upon

their flank:  the officers, being on horseback, were more easily

distinguish'd, pick'd out as marks, and fell very fast; and the soldiers

were crowded together in a huddle, having or hearing no orders,

and standing to be shot at till two-thirds of them were killed;

and then, being seiz'd with a panick, the whole fled with precipitation.



The waggoners took each a horse out of his team and scamper'd;

their example was immediately followed by others; so that all

the waggons, provisions, artillery, and stores were left to the enemy. 

The general, being wounded, was brought off with difficulty;

his secretary, Mr. Shirley, was killed by his side; and out

of eighty-six officers, sixty-three were killed or wounded,

and seven hundred and fourteen men killed out of eleven hundred. 

These eleven hundred had been picked men from the whole army;

the rest had been left behind with Colonel Dunbar, who was to follow

with the heavier part of the stores, provisions, and baggage. 

The flyers, not being pursu'd, arriv'd at Dunbar's camp,

and the panick they brought with them instantly seiz'd him

and all his people; and, tho' he had now above one thousand men,

and the enemy who bad beaten Braddock did not at most exceed

four hundred Indians and French together, instead of proceeding,

and endeavoring to recover some of the lost honour, he ordered

all the stores, ammunition, etc., to be destroy'd, that he might

have more horses to assist his flight towards the settlements,

and less lumber to remove.  He was there met with requests from

the governors of Virginia, Maryland, and Pennsylvania, that he would

post his troops on the frontiers, so as to afford some protection

to the inhabitants; but he continu'd his hasty march thro'

all the country, not thinking himself safe till he arriv'd

at Philadelphia, where the inhabitants could protect him.  This whole

transaction gave us Americans the first suspicion that our exalted

ideas of the prowess of British regulars had not been well founded.



In their first march, too, from their landing till they got beyond

the settlements, they had plundered and stripped the inhabitants,

totally ruining some poor families, besides insulting, abusing,

and confining the people if they remonstrated.  This was enough

to put us out of conceit of such defenders, if we had really

wanted any.  How different was the conduct of our French friends

in 1781, who, during a march thro' the most inhabited part of our

country from Rhode Island to Virginia, near seven hundred miles,

occasioned not the smallest complaint for the loss of a pig,

a chicken, or even an apple.



Captain Orme, who was one of the general's aids-de-camp, and,

being grievously wounded, was brought off with him, and continu'd

with him to his death, which happen'd in a few days, told me that

he was totally silent all the first day, and at night only said,

"Who would have thought it?"  That he was silent again the following day,

saying only at last, "We shall better know how to deal with them

another time;" and dy'd in a few minutes after.



The secretary's papers, with all the general's orders,

instructions, and correspondence, falling into the enemy's hands,

they selected and translated into French a number of the articles,

which they printed, to prove the hostile intentions of the British

court before the declaration of war.  Among these I saw some letters

of the general to the ministry, speaking highly of the great service

I had rendered the army, and recommending me to their notice. 

David Hume, too, who was some years after secretary to Lord Hertford,

when minister in France, and afterward to General Conway, when secretary

of state, told me he had seen among the papers in that office,

letters from Braddock highly recommending me.  But, the expedition

having been unfortunate, my service, it seems, was not thought

of much value, for those recommendations were never of any use to me.



As to rewards from himself, I ask'd only one, which was, that he would

give orders to his officers not to enlist any more of our bought servants,

and that he would discharge such as had been already enlisted. 

This he readily granted, and several were accordingly return'd

to their masters, on my application.  Dunbar, when the command

devolv'd on him, was not so generous.  He being at Philadelphia,

on his retreat, or rather flight, I apply'd to him for the discharge

of the servants of three poor farmers of Lancaster county that he

had enlisted, reminding him of the late general's orders on that bead. 

He promised me that, if the masters would come to him at Trenton,

where he should be in a few days on his march to New York,

he would there deliver their men to them.  They accordingly were at

the expense and trouble of going to Trenton, and there he refus'd

to perform his promise, to their great loss and disappointment.



As soon as the loss of the waggons and horses was generally known,

all the owners came upon me for the valuation which I had given bond

to pay.  Their demands gave me a great deal of trouble, my acquainting

them that the money was ready in the paymaster's hands, but that

orders for paying it must first be obtained from General Shirley,

and my assuring them that I had apply'd to that general by letter;

but, he being at a distance, an answer could not soon be receiv'd,

and they must have patience, all this was not sufficient to satisfy,

and some began to sue me.  General Shirley at length relieved me

from this terrible situation by appointing commissioners to examine

the claims, and ordering payment.  They amounted to near twenty

thousand pound, which to pay would have ruined me.



Before we had the news of this defeat, the two Doctors Bond came

to me with a subscription paper for raising money to defray

the expense of a grand firework, which it was intended to exhibit

at a rejoicing on receipt of the news of our taking Fort Duquesne. 

I looked grave, and said it would, I thought, be time enough

to prepare for the rejoicing when we knew we should have occasion

to rejoice.  They seem'd surpris'd that I did not immediately

comply with their proposal.  "Why the d--l!" says one of them,

"you surely don't suppose that the fort will not be taken?" 

"I don't know that it will not be taken, but I know that the events

of war are subject to great uncertainty."  I gave them the reasons

of my doubting; the subscription was dropt, and the projectors thereby

missed the mortification they would have undergone if the firework

had been prepared.  Dr. Bond, on some other occasion afterward,

said that he did not like Franklin's forebodings.



Governor Morris, who had continually worried the Assembly with message

after message before the defeat of Braddock, to beat them into

the making of acts to raise money for the defense of the province,

without taxing, among others, the proprietary estates, and had

rejected all their bills for not having such an exempting clause,

now redoubled his attacks with more hope of success, the danger

and necessity being greater.  The Assembly, however, continu'd firm,

believing they had justice on their side, and that it would

be giving up an essential right if they suffered the governor

to amend their money-bills. In one of the last, indeed, which was

for granting fifty thousand pounds, his propos'd amendment was

only of a single word.  The bill expressed "that all estates,

real and personal, were to be taxed, those of the proprietaries

not excepted."  His amendment was, for not read only:  a small,

but very material alteration.  However, when the news of this

disaster reached England, our friends there, whom we had taken care

to furnish with all the Assembly's answers to the governor's messages,

rais'd a clamor against the proprietaries for their meanness and

injustice in giving their governor such instructions; some going

so far as to say that, by obstructing the defense of their province,

they forfeited their right to it.  They were intimidated by this,

and sent orders to their receiver-general to add five thousand

pounds of their money to whatever sum might be given by the Assembly

for such purpose.



This, being notified to the House, was accepted in lieu of their share

of a general tax, and a new bill was form'd, with an exempting clause,

which passed accordingly.  By this act I was appointed one of the

commissioners for disposing of the money, sixty thousand pounds. 

I had been active in modelling the bill and procuring its passage,

and had, at the same time, drawn a bill for establishing

and disciplining of a voluntary militia, which I carried thro'

the House without much difficulty, as care was taken in it to

leave the Quakers at their liberty.  To promote the association

necessary to form the militia, I wrote a dialogue,<14> stating

and answering all the objections I could think of to such a militia,

which was printed, and had, as I thought, great effect.



     <14> This dialogue and the militia act are in the

          "Gentleman's Magazine" for February and March, 1756.

           --[Marg. note.]

