






When about 16 years of age I happened to meet with a book,

written by one Tryon, recommending a vegetable diet.  I determined

to go into it.  My brother, being yet unmarried, did not keep house,

but boarded himself and his apprentices in another family.  My refusing

to eat flesh occasioned an inconveniency, and I was frequently chid

for my singularity.  I made myself acquainted with Tryon's manner

of preparing some of his dishes, such as boiling potatoes or rice,

making hasty pudding, and a few others, and then proposed to my brother,

that if he would give me, weekly, half the money he paid for my board,

I would board myself.  He instantly agreed to it, and I presently

found that I could save half what he paid me.  This was an additional

fund for buying books.  But I had another advantage in it. 

My brother and the rest going from the printing-house to their meals,

I remained there alone, and, despatching presently my light repast,

which often was no more than a bisket or a slice of bread, a handful

of raisins or a tart from the pastry-cook's, and a glass of water,

had the rest of the time till their return for study, in which I

made the greater progress, from that greater clearness of head

and quicker apprehension which usually attend temperance in eating

and drinking.



And now it was that, being on some occasion made asham'd of my

ignorance in figures, which I had twice failed in learning when

at school, I took Cocker's book of Arithmetick, and went through

the whole by myself with great ease.  I also read Seller's and

Shermy's books of Navigation, and became acquainted with the little

geometry they contain; but never proceeded far in that science. 

And I read about this time Locke On Human Understanding,

and the Art of Thinking, by Messrs.  du Port Royal.



While I was intent on improving my language, I met with an English

grammar (I think it was Greenwood's), at the end of which there were

two little sketches of the arts of rhetoric and logic, the latter

finishing with a specimen of a dispute in the Socratic method;

and soon after I procur'd Xenophon's Memorable Things of Socrates,

wherein there are many instances of the same method.  I was

charm'd with it, adopted it, dropt my abrupt contradiction and

positive argumentation, and put on the humble inquirer and doubter. 

And being then, from reading Shaftesbury and Collins, become a real

doubter in many points of our religious doctrine, I found this method

safest for myself and very embarrassing to those against whom I used it;

therefore I took a delight in it, practis'd it continually, and grew

very artful and expert in drawing people, even of superior knowledge,

into concessions, the consequences of which they did not foresee,

entangling them in difficulties out of which they could not

extricate themselves, and so obtaining victories that neither myself

nor my cause always deserved.  I continu'd this method some few years,

but gradually left it, retaining only the habit of expressing myself

in terms of modest diffidence; never using, when I advanced any thing

that may possibly be disputed, the words certainly, undoubtedly, or any

others that give the air of positiveness to an opinion; but rather say,

I conceive or apprehend a thing to be so and so; it appears to me,

or I should think it so or so, for such and such reasons;

or I imagine it to be so; or it is so, if I am not mistaken. 

This habit, I believe, has been of great advantage to me when I

have had occasion to inculcate my opinions, and persuade men into

measures that I have been from time to time engag'd in promoting;

and, as the chief ends of conversation are to inform or to be informed,

to please or to persuade, I wish well-meaning, sensible men would

not lessen their power of doing good by a positive, assuming manner,

that seldom fails to disgust, tends to create opposition, and to

defeat every one of those purposes for which speech was given to us,

to wit, giving or receiving information or pleasure.  For, if you

would inform, a positive and dogmatical manner in advancing your

sentiments may provoke contradiction and prevent a candid attention. 

If you wish information and improvement from the knowledge of others,

and yet at the same time express yourself as firmly fix'd in your

present opinions, modest, sensible men, who do not love disputation,

will probably leave you undisturbed in the possession of your error. 

And by such a manner, you can seldom hope to recommend yourself

in pleasing your hearers, or to persuade those whose concurrence

you desire.  Pope says, judiciously:



          "Men should be taught as if you taught them not,  

          And things unknown propos'd as things forgot;"  



farther recommending to us  



          "To speak, tho' sure, with seeming diffidence."  



And he might have coupled with this line that which he has coupled

with another, I think, less properly,



          "For want of modesty is want of sense."  



If you ask, Why less properly? I must repeat the lines,  



          "Immodest words admit of no defense,  

          For want of modesty is want of sense."  



Now, is not want of sense (where a man is so unfortunate as to want it)

some apology for his want of modesty? and would not the lines stand

more justly thus?



          "Immodest words admit but this defense,  

          That want of modesty is want of sense."  



This, however, I should submit to better judgments.



My brother had, in 1720 or 1721, begun to print a newspaper. 

It was the second that appeared in America, and was called the New

England Courant.  The only one before it was the Boston News-Letter. I

remember his being dissuaded by some of his friends from the undertaking,

as not likely to succeed, one newspaper being, in their judgment,

enough for America.  At this time (1771) there are not less

than five-and-twenty. He went on, however, with the undertaking,

and after having worked in composing the types and printing off

the sheets, I was employed to carry the papers thro' the streets

to the customers.



He had some ingenious men among his friends, who amus'd themselves

by writing little pieces for this paper, which gain'd it credit

and made it more in demand, and these gentlemen often visited us. 

Hearing their conversations, and their accounts of the approbation their

papers were received with, I was excited to try my hand among them;

but, being still a boy, and suspecting that my brother would object

to printing anything of mine in his paper if he knew it to be mine,

I contrived to disguise my hand, and, writing an anonymous paper,

I put it in at night under the door of the printing-house. It was found

in the morning, and communicated to his writing friends when they

call'd in as usual.  They read it, commented on it in my hearing, and I

had the exquisite pleasure of finding it met with their approbation,

and that, in their different guesses at the author, none were named

but men of some character among us for learning and ingenuity. 

I suppose now that I was rather lucky in my judges, and that perhaps

they were not really so very good ones as I then esteem'd them.



Encourag'd, however, by this, I wrote and convey'd in the same way

to the press several more papers which were equally approv'd; and I

kept my secret till my small fund of sense for such performances was

pretty well exhausted and then I discovered it, when I began to be

considered a little more by my brother's acquaintance, and in a manner

that did not quite please him, as he thought, probably with reason,

that it tended to make me too vain.  And, perhaps, this might be one

occasion of the differences that we began to have about this time. 

Though a brother, he considered himself as my master, and me

as his apprentice, and accordingly, expected the same services

from me as he would from another, while I thought he demean'd me

too much in some he requir'd of me, who from a brother expected

more indulgence.  Our disputes were often brought before our father,

and I fancy I was either generally in the right, or else a

better pleader, because the judgment was generally in my favor. 

But my brother was passionate, and had often beaten me, which I

took extreamly amiss; and, thinking my apprenticeship very tedious,

I was continually wishing for some opportunity of shortening it,

which at length offered in a manner unexpected.<3>



      <3> I fancy his harsh and tyrannical treatment of me

          might be a means of impressing me with that aversion

          to arbitrary power that has stuck to me through my

          whole life.



One of the pieces in our newspaper on some political point, which I

have now forgotten, gave offense to the Assembly.  He was taken up,

censur'd, and imprison'd for a month, by the speaker's warrant,

I suppose, because he would not discover his author.  I too was taken

up and examin'd before the council; but, tho' I did not give them

any satisfaction, they content'd themselves with admonishing me,

and dismissed me, considering me, perhaps, as an apprentice, who was

bound to keep his master's secrets.



During my brother's confinement, which I resented a good deal,

notwithstanding our private differences, I had the management

of the paper; and I made bold to give our rulers some rubs in it,

which my brother took very kindly, while others began to consider

me in an unfavorable light, as a young genius that had a turn

for libelling and satyr.  My brother's discharge was accompany'd

with an order of the House (a very odd one), that "James Franklin

should no longer print the paper called the New England Courant."



There was a consultation held in our printing-house among

his friends, what he should do in this case.  Some proposed to

evade the order by changing the name of the paper; but my brother,

seeing inconveniences in that, it was finally concluded on as a

better way, to let it be printed for the future under the name

of BENJAMIN FRANKLIN; and to avoid the censure of the Assembly,

that might fall on him as still printing it by his apprentice,

the contrivance was that my old indenture should be return'd to me,

with a full discharge on the back of it, to be shown on occasion,

but to secure to him the benefit of my service, I was to sign new

indentures for the remainder of the term, which were to be kept private. 

A very flimsy scheme it was; however, it was immediately executed,

and the paper went on accordingly, under my name for several months.



At length, a fresh difference arising between my brother and me,

I took upon me to assert my freedom, presuming that he would not

venture to produce the new indentures.  It was not fair in me to

take this advantage, and this I therefore reckon one of the first

errata of my life; but the unfairness of it weighed little with me,

when under the impressions of resentment for the blows his passion

too often urged him to bestow upon me, though he was otherwise

not an ill-natur'd man:  perhaps I was too saucy and provoking.



When he found I would leave him, he took care to prevent my getting

employment in any other printing-house of the town, by going round

and speaking to every master, who accordingly refus'd to give me work. 

I then thought of going to New York, as the nearest place where

there was a printer; and I was rather inclin'd to leave Boston

when I reflected that I had already made myself a little obnoxious

to the governing party, and, from the arbitrary proceedings of the

Assembly in my brother's case, it was likely I might, if I stay'd,

soon bring myself into scrapes; and farther, that my indiscrete

disputations about religion began to make me pointed at with horror

by good people as an infidel or atheist.  I determin'd on the point,

but my father now siding with my brother, I was sensible that,

if I attempted to go openly, means would be used to prevent me. 

My friend Collins, therefore, undertook to manage a little for me. 

He agreed with the captain of a New York sloop for my passage,

under the notion of my being a young acquaintance of his, that had

got a naughty girl with child, whose friends would compel me to

marry her, and therefore I could not appear or come away publicly. 

So I sold some of my books to raise a little money, was taken on

board privately, and as we had a fair wind, in three days I found

myself in New York, near 300 miles from home, a boy of but 17,

without the least recommendation to, or knowledge of any person in

the place, and with very little money in my pocket.



My inclinations for the sea were by this time worne out, or I

might now have gratify'd them.  But, having a trade, and supposing

myself a pretty good workman, I offer'd my service to the printer

in the place, old Mr. William Bradford, who had been the first

printer in Pennsylvania, but removed from thence upon the quarrel

of George Keith.  He could give me no employment, having little to do,

and help enough already; but says he, "My son at Philadelphia

has lately lost his principal hand, Aquila Rose, by death;

if you go thither, I believe he may employ you."  Philadelphia was

a hundred miles further; I set out, however, in a boat for Amboy,

leaving my chest and things to follow me round by sea.



In crossing the bay, we met with a squall that tore our rotten sails

to pieces, prevented our getting into the Kill and drove us upon

Long Island.  In our way, a drunken Dutchman, who was a passenger too,

fell overboard; when he was sinking, I reached through the water

to his shock pate, and drew him up, so that we got him in again. 

His ducking sobered him a little, and he went to sleep, taking first

out of his pocket a book, which he desir'd I would dry for him. 

It proved to be my old favorite author, Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress,

in Dutch, finely printed on good paper, with copper cuts, a dress better

than I had ever seen it wear in its own language.  I have since found

that it has been translated into most of the languages of Europe,

and suppose it has been more generally read than any other book,

except perhaps the Bible.  Honest John was the first that I know

of who mix'd narration and dialogue; a method of writing very engaging

to the reader, who in the most interesting parts finds himself,

as it were, brought into the company and present at the discourse. 

De Foe in his Cruso, his Moll Flanders, Religious Courtship,

Family Instructor, and other pieces, has imitated it with success;

and Richardson has done the same, in his Pamela, etc.



When we drew near the island, we found it was at a place where there

could be no landing, there being a great surff on the stony beach. 

So we dropt anchor, and swung round towards the shore.  Some people

came down to the water edge and hallow'd to us, as we did to them;

but the wind was so high, and the surff so loud, that we could

not hear so as to understand each other.  There were canoes on

the shore, and we made signs, and hallow'd that they should fetch us;

but they either did not understand us, or thought it impracticable,

so they went away, and night coming on, we had no remedy but to wait

till the wind should abate; and, in the meantime, the boatman and I

concluded to sleep, if we could; and so crowded into the scuttle,

with the Dutchman, who was still wet, and the spray beating over

the head of our boat, leak'd thro' to us, so that we were soon

almost as wet as he.  In this manner we lay all night, with very

little rest; but, the wind abating the next day, we made a shift

to reach Amboy before night, having been thirty hours on the water,

without victuals, or any drink but a bottle of filthy rum,

and the water we sail'd on being salt.



In the evening I found myself very feverish, and went in to bed;

but, having read somewhere that cold water drank plentifully was good

for a fever, I follow'd the prescription, sweat plentiful most of

the night, my fever left me, and in the morning, crossing the ferry,

I proceeded on my journey on foot, having fifty miles to Burlington,

where I was told I should find boats that would carry me the rest

of the way to Philadelphia.



It rained very hard all the day; I was thoroughly soak'd, and by noon

a good deal tired; so I stopt at a poor inn, where I staid all night,

beginning now to wish that I had never left home.  I cut so miserable

a figure, too, that I found, by the questions ask'd me, I was

suspected to be some runaway servant, and in danger of being taken

up on that suspicion.  However, I proceeded the next day, and got

in the evening to an inn, within eight or ten miles of Burlington,

kept by one Dr. Brown.  He entered into conversation with me while I

took some refreshment, and, finding I had read a little, became very

sociable and friendly.  Our acquaintance continu'd as long as he

liv'd. He had been, I imagine, an itinerant doctor, for there was no

town in England, or country in Europe, of which he could not give

a very particular account.  He had some letters, and was ingenious,

but much of an unbeliever, and wickedly undertook, some years after,

to travestie the Bible in doggrel verse, as Cotton had done Virgil. 

By this means he set many of the facts in a very ridiculous light,

and might have hurt weak minds if his work had been published;

but it never was.



At his house I lay that night, and the next morning reach'd Burlington,

but had the mortification to find that the regular boats were gone

a little before my coming, and no other expected to go before Tuesday,

this being Saturday; wherefore I returned to an old woman in the town,

of whom I had bought gingerbread to eat on the water, and ask'd

her advice.  She invited me to lodge at her house till a passage

by water should offer; and being tired with my foot travelling,

I accepted the invitation.  She understanding I was a printer,

would have had me stay at that town and follow my business,

being ignorant of the stock necessary to begin with.  She was

very hospitable, gave me a dinner of ox-cheek with great good will,

accepting only a pot of ale in return; and I thought myself

fixed till Tuesday should come.  However, walking in the evening

by the side of the river, a boat came by, which I found was going

towards Philadelphia, with several people in her.  They took me in,

and, as there was no wind, we row'd all the way; and about midnight,

not having yet seen the city, some of the company were confident

we must have passed it, and would row no farther; the others knew

not where we were; so we put toward the shore, got into a creek,

landed near an old fence, with the rails of which we made a fire,

the night being cold, in October, and there we remained till daylight. 

Then one of the company knew the place to be Cooper's Creek, a little

above Philadelphia, which we saw as soon as we got out of the creek,

and arriv'd there about eight or nine o'clock on the Sunday morning,

and landed at the Market-street wharf.



I have been the more particular in this description of my journey,

and shall be so of my first entry into that city, that you may

in your mind compare such unlikely beginnings with the figure

I have since made there.  I was in my working dress, my best

cloaths being to come round by sea.  I was dirty from my journey;

my pockets were stuff'd out with shirts and stockings, and I

knew no soul nor where to look for lodging.  I was fatigued

with travelling, rowing, and want of rest, I was very hungry;

and my whole stock of cash consisted of a Dutch dollar, and about

a shilling in copper.  The latter I gave the people of the boat

for my passage, who at first refus'd it, on account of my rowing;

but I insisted on their taking it.  A man being sometimes more

generous when he has but a little money than when he has plenty,

perhaps thro' fear of being thought to have but little.



Then I walked up the street, gazing about till near the market-house

I met a boy with bread.  I had made many a meal on bread, and,

inquiring where he got it, I went immediately to the baker's

he directed me to, in Secondstreet, and ask'd for bisket,

intending such as we had in Boston; but they, it seems, were not

made in Philadelphia.  Then I asked for a three-penny loaf,

and was told they had none such.  So not considering or knowing

the difference of money, and the greater cheapness nor the names

of his bread, I made him give me three-penny worth of any sort. 

He gave me, accordingly, three great puffy rolls.  I was surpriz'd

at the quantity, but took it, and, having no room in my pockets,

walk'd off with a roll under each arm, and eating the other.  Thus I

went up Market-street as far as Fourth-street, passing by the door

of Mr. Read, my future wife's father; when she, standing at the door,

saw me, and thought I made, as I certainly did, a most awkward,

ridiculous appearance.  Then I turned and went down Chestnut-street and

part of Walnut-street, eating my roll all the way, and, corning round,

found myself again at Market-street wharf, near the boat I came in,

to which I went for a draught of the river water; and, being filled

with one of my rolls, gave the other two to a woman and her child that

came down the river in the boat with us, and were waiting to go farther.



Thus refreshed, I walked again up the street, which by this time had

many clean-dressed people in it, who were all walking the same way. 

I joined them, and thereby was led into the great meeting-house of

the Quakers near the market.  I sat down among them, and, after looking

round awhile and hearing nothing said, being very drowsy thro'

labor and want of rest the preceding night, I fell fast asleep,

and continued so till the meeting broke up, when one was kind

enough to rouse me.  This was, therefore, the first house I was in,

or slept in, in Philadelphia.



Walking down again toward the river, and, looking in the faces

of people, I met a young Quaker man, whose countenance I lik'd, and,

accosting him, requested he would tell me where a stranger could

get lodging.  We were then near the sign of the Three Mariners. 

"Here," says he, "is one place that entertains strangers, but it

is not a reputable house; if thee wilt walk with me, I'll show thee

a better."  He brought me to the Crooked Billet in Water-street. Here

I got a dinner; and, while I was eating it, several sly questions were

asked me, as it seemed to be suspected from my youth and appearance,

that I might be some runaway.



After dinner, my sleepiness return'd, and being shown to a bed,

I lay down without undressing, and slept till six in the evening,

was call'd to supper, went to bed again very early, and slept

soundly till next morning.  Then I made myself as tidy as I could,

and went to Andrew Bradford the printer's. I found in the shop

the old man his father, whom I had seen at New York, and who,

travelling on horseback, had got to Philadelphia before me. 

He introduc'd me to his son, who receiv'd me civilly, gave me

a breakfast, but told me he did not at present want a hand,

being lately suppli'd with one; but there was another printer

in town, lately set up, one Keimer, who, perhaps, might employ me;

if not, I should be welcome to lodge at his house, and he would

give me a little work to do now and then till fuller business

should offer.



The old gentleman said he would go with me to the new printer;

and when we found him, "Neighbor," says Bradford, "I have brought

to see you a young man of your business; perhaps you may want such

a one."  He ask'd me a few questions, put a composing stick in my

hand to see how I work'd, and then said he would employ me soon,

though he had just then nothing for me to do; and, taking old Bradford,

whom he had never seen before, to be one of the town's people that

had a good will for him, enter'd into a conversation on his present

undertaking and projects; while Bradford, not discovering that he

was the other printer's father, on Keimer's saying he expected

soon to get the greatest part of the business into his own hands,

drew him on by artful questions, and starting little doubts,

to explain all his views, what interests he reli'd on, and in what

manner he intended to proceed.  I, who stood by and heard all,

saw immediately that one of them was a crafty old sophister,

and the other a mere novice.  Bradford left me with Keimer, who was

greatly surpris'd when I told him who the old man was.



Keimer's printing-house, I found, consisted of an old shatter'd press,

and one small, worn-out font of English which he was then using himself,

composing an Elegy on Aquila Rose, before mentioned, an ingenious

young man, of excellent character, much respected in the town,

clerk of the Assembly, and a pretty poet.  Keimer made verses too,

but very indifferently.  He could not be said to write them, for his

manner was to compose them in the types directly out of his head. 

So there being no copy, but one pair of cases, and the Elegy

likely to require all the letter, no one could help him. 

I endeavor'd to put his press (which he had not yet us'd, and of

which he understood nothing) into order fit to be work'd with;

and, promising to come and print off his Elegy as soon as he

should have got it ready, I return'd to Bradford's, who gave me

a little job to do for the present, and there I lodged and dieted,

A few days after, Keimer sent for me to print off the Elegy. 

And now he had got another pair of cases, and a pamphlet to reprint,

on which he set me to work.



These two printers I found poorly qualified for their business. 

Bradford had not been bred to it, and was very illiterate;

and Keimer, tho' something of a scholar, was a mere compositor,

knowing nothing of presswork.  He had been one of the French prophets,

and could act their enthusiastic agitations.  At this time he did

not profess any particular religion, but something of all on occasion;

was very ignorant of the world, and had, as I afterward found,

a good deal of the knave in his composition.  He did not like my

lodging at Bradford's while I work'd with him.  He had a house,

indeed, but without furniture, so he could not lodge me; but he got

me a lodging at Mr. Read's, before mentioned, who was the owner

of his house; and, my chest and clothes being come by this time,

I made rather a more respectable appearance in the eyes of Miss Read

than I had done when she first happen'd to see me eating my roll in

the street.



I began now to have some acquaintance among the young people of

the town, that were lovers of reading, with whom I spent my evenings

very pleasantly; and gaining money by my industry and frugality,

I lived very agreeably, forgetting Boston as much as I could,

and not desiring that any there should know where I resided,

except my friend Collins, who was in my secret, and kept it when I

wrote to him.  At length, an incident happened that sent me back

again much sooner than I had intended.  I had a brother-in-law,

Robert Holmes, master of a sloop that traded between Boston

and Delaware.  He being at Newcastle, forty miles below Philadelphia,

heard there of me, and wrote me a letter mentioning the concern

of my friends in Boston at my abrupt departure, assuring me of their

good will to me, and that every thing would be accommodated to my

mind if I would return, to which he exhorted me very earnestly. 

I wrote an answer to his letter, thank'd him for his advice,

but stated my reasons for quitting Boston fully and in such a light

as to convince him I was not so wrong as he had apprehended.



Sir William Keith, governor of the province, was then at Newcastle,

and Captain Holmes, happening to be in company with him when my

letter came to hand, spoke to him of me, and show'd him the letter. 

The governor read it, and seem'd surpris'd when he was told my age. 

He said I appear'd a young man of promising parts, and therefore

should be encouraged; the printers at Philadelphia were wretched ones;

and, if I would set up there, he made no doubt I should succeed;

for his part, he would procure me the public business, and do me

every other service in his power.  This my brother-in-law afterwards

told me in Boston, but I knew as yet nothing of it; when, one day,

Keimer and I being at work together near the window, we saw the

governor and another gentleman (which proved to be Colonel French,

of Newcastle), finely dress'd, come directly across the street to

our house, and heard them at the door.



Keimer ran down immediately, thinking it a visit to him;

but the governor inquir'd for me, came up, and with a condescension

of politeness I had been quite unus'd to, made me many compliments,

desired to be acquainted with me, blam'd me kindly for not

having made myself known to him when I first came to the place,

and would have me away with him to the tavern, where he was going

with Colonel French to taste, as he said, some excellent Madeira. 

I was not a little surprised, and Keimer star'd like a pig poison'd.

I went, however, with the governor and Colonel French to a tavern,

at the corner of Third-street, and over the Madeira he propos'd my

setting up my business, laid before me the probabilities of success,

and both he and Colonel French assur'd me I should have their interest

and influence in procuring the public business of both governments. 

On my doubting whether my father would assist me in it, Sir William

said he would give me a letter to him, in which he would state

the advantages, and he did not doubt of prevailing with him. 

So it was concluded I should return to Boston in the first vessel,

with the governor's letter recommending me to my father. 

In the mean time the intention was to be kept a secret, and I

went on working with Keimer as usual, the governor sending for me

now and then to dine with him, a very great honor I thought it,

and conversing with me in the most affable, familiar, and friendly

manner imaginable.



About the end of April, 1724, a little vessel offer'd for Boston. 

I took leave of Keimer as going to see my friends.  The governor gave

me an ample letter, saying many flattering things of me to my father,

and strongly recommending the project of my setting up at Philadelphia

as a thing that must make my fortune.  We struck on a shoal in going

down the bay, and sprung a leak; we had a blustering time at sea,

and were oblig'd to pump almost continually, at which I took my turn. 

We arriv'd safe, however, at Boston in about a fortnight.  I had

been absent seven months, and my friends had heard nothing of me;

for my br.  Holmes was not yet return'd, and had not written about me. 

My unexpected appearance surpriz'd the family; all were, however,

very glad to see me, and made me welcome, except my brother. 

I went to see him at his printing-house. I was better dress'd than ever

while in his service, having a genteel new suit from head to foot,

a watch, and my pockets lin'd with near five pounds sterling in silver. 

He receiv'd me not very frankly, look'd me all over, and turn'd to his

work again.



The journeymen were inquisitive where I had been, what sort of a

country it was, and how I lik'd it.  I prais'd it much, the happy

life I led in it, expressing strongly my intention of returning

to it; and, one of them asking what kind of money we had there,

I produc'd a handful of silver, and spread it before them,

which was a kind of raree-show they had not been us'd to, paper being

the money of Boston.  Then I took an opportunity of letting them see

my watch; and, lastly (my brother still grum and sullen), I gave them

a piece of eight to drink, and took my leave.  This visit of mine

offended him extreamly; for, when my mother some time after spoke

to him of a reconciliation, and of her wishes to see us on good

terms together, and that we might live for the future as brothers,

he said I had insulted him in such a manner before his people that

he could never forget or forgive it.  In this, however, he was mistaken.



My father received the governor's letter with some apparent surprise,

but said little of it to me for some days, when Capt. Holmes returning

he showed it to him, ask'd him if he knew Keith, and what kind of

man he was; adding his opinion that he must be of small discretion

to think of setting a boy up in business who wanted yet three years

of being at man's estate.  Holmes said what he could in favor

of the project, but my father was clear in the impropriety of it,

and at last gave a flat denial to it.  Then he wrote a civil letter

to Sir William, thanking him for the patronage he had so kindly

offered me, but declining to assist me as yet in setting up, I being,

in his opinion, too young to be trusted with the management of a

business so important, and for which the preparation must be so expensive.



My friend and companion Collins, who was a clerk in the post-office,

pleas'd with the account I gave him of my new country, determined to

go thither also; and, while I waited for my father's determination,

he set out before me by land to Rhode Island, leaving his books,

which were a pretty collection of mathematicks and natural philosophy,

to come with mine and me to New York, where he propos'd to wait

for me.



My father, tho' he did not approve Sir William's proposition,

was yet pleas'd that I had been able to obtain so advantageous a

character from a person of such note where I had resided, and that I

had been so industrious and careful as to equip myself so handsomely

in so short a time; therefore, seeing no prospect of an accommodation

between my brother and me, he gave his consent to my returning again

to Philadelphia, advis'd me to behave respectfully to the people there,

endeavor to obtain the general esteem, and avoid lampooning

and libeling, to which he thought I had too much inclination;

telling me, that by steady industry and a prudent parsimony I might

save enough by the time I was one-and-twenty to set me up; and that,

if I came near the matter, he would help me out with the rest. 

This was all I could obtain, except some small gifts as tokens

of his and my mother's love, when I embark'd again for New York,

now with their approbation and their blessing.



The sloop putting in at Newport, Rhode Island, I visited my brother John,

who had been married and settled there some years.  He received

me very affectionately, for he always lov'd me.  A friend of his,

one Vernon, having some money due to him in Pensilvania, about thirty-five

pounds currency, desired I would receive it for him, and keep it

till I had his directions what to remit it in.  Accordingly, he gave

me an order.  This afterwards occasion'd me a good deal of uneasiness.



At Newport we took in a number of passengers for New York,

among which were two young women, companions, and a grave, sensible,

matron-like Quaker woman, with her attendants.  I had shown an obliging

readiness to do her some little services, which impress'd her I

suppose with a degree of good will toward me; therefore, when she

saw a daily growing familiarity between me and the two young women,

which they appear'd to encourage, she took me aside, and said: 

"Young man, I am concern'd for thee, as thou has no friend with thee,

and seems not to know much of the world, or of the snares youth

is expos'd to; depend upon it, those are very bad women; I can

see it in all their actions; and if thee art not upon thy guard,

they will draw thee into some danger; they are strangers to thee,

and I advise thee, in a friendly concern for thy welfare, to have no

acquaintance with them."  As I seem'd at first not to think so ill

of them as she did, she mentioned some things she had observ'd and

heard that had escap'd my notice, but now convinc'd me she was right. 

I thank'd her for her kind advice, and promis'd to follow it. 

When we arriv'd at New York, they told me where they liv'd, and invited

me to come and see them; but I avoided it, and it was well I did;

for the next day the captain miss'd a silver spoon and some other things,

that had been taken out of his cabbin, and, knowing that these were

a couple of strumpets, he got a warrant to search their lodgings,

found the stolen goods, and had the thieves punish'd. So, tho'

we had escap'd a sunken rock, which we scrap'd upon in the passage,

I thought this escape of rather more importance to me.



At New York I found my friend Collins, who had arriv'd there some time

before me.  We had been intimate from children, and had read the same

books together; but he had the advantage of more time for reading

and studying, and a wonderful genius for mathematical learning,

in which he far outstript me.  While I liv'd in Boston most of my hours

of leisure for conversation were spent with him, and he continu'd

a sober as well as an industrious lad; was much respected for his

learning by several of the clergy and other gentlemen, and seemed

to promise making a good figure in life.  But, during my absence,

he had acquir'd a habit of sotting with brandy; and I found by his

own account, and what I heard from others, that he had been drunk

every day since his arrival at New York, and behav'd very oddly. 

He had gam'd, too, and lost his money, so that I was oblig'd to

discharge his lodgings, and defray his expenses to and at Philadelphia,

which prov'd extremely inconvenient to me.



The then governor of New York, Burnet (son of Bishop Burnet),

hearing from the captain that a young man, one of his passengers,

had a great many books, desir'd he would bring me to see him. 

I waited upon him accordingly, and should have taken Collins

with me but that he was not sober.  The gov'r. treated me with

great civility, show'd me his library, which was a very large one,

and we had a good deal of conversation about books and authors. 

This was the second governor who had done me the honor to take notice

of me; which, to a poor boy like me, was very pleasing.



We proceeded to Philadelphia.  I received on the way Vernon's money,

without which we could hardly have finish'd our journey.  Collins wished

to be employ'd in some counting-house, but, whether they discover'd

his dramming by his breath, or by his behaviour, tho' he had

some recommendations, he met with no success in any application,

and continu'd lodging and boarding at the same house with me,

and at my expense.  Knowing I had that money of Vernon's, he was

continually borrowing of me, still promising repayment as soon

as he should be in business.  At length he had got so much of it

that I was distress'd to think what I should do in case of being

call'd on to remit it.



His drinking continu'd, about which we sometimes quarrell'd;, for,

when a little intoxicated, he was very fractious.  Once, in a boat

on the Delaware with some other young men, he refused to row

in his turn.  "I will be row'd home," says he.  "We will not

row you," says I. "You must, or stay all night on the water,"

says he, "just as you please."  The others said, "Let us row;

what signifies it?"  But, my mind being soured with his other conduct,

I continu'd to refuse.  So he swore he would make me row,

or throw me overboard; and coming along, stepping on the thwarts,

toward me, when he came up and struck at me, I clapped my hand under

his crutch, and, rising, pitched him head-foremost into the river. 

I knew he was a good swimmer, and so was under little concern

about him; but before he could get round to lay hold of the boat,

we had with a few strokes pull'd her out of his reach; and ever when he

drew near the boat, we ask'd if he would row, striking a few strokes

to slide her away from him.  He was ready to die with vexation,

and obstinately would not promise to row.  However, seeing him at last

beginning to tire, we lifted him in and brought him home dripping

wet in the evening.  We hardly exchang'd a civil word afterwards,

and a West India captain, who had a commission to procure a tutor

for the sons of a gentleman at Barbadoes, happening to meet with him,

agreed to carry him thither.  He left me then, promising to remit me

the first money he should receive in order to discharge the debt;

but I never heard of him after.



The breaking into this money of Vernon's was one of the first great

errata of my life; and this affair show'd that my father was not much

out in his judgment when he suppos'd me too young to manage business

of importance.  But Sir William, on reading his letter, said he was

too prudent.  There was great difference in persons; and discretion

did not always accompany years, nor was youth always without it. 

"And since he will not set you up," says he, "I will do it myself. 

Give me an inventory of the things necessary to be had from England,

and I will send for them.  You shall repay me when you are able;

I am resolv'd to have a good printer here, and I am sure you

must succeed."  This was spoken with such an appearance of cordiality,

that I had not the least doubt of his meaning what he said. 

I had hitherto kept the proposition of my setting up, a secret

in Philadelphia, and I still kept it.  Had lt been known that I

depended on the governor, probably some friend, that knew him better,

would have advis'd me not to rely on him, as I afterwards heard it

as his known character to be liberal of promises which he never meant

to keep.  Yet, unsolicited as he was by me, how could I think his

generous offers insincere?  I believ'd him one of the best men in

the world.



I presented him an inventory of a little print'g-house, amounting

by my computation to about one hundred pounds sterling.  He lik'd it,

but ask'd me if my being on the spot in England to chuse the types,

and see that every thing was good of the kind, might not be of

some advantage.  "Then," says he, "when there, you may make acquaintances,

and establish correspondences in the bookselling and stationery way." 

I agreed that this might be advantageous.  "Then," says he,

"get yourself ready to go with Annis;" which was the annual ship,

and the only one at that time usually passing between London

and Philadelphia.  But it would be some months before Annis sail'd,

so I continu'd working with Keimer, fretting about the money Collins

had got from me, and in daily apprehensions of being call'd upon

by Vernon, which, however, did not happen for some years after.



I believe I have omitted mentioning that, in my first voyage

from Boston, being becalm'd off Block Island, our people set

about catching cod, and hauled up a great many.  Hitherto I had

stuck to my resolution of not eating animal food, and on this

occasion consider'd, with my master Tryon, the taking every

fish as a kind of unprovoked murder, since none of them had,

or ever could do us any injury that might justify the slaughter. 

All this seemed very reasonable.  But I had formerly been a great

lover of fish, and, when this came hot out of the frying-pan, it

smelt admirably well.  I balanc'd some time between principle

and inclination, till I recollected that, when the fish were opened,

I saw smaller fish taken out of their stomachs; then thought I,

"If you eat one another, I don't see why we mayn't eat you."  So I

din'd upon cod very heartily, and continued to eat with other people,

returning only now and then occasionally to a vegetable diet. 

So convenient a thing it is to be a reasonable creature, since it

enables one to find or make a reason for everything one has a mind

to do.



Keimer and I liv'd on a pretty good familiar footing, and agreed

tolerably well, for he suspected nothing of my setting up. 

He retained a great deal of his old enthusiasms and lov'd argumentation. 

We therefore had many disputations.  I used to work him so with my

Socratic method, and had trepann'd him so often by questions apparently

so distant from any point we had in hand, and yet by degrees lead

to the point, and brought him into difficulties and contradictions,

that at last he grew ridiculously cautious, and would hardly answer

me the most common question, without asking first, "What do you

intend to infer from that?"  However, it gave him so high an opinion

of my abilities in the confuting way, that he seriously proposed my

being his colleague in a project he had of setting up a new sect. 

He was to preach the doctrines, and I was to confound all opponents. 

When he came to explain with me upon the doctrines, I found several

conundrums which I objected to, unless I might have my way a little too,

and introduce some of mine.



Keimer wore his beard at full length, because somewhere in the Mosaic

law it is said, "Thou shalt not mar the corners of thy beard." 

He likewise kept the Seventh day, Sabbath; and these two points were

essentials with him.  I dislik'd both; but agreed to admit them upon

condition of his adopting the doctrine of using no animal food. 

"I doubt," said he, "my constitution will not bear that."  I assur'd

him it would, and that he would be the better for it.  He was usually a

great glutton, and I promised myself some diversion in half starving him. 

He agreed to try the practice, if I would keep him company. 

I did so, and we held it for three months.  We had our victuals

dress'd, and brought to us regularly by a woman in the neighborhood,

who had from me a list of forty dishes to be prepar'd for us at

different times, in all which there was neither fish, flesh, nor fowl,

and the whim suited me the better at this time from the cheapness

of it, not costing us above eighteenpence sterling each per week. 

I have since kept several Lents most strictly, leaving the common

diet for that, and that for the common, abruptly, without the

least inconvenience, so that I think there is little in the advice

of making those changes by easy gradations.  I went on pleasantly,

but poor Keimer suffered grievously, tired of the project,

long'd for the flesh-pots of Egypt, and order'd a roast pig. 

He invited me and two women friends to dine with him; but, it being

brought too soon upon table, he could not resist the temptation,

and ate the whole before we came.
