







While the several companies in the city and country were forming

and learning their exercise, the governor prevail'd with me to take

charge of our North-western frontier, which was infested by the enemy,

and provide for the defense of the inhabitants by raising troops and

building a line of forts.  I undertook this military business, tho' I did

not conceive myself well qualified for it.  He gave me a commission

with full powers, and a parcel of blank commissions for officers,

to be given to whom I thought fit.  I had but little difficulty

in raising men, having soon five hundred and sixty under my command. 

My son, who had in the preceding war been an officer in the army

rais'd against Canada, was my aid-de-camp, and of great use to me. 

The Indians had burned Gnadenhut, a village settled by the Moravians,

and massacred the inhabitants; but the place was thought a good

situation for one of the forts.



In order to march thither, I assembled the companies at Bethlehem,

the chief establishment of those people.  I was surprised to find

it in so good a posture of defense; the destruction of Gnadenhut

had made them apprehend danger.  The principal buildings were

defended by a stockade; they had purchased a quantity of arms and

ammunition from New York, and had even plac'd quantities of small

paving stones between the windows of their high stone houses,

for their women to throw down upon the heads of any Indians

that should attempt to force into them.  The armed brethren, too,

kept watch, and reliev'd as methodically as in any garrison town. 

In conversation with the bishop, Spangenberg, I mention'd this

my surprise; for, knowing they had obtained an act of Parliament

exempting them from military duties in the colonies, I had

suppos'd they were conscientiously scrupulous of bearing arms. 

He answer'd me that it was not one of their established principles,

but that, at the time of their obtaining that act, it was thought

to be a principle with many of their people.  On this occasion,

however, they, to their surprise, found it adopted by but a few. 

It seems they were either deceiv'd in themselves, or deceiv'd

the Parliament; but common sense, aided by present danger,

will sometimes be too strong for whimsical opinions.



It was the beginning of January when we set out upon this business

of building forts.  I sent one detachment toward the Minisink,

with instructions to erect one for the security of that upper part of

the country, and another to the lower part, with similar instructions;

and I concluded to go myself with the rest of my force to Gnadenhut,

where a fort was tho't more immediately necessary.  The Moravians

procur'd me five waggons for our tools, stores, baggage, etc.



Just before we left Bethlehem, eleven farmers, who had been driven

from their plantations by the Indians, came to me requesting a supply

of firearms, that they might go back and fetch off their cattle. 

I gave them each a gun with suitable ammunition.  We had not march'd

many miles before it began to rain, and it continued raining all day;

there were no habitations on the road to shelter us, till we arriv'd

near night at the house of a German, where, and in his barn,

we were all huddled together, as wet as water could make us. 

It was well we were not attack'd in our march, for our arms were of

the most ordinary sort, and our men could not keep their gun locks dry. 

The Indians are dextrous in contrivances for that purpose, which we

had not.  They met that day the eleven poor farmers above mentioned,

and killed ten of them.  The one who escap'd inform'd that his and

his companions' guns would not go off, the priming being wet with

the rain.



The next day being fair, we continu'd our march, and arriv'd at

the desolated Gnadenhut.  There was a saw-mill near, round which were

left several piles of boards, with which we soon hutted ourselves;

an operation the more necessary at that inclement season, as we

had no tents.  Our first work was to bury more effectually the dead

we found there, who had been half interr'd by the country people.



The next morning our fort was plann'd and mark'd out, the circumference

measuring four hundred and fifty-five feet, which would require

as many palisades to be made of trees, one with another,

of a foot diameter each.  Our axes, of which we had seventy,

were immediately set to work to cut down trees, and, our men

being dextrous in the use of them, great despatch was made. 

Seeing the trees fall so fast, I had the curiosity to look at my watch

when two men began to cut at a pine; in six minutes they had it upon

the ground, and I found it of fourteen inches diameter.  Each pine

made three palisades of eighteen feet long, pointed at one end. 

While these were preparing, our other men dug a trench all round,

of three feet deep, in which the palisades were to be planted;

and, our waggons, the bodys being taken off, and the fore and hind

wheels separated by taking out the pin which united the two parts

of the perch, we had ten carriages, with two horses each, to bring

the palisades from the woods to the spot.  When they were set up,

our carpenters built a stage of boards all round within, about six

feet high, for the men to stand on when to fire thro' the loopholes. 

We had one swivel gun, which we mounted on one of the angles,

and fir'd it as soon as fix'd, to let the Indians know, if any

were within hearing, that we had such pieces; and thus our fort,

if such a magnificent name may be given to so miserable a stockade,

was finish'd in a week, though it rain'd so hard every other day

that the men could not work.



This gave me occasion to observe, that, when men are employ'd, they

are best content'd; for on the days they worked they were good-natur'd

and cheerful, and, with the consciousness of having done a good

day's work, they spent the evening jollily; but on our idle days

they were mutinous and quarrelsome, finding fault with their pork,

the bread, etc., and in continual ill-humor, which put me in mind

of a sea-captain, whose rule it was to keep his men constantly

at work; and, when his mate once told him that they had done

every thing, and there was nothing further to employ them about,

"Oh," says he, "Make them scour the anchor."



This kind of fort, however contemptible, is a sufficient defense

against Indians, who have no cannon.  Finding ourselves now posted

securely, and having a place to retreat to on occasion, we ventur'd

out in parties to scour the adjacent country.  We met with no Indians,

but we found the places on the neighboring hills where they had lain

to watch our proceedings.  There was an art in their contrivance

of those places, that seems worth mention.  It being winter, a fire

was necessary for them; but a common fire on the surface of the ground

would by its light have discovered their position at a distance. 

They had therefore dug holes in the ground about three feet diameter,

and somewhat deeper; we saw where they had with their hatchets cut

off the charcoal from the sides of burnt logs lying in the woods. 

With these coals they had made small fires in the bottom of

the holes, and we observ'd among the weeds and grass the prints

of their bodies, made by their laying all round, with their legs

hanging down in the holes to keep their feet warm, which, with them,

is an essential point.  This kind of fire, so manag'd, could not

discover them, either by its light, flame, sparks, or even smoke: 

it appear'd that their number was not great, and it seems they saw

we were too many to be attacked by them with prospect of advantage.



We had for our chaplain a zealous Presbyterian minister, Mr. Beatty,

who complained to me that the men did not generally attend his prayers

and exhortations.  When they enlisted, they were promised, besides pay

and provisions, a gill of rum a day, which was punctually serv'd

out to them, half in the morning, and the other half in the evening;

and I observ'd they were as punctual in attending to receive it;

upon which I said to Mr. Beatty, "It is, perhaps, below the dignity

of your profession to act as steward of the rum, but if you were to deal

it out and only just after prayers, you would have them all about you." 

He liked the tho't, undertook the office, and, with the help of a

few hands to measure out the liquor, executed it to satisfaction,

and never were prayers more generally and more punctually attended;

so that I thought this method preferable to the punishment inflicted

by some military laws for non-attendance on divine service.



I had hardly finish'd this business, and got my fort well stor'd

with provisions, when I receiv'd a letter from the governor,

acquainting me that he had call'd the Assembly, and wished my

attendance there, if the posture of affairs on the frontiers

was such that my remaining there was no longer necessary. 

My friends, too, of the Assembly, pressing me by their letters to be,

if possible, at the meeting, and my three intended forts being

now compleated, and the inhabitants contented to remain on their farms

under that protection, I resolved to return; the more willingly,

as a New England officer, Colonel Clapham, experienced in Indian war,

being on a visit to our establishment, consented to accept the command. 

I gave him a commission, and, parading the garrison, had it

read before them, and introduc'd him to them as an officer who,

from his skill in military affairs, was much more fit to command them

than myself; and, giving them a little exhortation, took my leave. 

I was escorted as far as Bethlehem, where I rested a few days to

recover from the fatigue I had undergone.  The first night, being in

a good bed, I could hardly sleep, it was so different from my hard

lodging on the floor of our hut at Gnaden wrapt only in a blanket or two.



While at Bethlehem, I inquir'd a little into the practice of

the Moravians:  some of them had accompanied me, and all were very

kind to me.  I found they work'd for a common stock, eat at common

tables, and slept in common dormitories, great numbers together. 

In the dormitories I observed loopholes, at certain distances all

along just under the ceiling, which I thought judiciously placed

for change of air.  I was at their church, where I was entertain'd

with good musick, the organ being accompanied with violins, hautboys,

flutes, clarinets, etc.  I understood that their sermons were not

usually preached to mixed congregations of men, women, and children,

as is our common practice, but that they assembled sometimes

the married men, at other times their wives, then the young men,

the young women, and the little children, each division by itself. 

The sermon I heard was to the latter, who came in and were plac'd in rows

on benches; the boys under the conduct of a young man, their tutor,

and the girls conducted by a young woman.  The discourse seem'd

well adapted to their capacities, and was deliver'd in a pleasing,

familiar manner, coaxing them, as it were, to be good.  They behav'd

very orderly, but looked pale and unhealthy, which made me suspect

they were kept too much within doors, or not allow'd sufficient exercise.



I inquir'd concerning the Moravian marriages, whether the report

was true that they were by lot.  I was told that lots were us'd

only in particular cases; that generally, when a young man found

himself dispos'd to marry, he inform'd the elders of his class,

who consulted the elder ladies that govern'd the young women. 

As these elders of the different sexes were well acquainted

with the tempers and dispositions of their respective pupils,

they could best judge what matches were suitable, and their judgments

were generally acquiesc'd in; but if, for example, it should happen

that two or three young women were found to be equally proper

for the young man, the lot was then recurred to.  I objected,

if the matches are not made by the mutual choice of the parties,

some of them may chance to be very unhappy.  "And so they may,"

answer'd my informer, "if you let the parties chuse for themselves;"

which, indeed, I could not deny.



Being returned to Philadelphia, I found the association went

on swimmingly, the inhabitants that were not Quakers having pretty

generally come into it, formed themselves into companies, and chose

their captains, lieutenants, and ensigns, according to the new law. 

Dr. B. visited me, and gave me an account of the pains he had taken

to spread a general good liking to the law, and ascribed much to

those endeavors.  I had had the vanity to ascribe all to my Dialogue;

however, not knowing but that he might be in the right, I let him enjoy

his opinion, which I take to be generally the best way in such cases. 

The officers, meeting, chose me to be colonel of the regiment,

which I this time accepted.  I forget how many companies we had,

but we paraded about twelve hundred well-looking men, with a company

of artillery, who had been furnished with six brass field-pieces,

which they had become so expert in the use of as to fire twelve times

in a minute.  The first time I reviewed my regiment they accompanied me

to my house, and would salute me with some rounds fired before my door,

which shook down and broke several glasses of my electrical apparatus. 

And my new honour proved not much less brittle; for all our

commissions were soon after broken by a repeal of the law in England.



During this short time of my colonelship, being about to set out on

a journey to Virginia, the officers of my regiment took it into their

heads that it would be proper for them to escort me out of town,

as far as the Lower Ferry.  Just as I was getting on horseback they

came to my door, between thirty and forty, mounted, and all in

their uniforms.  I had not been previously acquainted with the project,

or I should have prevented it, being naturally averse to the assuming

of state on any occasion; and I was a good deal chagrin'd at

their appearance, as I could not avoid their accompanying me. 

What made it worse was, that, as soon as we began to move,

they drew their swords and rode with them naked all the way. 

Somebody wrote an account of this to the proprietor, and it gave him

great offense.  No such honor had been paid him when in the province,

nor to any of his governors; and he said it was only proper to

princes of the blood royal, which may be true for aught I know,

who was, and still am, ignorant of the etiquette in such cases.



This silly affair, however, greatly increased his rancour against me,

which was before not a little, on account of my conduct in the

Assembly respecting the exemption of his estate from taxation,

which I had always oppos'd very warmly, and not without severe

reflections on his meanness and injustice of contending for it. 

He accused me to the ministry as being the great obstacle to

the king's service, preventing, by my influence in the House,

the proper form of the bills for raising money, and he instanced

this parade with my officers as a proof of my having an intention

to take the government of the province out of his hands by force. 

He also applied to Sir Everard Fawkener, the postmaster-general,

to deprive me of my office; but it had no other effect than to procure

from Sir Everard a gentle admonition.



Notwithstanding the continual wrangle between the governor

and the House, in which I, as a member, had so large a share,

there still subsisted a civil intercourse between that gentleman

and myself, and we never had any personal difference.  I have

sometimes since thought that his little or no resentment against me,

for the answers it was known I drew up to his messages, might be

the effect of professional habit, and that, being bred a lawyer,

he might consider us both as merely advocates for contending clients

in a suit, he for the proprietaries and I for the Assembly. 

He would, therefore, sometimes call in a friendly way to advise

with me on difficult points, and sometimes, tho' not often,

take my advice.



We acted in concert to supply Braddock's army with provisions;

and, when the shocking news arrived of his defeat, the governor sent

in haste for me, to consult with him on measures for preventing

the desertion of the back counties.  I forget now the advice

I gave; but I think it was, that Dunbar should be written to,

and prevail'd with, if possible, to post his troops on the frontiers

for their protection, till, by re-enforcements from the colonies,

he might be able to proceed on the expedition.  And, after my return

from the frontier, he would have had me undertake the conduct

of such an expedition with provincial troops, for the reduction

of Fort Duquesne, Dunbar and his men being otherwise employed; and he

proposed to commission me as general.  I had not so good an opinion

of my military abilities as he profess'd to have, and I believe his

professions must have exceeded his real sentiments; but probably he

might think that my popularity would facilitate the raising of the men,

and my influence in Assembly, the grant of money to pay them,

and that, perhaps, without taxing the proprietary estate.  Finding me

not so forward to engage as he expected, the project was dropt,

and he soon after left the government, being superseded by Captain Denny.



Before I proceed in relating the part I had in public affairs under

this new governor's administration, it may not be amiss here to give

some account of the rise and progress of my philosophical reputation.



In 1746, being at Boston, I met there with a Dr. Spence, who was lately

arrived from Scotland, and show'd me some electric experiments. 

They were imperfectly perform'd, as he was not very expert; but, being on

a subject quite new to me, they equally surpris'd and pleased me. 

Soon after my return to Philadelphia, our library company receiv'd

from Mr. P. Collinson, Fellow of the Royal Society of London,

a present of a glass tube, with some account of the use of it

in making such experiments.  I eagerly seized the opportunity

of repeating what I had seen at Boston; and, by much practice,

acquir'd great readiness in performing those, also, which we had

an account of from England, adding a number of new ones.  I say

much practice, for my house was continually full, for some time,

with people who came to see these new wonders.



To divide a little this incumbrance among my friends, I caused

a number of similar tubes to be blown at our glass-house,

with which they furnish'd themselves, so that we had at length

several performers.  Among these, the principal was Mr. Kinnersley,

an ingenious neighbor, who, being out of business, I encouraged

to undertake showing the experiments for money, and drew up for him

two lectures, in which the experiments were rang'd in such order,

and accompanied with such explanations in such method, as that

the foregoing should assist in comprehending the following. 

He procur'd an elegant apparatus for the purpose, in which all

the little machines that I had roughly made for myself were nicely

form'd by instrument-makers. His lectures were well attended,

and gave great satisfaction; and after some time he went thro'

the colonies, exhibiting them in every capital town, and pick'd up

some money.  In the West India islands, indeed, it was with difficulty

the experiments could be made, from the general moisture of the air.



Oblig'd as we were to Mr. Collinson for his present of the tube, etc., I

thought it right he should be inform'd of our success in using it,

and wrote him several letters containing accounts of our experiments. 

He got them read in the Royal Society, where they were not at first

thought worth so much notice as to be printed in their Transactions. 

One paper, which I wrote for Mr. Kinnersley, on the sameness of

lightning with electricity, I sent to Dr. Mitchel, an acquaintance

of mine, and one of the members also of that society, who wrote me

word that it had been read, but was laughed at by the connoisseurs. 

The papers, however, being shown to Dr. Fothergill, he thought them

of too much value to be stifled, and advis'd the printing of them. 

Mr. Collinson then gave them to Cave for publication in his

Gentleman's Magazine; but he chose to print them separately in

a pamphlet, and Dr. Fothergill wrote the preface.  Cave, it seems,

judged rightly for his profit, for by the additions that arrived

afterward they swell'd to a quarto volume, which has had five editions,

and cost him nothing for copy-money.



It was, however, some time before those papers were much taken notice

of in England.  A copy of them happening to fall into the hands

of the Count de Buffon, a philosopher deservedly of great reputation

in France, and, indeed, all over Europe, he prevailed with M. Dalibard

to translate them into French, and they were printed at Paris. 

The publication offended the Abbe Nollet, preceptor in Natural Philosophy

to the royal family, and an able experimenter, who had form'd and

publish'd a theory of electricity, which then had the general vogue. 

He could not at first believe that such a work came from America,

and said it must have been fabricated by his enemies at Paris, to decry

his system.  Afterwards, having been assur'd that there really existed

such a person as Franklin at Philadelphia, which he had doubted,

he wrote and published a volume of Letters, chiefly address'd to me,

defending his theory, and denying the verity of my experiments,

and of the positions deduc'd from them.



I once purpos'd answering the abbe, and actually began the answer;

but, on consideration that my writings contain'd a description

of experiments which any one might repeat and verify, and if not

to be verifi'd, could not be defended; or of observations offer'd

as conjectures, and not delivered dogmatically, therefore not

laying me under any obligation to defend them; and reflecting

that a dispute between two persons, writing in different languages,

might be lengthened greatly by mistranslations, and thence

misconceptions of one another's meaning, much of one of the abbe's

letters being founded on an error in the translation, I concluded

to let my papers shift for themselves, believing it was better

to spend what time I could spare from public business in making

new experiments, than in disputing about those already made. 

I therefore never answered M. Nollet, and the event gave me no

cause to repent my silence; for my friend M. le Roy, of the Royal

Academy of Sciences, took up my cause and refuted him; my book

was translated into the Italian, German, and Latin languages;

and the doctrine it contain'd was by degrees universally adopted

by the philosophers of Europe, in preference to that of the abbe;

so that he lived to see himself the last of his sect, except Monsieur

B----, of Paris, his eleve and immediate disciple.



What gave my book the more sudden and general celebrity,

was the success of one of its proposed experiments, made by Messrs. 

Dalibard and De Lor at Marly, for drawing lightning from the clouds. 

This engag'd the public attention every where.  M. de Lor,

who had an apparatus for experimental philosophy, and lectur'd

in that branch of science, undertook to repeat what he called

the Philadelphia Experiments; and, after they were performed before

the king and court, all the curious of Paris flocked to see them. 

I will not swell this narrative with an account of that capital

experiment, nor of the infinite pleasure I receiv'd in the success

of a similar one I made soon after with a kite at Philadelphia,

as both are to be found in the histories of electricity.



Dr. Wright, an English physician, when at Paris, wrote to a friend,

who was of the Royal Society, an account of the high esteem my

experiments were in among the learned abroad, and of their wonder

that my writings had been so little noticed in England.  The society,

on this, resum'd the consideration of the letters that had been read

to them; and the celebrated Dr. Watson drew up a summary account

of them, and of all I had afterwards sent to England on the subject,

which be accompanied with some praise of the writer.  This summary

was then printed in their Transactions; and some members of the society

in London, particularly the very ingenious Mr. Canton, having verified

the experiment of procuring lightning from the clouds by a pointed rod,

and acquainting them with the success, they soon made me more than

amends for the slight with which they had before treated me. 

Without my having made any application for that honor, they chose me

a member, and voted that I should be excus'd the customary payments,

which would have amounted to twenty-five guineas; and ever since

have given me their Transactions gratis.  They also presented

me with the gold medal of Sir Godfrey Copley for the year 1753,

the delivery of which was accompanied by a very handsome speech

of the president, Lord Macclesfield, wherein I was highly honoured.



Our new governor, Captain Denny, brought over for me the before-mentioned

medal from the Royal Society, which he presented to me at an

entertainment given him by the city.  He accompanied it with very

polite expressions of his esteem for me, having, as he said, been long

acquainted with my character.  After dinner, when the company,

as was customary at that time, were engag'd in drinking, he took

me aside into another room, and acquainted me that he had been

advis'd by his friends in England to cultivate a friendship with me,

as one who was capable of giving him the best advice, and of

contributing most effectually to the making his administration easy;

that he therefore desired of all things to have a good understanding

with me, and he begg'd me to be assur'd of his readiness on all

occasions to render me every service that might be in his power. 

He said much to me, also, of the proprietor's good disposition

towards the province, and of the advantage it might be to us all,

and to me in particular, if the opposition that had been so long

continu'd to his measures was dropt, and harmony restor'd between

him and the people; in effecting which, it was thought no one could

be more serviceable than myself; and I might depend on adequate

acknowledgments and recompenses, etc., etc.  The drinkers,

finding we did not return immediately to the table, sent us

a decanter of Madeira, which the governor made liberal use of,

and in proportion became more profuse of his solicitations and promises.



My answers were to this purpose:  that my circumstances, thanks to God,

were such as to make proprietary favours unnecessary to me;

and that, being a member of the Assembly, I could not possibly accept

of any; that, however, I had no personal enmity to the proprietary,

and that, whenever the public measures he propos'd should appear

to be for the good of the people, no one should espouse and forward

them more zealously than myself; my past opposition having been

founded on this, that the measures which had been urged were evidently

intended to serve the proprietary interest, with great prejudice

to that of the people; that I was much obliged to him (the governor)

for his professions of regard to me, and that he might rely on every

thing in my power to make his administration as easy as possible,

hoping at the same time that he had not brought with him the same

unfortunate instruction his predecessor had been hamper'd with.



On this he did not then explain himself; but when he afterwards came

to do business with the Assembly, they appear'd again, the disputes

were renewed, and I was as active as ever in the opposition,

being the penman, first, of the request to have a communication

of the instructions, and then of the remarks upon them, which may

be found in the votes of the time, and in the Historical Review I

afterward publish'd. But between us personally no enmity arose;

we were often together; he was a man of letters, had seen much of

the world, and was very entertaining and pleasing in conversation. 

He gave me the first information that my old friend Jas.  Ralph was

still alive; that he was esteem'd one of the best political writers

in England; had been employ'd in the dispute between Prince Frederic

and the king, and had obtain'd a pension of three hundred a year;

that his reputation was indeed small as a poet, Pope having damned

his poetry in the Dunciad; but his prose was thought as good as any

man's.



<15>The Assembly finally finding the proprietary obstinately persisted

in manacling their deputies with instructions inconsistent not only

with the privileges of the people, but with the service of the crown,

resolv'd to petition the king against them, and appointed me their

agent to go over to England, to present and support the petition. 

The House had sent up a bill to the governor, granting a sum

of sixty thousand pounds for the king's use (ten thousand pounds

of which was subjected to the orders of the then general,

Lord Loudoun), which the governor absolutely refus'd to pass,

in compliance with his instructions.



     <15> The many unanimous resolves of the Assembly--

          what date?-- [Marg. note.]



I had agreed with Captain Morris, of the paquet at New York,

for my passage, and my stores were put on board, when Lord Loudoun

arriv'd at Philadelphia, expressly, as he told me, to endeavor

an accommodation between the governor and Assembly, that his

majesty's service might not be obstructed by their dissensions. 

Accordingly, he desir'd the governor and myself to meet him, that he

might hear what was to be said on both sides.  We met and discuss'd

the business.  In behalf of the Assembly, I urg'd all the various

arguments that may be found in the public papers of that time,

which were of my writing, and are printed with the minutes of

the Assembly; and the governor pleaded his instructions; the bond he

had given to observe them, and his ruin if he disobey'd, yet seemed

not unwilling to hazard himself if Lord Loudoun would advise it. 

This his lordship did not chuse to do, though I once thought I

had nearly prevail'd with him to do it; but finally he rather chose

to urge the compliance of the Assembly; and he entreated me to use

my endeavours with them for that purpose, declaring that he would

spare none of the king's troops for the defense of our frontiers,

and that, if we did not continue to provide for that defense ourselves,

they must remain expos'd to the enemy.



I acquainted the House with what had pass'd, and, presenting them

with a set of resolutions I had drawn up, declaring our rights,

and that we did not relinquish our claim to those rights, but only

suspended the exercise of them on this occasion thro' force,

against which we protested, they at length agreed to drop that bill,

and frame another conformable to the proprietary instructions. 

This of course the governor pass'd, and I was then at liberty

to proceed on my voyage.  But, in the meantime, the paquet

had sailed with my sea-stores, which was some loss to me,

and my only recompense was his lordship's thanks for my service,

all the credit of obtaining the accommodation falling to his share.



He set out for New York before me; and, as the time for dispatching

the paquet-boats was at his disposition, and there were two then

remaining there, one of which, he said, was to sail very soon,

I requested to know the precise time, that I might not miss her

by any delay of mine.  His answer was, "I have given out that she

is to sail on Saturday next; but I may let you know, entre nous,

that if you are there by Monday morning, you will be in time,

but do not delay longer."  By some accidental hinderance at a ferry,

it was Monday noon before I arrived, and I was much afraid

she might have sailed, as the wind was fair; but I was soon

made easy by the information that she was still in the harbor,

and would not move till the next day.  One would imagine that I

was now on the very point of departing for Europe.  I thought so;

but I was not then so well acquainted with his lordship's character,

of which indecision was one of the strongest features.  I shall

give some instances.  It was about the beginning of April that I

came to New York, and I think it was near the end of June before

we sail'd. There were then two of the paquet-boats, which had

been long in port, but were detained for the general's letters,

which were always to be ready to-morrow. Another paquet arriv'd;

she too was detain'd; and, before we sail'd, a fourth was expected. 

Ours was the first to be dispatch'd, as having been there longest. 

Passengers were engag'd in all, and some extremely impatient

to be gone, and the merchants uneasy about their letters,

and the orders they had given for insurance (it being war time)

for fall goods! but their anxiety avail'd nothing; his lordship's

letters were not ready; and yet whoever waited on him found him

always at his desk, pen in hand, and concluded he must needs

write abundantly.



Going myself one morning to pay my respects, I found in his antechamber

one Innis, a messenger of Philadelphia, who had come from thence

express with a paquet from Governor Denny for the General. 

He delivered to me some letters from my friends there, which occasion'd

my inquiring when he was to return, and where be lodg'd, that I

might send some letters by him.  He told me he was order'd to call

to-morrow at nine for the general's answer to the governor, and should

set off immediately.  I put my letters into his hands the same day. 

A fortnight after I met him again in the same place.  "So, you

are soon return'd, Innis?"  "Returned! no, I am not gone yet." 

"How so?"  "I have called here by order every morning these two

weeks past for his lordship's letter, and it is not yet ready." 

"Is it possible, when he is so great a writer? for I see him

constantly at his escritoire."  "Yes," says Innis, "but he is like

St. George on the signs, always on horseback, and never rides on!" 

This observation of the messenger was, it seems, well founded; for,

when in England, I understood that Mr. Pitt gave it as one reason

for removing this general, and sending Generals Amherst and Wolfe,

that the minister never heard from him, and could not know what he

was doing.



This daily expectation of sailing, and all the three paquets going

down to Sandy Hook, to join the fleet there, the passengers thought

it best to be on board, lest by a sudden order the ships should sail,

and they be left behind.  There, if I remember right, we were about

six weeks, consuming our sea-stores, and oblig'd to procure more. 

At length the fleet sail'd, the General and all his army on board,

bound to Louisburg, with intent to besiege and take that fortress;

all the paquet-boats in company ordered to attend the General's ship,

ready to receive his dispatches when they should be ready. 

We were out five days before we got a letter with leave to part,

and then our ship quitted the fleet and steered for England.  The other

two paquets he still detained, carried them with him to Halifax,

where he stayed some time to exercise the men in sham attacks

upon sham forts, then alter'd his mind as to besieging Louisburg,

and return'd to New York, with all his troops, together with the two

paquets above mentioned, and all their passengers!  During his

absence the French and savages had taken Fort George, on the frontier

of that province, and the savages had massacred many of the garrison

after capitulation.



I saw afterwards in London Captain Bonnell, who commanded one

of those paquets.  He told me that, when he had been detain'd

a month, he acquainted his lordship that his ship was grown foul,

to a degree that must necessarily hinder her fast sailing, a point

of consequence for a paquet-boat, and requested an allowance

of time to heave her down and clean her bottom.  He was asked

how long time that would require.  He answer'd, three days. 

The general replied, "If you can do it in one day, I give leave;

otherwise not; for you must certainly sail the day after to-morrow."

So he never obtain'd leave, though detained afterwards from day

to day during full three months.



I saw also in London one of Bonnell's passengers, who was so enrag'd

against his lordship for deceiving and detaining him so long

at New York, and then carrying him to Halifax and back again,

that he swore he would sue for damages.  Whether he did or not,

I never heard; but, as he represented the injury to his affairs,

it was very considerable.



On the whole, I wonder'd much how such a man came to be intrusted

with so important a business as the conduct of a great army;

but, having since seen more of the great world, and the means

of obtaining, and motives for giving places, my wonder is diminished. 

General Shirley, on whom the command of the army devolved upon

the death of Braddock, would, in my opinion, if continued in place,

have made a much better campaign than that of Loudoun in 1757,

which was frivolous, expensive, and disgraceful to our nation

beyond conception; for, tho' Shirley was not a bred soldier, he was

sensible and sagacious in himself, and attentive to good advice

from others, capable of forming judicious plans, and quick and active

in carrying them into execution.  Loudoun, instead of defending

the colonies with his great army, left them totally expos'd while

he paraded idly at Halifax, by which means Fort George was lost,

besides, he derang'd all our mercantile operations, and distress'd

our trade, by a long embargo on the exportation of provisions,

on pretence of keeping supplies from being obtain'd by the enemy,

but in reality for beating down their price in favor of the contractors,

in whose profits, it was said, perhaps from suspicion only, he had

a share.  And, when at length the embargo was taken off, by neglecting

to send notice of it to Charlestown, the Carolina fleet was detain'd

near three months longer, whereby their bottoms were so much damaged

by the worm that a great part of them foundered in their passage home.



Shirley was, I believe, sincerely glad of being relieved from

so burdensome a charge as the conduct of an army must be to a man

unacquainted with military business.  I was at the entertainment

given by the city of New York to Lord Loudoun, on his taking upon him

the command.  Shirley, tho' thereby superseded, was present also. 

There was a great company of officers, citizens, and strangers, and,

some chairs having been borrowed in the neighborhood, there was one among

them very low, which fell to the lot of Mr. Shirley.  Perceiving it

as I sat by him, I said, "They have given you, sir, too low a seat." 

"No matter," says he, "Mr. Franklin, I find a low seat the easiest."



While I was, as afore mention'd, detain'd at New York, I receiv'd

all the accounts of the provisions, etc., that I had furnish'd

to Braddock, some of which accounts could not sooner be obtain'd

from the different persons I had employ'd to assist in the business. 

I presented them to Lord Loudoun, desiring to be paid the ballance. 

He caus'd them to be regularly examined by the proper officer, who,

after comparing every article with its voucher, certified them

to be right; and the balance due for which his lordship promis'd

to give me an order on the paymaster.  This was, however, put off

from time to time; and, tho' I call'd often for it by appointment,

I did not get it.  At length, just before my departure, he told me

he had, on better consideration, concluded not to mix his accounts

with those of his predecessors.  "And you," says he, "when in England,

have only to exhibit your accounts at the treasury, and you will be

paid immediately."



I mention'd, but without effect, the great and unexpected expense I

had been put to by being detain'd so long at New York, as a reason

for my desiring to be presently paid; and on my observing that it was

not right I should be put to any further trouble or delay in obtaining

the money I had advanc'd, as I charged no commission for my service,

"0, sir," says he, "you must not think of persuading us that you are

no gainer; we understand better those affairs, and know that every

one concerned in supplying the army finds means, in the doing it,

to fill his own pockets."  I assur'd him that was not my case,

and that I had not pocketed a farthing; but he appear'd clearly

not to believe me; and, indeed, I have since learnt that immense

fortunes are often made in such employments.  As to my ballance,

I am not paid it to this day, of which more hereafter.



Our captain of the paquet had boasted much, before we sailed,

of the swiftness of his ship; unfortunately, when we came to sea,

she proved the dullest of ninety-six sail, to his no small mortification. 

After many conjectures respecting the cause, when we were near

another ship almost as dull as ours, which, however, gain'd upon us,

the captain ordered all hands to come aft, and stand as near the ensign

staff as possible.  We were, passengers included, about forty persons. 

While we stood there, the ship mended her pace, and soon left her

neighbour far behind, which prov'd clearly what our captain suspected,

that she was loaded too much by the head.  The casks of water,

it seems, had been all plac'd forward; these he therefore order'd

to be mov'd further aft, on which the ship recover'd her character,

and proved the sailer in the fleet.



The captain said she had once gone at the rate of thirteen knots,

which is accounted thirteen miles per hour.  We had on board,

as a passenger, Captain Kennedy, of the Navy, who contended that it

was impossible, and that no ship ever sailed so fast, and that

there must have been some error in the division of the log-line,

or some mistake in heaving the log.  A wager ensu'd between the

two captains, to be decided when there should be sufficient wind. 

Kennedy thereupon examin'd rigorously the log-line, and,

being satisfi'd with that, he determin'd to throw the log himself. 

Accordingly some days after, when the wind blew very fair and fresh,

and the captain of the paquet, Lutwidge, said he believ'd she then

went at the rate of thirteen knots, Kennedy made the experiment,

and own'd his wager lost.



The above fact I give for the sake of the following observation. 

It has been remark'd, as an imperfection in the art of ship-building,

that it can never be known, till she is tried, whether a new ship will

or will not be a good sailer; for that the model of a good-sailing

ship has been exactly follow'd in a new one, which has prov'd, on

the contrary, remarkably dull.  I apprehend that this may partly be

occasion'd by the different opinions of seamen respecting the modes

of lading, rigging, and sailing of a ship; each has his system;

and the same vessel, laden by the judgment and orders of one captain,

shall sail better or worse than when by the orders of another. 

Besides, it scarce ever happens that a ship is form'd, fitted for

the sea, and sail'd by the same person.  One man builds the hull,

another rigs her, a third lades and sails her.  No one of these has

the advantage of knowing all the ideas and experience of the others,

and, therefore, can not draw just conclusions from a combination

of the whole.



Even in the simple operation of sailing when at sea, I have

often observ'd different judgments in the officers who commanded

the successive watches, the wind being the same.  One would have

the sails trimm'd sharper or flatter than another, so that they

seem'd to have no certain rule to govern by.  Yet I think a set

of experiments might be instituted, first, to determine the most

proper form of the hull for swift sailing; next, the best dimensions

and properest place for the masts:  then the form and quantity

of sails, and their position, as the wind may be; and, lastly,

the disposition of the lading.  This is an age of experiments,

and I think a set accurately made and combin'd would be of great use. 

I am persuaded, therefore, that ere long some ingenious philosopher

will undertake it, to whom I wish success.



We were several times chas'd in our passage, but outsail'd every thing,

and in thirty days had soundings.  We had a good observation,

and the captain judg'd himself so near our port, Falmouth, that,

if we made a good run in the night, we might be off the mouth

of that harbor in the morning, and by running in the night might

escape the notice of the enemy's privateers, who often crus'd near

the entrance of the channel.  Accordingly, all the sail was set

that we could possibly make, and the wind being very fresh and fair,

we went right before it, and made great way.  The captain,

after his observation, shap'd his course, as he thought, so as to

pass wide of the Scilly Isles; but it seems there is sometimes

a strong indraught setting up St. George's Channel, which deceives

seamen and caused the loss of Sir Cloudesley Shovel's squadron. 

This indraught was probably the cause of what happened to us.



We had a watchman plac'd in the bow, to whom they often called,

"Look well out before there," and he as often answered, "Ay ay;

" but perhaps had his eyes shut, and was half asleep at the time,

they sometimes answering, as is said, mechanically; for he did not

see a light just before us, which had been hid by the studdingsails

from the man at the helm, and from the rest of the watch,

but by an accidental yaw of the ship was discover'd, and occasion'd

a great alarm, we being very near it, the light appearing

to me as big as a cart-wheel. It was midnight, and our captain

fast asleep; but Captain Kennedy, jumping upon deck, and seeing

the danger, ordered the ship to wear round, all sails standing;

an operation dangerous to the masts, but it carried us clear,

and we escaped shipwreck, for we were running right upon the rocks

on which the light-house was erected.  This deliverance impressed

me strongly with the utility of light-houses, and made me resolve

to encourage the building more of them in America, if I should live

to return there.



In the morning it was found by the soundings, etc., that we were near

our port, but a thick fog hid the land from our sight.  About nine

o'clock the fog began to rise, and seem'd to be lifted up from

the water like the curtain at a play-house, discovering underneath,

the town of Falmouth, the vessels in its harbor, and the fields

that surrounded it.  This was a most pleasing spectacle to those

who had been so long without any other prospects than the uniform

view of a vacant ocean, and it gave us the more pleasure as we

were now free from the anxieties which the state of war occasion'd.



I set out immediately, with my son, for London, and we only stopt

a little by the way to view Stonehenge on Salisbury Plain, and Lord

Pembroke's house and gardens, with his very curious antiquities

at Wilton.  We arrived in London the 27th of July, 1757.<16>



     <16> Here terminates the Autobiography, as published by

          Wm. Temple Franklin and his successors.  What follows

          was written in the last year of Dr. Franklin's life,

          and was first printed (in English) in Mr. Bigelow's

          edition of 1868.--ED.



AS SOON as I was settled in a lodging Mr. Charles had provided for me,

I went to visit Dr. Fothergill, to whom I was strongly recommended,

and whose counsel respecting my proceedings I was advis'd to obtain. 

He was against an immediate complaint to government, and thought

the proprietaries should first be personally appli'd to, who might

possibly be induc'd by the interposition and persuasion of some

private friends, to accommodate matters amicably.  I then waited

on my old friend and correspondent, Mr. Peter Collinson, who told

me that John Hanbury, the great Virginia merchant, had requested

to be informed when I should arrive, that he might carry me to Lord

Granville's, who was then President of the Council and wished to see

me as soon as possible.  I agreed to go with him the next morning. 

Accordingly Mr. Hanbury called for me and took me in his carriage

to that nobleman's, who receiv'd me with great civility; and after

some questions respecting the present state of affairs in America

and discourse thereupon, he said to me:  "You Americans have wrong

ideas of the nature of your constitution; you contend that the king's

instructions to his governors are not laws, and think yourselves

at liberty to regard or disregard them at your own discretion. 

But those instructions are not like the pocket instructions given

to a minister going abroad, for regulating his conduct in some

trifling point of ceremony.  They are first drawn up by judges

learned in the laws; they are then considered, debated, and perhaps

amended in Council, after which they are signed by the king. 

They are then, so far as they relate to you, the law of the land,

for the king is the LEGISLATOR OF THE COLONIES."  I told his

lordship this was new doctrine to me.  I had always understood

from our charters that our laws were to be made by our Assemblies,

to be presented indeed to the king for his royal assent,

but that being once given the king could not repeal or alter them. 

And as the Assemblies could not make permanent laws without

his assent, so neither could he make a law for them without theirs. 

He assur'd me I was totally mistaken.  I did not think so, however,

and his lordship's conversation having a little alarm'd me as to

what might be the sentiments of the court concerning us, I wrote

it down as soon as I return'd to my lodgings.  I recollected that

about 20 years before, a clause in a bill brought into Parliament

by the ministry had propos'd to make the king's instructions laws

in the colonies, but the clause was thrown out by the Commons,

for which we adored them as our friends and friends of liberty,

till by their conduct towards us in 1765 it seem'd that they had

refus'd that point of sovereignty to the king only that they might

reserve it for themselves.



After some days, Dr. Fothergill having spoken to the proprietaries,

they agreed to a meeting with me at Mr. T. Penn's house in Spring Garden. 

The conversation at first consisted of mutual declarations

of disposition to reasonable accommodations, but I suppose each

party had its own ideas of what should be meant by reasonable. 

We then went into consideration of our several points of complaint,

which I enumerated.  The proprietaries justify'd their conduct

as well as they could, and I the Assembly's. We now appeared

very wide, and so far from each other in our opinions as to

discourage all hope of agreement.  However, it was concluded

that I should give them the heads of our complaints in writing,

and they promis'd then to consider them.  I did so soon after,

but they put the paper into the hands of their solicitor,

Ferdinand John Paris, who managed for them all their law business

in their great suit with the neighbouring proprietary of Maryland,

Lord Baltimore, which had subsisted 70 years, and wrote for them

all their papers and messages in their dispute with the Assembly. 

He was a proud, angry man, and as I had occasionally in the answers

of the Assembly treated his papers with some severity, they being

really weak in point of argument and haughty in expression,

he had conceived a mortal enmity to me, which discovering itself

whenever we met, I declin'd the proprietary's proposal that he

and I should discuss the heads of complaint between our two selves,

and refus'd treating with any one but them.  They then by his advice

put the paper into the hands of the Attorney and Solicitor-General

for their opinion and counsel upon it, where it lay unanswered

a year wanting eight days, during which time I made frequent demands

of an answer from the proprietaries, but without obtaining any other

than that they had not yet received the opinion of the Attorney

and Solicitor-General.  What it was when they did receive it I

never learnt, for they did not communicate it to me, but sent a long

message to the Assembly drawn and signed by Paris, reciting my paper,

complaining of its want of formality, as a rudeness on my part,

and giving a flimsy justification of their conduct, adding that they

should be willing to accommodate matters if the Assembly would send

out some person of candour to treat with them for that purpose,

intimating thereby that I was not such.



The want of formality or rudeness was, probably, my not having

address'd the paper to them with their assum'd titles of True

and Absolute Proprietaries of the Province of Pennsylvania,

which I omitted as not thinking it necessary in a paper,

the intention of which was only to reduce to a certainty by writing,

what in conversation I had delivered viva voce.



But during this delay, the Assembly having prevailed with Gov'r

Denny to pass an act taxing the proprietary estate in common with

the estates of the people, which was the grand point in dispute,

they omitted answering the message.



When this act however came over, the proprietaries, counselled

by Paris, determined to oppose its receiving the royal assent. 

Accordingly they petition'd the king in Council, and a hearing was

appointed in which two lawyers were employ'd by them against the act,

and two by me in support of it.  They alledg'd that the act was

intended to load the proprietary estate in order to spare those

of the people, and that if it were suffer'd to continue in force,

and the proprietaries who were in odium with the people, left to their

mercy in proportioning the taxes, they would inevitably be ruined. 

We reply'd that the act had no such intention, and would have no

such effect.  That the assessors were honest and discreet men under

an oath to assess fairly and equitably, and that any advantage each

of them might expect in lessening his own tax by augmenting that of

the proprietaries was too trifling to induce them to perjure themselves. 

This is the purport of what I remember as urged by both sides,

except that we insisted strongly on the mischievous consequences

that must attend a repeal, for that the money, L100,000, being printed

and given to the king's use, expended in his service, and now spread

among the people, the repeal would strike it dead in their hands

to the ruin of many, and the total discouragement of future grants,

and the selfishness of the proprietors in soliciting such a

general catastrophe, merely from a groundless fear of their estate

being taxed too highly, was insisted on in the strongest terms. 

On this, Lord Mansfield, one of the counsel rose, and beckoning me

took me into the clerk's chamber, while the lawyers were pleading,

and asked me if I was really of opinion that no injury would be done

the proprietary estate in the execution of the act.  I said certainly. 

"Then," says he, "you can have little objection to enter into

an engagement to assure that point."  I answer'd, "None at all." 

He then call'd in Paris, and after some discourse, his lordship's

proposition was accepted on both sides; a paper to the purpose was

drawn up by the Clerk of the Council, which I sign'd with Mr. Charles,

who was also an Agent of the Province for their ordinary affairs,

when Lord Mansfield returned to the Council Chamber, where finally

the law was allowed to pass.  Some changes were however recommended

and we also engaged they should be made by a subsequent law,

but the Assembly did not think them necessary; for one year's tax

having been levied by the act before the order of Council arrived,

they appointed a committee to examine the proceedings of the assessors,

and on this committee they put several particular friends of

the proprietaries.  After a full enquiry, they unanimously sign'd

a report that they found the tax had been assess'd with perfect equity.



The Assembly looked into my entering into the first part of

the engagement, as an essential service to the Province, since it

secured the credit of the paper money then spread over all the country. 

They gave me their thanks in form when I return'd. But the proprietaries

were enraged at Governor Denny for having pass'd the act, and turn'd

him out with threats of suing him for breach of instructions

which he had given bond to observe.  He, however, having done it

at the instance of the General, and for His Majesty's service,

and having some powerful interest at court, despis'd the threats

and they were never put in execution.  . . . [Unfinished].





CHIEF EVENTS IN FRANKLIN'S LIFE



[Ending, as it does, with the year 1757, the autobiography leaves

important facts un-recorded.  It has seemed advisable, therefore, to

detail the chief events in Franklin's life, from the beginning, in

the following list:



1706    He is born, in Boston, and baptized in the Old South Church.



1714    At the age of eight, enters the Grammar School.



1716    Becomes his father's assistant in the tallow-chandlery business.



1718    Apprenticed to his brother James, printer.



1721    Writes ballads and peddles them, in printed form, in the

        streets; contributes, anonymously, to the "New England

        Courant," and temporarily edits that paper; becomes a

        free-thinker, and a vegetarian.



1723    Breaks his indenture and removes to Philadelphia; obtaining

        employment in Keimer's printing-office; abandons vegetarianism.



1724    Is persuaded by Governor Keith to establish himself independently,

        and goes to London to buy type; works at his trade there, and

        publishes "Dissertation on Liberty and Necessity,

        Pleasure and Pain."



1726    Returns to Philadelphia; after serving as clerk in a dry goods

        store, becomes manager of Keimer's printing-house.



1727    Founds the Junto, or "Leathern Apron" Club.



1728    With Hugh Meredith, opens a printing-office.



1729    Becomes proprietor and editor of the "Pennsylvania Gazette";

        prints, anonymously, "Nature and Necessity of a Paper Currency";

        opens a stationer's shop.



1730    Marries Rebecca Read.



1731    Founds the Philadelphia Library.



1732    Publishes the first number of "Poor Richard's Almanac" under

        the pseudonym of "Richard Saunders." The Almanac, which

        continued for twenty-five years to contain his witty,

        worldly-wise sayings, played a very large part in bringing

        together and molding the American character which was at

        that time made up of so many diverse and scattered types.



1738    Begins to study French, Italian, Spanish, and Latin.



1736    Chosen clerk of the General Assembly; forms the Union Fire

        Company of Philadelphia.



1737    Elected to the Assembly; appointed Deputy Postmaster-General;

        plans a city police.



1742    Invents the open, or "Franklin," stove.



1743    Proposes a plan for an Academy, which is adopted 1749 and

        develops into the University of Pennsylvania.



1744    Establishes the American Philosophical Society.



1746    Publishes a pamphlet, "Plain Truth," on the necessity for

        disciplined defense, and forms a military company; begins

        electrical experiments.



1748    Sells out his printing business; is appointed on the

        Commission of the Peace, chosen to the Common Council,

        and to the Assembly.



1749    Appointed a Commissioner to trade with the Indians.



1751    Aids in founding a hospital.



1752    Experiments with a kite and discovers that lightning is an

        electrical discharge.



1753    Awarded the Copley medal for this discovery, and elected a

        member of the Royal Society; receives the degree of M.A.

        from Yale and Harvard.  Appointed joint Postmaster-General.



1754    Appointed one of the Commissioners from Pennsylvania to the

        Colonial Congress at Albany; proposes a plan for the union

        of the colonies.



1755    Pledges his personal property in order that supplies may be

        raised for Braddock's army; obtains a grant from the Assembly

        in aid of the Crown Point expedition; carries through a bill

        establishing a voluntary militia; is appointed Colonel,

        and takes the field.



1757    Introduces a bill in the Assembly for paving the streets of

        Philadelphia; publishes his famous "Way to Wealth"; goes to

        England to plead the cause of the Assembly against the

        Proprietaries; remains as agent for Pennsylvania; enjoys the

        friendship of the scientific and literary men of the kingdom.



  [HERE THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY BREAKS OFF]



1760    Secures from the Privy Council, by a compromise, a decision

        obliging the Proprietary estates to contribute to the public

        revenue.



1762    Receives the degree of LL.D. from Oxford and Edinburgh; returns

        to America.



1763    Makes a five months' tour of the northern colonies for the

        Purpose of inspecting the post-offices.



1764    Defeated by the Penn faction for reelection to the Assembly;

        sent to England as agent for Pennsylvania.



1765    Endeavors to prevent the passage of the Stamp Act.



1766    Examined before the House of Commons relative to the

        passage of the Stamp Act; appointed agent of Massachusetts,

        New Jersey, and Georgia; visits Gottingen University.



1767    Travels in France and is presented at court.



1769    Procures a telescope for Harvard College.



1772    Elected Associe Etranger of the French Academy.



1774    Dismissed from the office of Postmaster-General; influences

        Thomas Paine to emigrate to America.



1775    Returns to America; chosen a delegate to the Second Continental

        Congress; placed on the committee of secret correspondence;

        appointed one of the commissioners to secure the cooperation

        of Canada.



1776    Placed on the committee to draft a Declaration of Independence;

        chosen president of the Constitutional Committee of Pennsylvania;

        sent to France as agent of the colonies.



1778    Concludes treaties of defensive alliance, and of amity and

        commerce; is received at court.



1779    Appointed Minister Plenipotentiary to France.



1780    Appoints Paul Jones commander of the "Alliance."



1782    Signs the preliminary articles of peace.



1783    Signs the definite treaty of peace.



1785    Returns to America; is chosen President of Pennsylvania;

        reelected 1786.



1787    Reelected President; sent as delegate to the convention for

        framing a Federal Constitution.



1788    Retires from public life.



1790    April 17, dies.  His grave is in the churchyard at Fifth and

        Arch streets, Philadelphia.  Editor.




