



Index.





Aix-la-Chapelle, placed under the Ban.

Arnheim, Field-Marshal:  communicates with Wallenstein;

  marches into Saxon territory; offers alliance to Wallenstein.

Augsburg, Diet of.

Augsburg, Peace of.

Aulic Council.

Austria, House of:  religious and political position; power under Charles V.

Avaux, D', Count.  [See letter D.]



Baden, Margrave of, joins Frederick V.

Bamberg, Bishop of.

Banner, Swedish general:  at Leipzig; enters Magdeburg; joins Oxenstiern;

  relieves Domitz; attacks Imperialists at Wittstock; returns into Pomerania;

  opens the campaign in 1638; retreats through Egra, and dies.

Bavaria, Duke of:  makes cause with the Emperor; attends the Diet at Ratisbon.

Bavaria, Elector of:  he demands Wallenstein's dismissal.  [See Maximilian.]

Bavaria, invasion of, by the Swedes.

Bethlen Gabor, Prince:  menaces Hungary; invades Hungary; marches to Vienna;

  crowned King of Hungary; makes peace with the Emperor;

  breaks truce with the Emperor.  <variant in original:  Bethlem Gabor>

Bohemia:  condition of, and history; invasion of; peace proclaimed.

Bohemian Brethren, edict against.

Bohemian Compact.

Bohemian Diet:  1609; 1619.

Bohemian Insurrection.

Bohemian Letter of Majesty.

Bohemian Reformers at the Diet, 1609.

Brahe, Count, Swedish general.

Brandenburg:  atrocities in; George William Elector of.

Bremen, Bishop of:  assembles troops for Gustavus.

Breze, Marquis of.

Brunn, siege of.

Brunswick, Ulric, Duke of:  forbids Swedes to recruit;

  threatened by Oxenstiern.

Bucquoi:  defeats Mansfeld; death of.

Buttler, Colonel.



Calvinists in the Palatinate and Empire.

Catholic League:  formation of; impart their secrets to the Emperor.

Charles V., Emperor.

Charles Louis, Count Palatine.

Charnasse, agent of Richelieu.

Christian IV. of Denmark:  appointed generalissimo.

Christian, Duke of Brunswick:  serves in Holland; defeated by Tilly; death of.

Christian William, Administrator of Brandenburg:

  enters Magdeburg in disguise.

Conde, Prince de.  <Conde/>

Conti Torquati, Imperialist.



Darmstadt:  William, Landgrave of; George, Landgrave of.

D'Avaux negotiates treaty between Sweden and Poland.

"Defenders of Liberty", the.

Denmark, King of, sues for peace 1645.

Dettingen, Battle of.

Devereux, Captain.

Donauwerth:  banned by the Aulic Council; Swedish officers at.



"Edict of Restitution" signed 1629.

Egra, Castle of, great banquet held at.

Enghien, Duke of, heroic conduct of.

England, political position of.

Evangelical Union:  declaration in favour of, by Matthias;

  moves in support of Bohemian Protestants.



Falkenberg, Dietrich, sent to Magdeburg.

Ferdinand I., Emperor:  character of; position after Augsburg.

Ferdinand II.:  his Popish announcement; as Archduke of Gratz;

  as Archduke of Styria, becomes Emperor; Protestantism in Styria;

  besieged in Vienna; chosen Emperor 1619; rewards Maximilian with Bohemia;

  confiscates estates of Frederick; invests Maximilian with Palatinate;

  attends Diet of Ratisbon; at Mantua; character of, by his confessor;

  negotiations with Sweden; selects Wallenstein as general; gives orders

  to spare Saxony; state of his dominions after the fall of Prague;

  receives news of Lutzen; deprives Wallenstein of command;

  issues orders for his seizure; orders masses for Wallenstein; death.

Ferdinand III.:  King of Hungary and Bohemia; appointed generalissimo;

  elected King of the Romans; becomes Emperor; defeat at Jancowitz;

  conspires against Bavaria.

Feria, Duke of, Spanish general.

Feuquieres, French Ambassador at Dresden.

France:  political position after Henry IV.; ambassadors at Ratisbon;

  interests and claims of; triumph of her policy; declaration of war

  against the Emperor; retreat of the army under Turenne from Bavaria.

Frankfort-on-the-Oder:  sacked by the Swedes; Diet of.

Frederick V., Elector Palatine and King of Bohemia:

  alienates his Bohemian subjects; defeated at Prague; joins Mansfeld;

  deprived of the Palatinate; at Munich with Gustavus;

  meets Gustavus after Leipzig; death.

Friburg, Battle of.

Friedland, Duke of.  [See Wallenstein.]



Gabor, Bethlen.  [See letter B.]

Gallas, Imperialist general:  made generalissimo; Commander-in-chief;

  in command under King of Hungary; overruns Ribses; defeated by Torstensohn.

Gebhard, Elector of Cologne.

German people, principles and religious zeal of.

Germany:  its condition after Augsburg; at the accession of Rodolph;

  after Wallenstein's death.

"God's friend, priests' foe", motto of Duke of Brunswick.

"God with us", war-cry of the Swedes.

Gordon, Colonel.

Gratz, Archduke of.  [See Ferdinand II.]

Guebriant, Field-Marshal.

Gustavus Adolphus, of Sweden:  ascends the throne; early life, incident of;

  position of; resources; concludes a treaty with France; with Magdeburg;

  complaints against; appears before Berlin; treaty with Hesse Cassel;

  with Saxony; meeting at Forgue; Battle of Leipzig; marches to the Rhine;

  seats the Palatine in Munich; retrospect of his career from Halle to Lutzen

  (all of Book III.); storms Marienburg; takes possession of Frankfort;

  besieges Mentz; carries Oppenheim by storm; exposed to the malice

  of the Jesuits; enters Nuremberg; besieges Ingoldstadt, narrow escape;

  enters Munich; receives congratulations from Wallenstein;

  hastens to the Upper Palatinate; seizes Nuremberg;

  attacks Wallenstein's camp; marches to Neustadt; enters Naumberg;

  death of, at the Battle of Lutzen; his body discovered;

  review of his policy.

Gustavus Vasa.



Henderson, Colonel, Scotch officer, commands reserve at Leipzig.

Henry IV. of France, "Henry of Arragon", projects and views of.

Hepburn, Colonel, Scotch officer, anecdote of.

Hesse, Landgrave of:  reply to Tilly's demands; concludes a treaty

  with Gustavus; does important service for Gustavus.

Holland, political position of.

Holk, General, death of.

Horn, Gustavus:  drives Imperialists from Alsace; conduct at Leipzig;

  left to subdue Franconia; successes in Franconia; services at Lutzen;

  marches to the Swedish frontier.

Hungary, its relations to Austria.

Hussites, account of the.



Illo, Count:  confederate of Wallenstein; acts as Wallenstein's agent;

  death of.

Imperialists:  delegates of, at Prague; army reduced to distress;

  overrun Bavaria.

Interim, the, system of theology.



James I., King of England, assists the Elector.

Jancowitz, Battle of.

Jesuits, the:  banishment of; they work against Gustavus;

  their oppression of the Protestants; in Vienna, mention of;

  reference to, in Wallenstein's career.

"Jesus Maria", war-cry of the Imperialists.

Joseph, Father, agent of Richelieu.

Juliers, Duchy of:  disputes succession to; "singular turn in the disruption".



Kinsky, Count.

Kinsky, Countess.

Klostergrab.

Koenigsmark, Swedish general.



Ladislaus, son of Segismund of Poland.

Lauenburg, Duke of.

Lavelette, Cardinal.

Leipzig:  general convention of, 1631; Battle of.

Leslie, an officer of Wallenstein.

Letter of Majesty:  issue of; explanation of; torn by Ferdinand.

Lorraine, Charles, Duke of, defeated by Gustavus.

Lubeck, Peace of.

Lutherans, the:  their position stated; their oppression of the Calvinists.

Lutter, battle at.

Lutzen:  mention of; Battle of; death of Gustavus.



Magdeburg:  besieged by Tilly; assaulted; taken by the Swedes.

Mansfeld, Count Ernst:  defeated at Budweiss; ravages the Palatinates;

  enters the Dutch service; defeated at Dessau.

Mansfeld, Wolf, Count von, leaves Magdeburg to the Swedes.

Matthias, Emperor and Archduke:  chosen as Austrian leader;

  heads a revolt against the Emperor; acknowledged King of Bohemia;

  ascends the throne; death of.

Maximilian II., Emperor and King of Hungary, government and position of.

Maximilian, Duke of Bavaria:  Head of Catholic League; marches into Bohemia;

  character and position of; makes secret treaty with France; perfidy of;

  anxious for peace; tactics for supremacy; takes shelter in Salzburg.

Mazarin, Cardinal:  and the Battle of Friburg; his diplomatic tactics

  in the war.  <variant in original:  Mazarine>

Melander, a Calvinist:  commands the Imperial forces;

  mortally wounded at Egra.

Mentz, besieged and taken.

Moravian Brethren, doctrines of.

Munich surrenders to Gustavus.

Mutiny amongst Swedish officers near Donauwerth.



Neumann, Captain.

Nevers, Duke of.

Nordlingen, Battle of.

Nuremberg:  battleground; exertions of the magistrates.



Odowalsky, disbanded officer.

Oppenheim carried by storm.

Oxenstiern, Chancellor of Sweden:  receives Mentz Library;

  position; assembles Estates at Heilbronn; suspects Wallenstein;

  alliance with Wallenstein; solicits French assistance; applies to France.



Palatinate, the, religious history of.

Palatine, Elector, position and character of.

Pappenheim, Imperialist general:  assaults Magdeburg; recalls Tilly;

  attacks Swedish vanguard; at Leipzig; marches to Cologne; at Lutzen;

  death of.

Peace negotiations and conclusion, 1647.

Peace negotiations of Prague:  terms of; results of to France and Sweden.

Philip II., of Spain, character and political views of.

Piccolomini:  Wallenstein's reference to; becomes confidant of Wallenstein;

  gives warning of Wallenstein to the Court; in command at Saalfield;

  in pursuit of Banner; defeated by Torstensohn; commands Imperialists.

Prague:  meeting of the "Defenders"; insurrection at; Battle of,

  and savage treatment of the vanquished; entered by the Saxon Army;

  the taking of.  [See also Bohemian Diet.]

Protestant Union:  design and aim of; divisions and changes; points of union;

  formation of Evangelical Union; demands on accession of Matthias;

  alliance with Hungary; preachers banished; dissolved; suppression of;

  oppressions in Germany; reprisals in Prague.



Ragotsky, Prince:  successor to Bethlen Gabor; in Austria and Moravia,

  ravages the country.

Ratisbon:  Diet held at, 1630; results of Diet, taken by Duke Bernard;

  besieged by King of Hungary; Diet held at, 1641.

Rednitz, desperate fight at.

Reformation:  history of the (most of Book I.); influence throughout Europe;

  progress in Hungary; outbreaks at Strasburg.

Reservatum Ecclesiasticum, explanation of.

Richelieu, Minister of France:  negotiates with Sweden;

  effects a truce; treaty with Sweden; labours in favour of Gustavus;

  assists German Protestants; terms with Duke Bernard; fall of Breysach;

  death of.

Rodolph, Archduke and Emperor:  ascends Imperial throne as Rodolph II.;

  his political position; abdicates in favour of his brother; death of.

Rostock, taken by Imperialists.



Saxe-Lauenberg, Francis Albert, Duke of.

Saxe-Weimar, Bernard, Duke of:  succeeds Gustavus at Lutzen;

  remains on the field; captures Leipzig; takes Ratisbon; removal of;

  escapes capture; visits France; defeats the Imperialists;

  lays siege to Breysach; death of.

Saxony, Elector of, John George:  refuses Tilly's demands;

  alliance with Gustavus; at Leipzig; meditates a separation from Sweden;

  leaves the Swedes; treats with the Emperor; recalls his officers

  from Banner's army; treaty with Sweden.

Schafgotsch, Imperialist general.

Seni, Wallenstein's astrologer.

"Snow King", nickname for Gustavus.

Spain:  influence in Germany; policy of, under Charles V.

Spanish prisoners.

Stralsund, siege of.

Strasbourg, religious divisions.

Styria, Archduke of.  [See Ferdinand II.]

Suys, Imperialist general.

Sweden:  political and religious condition of; historical summary

  of Polish connection; origin of her intervention in the Thirty Years' War;

  truce with Poland; alliance with France 1631; condition after death

  of Gustavus.

Swedes:  offer battle to Wallenstein; overrun Bavaria;

  successes throughout Germany; capture Bregentz; advance to Nordlingen.



Terzky, Count.

Terzky, Countess.

Thurn, Count, "Defender":  seizes Krummau; invades Moravia;

  encamps before Vienna; takes flight to Holland; returns to Prague;

  conveys Wallenstein's message to Gustavus.

Thurn, Count, Swedish general:  at Steinau; surrender to Wallenstein;

  demanded by the Jesuits.

Tilly, Count:  commands the "army of execution"; defeats the Danish army

  at Lutter; appointed generalissimo; character and appearance;

  returns to Magdeburg; takes Magdeburg; encamped on the Elbe;

  demands assistance from Saxony; ravages Saxony; at Leipzig;

  flies to Lower Saxony; defeats Charles, Duke of Lorraine;

  punishes the Bishop of Bamberg; awaits Gustavus at Rain; death.

Torgua:  Diet of; council at.

Torstensohn, Bernard, Swedish general:  enters Silesia; defeats Piccolomini;

  overruns Holstein; enters Bohemia; routs the Austrians at Jancowitz;

  retires from command.

Turenne, French general:  at Friburg; recrosses the Rhine;

  joins the Swedes at Giessen; retires to the Netherlands.

Turks:  the hostile inroads of; reference to.

Trent, Council of.



Union, the Protestant, first success and failures.

Urban VIII., Pope.



Wallenstein, Count:  invades Holstein; created Duke of Friedland;

  besieges Stralsund; makes a treaty with the Danes; his exactions;

  appears at Ratisbon Diet; his dismissal; mode of life;

  reply to the King of Denmark; pressed by the Emperor to take command;

  quits Prague; his position and personal feelings; makes use of Arnheim;

  advises the Saxons; assumes command; avenges himself on Maximilian;

  meets the Elector at Egra, Wallenstein's triumph; review at Neumark;

  besieges Nuremberg; marches to Zirndorf; takes winter quarters in Saxony;

  joins Pappenheim; belief in astrology; at Lutzen; advises an amnesty;

  duplicity with Elector of Bavaria; offers terms to the Swedes;

  suspicions aroused; secret negotiations with France;

  defeats Swedes on the Oder; releases Count Thurn; storms Goerlitz;

  marches to the Upper Palatinate; deprived of command;

  calls a meeting of generals at Pilsen; his duplicity;

  calls for absent generals; secret orders for his apprehension issued;

  publicly denounced; retires to Egra; assassination.

Weimar.  [See Saxe-Weimar.]

Werth, John de, Imperialist general:  heads Bavarian malcontents.

Westphalia, Treaty of (Treaty of Peace).

Wimpfen.

Wrangel, Gustavus, Swedish general:  marches to the Danube; ravages Bavaria;

  marches to Bohemia; driven from Bohemia.











End 