



CHAPTER III - Part The Third




THE world had grown six years older since that night of the return.  

It was a warm autumn afternoon, and there had been heavy rain.  The 

sun burst suddenly from among the clouds; and the old battle-

ground, sparkling brilliantly and cheerfully at sight of it in one 

green place, flashed a responsive welcome there, which spread along 

the country side as if a joyful beacon had been lighted up, and 

answered from a thousand stations.



How beautiful the landscape kindling in the light, and that 

luxuriant influence passing on like a celestial presence, 

brightening everything!  The wood, a sombre mass before, revealed 

its varied tints of yellow, green, brown, red:  its different forms 

of trees, with raindrops glittering on their leaves and twinkling 

as they fell.  The verdant meadow-land, bright and glowing, seemed 

as if it had been blind, a minute since, and now had found a sense 

of sight where-with to look up at the shining sky.  Corn-fields, 

hedge-rows, fences, homesteads, and clustered roofs, the steeple of 

the church, the stream, the water-mill, all sprang out of the 

gloomy darkness smiling.  Birds sang sweetly, flowers raised their 

drooping heads, fresh scents arose from the invigorated ground; the 

blue expanse above extended and diffused itself; already the sun's 

slanting rays pierced mortally the sullen bank of cloud that 

lingered in its flight; and a rainbow, spirit of all the colours 

that adorned the earth and sky, spanned the whole arch with its 

triumphant glory.



At such a time, one little roadside Inn, snugly sheltered behind a 

great elm-tree with a rare seat for idlers encircling its capacious 

bole, addressed a cheerful front towards the traveller, as a house 

of entertainment ought, and tempted him with many mute but 

significant assurances of a comfortable welcome.  The ruddy sign-

board perched up in the tree, with its golden letters winking in 

the sun, ogled the passer-by, from among the green leaves, like a 

jolly face, and promised good cheer.  The horse-trough, full of 

clear fresh water, and the ground below it sprinkled with droppings 

of fragrant hay, made every horse that passed, prick up his ears.  

The crimson curtains in the lower rooms, and the pure white 

hangings in the little bed-chambers above, beckoned, Come in! with 

every breath of air.  Upon the bright green shutters, there were 

golden legends about beer and ale, and neat wines, and good beds; 

and an affecting picture of a brown jug frothing over at the top.  

Upon the window-sills were flowering plants in bright red pots, 

which made a lively show against the white front of the house; and 

in the darkness of the doorway there were streaks of light, which 

glanced off from the surfaces of bottles and tankards.



On the door-step, appeared a proper figure of a landlord, too; for, 

though he was a short man, he was round and broad, and stood with 

his hands in his pockets, and his legs just wide enough apart to 

express a mind at rest upon the subject of the cellar, and an easy 

confidence - too calm and virtuous to become a swagger - in the 

general resources of the Inn.  The superabundant moisture, 

trickling from everything after the late rain, set him off well.  

Nothing near him was thirsty.  Certain top-heavy dahlias, looking 

over the palings of his neat well-ordered garden, had swilled as 

much as they could carry - perhaps a trifle more - and may have 

been the worse for liquor; but the sweet-briar, roses, wall-

flowers, the plants at the windows, and the leaves on the old tree, 

were in the beaming state of moderate company that had taken no 

more than was wholesome for them, and had served to develop their 

best qualities.  Sprinkling dewy drops about them on the ground, 

they seemed profuse of innocent and sparkling mirth, that did good 

where it lighted, softening neglected corners which the steady rain 

could seldom reach, and hurting nothing.



This village Inn had assumed, on being established, an uncommon 

sign.  It was called The Nutmeg-Grater.  And underneath that 

household word, was inscribed, up in the tree, on the same flaming 

board, and in the like golden characters, By Benjamin Britain.



At a second glance, and on a more minute examination of his face, 

you might have known that it was no other than Benjamin Britain 

himself who stood in the doorway - reasonably changed by time, but 

for the better; a very comfortable host indeed.



'Mrs. B.,' said Mr. Britain, looking down the road, 'is rather 

late.  It's tea-time.'



As there was no Mrs. Britain coming, he strolled leisurely out into 

the road and looked up at the house, very much to his satisfaction.  

'It's just the sort of house,' said Benjamin, 'I should wish to 

stop at, if I didn't keep it.'



Then, he strolled towards the garden-paling, and took a look at the 

dahlias.  They looked over at him, with a helpless drowsy hanging 

of their heads:  which bobbed again, as the heavy drops of wet 

dripped off them.



'You must be looked after,' said Benjamin.  'Memorandum, not to 

forget to tell her so.  She's a long time coming!'



Mr. Britain's better half seemed to be by so very much his better 

half, that his own moiety of himself was utterly cast away and 

helpless without her.



'She hadn't much to do, I think,' said Ben.  'There were a few 

little matters of business after market, but not many.  Oh! here we 

are at last!'



A chaise-cart, driven by a boy, came clattering along the road:  

and seated in it, in a chair, with a large well-saturated umbrella 

spread out to dry behind her, was the plump figure of a matronly 

woman, with her bare arms folded across a basket which she carried 

on her knee, several other baskets and parcels lying crowded around 

her, and a certain bright good nature in her face and contented 

awkwardness in her manner, as she jogged to and fro with the motion 

of her carriage, which smacked of old times, even in the distance.  

Upon her nearer approach, this relish of by-gone days was not 

diminished; and when the cart stopped at the Nutmeg-Grater door, a 

pair of shoes, alighting from it, slipped nimbly through Mr. 

Britain's open arms, and came down with a substantial weight upon 

the pathway, which shoes could hardly have belonged to any one but 

Clemency Newcome.



In fact they did belong to her, and she stood in them, and a rosy 

comfortable-looking soul she was:  with as much soap on her glossy 

face as in times of yore, but with whole elbows now, that had grown 

quite dimpled in her improved condition.



'You're late, Clemmy!' said Mr. Britain.



'Why, you see, Ben, I've had a deal to do!' she replied, looking 

busily after the safe removal into the house of all the packages 

and baskets:  'eight, nine, ten - where's eleven?  Oh! my basket's 

eleven!  It's all right.  Put the horse up, Harry, and if he coughs 

again give him a warm mash to-night.  Eight, nine, ten.  Why, 

where's eleven?  Oh! forgot, it's all right.  How's the children, 

Ben?'



'Hearty, Clemmy, hearty.'



'Bless their precious faces!' said Mrs. Britain, unbonneting her 

own round countenance (for she and her husband were by this time in 

the bar), and smoothing her hair with her open hands.  'Give us a 

kiss, old man!'



Mr. Britain promptly complied.



'I think,' said Mrs. Britain, applying herself to her pockets and 

drawing forth an immense bulk of thin books and crumpled papers:  a 

very kennel of dogs'-ears:  'I've done everything.  Bills all 

settled - turnips sold - brewer's account looked into and paid - 

'bacco pipes ordered - seventeen pound four, paid into the Bank - 

Doctor Heathfield's charge for little Clem - you'll guess what that 

is - Doctor Heathfield won't take nothing again, Ben.'



'I thought he wouldn't,' returned Ben.



'No.  He says whatever family you was to have, Ben, he'd never put 

you to the cost of a halfpenny.  Not if you was to have twenty.'



Mr. Britain's face assumed a serious expression, and he looked hard 

at the wall.



'An't it kind of him?' said Clemency.



'Very,' returned Mr. Britain.  'It's the sort of kindness that I 

wouldn't presume upon, on any account.'



'No,' retorted Clemency.  'Of course not.  Then there's the pony - 

he fetched eight pound two; and that an't bad, is it?'



'It's very good,' said Ben.



'I'm glad you're pleased!' exclaimed his wife.  'I thought you 

would be; and I think that's all, and so no more at present from 

yours and cetrer, C. Britain.  Ha ha ha! There!  Take all the 

papers, and lock 'em up.  Oh!  Wait a minute.  Here's a printed 

bill to stick on the wall.  Wet from the printer's.  How nice it 

smells!'



'What's this?' said Ben, looking over the document.



'I don't know,' replied his wife.  'I haven't read a word of it.'



'"To be sold by Auction,"' read the host of the Nutmeg-Grater, 

'"unless previously disposed of by private contract."'



'They always put that,' said Clemency.



'Yes, but they don't always put this,' he returned.  'Look here, 

"Mansion," &c. - "offices," &c., "shrubberies," &c., "ring fence," 

&c. "Messrs. Snitchey and Craggs," &c., "ornamental portion of the 

unencumbered freehold property of Michael Warden, Esquire, 

intending to continue to reside abroad"!'



'Intending to continue to reside abroad!' repeated Clemency.



'Here it is,' said Britain.  'Look!'



'And it was only this very day that I heard it whispered at the old 

house, that better and plainer news had been half promised of her, 

soon!' said Clemency, shaking her head sorrowfully, and patting her 

elbows as if the recollection of old times unconsciously awakened 

her old habits.  'Dear, dear, dear!  There'll be heavy hearts, Ben, 

yonder.'



Mr. Britain heaved a sigh, and shook his head, and said he couldn't 

make it out:  he had left off trying long ago.  With that remark, 

he applied himself to putting up the bill just inside the bar 

window.  Clemency, after meditating in silence for a few moments, 

roused herself, cleared her thoughtful brow, and bustled off to 

look after the children.



Though the host of the Nutmeg-Grater had a lively regard for his 

good-wife, it was of the old patronising kind, and she amused him 

mightily.  Nothing would have astonished him so much, as to have 

known for certain from any third party, that it was she who managed 

the whole house, and made him, by her plain straightforward thrift, 

good-humour, honesty, and industry, a thriving man.  So easy it is, 

in any degree of life (as the world very often finds it), to take 

those cheerful natures that never assert their merit, at their own 

modest valuation; and to conceive a flippant liking of people for 

their outward oddities and eccentricities, whose innate worth, if 

we would look so far, might make us blush in the comparison!



It was comfortable to Mr. Britain, to think of his own 

condescension in having married Clemency.  She was a perpetual 

testimony to him of the goodness of his heart, and the kindness of 

his disposition; and he felt that her being an excellent wife was 

an illustration of the old precept that virtue is its own reward.



He had finished wafering up the bill, and had locked the vouchers 

for her day's proceedings in the cupboard - chuckling all the time, 

over her capacity for business - when, returning with the news that 

the two Master Britains were playing in the coach-house under the 

superintendence of one Betsey, and that little Clem was sleeping 

'like a picture,' she sat down to tea, which had awaited her 

arrival, on a little table.  It was a very neat little bar, with 

the usual display of bottles and glasses; a sedate clock, right to 

the minute (it was half-past five); everything in its place, and 

everything furbished and polished up to the very utmost.



'It's the first time I've sat down quietly to-day, I declare,' said 

Mrs. Britain, taking a long breath, as if she had sat down for the 

night; but getting up again immediately to hand her husband his 

tea, and cut him his bread-and-butter; 'how that bill does set me 

thinking of old times!'



'Ah!' said Mr. Britain, handling his saucer like an oyster, and 

disposing of its contents on the same principle.



'That same Mr. Michael Warden,' said Clemency, shaking her head at 

the notice of sale, 'lost me my old place.'



'And got you your husband,' said Mr. Britain.



'Well!  So he did,' retorted Clemency, 'and many thanks to him.'



'Man's the creature of habit,' said Mr. Britain, surveying her, 

over his saucer.  'I had somehow got used to you, Clem; and I found 

I shouldn't be able to get on without you.  So we went and got made 

man and wife.  Ha! ha!  We!  Who'd have thought it!'



'Who indeed!' cried Clemency.  'It was very good of you, Ben.'



'No, no, no,' replied Mr. Britain, with an air of self-denial.  

'Nothing worth mentioning.'



'Oh yes it was, Ben,' said his wife, with great simplicity; 'I'm 

sure I think so, and am very much obliged to you.  Ah!' looking 

again at the bill; 'when she was known to be gone, and out of 

reach, dear girl, I couldn't help telling - for her sake quite as 

much as theirs - what I knew, could I?'



'You told it, anyhow,' observed her husband.



'And Dr. Jeddler,' pursued Clemency, putting down her tea-cup, and 

looking thoughtfully at the bill, 'in his grief and passion turned 

me out of house and home!  I never have been so glad of anything in 

all my life, as that I didn't say an angry word to him, and hadn't 

any angry feeling towards him, even then; for he repented that 

truly, afterwards.  How often he has sat in this room, and told me 

over and over again he was sorry for it! - the last time, only 

yesterday, when you were out.  How often he has sat in this room, 

and talked to me, hour after hour, about one thing and another, in 

which he made believe to be interested! - but only for the sake of 

the days that are gone by, and because he knows she used to like 

me, Ben!'



'Why, how did you ever come to catch a glimpse of that, Clem?' 

asked her husband:  astonished that she should have a distinct 

perception of a truth which had only dimly suggested itself to his 

inquiring mind.



'I don't know, I'm sure,' said Clemency, blowing her tea, to cool 

it.  'Bless you, I couldn't tell you, if you was to offer me a 

reward of a hundred pound.'



He might have pursued this metaphysical subject but for her 

catching a glimpse of a substantial fact behind him, in the shape 

of a gentleman attired in mourning, and cloaked and booted like a 

rider on horseback, who stood at the bar-door.  He seemed attentive 

to their conversation, and not at all impatient to interrupt it.



Clemency hastily rose at this sight.  Mr. Britain also rose and 

saluted the guest.  'Will you please to walk up-stairs, sir?  

There's a very nice room up-stairs, sir.'



'Thank you,' said the stranger, looking earnestly at Mr. Britain's 

wife.  'May I come in here?'



'Oh, surely, if you like, sir,' returned Clemency, admitting him.



'What would you please to want, sir?'



The bill had caught his eye, and he was reading it.



'Excellent property that, sir,' observed Mr. Britain.



He made no answer; but, turning round, when he had finished 

reading, looked at Clemency with the same observant curiosity as 

before.  'You were asking me,' - he said, still looking at her, - 

'What you would please to take, sir,' answered Clemency, stealing a 

glance at him in return.



'If you will let me have a draught of ale,' he said, moving to a 

table by the window, 'and will let me have it here, without being 

any interruption to your meal, I shall be much obliged to you.'  He 

sat down as he spoke, without any further parley, and looked out at 

the prospect.  He was an easy, well-knit figure of a man in the 

prime of life.  His face, much browned by the sun, was shaded by a 

quantity of dark hair; and he wore a moustache.  His beer being set 

before him, he filled out a glass, and drank, good-humouredly, to 

the house; adding, as he put the tumbler down again:



'It's a new house, is it not?'



'Not particularly new, sir,' replied Mr. Britain.



'Between five and six years old,' said Clemency; speaking very 

distinctly.



'I think I heard you mention Dr. Jeddler's name, as I came in,' 

inquired the stranger.  'That bill reminds me of him; for I happen 

to know something of that story, by hearsay, and through certain 

connexions of mine. - Is the old man living?'



'Yes, he's living, sir,' said Clemency.



'Much changed?'



'Since when, sir?' returned Clemency, with remarkable emphasis and 

expression.



'Since his daughter - went away.'



'Yes! he's greatly changed since then,' said Clemency.  'He's grey 

and old, and hasn't the same way with him at all; but, I think he's 

happy now.  He has taken on with his sister since then, and goes to 

see her very often.  That did him good, directly.  At first, he was 

sadly broken down; and it was enough to make one's heart bleed, to 

see him wandering about, railing at the world; but a great change 

for the better came over him after a year or two, and then he began 

to like to talk about his lost daughter, and to praise her, ay and 

the world too! and was never tired of saying, with the tears in his 

poor eyes, how beautiful and good she was.  He had forgiven her 

then.  That was about the same time as Miss Grace's marriage.  

Britain, you remember?'



Mr. Britain remembered very well.



'The sister is married then,' returned the stranger.  He paused for 

some time before he asked, 'To whom?'



Clemency narrowly escaped oversetting the tea-board, in her emotion 

at this question.



'Did YOU never hear?' she said.



'I should like to hear,' he replied, as he filled his glass again, 

and raised it to his lips.



'Ah!  It would be a long story, if it was properly told,' said 

Clemency, resting her chin on the palm of her left hand, and 

supporting that elbow on her right hand, as she shook her head, and 

looked back through the intervening years, as if she were looking 

at a fire.  'It would be a long story, I am sure.'



'But told as a short one,' suggested the stranger.



Told as a short one,' repeated Clemency in the same thoughtful 

tone, and without any apparent reference to him, or consciousness 

of having auditors, 'what would there be to tell?  That they 

grieved together, and remembered her together, like a person dead; 

that they were so tender of her, never would reproach her, called 

her back to one another as she used to be, and found excuses for 

her!  Every one knows that.  I'm sure I do.  No one better,' added 

Clemency, wiping her eyes with her hand.



'And so,' suggested the stranger.



'And so,' said Clemency, taking him up mechanically, and without 

any change in her attitude or manner, 'they at last were married.  

They were married on her birth-day - it comes round again to-morrow 

- very quiet, very humble like, but very happy.  Mr. Alfred said, 

one night when they were walking in the orchard, "Grace, shall our 

wedding-day be Marion's birth-day?"  And it was.'



'And they have lived happily together?' said the stranger.



'Ay,' said Clemency.  'No two people ever more so.  They have had 

no sorrow but this.'



She raised her head as with a sudden attention to the circumstances 

under which she was recalling these events, and looked quickly at 

the stranger.  Seeing that his face was turned toward the window, 

and that he seemed intent upon the prospect, she made some eager 

signs to her husband, and pointed to the bill, and moved her mouth 

as if she were repeating with great energy, one word or phrase to 

him over and over again.  As she uttered no sound, and as her dumb 

motions like most of her gestures were of a very extraordinary 

kind, this unintelligible conduct reduced Mr. Britain to the 

confines of despair.  He stared at the table, at the stranger, at 

the spoons, at his wife - followed her pantomime with looks of deep 

amazement and perplexity - asked in the same language, was it 

property in danger, was it he in danger, was it she - answered her 

signals with other signals expressive of the deepest distress and 

confusion - followed the motions of her lips - guessed half aloud 

'milk and water,' 'monthly warning,' 'mice and walnuts' - and 

couldn't approach her meaning.



Clemency gave it up at last, as a hopeless attempt; and moving her 

chair by very slow degrees a little nearer to the stranger, sat 

with her eyes apparently cast down but glancing sharply at him now 

and then, waiting until he should ask some other question.  She had 

not to wait long; for he said, presently:



'And what is the after history of the young lady who went away?  

They know it, I suppose?'



Clemency shook her head.  'I've heard,' she said, 'that Doctor 

Jeddler is thought to know more of it than he tells.  Miss Grace 

has had letters from her sister, saying that she was well and 

happy, and made much happier by her being married to Mr. Alfred:  

and has written letters back.  But there's a mystery about her life 

and fortunes, altogether, which nothing has cleared up to this 

hour, and which - '



She faltered here, and stopped.



'And which' - repeated the stranger.



'Which only one other person, I believe, could explain,' said 

Clemency, drawing her breath quickly.



'Who may that be?' asked the stranger.



'Mr. Michael Warden!' answered Clemency, almost in a shriek:  at 

once conveying to her husband what she would have had him 

understand before, and letting Michael Warden know that he was 

recognised.



'You remember me, sir?' said Clemency, trembling with emotion; 'I 

saw just now you did!  You remember me, that night in the garden.  

I was with her!'



'Yes.  You were,' he said.



'Yes, sir,' returned Clemency.  'Yes, to be sure.  This is my 

husband, if you please.  Ben, my dear Ben, run to Miss Grace - run 

to Mr. Alfred - run somewhere, Ben!  Bring somebody here, 

directly!'



'Stay!' said Michael Warden, quietly interposing himself between 

the door and Britain.  'What would you do?'



'Let them know that you are here, sir,' answered Clemency, clapping 

her hands in sheer agitation.  'Let them know that they may hear of 

her, from your own lips; let them know that she is not quite lost 

to them, but that she will come home again yet, to bless her father 

and her loving sister - even her old servant, even me,' she struck 

herself upon the breast with both hands, 'with a sight of her sweet 

face.  Run, Ben, run!'  And still she pressed him on towards the 

door, and still Mr. Warden stood before it, with his hand stretched 

out, not angrily, but sorrowfully.



'Or perhaps,' said Clemency, running past her husband, and catching 

in her emotion at Mr. Warden's cloak, 'perhaps she's here now; 

perhaps she's close by.  I think from your manner she is.  Let me 

see her, sir, if you please.  I waited on her when she was a little 

child.  I saw her grow to be the pride of all this place.  I knew 

her when she was Mr. Alfred's promised wife.  I tried to warn her 

when you tempted her away.  I know what her old home was when she 

was like the soul of it, and how it changed when she was gone and 

lost.  Let me speak to her, if you please!'



He gazed at her with compassion, not unmixed with wonder:  but, he 

made no gesture of assent.



'I don't think she CAN know,' pursued Clemency, 'how truly they 

forgive her; how they love her; what joy it would be to them, to 

see her once more.  She may be timorous of going home.  Perhaps if 

she sees me, it may give her new heart.  Only tell me truly, Mr. 

Warden, is she with you?'



'She is not,' he answered, shaking his head.



This answer, and his manner, and his black dress, and his coming 

back so quietly, and his announced intention of continuing to live 

abroad, explained it all.  Marion was dead.



He didn't contradict her; yes, she was dead!  Clemency sat down, 

hid her face upon the table, and cried.



At that moment, a grey-headed old gentleman came running in:  quite 

out of breath, and panting so much that his voice was scarcely to 

be recognised as the voice of Mr. Snitchey.



'Good Heaven, Mr. Warden!' said the lawyer, taking him aside, 'what 

wind has blown - '  He was so blown himself, that he couldn't get 

on any further until after a pause, when he added, feebly, 'you 

here?'



'An ill-wind, I am afraid,' he answered.  'If you could have heard 

what has just passed - how I have been besought and entreated to 

perform impossibilities - what confusion and affliction I carry 

with me!'



'I can guess it all.  But why did you ever come here, my good sir?' 

retorted Snitchey.



'Come!  How should I know who kept the house?  When I sent my 

servant on to you, I strolled in here because the place was new to 

me; and I had a natural curiosity in everything new and old, in 

these old scenes; and it was outside the town.  I wanted to 

communicate with you, first, before appearing there.  I wanted to 

know what people would say to me.  I see by your manner that you 

can tell me.  If it were not for your confounded caution, I should 

have been possessed of everything long ago.'



'Our caution!' returned the lawyer, 'speaking for Self and Craggs - 

deceased,' here Mr. Snitchey, glancing at his hat-band, shook his 

head, 'how can you reasonably blame us, Mr. Warden?  It was 

understood between us that the subject was never to be renewed, and 

that it wasn't a subject on which grave and sober men like us (I 

made a note of your observations at the time) could interfere.  Our 

caution too!  When Mr. Craggs, sir, went down to his respected 

grave in the full belief - '



'I had given a solemn promise of silence until I should return, 

whenever that might be,' interrupted Mr. Warden; 'and I have kept 

it.'



'Well, sir, and I repeat it,' returned Mr. Snitchey, 'we were bound 

to silence too.  We were bound to silence in our duty towards 

ourselves, and in our duty towards a variety of clients, you among 

them, who were as close as wax.  It was not our place to make 

inquiries of you on such a delicate subject.  I had my suspicions, 

sir; but, it is not six months since I have known the truth, and 

been assured that you lost her.'



'By whom?' inquired his client.



'By Doctor Jeddler himself, sir, who at last reposed that 

confidence in me voluntarily.  He, and only he, has known the whole 

truth, years and years.'



'And you know it?' said his client.



'I do, sir!' replied Snitchey; 'and I have also reason to know that 

it will be broken to her sister to-morrow evening.  They have given 

her that promise.  In the meantime, perhaps you'll give me the 

honour of your company at my house; being unexpected at your own.  

But, not to run the chance of any more such difficulties as you 

have had here, in case you should be recognised - though you're a 

good deal changed; I think I might have passed you myself, Mr. 

Warden - we had better dine here, and walk on in the evening.  It's 

a very good place to dine at, Mr. Warden:  your own property, by-

the-bye.  Self and Craggs (deceased) took a chop here sometimes, 

and had it very comfortably served.  Mr. Craggs, sir,' said 

Snitchey, shutting his eyes tight for an instant, and opening them 

again, 'was struck off the roll of life too soon.'



'Heaven forgive me for not condoling with you,' returned Michael 

Warden, passing his hand across his forehead, 'but I'm like a man 

in a dream at present.  I seem to want my wits.  Mr. Craggs - yes - 

I am very sorry we have lost Mr. Craggs.'  But he looked at 

Clemency as he said it, and seemed to sympathise with Ben, 

consoling her.



'Mr. Craggs, sir,' observed Snitchey, 'didn't find life, I regret 

to say, as easy to have and to hold as his theory made it out, or 

he would have been among us now.  It's a great loss to me.  He was 

my right arm, my right leg, my right ear, my right eye, was Mr. 

Craggs.  I am paralytic without him.  He bequeathed his share of 

the business to Mrs. Craggs, her executors, administrators, and 

assigns.  His name remains in the Firm to this hour.  I try, in a 

childish sort of a way, to make believe, sometimes, he's alive.  

You may observe that I speak for Self and Craggs - deceased, sir - 

deceased,' said the tender-hearted attorney, waving his pocket-

handkerchief.



Michael Warden, who had still been observant of Clemency, turned to 

Mr. Snitchey when he ceased to speak, and whispered in his ear.



'Ah, poor thing!' said Snitchey, shaking his head.  'Yes.  She was 

always very faithful to Marion.  She was always very fond of her.  

Pretty Marion!  Poor Marion!  Cheer up, Mistress - you are married 

now, you know, Clemency.'



Clemency only sighed, and shook her head.



'Well, well!  Wait till to-morrow,' said the lawyer, kindly.



'To-morrow can't bring back' the dead to life, Mister,' said 

Clemency, sobbing.



'No.  It can't do that, or it would bring back Mr. Craggs, 

deceased,' returned the lawyer.  'But it may bring some soothing 

circumstances; it may bring some comfort.  Wait till to-morrow!'



So Clemency, shaking his proffered hand, said she would; and 

Britain, who had been terribly cast down at sight of his despondent 

wife (which was like the business hanging its head), said that was 

right; and Mr. Snitchey and Michael Warden went up-stairs; and 

there they were soon engaged in a conversation so cautiously 

conducted, that no murmur of it was audible above the clatter of 

plates and dishes, the hissing of the frying-pan, the bubbling of 

saucepans, the low monotonous waltzing of the jack - with a 

dreadful click every now and then as if it had met with some mortal 

accident to its head, in a fit of giddiness - and all the other 

preparations in the kitchen for their dinner.





To-morrow was a bright and peaceful day; and nowhere were the 

autumn tints more beautifully seen, than from the quiet orchard of 

the Doctor's house.  The snows of many winter nights had melted 

from that ground, the withered leaves of many summer times had 

rustled there, since she had fled.  The honey-suckle porch was 

green again, the trees cast bountiful and changing shadows on the 

grass, the landscape was as tranquil and serene as it had ever 

been; but where was she!



Not there.  Not there.  She would have been a stranger sight in her 

old home now, even than that home had been at first, without her.  

But, a lady sat in the familiar place, from whose heart she had 

never passed away; in whose true memory she lived, unchanging, 

youthful, radiant with all promise and all hope; in whose affection 

- and it was a mother's now, there was a cherished little daughter 

playing by her side - she had no rival, no successor; upon whose 

gentle lips her name was trembling then.



The spirit of the lost girl looked out of those eyes.  Those eyes 

of Grace, her sister, sitting with her husband in the orchard, on 

their wedding-day, and his and Marion's birth-day.



He had not become a great man; he had not grown rich; he had not 

forgotten the scenes and friends of his youth; he had not fulfilled 

any one of the Doctor's old predictions.  But, in his useful, 

patient, unknown visiting of poor men's homes; and in his watching 

of sick beds; and in his daily knowledge of the gentleness and 

goodness flowering the by-paths of this world, not to be trodden 

down beneath the heavy foot of poverty, but springing up, elastic, 

in its track, and making its way beautiful; he had better learned 

and proved, in each succeeding year, the truth of his old faith.  

The manner of his life, though quiet and remote, had shown him how 

often men still entertained angels, unawares, as in the olden time; 

and how the most unlikely forms - even some that were mean and ugly 

to the view, and poorly clad - became irradiated by the couch of 

sorrow, want, and pain, and changed to ministering spirits with a 

glory round their heads.



He lived to better purpose on the altered battle-ground, perhaps, 

than if he had contended restlessly in more ambitious lists; and he 

was happy with his wife, dear Grace.



And Marion.  Had HE forgotten her?



'The time has flown, dear Grace,' he said, 'since then;' they had 

been talking of that night; 'and yet it seems a long long while 

ago.  We count by changes and events within us.  Not by years.'



'Yet we have years to count by, too, since Marion was with us,' 

returned Grace.  'Six times, dear husband, counting to-night as 

one, we have sat here on her birth-day, and spoken together of that 

happy return, so eagerly expected and so long deferred.  Ah when 

will it be!  When will it be!'



Her husband attentively observed her, as the tears collected in her 

eyes; and drawing nearer, said:



'But, Marion told you, in that farewell letter which she left for 

you upon your table, love, and which you read so often, that years 

must pass away before it COULD be.  Did she not?'



She took a letter from her breast, and kissed it, and said 'Yes.'



'That through these intervening years, however happy she might be, 

she would look forward to the time when you would meet again, and 

all would be made clear; and that she prayed you, trustfully and 

hopefully to do the same.  The letter runs so, does it not, my 

dear?'



'Yes, Alfred.'



'And every other letter she has written since?'



'Except the last - some months ago - in which she spoke of you, and 

what you then knew, and what I was to learn to-night.'



He looked towards the sun, then fast declining, and said that the 

appointed time was sunset.



'Alfred!' said Grace, laying her hand upon his shoulder earnestly, 

'there is something in this letter - this old letter, which you say 

I read so often - that I have never told you.  But, to-night, dear 

husband, with that sunset drawing near, and all our life seeming to 

soften and become hushed with the departing day, I cannot keep it 

secret.'



'What is it, love?'



'When Marion went away, she wrote me, here, that you had once left 

her a sacred trust to me, and that now she left you, Alfred, such a 

trust in my hands:  praying and beseeching me, as I loved her, and 

as I loved you, not to reject the affection she believed (she knew, 

she said) you would transfer to me when the new wound was healed, 

but to encourage and return it.'



' - And make me a proud, and happy man again, Grace.  Did she say 

so?'



'She meant, to make myself so blest and honoured in your love,' was 

his wife's answer, as he held her in his arms.



'Hear me, my dear!' he said. - 'No.  Hear me so!' - and as he 

spoke, he gently laid the head she had raised, again upon his 

shoulder.  'I know why I have never heard this passage in the 

letter, until now.  I know why no trace of it ever showed itself in 

any word or look of yours at that time.  I know why Grace, although 

so true a friend to me, was hard to win to be my wife.  And knowing 

it, my own! I know the priceless value of the heart I gird within 

my arms, and thank GOD for the rich possession!'



She wept, but not for sorrow, as he pressed her to his heart.  

After a brief space, he looked down at the child, who was sitting 

at their feet playing with a little basket of flowers, and bade her 

look how golden and how red the sun was.



'Alfred,' said Grace, raising her head quickly at these words.  

'The sun is going down.  You have not forgotten what I am to know 

before it sets.'



'You are to know the truth of Marion's history, my love,' he 

answered.



'All the truth,' she said, imploringly.  'Nothing veiled from me, 

any more.  That was the promise.  Was it not?'



'It was,' he answered.



'Before the sun went down on Marion's birth-day.  And you see it, 

Alfred?  It is sinking fast.'



He put his arm about her waist, and, looking steadily into her 

eyes, rejoined:



'That truth is not reserved so long for me to tell, dear Grace.  It 

is to come from other lips.'



'From other lips!' she faintly echoed.



'Yes.  I know your constant heart, I know how brave you are, I know 

that to you a word of preparation is enough.  You have said, truly, 

that the time is come.  It is.  Tell me that you have present 

fortitude to bear a trial - a surprise - a shock:  and the 

messenger is waiting at the gate.'



'What messenger?' she said.  'And what intelligence does he bring?'



'I am pledged,' he answered her, preserving his steady look, 'to 

say no more.  Do you think you understand me?'



'I am afraid to think,' she said.



There was that emotion in his face, despite its steady gaze, which 

frightened her.  Again she hid her own face on his shoulder, 

trembling, and entreated him to pause - a moment.



'Courage, my wife!  When you have firmness to receive the 

messenger, the messenger is waiting at the gate.  The sun is 

setting on Marion's birth-day.  Courage, courage, Grace!'



She raised her head, and, looking at him, told him she was ready.  

As she stood, and looked upon him going away, her face was so like 

Marion's as it had been in her later days at home, that it was 

wonderful to see.  He took the child with him.  She called her back 

- she bore the lost girl's name - and pressed her to her bosom.  

The little creature, being released again, sped after him, and 

Grace was left alone.



She knew not what she dreaded, or what hoped; but remained there, 

motionless, looking at the porch by which they had disappeared.



Ah! what was that, emerging from its shadow; standing on its 

threshold!  That figure, with its white garments rustling in the 

evening air; its head laid down upon her father's breast, and 

pressed against it to his loving heart!  O God! was it a vision 

that came bursting from the old man's arms, and with a cry, and 

with a waving of its hands, and with a wild precipitation of itself 

upon her in its boundless love, sank down in her embrace!



'Oh, Marion, Marion!  Oh, my sister!  Oh, my heart's dear love!  

Oh, joy and happiness unutterable, so to meet again!'



It was no dream, no phantom conjured up by hope and fear, but 

Marion, sweet Marion!  So beautiful, so happy, so unalloyed by care 

and trial, so elevated and exalted in her loveliness, that as the 

setting sun shone brightly on her upturned face, she might have 

been a spirit visiting the earth upon some healing mission.



Clinging to her sister, who had dropped upon a seat and bent down 

over her - and smiling through her tears - and kneeling, close 

before her, with both arms twining round her, and never turning for 

an instant from her face - and with the glory of the setting sun 

upon her brow, and with the soft tranquillity of evening gathering 

around them - Marion at length broke silence; her voice, so calm, 

low, clear, and pleasant, well-tuned to the time.



'When this was my dear home, Grace, as it will be now again - '



'Stay, my sweet love!  A moment!  O Marion, to hear you speak 

again.'



She could not bear the voice she loved so well, at first.



'When this was my dear home, Grace, as it will be now again, I 

loved him from my soul.  I loved him most devotedly.  I would have 

died for him, though I was so young.  I never slighted his 

affection in my secret breast for one brief instant.  It was far 

beyond all price to me.  Although it is so long ago, and past, and 

gone, and everything is wholly changed, I could not bear to think 

that you, who love so well, should think I did not truly love him 

once.  I never loved him better, Grace, than when he left this very 

scene upon this very day.  I never loved him better, dear one, than 

I did that night when I left here.'



Her sister, bending over her, could look into her face, and hold 

her fast.



'But he had gained, unconsciously,' said Marion, with a gentle 

smile, 'another heart, before I knew that I had one to give him.  

That heart - yours, my sister! - was so yielded up, in all its 

other tenderness, to me; was so devoted, and so noble; that it 

plucked its love away, and kept its secret from all eyes but mine - 

Ah! what other eyes were quickened by such tenderness and 

gratitude! - and was content to sacrifice itself to me.  But, I 

knew something of its depths.  I knew the struggle it had made.  I 

knew its high, inestimable worth to him, and his appreciation of 

it, let him love me as he would.  I knew the debt I owed it.  I had 

its great example every day before me.  What you had done for me, I 

knew that I could do, Grace, if I would, for you.  I never laid my 

head down on my pillow, but I prayed with tears to do it.  I never 

laid my head down on my pillow, but I thought of Alfred's own words 

on the day of his departure, and how truly he had said (for I knew 

that, knowing you) that there were victories gained every day, in 

struggling hearts, to which these fields of battle were nothing.  

Thinking more and more upon the great endurance cheerfully 

sustained, and never known or cared for, that there must be, every 

day and hour, in that great strife of which he spoke, my trial 

seemed to grow light and easy.  And He who knows our hearts, my 

dearest, at this moment, and who knows there is no drop of 

bitterness or grief - of anything but unmixed happiness - in mine, 

enabled me to make the resolution that I never would be Alfred's 

wife.  That he should be my brother, and your husband, if the 

course I took could bring that happy end to pass; but that I never 

would (Grace, I then loved him dearly, dearly!) be his wife!'



'O Marion!  O Marion!'



'I had tried to seem indifferent to him;' and she pressed her 

sister's face against her own; 'but that was hard, and you were 

always his true advocate.  I had tried to tell you of my 

resolution, but you would never hear me; you would never understand 

me.  The time was drawing near for his return.  I felt that I must 

act, before the daily intercourse between us was renewed.  I knew 

that one great pang, undergone at that time, would save a 

lengthened agony to all of us.  I knew that if I went away then, 

that end must follow which HAS followed, and which has made us both 

so happy, Grace!  I wrote to good Aunt Martha, for a refuge in her 

house:  I did not then tell her all, but something of my story, and 

she freely promised it.  While I was contesting that step with 

myself, and with my love of you, and home, Mr. Warden, brought here 

by an accident, became, for some time, our companion.'



'I have sometimes feared of late years, that this might have been,' 

exclaimed her sister; and her countenance was ashy-pale.  'You 

never loved him - and you married him in your self-sacrifice to 

me!'



'He was then,' said Marion, drawing her sister closer to her, 'on 

the eve of going secretly away for a long time.  He wrote to me, 

after leaving here; told me what his condition and prospects really 

were; and offered me his hand.  He told me he had seen I was not 

happy in the prospect of Alfred's return.  I believe he thought my 

heart had no part in that contract; perhaps thought I might have 

loved him once, and did not then; perhaps thought that when I tried 

to seem indifferent, I tried to hide indifference - I cannot tell.  

But I wished that you should feel me wholly lost to Alfred - 

hopeless to him - dead.  Do you understand me, love?'



Her sister looked into her face, attentively.  She seemed in doubt.



'I saw Mr. Warden, and confided in his honour; charged him with my 

secret, on the eve of his and my departure.  He kept it.  Do you 

understand me, dear?'



Grace looked confusedly upon her.  She scarcely seemed to hear.



'My love, my sister!' said Marion, 'recall your thoughts a moment; 

listen to me.  Do not look so strangely on me.  There are 

countries, dearest, where those who would abjure a misplaced 

passion, or would strive, against some cherished feeling of their 

hearts and conquer it, retire into a hopeless solitude, and close 

the world against themselves and worldly loves and hopes for ever.  

When women do so, they assume that name which is so dear to you and 

me, and call each other Sisters.  But, there may be sisters, Grace, 

who, in the broad world out of doors, and underneath its free sky, 

and in its crowded places, and among its busy life, and trying to 

assist and cheer it and to do some good, - learn the same lesson; 

and who, with hearts still fresh and young, and open to all 

happiness and means of happiness, can say the battle is long past, 

the victory long won.  And such a one am I!  You understand me 

now?'



Still she looked fixedly upon her, and made no reply.



'Oh Grace, dear Grace,' said Marion, clinging yet more tenderly and 

fondly to that breast from which she had been so long exiled, 'if 

you were not a happy wife and mother - if I had no little namesake 

here - if Alfred, my kind brother, were not your own fond husband - 

from whence could I derive the ecstasy I feel to-night!  But, as I 

left here, so I have returned.  My heart has known no other love, 

my hand has never been bestowed apart from it.  I am still your 

maiden sister, unmarried, unbetrothed:  your own loving old Marion, 

in whose affection you exist alone and have no partner, Grace!'



She understood her now.  Her face relaxed:  sobs came to her 

relief; and falling on her neck, she wept and wept, and fondled her 

as if she were a child again.



When they were more composed, they found that the Doctor, and his 

sister good Aunt Martha, were standing near at hand, with Alfred.



'This is a weary day for me,' said good Aunt Martha, smiling 

through her tears, as she embraced her nieces; 'for I lose my dear 

companion in making you all happy; and what can you give me, in 

return for my Marion?'



'A converted brother,' said the Doctor.



'That's something, to be sure,' retorted Aunt Martha, 'in such a 

farce as - '



'No, pray don't,' said the doctor penitently.



'Well, I won't,' replied Aunt Martha.  'But, I consider myself ill 

used.  I don't know what's to become of me without my Marion, after 

we have lived together half-a-dozen years.'



'You must come and live here, I suppose,' replied the Doctor.  'We 

shan't quarrel now, Martha.'



'Or you must get married, Aunt,' said Alfred.



'Indeed,' returned the old lady, 'I think it might be a good 

speculation if I were to set my cap at Michael Warden, who, I hear, 

is come home much the better for his absence in all respects.  But 

as I knew him when he was a boy, and I was not a very young woman 

then, perhaps he mightn't respond.  So I'll make up my mind to go 

and live with Marion, when she marries, and until then (it will not 

be very long, I dare say) to live alone.  What do YOU say, 

Brother?'



'I've a great mind to say it's a ridiculous world altogether, and 

there's nothing serious in it,' observed the poor old Doctor.



'You might take twenty affidavits of it if you chose, Anthony,' 

said his sister; 'but nobody would believe you with such eyes as 

those.'



'It's a world full of hearts,' said the Doctor, hugging his 

youngest daughter, and bending across her to hug Grace - for he 

couldn't separate the sisters; 'and a serious world, with all its 

folly - even with mine, which was enough to have swamped the whole 

globe; and it is a world on which the sun never rises, but it looks 

upon a thousand bloodless battles that are some set-off against the 

miseries and wickedness of Battle-Fields; and it is a world we need 

be careful how we libel, Heaven forgive us, for it is a world of 

sacred mysteries, and its Creator only knows what lies beneath the 

surface of His lightest image!'





You would not be the better pleased with my rude pen, if it 

dissected and laid open to your view the transports of this family, 

long severed and now reunited.  Therefore, I will not follow the 

poor Doctor through his humbled recollection of the sorrow he had 

had, when Marion was lost to him; nor, will I tell how serious he 

had found that world to be, in which some love, deep-anchored, is 

the portion of all human creatures; nor, how such a trifle as the 

absence of one little unit in the great absurd account, had 

stricken him to the ground.  Nor, how, in compassion for his 

distress, his sister had, long ago, revealed the truth to him by 

slow degrees, and brought him to the knowledge of the heart of his 

self-banished daughter, and to that daughter's side.



Nor, how Alfred Heathfield had been told the truth, too, in the 

course of that then current year; and Marion had seen him, and had 

promised him, as her brother, that on her birth-day, in the 

evening, Grace should know it from her lips at last.



'I beg your pardon, Doctor,' said Mr. Snitchey, looking into the 

orchard, 'but have I liberty to come in?'



Without waiting for permission, he came straight to Marion, and 

kissed her hand, quite joyfully.



'If Mr. Craggs had been alive, my dear Miss Marion,' said Mr. 

Snitchey, 'he would have had great interest in this occasion.  It 

might have suggested to him, Mr. Alfred, that our life is not too 

easy perhaps:  that, taken altogether, it will bear any little 

smoothing we can give it; but Mr. Craggs was a man who could endure 

to be convinced, sir.  He was always open to conviction.  If he 

were open to conviction, now, I - this is weakness.  Mrs. Snitchey, 

my dear,' - at his summons that lady appeared from behind the door, 

'you are among old friends.'



Mrs. Snitchey having delivered her congratulations, took her 

husband aside.



'One moment, Mr. Snitchey,' said that lady.  'It is not in my 

nature to rake up the ashes of the departed.'



'No, my dear,' returned her husband.



'Mr. Craggs is - '



'Yes, my dear, he is deceased,' said Snitchey.



'But I ask you if you recollect,' pursued his wife, 'that evening 

of the ball?  I only ask you that.  If you do; and if your memory 

has not entirely failed you, Mr. Snitchey; and if you are not 

absolutely in your dotage; I ask you to connect this time with that 

- to remember how I begged and prayed you, on my knees - '



'Upon your knees, my dear?' said Mr. Snitchey.



'Yes,' said Mrs. Snitchey, confidently, 'and you know it - to 

beware of that man - to observe his eye - and now to tell me 

whether I was right, and whether at that moment he knew secrets 

which he didn't choose to tell.'



'Mrs. Snitchey,' returned her husband, in her ear, 'Madam.  Did you 

ever observe anything in MY eye?'



'No,' said Mrs. Snitchey, sharply.  'Don't flatter yourself.'



'Because, Madam, that night,' he continued, twitching her by the 

sleeve, 'it happens that we both knew secrets which we didn't 

choose to tell, and both knew just the same professionally.  And so 

the less you say about such things the better, Mrs. Snitchey; and 

take this as a warning to have wiser and more charitable eyes 

another time.  Miss Marion, I brought a friend of yours along with 

me.  Here!  Mistress!'



Poor Clemency, with her apron to her eyes, came slowly in, escorted 

by her husband; the latter doleful with the presentiment, that if 

she abandoned herself to grief, the Nutmeg-Grater was done for.



'Now, Mistress,' said the lawyer, checking Marion as she ran 

towards her, and interposing himself between them, 'what's the 

matter with YOU?'



'The matter!' cried poor Clemency. - When, looking up in wonder, 

and in indignant remonstrance, and in the added emotion of a great 

roar from Mr. Britain, and seeing that sweet face so well 

remembered close before her, she stared, sobbed, laughed, cried, 

screamed, embraced her, held her fast, released her, fell on Mr. 

Snitchey and embraced him (much to Mrs. Snitchey's indignation), 

fell on the Doctor and embraced him, fell on Mr. Britain and 

embraced him, and concluded by embracing herself, throwing her 

apron over her head, and going into hysterics behind it.



A stranger had come into the orchard, after Mr. Snitchey, and had 

remained apart, near the gate, without being observed by any of the 

group; for they had little spare attention to bestow, and that had 

been monopolised by the ecstasies of Clemency.  He did not appear 

to wish to be observed, but stood alone, with downcast eyes; and 

there was an air of dejection about him (though he was a gentleman 

of a gallant appearance) which the general happiness rendered more 

remarkable.



None but the quick eyes of Aunt Martha, however, remarked him at 

all; but, almost as soon as she espied him, she was in conversation 

with him.  Presently, going to where Marion stood with Grace and 

her little namesake, she whispered something in Marion's ear, at 

which she started, and appeared surprised; but soon recovering from 

her confusion, she timidly approached the stranger, in Aunt 

Martha's company, and engaged in conversation with him too.



'Mr. Britain,' said the lawyer, putting his hand in his pocket, and 

bringing out a legal-looking document, while this was going on, 'I 

congratulate you.  You are now the whole and sole proprietor of 

that freehold tenement, at present occupied and held by yourself as 

a licensed tavern, or house of public entertainment, and commonly 

called or known by the sign of the Nutmeg-Grater.  Your wife lost 

one house, through my client Mr. Michael Warden; and now gains 

another.  I shall have the pleasure of canvassing you for the 

county, one of these fine mornings.'



'Would it make any difference in the vote if the sign was altered, 

sir?' asked Britain.



'Not in the least,' replied the lawyer.



'Then,' said Mr. Britain, handing him back the conveyance, 'just 

clap in the words, "and Thimble," will you be so good; and I'll 

have the two mottoes painted up in the parlour instead of my wife's 

portrait.'



'And let me,' said a voice behind them; it was the stranger's - 

Michael Warden's; 'let me claim the benefit of those inscriptions.  

Mr. Heathfield and Dr. Jeddler, I might have deeply wronged you 

both.  That I did not, is no virtue of my own.  I will not say that 

I am six years wiser than I was, or better.  But I have known, at 

any rate, that term of self-reproach.  I can urge no reason why you 

should deal gently with me.  I abused the hospitality of this 

house; and learnt by my own demerits, with a shame I never have 

forgotten, yet with some profit too, I would fain hope, from one,' 

he glanced at Marion, 'to whom I made my humble supplication for 

forgiveness, when I knew her merit and my deep unworthiness.  In a 

few days I shall quit this place for ever.  I entreat your pardon.  

Do as you would be done by!  Forget and Forgive!'





TIME - from whom I had the latter portion of this story, and with 

whom I have the pleasure of a personal acquaintance of some five-

and-thirty years' duration - informed me, leaning easily upon his 

scythe, that Michael Warden never went away again, and never sold 

his house, but opened it afresh, maintained a golden means of 

hospitality, and had a wife, the pride and honour of that 

countryside, whose name was Marion.  But, as I have observed that 

Time confuses facts occasionally, I hardly know what weight to give 

to his authority.





End 
