





BOOK XXI







CHAPTER I



How Sir Mordred presumed and took on him to be King of

England, and would have married the queen, his father's

wife





AS Sir Mordred was ruler of all England, he did do make

letters as though that they came from beyond the sea, and

the letters specified that King Arthur was slain in battle

with Sir Launcelot.  Wherefore Sir Mordred made a

parliament, and called the lords together, and there he

made them to choose him king; and so was he crowned

at Canterbury, and held a feast there fifteen days; and

afterward he drew him unto Winchester, and there he

took the Queen Guenever, and said plainly that he would

wed her which was his uncle's wife and his father's wife.

And so he made ready for the feast, and a day prefixed

that they should be wedded; wherefore Queen Guenever

was passing heavy.  But she durst not discover her heart,

but spake fair, and agreed to Sir Mordred's will.  Then

she desired of Sir Mordred for to go to London, to buy

all manner of things that longed unto the wedding.  And

because of her fair speech Sir Mordred trusted her well

enough, and gave her leave to go.  And so when she

came to London she took the Tower of London, and

suddenly in all haste possible she stuffed it with all

manner of victual, and well garnished it with men, and so

kept it.



Then when Sir Mordred wist and understood how he

was beguiled, he was passing wroth out of measure.  And

a short tale for to make, he went and laid a mighty siege

about the Tower of London, and made many great

assaults thereat, and threw many great engines unto them,

and shot great guns.  But all might not prevail Sir

Mordred, for Queen Guenever would never for fair speech nor

for foul, would never trust to come in his hands again.



Then came the Bishop of Canterbury, the which was

a noble clerk and an holy man, and thus he said to Sir

Mordred:  Sir, what will ye do? will ye first displease

God and sithen shame yourself, and all knighthood?  Is

not King Arthur your uncle, no farther but your mother's

brother, and on her himself King Arthur begat you upon his

own sister, therefore how may you wed your father's wife?

Sir, said the noble clerk, leave this opinion or I shall curse

you with book and bell and candle.  Do thou thy worst,

said Sir Mordred, wit thou well I shall defy thee.  Sir,

said the Bishop, and wit you well I shall not fear me to

do that me ought to do.  Also where ye noise where my

lord Arthur is slain, and that is not so, and therefore ye

will make a foul work in this land.  Peace, thou false

priest, said Sir Mordred, for an thou chafe me any more

I shall make strike off thy head.  So the Bishop departed

and did the cursing in the most orgulist wise that might

be done.  And then Sir Mordred sought the Bishop of

Canterbury, for to have slain him.  Then the Bishop fled,

and took part of his goods with him, and went nigh unto

Glastonbury; and there he was as priest hermit in a

chapel, and lived in poverty and in holy prayers, for well

he understood that mischievous war was at hand.



Then Sir Mordred sought on Queen Guenever by

letters and sonds, and by fair means and foul means, for

to have her to come out of the Tower of London; but

all this availed not, for she answered him shortly, openly

and privily, that she had liefer slay herself than to be

married with him.  Then came word to Sir Mordred that

King Arthur had araised the siege for Sir Launcelot, and

he was coming homeward with a great host, to be avenged

upon Sir Mordred; wherefore Sir Mordred made write

writs to all the barony of this land, and much people

drew to him.  For then was the common voice among

them that with Arthur was none other life but war and

strife, and with Sir Mordred was great joy and bliss.

Thus was Sir Arthur depraved, and evil said of.  And

many there were that King Arthur had made up of

nought, and given them lands, might not then say him a

good word.  Lo ye all Englishmen, see ye not what a

mischief here was! for he that was the most king and

knight of the world, and most loved the fellowship of

noble knights, and by him they were all upholden, now

might not these Englishmen hold them content with him.

Lo thus was the old custom and usage of this land; and

also men say that we of this land have not yet lost nor

forgotten that custom and usage.  Alas, this is a great

default of us Englishmen, for there may no thing please

us no term.  And so fared the people at that time, they

were better pleased with Sir Mordred than they were with

King Arthur; and much people drew unto Sir Mordred,

and said they would abide with him for better and for

worse.  And so Sir Mordred drew with a great host to

Dover, for there he heard say that Sir Arthur would

arrive, and so he thought to beat his own father from his

lands; and the most part of all England held with Sir

Mordred, the people were so new-fangle.







CHAPTER II



How after that King Arthur had tidings, he returned and

came to Dover, where Sir Mordred met him to let his

landing; and of the death of Sir Gawaine





AND so as Sir Mordred was at Dover with his host, there

came King Arthur with a great navy of ships, and galleys,

and carracks.  And there was Sir Mordred ready awaiting

upon his landing, to let his own father to land upon the

land that he was king over.  Then there was launching

of great boats and small, and full of noble men of arms;

and there was much slaughter of gentle knights, and

many a full bold baron was laid full low, on both parties.

But King Arthur was so courageous that there might no

manner of knights let him to land, and his knights fiercely

followed him; and so they landed maugre Sir Mordred

and all his power, and put Sir Mordred aback, that he

fled and all his people.



So when this battle was done, King Arthur let bury

his people that were dead.  And then was noble Sir

Gawaine found in a great boat, lying more than half dead

When Sir Arthur wist that Sir Gawaine was laid so low;

he went unto him; and there the king made sorrow out

of measure, and took Sir Gawaine in his arms, and thrice

he there swooned.  And then when he awaked, he said:

Alas, Sir Gawaine, my sister's son, here now thou liest;

the man in the world that I loved most; and now is my

joy gone, for now, my nephew Sir Gawaine, I will discover

me unto your person: in Sir Launcelot and you I most

had my joy, and mine affiance, and now have I lost my

joy of you both; wherefore all mine earthly joy is gone

from me.  Mine uncle King Arthur, said Sir Gawaine,

wit you well my death-day is come, and all is through

mine own hastiness and wilfulness; for I am smitten upon

the old wound the which Sir Launcelot gave me, on the

which I feel well I must die; and had Sir Launcelot been

with you as he was, this unhappy war had never begun;

and of all this am I causer, for Sir Launcelot and his

blood, through their prowess, held all your cankered

enemies in subjection and daunger.  And now, said Sir

Gawaine, ye shall miss Sir Launcelot.  But alas, I would

not accord with him, and therefore, said Sir Gawaine, I

pray you, fair uncle, that I may have paper, pen, and ink,

that I may write to Sir Launcelot a cedle with mine own

hands.



And then when paper and ink was brought, then

Gawaine was set up weakly by King Arthur, for he was

shriven a little to-fore; and then he wrote thus, as the

French book maketh mention:  Unto Sir Launcelot, flower

of all noble knights that ever I heard of or saw by my

days, I, Sir Gawaine, King Lot's son of Orkney, sister's

son unto the noble King Arthur, send thee greeting, and

let thee have knowledge that the tenth day of May I was

smitten upon the old wound that thou gavest me afore the

city of Benwick, and through the same wound that thou

gavest me I am come to my death-day.  And I will that

all the world wit, that I, Sir Gawaine, knight of the Table

Round, sought my death, and not through thy deserving,

but it was mine own seeking; wherefore I beseech thee,

Sir Launcelot, to return again unto this realm, and see

my tomb, and pray some prayer more or less for my soul.

And this same day that I wrote this cedle, I was hurt to

the death in the same wound, the which I had of thy

hand, Sir Launcelot; for of a more nobler man might

I not be slain.  Also Sir Launcelot, for all the love

that ever was betwixt us, make no tarrying, but come

over the sea in all haste, that thou mayst with thy noble

knights rescue that noble king that made thee knight, that

is my lord Arthur; for he is full straitly bestead with a

false traitor, that is my half-brother, Sir Mordred; and he

hath let crown him king, and would have wedded my lady

Queen Guenever, and so had he done had she not put

herself in the Tower of London.  And so the tenth day

of May last past, my lord Arthur and we all landed upon

them at Dover; and there we put that false traitor, Sir

Mordred, to flight, and there it misfortuned me to be

stricken upon thy stroke.  And at the date of this letter

was written, but two hours and a half afore my death,

written with mine own hand, and so subscribed with part

of my heart's blood.  And I require thee, most famous

knight of the world, that thou wilt see my tomb.  And

then Sir Gawaine wept, and King Arthur wept; and then

they swooned both.  And when they awaked both, the

king made Sir Gawaine to receive his Saviour.  And then

Sir Gawaine prayed the king for to send for Sir Launcelot,

and to cherish him above all other knights.



And so at the hour of noon Sir Gawaine yielded up

the spirit; and then the king let inter him in a chapel

within Dover Castle; and there yet all men may see the

skull of him, and the same wound is seen that Sir Launcelot

gave him in battle.  Then was it told the king that

Sir Mordred had pight a new field upon Barham Down.

And upon the morn the king rode thither to him, and

there was a great battle betwixt them, and much people

was slain on both parties; but at the last Sir Arthur's

party stood best, and Sir Mordred and his party fled unto

Canterbury.







CHAPTER III



How after, Sir Gawaine's ghost appeared to King Arthur,

and warned him that he should not fight that day





AND then the king let search all the towns for his knights

that were slain, and interred them; and salved them with

soft salves that so sore were wounded.  Then much people

drew unto King Arthur.  And then they said that Sir

Mordred warred upon King Arthur with wrong.  And

then King Arthur drew him with his host down by the

seaside, westward toward Salisbury; and there was a day

assigned betwixt King Arthur and Sir Mordred, that they

should meet upon a down beside Salisbury, and not far

from the seaside; and this day was assigned on a Monday

after Trinity Sunday, whereof King Arthur was passing

glad, that he might be avenged upon Sir Mordred.  Then

Sir Mordred araised much people about London, for they

of Kent, Southsex, and Surrey, Estsex, and of Southfolk,

and of Northfolk, held the most part with Sir Mordred;

and many a full noble knight drew unto Sir Mordred and

to the king: but they that loved Sir Launcelot drew unto

Sir Mordred.



So upon Trinity Sunday at night, King Arthur dreamed

a wonderful dream, and that was this: that him seemed

he sat upon a chaflet in a chair, and the chair was fast to

a wheel, and thereupon sat King Arthur in the richest

cloth of gold that might be made; and the king thought

there was under him, far from him, an hideous deep black

water, and therein were all manner of serpents, and worms,

and wild beasts, foul and horrible; and suddenly the king

thought the wheel turned up-so-down, and he fell among

the serpents, and every beast took him by a limb; and

then the king cried as he lay in his bed and slept:  Help.

And then knights, squires, and yeomen, awaked the king;

and then he was so amazed that he wist not where he was;

and then he fell a-slumbering again, not sleeping nor

thoroughly waking.  So the king seemed verily that there

came Sir Gawaine unto him with a number of fair ladies

with him.  And when King Arthur saw him, then he

said:  Welcome, my sister's son; I weened thou hadst

been dead, and now I see thee alive, much am I beholding

unto Almighty Jesu.  O fair nephew and my sister's son,

what be these ladies that hither be come with you?  Sir,

said Sir Gawaine, all these be ladies for whom I have

foughten when I was man living, and all these are those

that I did battle for in righteous quarrel; and God hath

given them that grace at their great prayer, because I did

battle for them, that they should bring me hither unto

you: thus much hath God given me leave, for to warn

you of your death; for an ye fight as to-morn with Sir

Mordred, as ye both have assigned, doubt ye not ye must

be slain, and the most part of your people on both parties.

And for the great grace and goodness that almighty Jesu

hath unto you, and for pity of you, and many more other

good men there shall be slain, God hath sent me to you of

his special grace, to give you warning that in no wise ye

do battle as to-morn, but that ye take a treaty for a month

day; and proffer you largely, so as to-morn to be put in

a delay.  For within a month shall come Sir Launcelot

with all his noble knights, and rescue you worshipfully,

and slay Sir Mordred, and all that ever will hold with

him.  Then Sir Gawaine and all the ladies vanished.



And anon the king called upon his knights, squires,

and yeomen, and charged them wightly to fetch his noble

lords and wise bishops unto him.  And when they were

come, the king told them his avision, what Sir Gawaine had

told him, and warned him that if he fought on the morn

he should be slain.  Then the king commanded Sir Lucan

the Butler, and his brother Sir Bedivere, with two bishops

with them, and charged them in any wise, an they might,

Take a treaty for a month day with Sir Mordred, and spare

not, proffer him lands and goods as much as ye think

best.  So then they departed, and came to Sir Mordred,

where he had a grim host of an hundred thousand men.

And there they entreated Sir Mordred long time; and at

the last Sir Mordred was agreed for to have Cornwall and

Kent, by Arthur's days: after, all England, after the days

of King Arthur.







CHAPTER IV



How by misadventure of an adder the battle began, where

Mordred was slain, and Arthur hurt to the death





THEN were they condescended that King Arthur and

Sir Mordred should meet betwixt both their hosts, and

everych of them should bring fourteen persons; and they

came with this word unto Arthur.  Then said he:  I am

glad that this is done: and so he went into the field.  And

when Arthur should depart, he warned all his host that an

they see any sword drawn:  Look ye come on fiercely, and

slay that traitor, Sir Mordred, for I in no wise trust him.

In like wise Sir Mordred warned his host that:  An ye see

any sword drawn, look that ye come on fiercely, and so

slay all that ever before you standeth; for in no wise I

will not trust for this treaty, for I know well my father

will be avenged on me.  And so they met as their appointment

was, and so they were agreed and accorded thoroughly;

and wine was fetched, and they drank.  Right

soon came an adder out of a little heath bush, and it stung

a knight on the foot.  And when the knight felt him

stung, he looked down and saw the adder, and then he

drew his sword to slay the adder, and thought of none

other harm.  And when the host on both parties saw that

sword drawn, then they blew beams, trumpets, and horns,

and shouted grimly.  And so both hosts dressed them

together.  And King Arthur took his horse, and said:

Alas this unhappy day! and so rode to his party.  And

Sir Mordred in like wise.  And never was there seen a

more dolefuller battle in no Christian land; for there was

but rushing and riding, foining and striking, and many a

grim word was there spoken either to other, and many a

deadly stroke.  But ever King Arthur rode throughout

the battle of Sir Mordred many times, and did full nobly

as a noble king should, and at all times he fainted never;

and Sir Mordred that day put him in devoir, and in great

peril.  And thus they fought all the long day, and never

stinted till the noble knights were laid to the cold earth;

and ever they fought still till it was near night, and by

that time was there an hundred thousand laid dead upon

the down.  Then was Arthur wood wroth out of measure,

when he saw his people so slain from him.



Then the king looked about him, and then was he

ware, of all his host and of all his good knights, were left

no more alive but two knights; that one was Sir Lucan

the Butler, and his brother Sir Bedivere, and they were

full sore wounded.  Jesu mercy, said the king, where are

all my noble knights become?  Alas that ever I should

see this doleful day, for now, said Arthur, I am come to

mine end.  But would to God that I wist where were that

traitor Sir Mordred, that hath caused all this mischief.

Then was King Arthur ware where Sir Mordred leaned

upon his sword among a great heap of dead men.  Now

give me my spear, said Arthur unto Sir Lucan, for yonder

I have espied the traitor that all this woe hath wrought.

Sir, let him be, said Sir Lucan, for he is unhappy; and if

ye pass this unhappy day ye shall be right well revenged

upon him.  Good lord, remember ye of your night's

dream, and what the spirit of Sir Gawaine told you this

night, yet God of his great goodness hath preserved you

hitherto.  Therefore, for God's sake, my lord, leave off

by this, for blessed be God ye have won the field, for here

we be three alive, and with Sir Mordred is none alive;

and if ye leave off now this wicked day of destiny is past.

Tide me death, betide me life, saith the king, now I see

him yonder alone he shall never escape mine hands, for at

a better avail shall I never have him.  God speed you

well, said Sir Bedivere.



Then the king gat his spear in both his hands, and ran

toward Sir Mordred, crying:  Traitor, now is thy death-day

come.  And when Sir Mordred heard Sir Arthur, he

ran until him with his sword drawn in his hand.  And

there King Arthur smote Sir Mordred under the shield,

with a foin of his spear, throughout the body, more than

a fathom.  And when Sir Mordred felt that he had his

death wound he thrust himself with the might that he

had up to the bur of King Arthur's spear.  And right

so he smote his father Arthur, with his sword holden in

both his hands, on the side of the head, that the sword

pierced the helmet and the brain-pan, and therewithal Sir

Mordred fell stark dead to the earth; and the noble

Arthur fell in a swoon to the earth, and there he swooned

ofttimes.  And Sir Lucan the Butler and Sir Bedivere

ofttimes heaved him up.  And so weakly they led him

betwixt them both, to a little chapel not far from

the seaside.  And when the king was there he thought him well

eased.



Then heard they people cry in the field.  Now go

thou, Sir Lucan, said the king, and do me to wit what

betokens that noise in the field.  So Sir Lucan departed,

for he was grievously wounded in many places.  And so

as he yede, he saw and hearkened by the moonlight, how

that pillers and robbers were come into the field, to pill

and to rob many a full noble knight of brooches, and

beads, of many a good ring, and of many a rich jewel;

and who that were not dead all out, there they slew them

for their harness and their riches.  When Sir Lucan

understood this work, he came to the king as soon as he might,

and told him all what he had heard and seen.  Therefore

by my rede, said Sir Lucan, it is best that we bring you

to some town.  I would it were so, said the king.







CHAPTER V



How King Arthur commanded to cast his sword Excalibur

into the water, and how he was delivered to ladies in

a barge





BUT I may not stand, mine head works so.  Ah Sir

Launcelot, said King Arthur, this day have I sore missed

thee: alas, that ever I was against thee, for now have I

my death, whereof Sir Gawaine me warned in my dream.

Then Sir Lucan took up the king the one part, and Sir

Bedivere the other part, and in the lifting the king

swooned; and Sir Lucan fell in a swoon with the lift,

that the part of his guts fell out of his body, and

therewith the noble knight's heart brast.  And when the king

awoke, he beheld Sir Lucan, how he lay foaming at the

mouth, and part of his guts lay at his feet.  Alas, said

the king, this is to me a full heavy sight, to see this noble

duke so die for my sake, for he would have holpen me,

that had more need of help than I.  Alas, he would not

complain him, his heart was so set to help me: now Jesu

have mercy upon his soul!  Then Sir Bedivere wept for

the death of his brother.  Leave this mourning and weeping,

said the king, for all this will not avail me, for wit

thou well an I might live myself, the death of Sir Lucan

would grieve me evermore; but my time hieth fast, said

the king.  Therefore, said Arthur unto Sir Bedivere, take

thou Excalibur, my good sword, and go with it to yonder

water side, and when thou comest there I charge thee

throw my sword in that water, and come again and tell

me what thou there seest.  My lord, said Bedivere, your

commandment shall be done, and lightly bring you word

again.



So Sir Bedivere departed, and by the way he beheld

that noble sword, that the pommel and the haft was all of

precious stones; and then he said to himself:  If I throw

this rich sword in the water, thereof shall never come

good, but harm and loss.  And then Sir Bedivere hid

Excalibur under a tree.  And so, as soon as he might, he

came again unto the king, and said he had been at the

water, and had thrown the sword in the water.  What

saw thou there? said the king.  Sir, he said, I saw nothing

but waves and winds.  That is untruly said of thee, said

the king, therefore go thou lightly again, and do my

commandment; as thou art to me lief and dear, spare not,

but throw it in.  Then Sir Bedivere returned again, and

took the sword in his hand; and then him thought sin

and shame to throw away that noble sword, and so eft he

hid the sword, and returned again, and told to the king

that he had been at the water, and done his commandment.

What saw thou there? said the king.  Sir, he said, I saw

nothing but the waters wap and waves wan.  Ah, traitor

untrue, said King Arthur, now hast thou betrayed me

twice.  Who would have weened that, thou that hast been

to me so lief and dear? and thou art named a noble

knight, and would betray me for the richness of the sword.

But now go again lightly, for thy long tarrying putteth

me in great jeopardy of my life, for I have taken cold.

And but if thou do now as I bid thee, if ever I may see

thee, I shall slay thee with mine own hands; for thou

wouldst for my rich sword see me dead.



Then Sir Bedivere departed, and went to the sword,

and lightly took it up, and went to the water side; and

there he bound the girdle about the hilts, and then he

threw the sword as far into the water as he might; and

there came an arm and an hand above the water and met

it, and caught it, and so shook it thrice and brandished,

and then vanished away the hand with the sword in the

water.  So Sir Bedivere came again to the king, and told

him what he saw.  Alas, said the king, help me hence, for

I dread me I have tarried over long.  Then Sir Bedivere

took the king upon his back, and so went with him to

that water side.  And when they were at the water side,

even fast by the bank hoved a little barge with many fair

ladies in it, and among them all was a queen, and all they

had black hoods, and all they wept and shrieked when

they saw King Arthur.  Now put me into the barge, said

the king.  And so he did softly; and there received him

three queens with great mourning; and so they set them

down, and in one of their laps King Arthur laid his head.

And then that queen said:  Ah, dear brother, why have

ye tarried so long from me? alas, this wound on your head

hath caught over-much cold.  And so then they rowed

from the land, and Sir Bedivere beheld all those ladies go

from him.  Then Sir Bedivere cried:  Ah my lord Arthur,

what shall become of me, now ye go from me and leave

me here alone among mine enemies?  Comfort thyself,

said the king, and do as well as thou mayst, for in me is

no trust for to trust in; for I will into the vale of Avilion

to heal me of my grievous wound: and if thou hear never

more of me, pray for my soul.  But ever the queens and

ladies wept and shrieked, that it was pity to hear.  And

as soon as Sir Bedivere had lost the sight of the barge, he

wept and wailed, and so took the forest; and so he went

all that night, and in the morning he was ware betwixt two

holts hoar, of a chapel and an hermitage.







CHAPTER VI



How Sir Bedivere found him on the morrow dead in an

hermitage, and how he abode there with the hermit





THEN was Sir Bedivere glad, and thither he went; and

when he came into the chapel, he saw where lay an hermit

grovelling on all four, there fast by a tomb was new graven.

When the hermit saw Sir Bedivere he knew him well, for

he was but little to-fore Bishop of Canterbury, that Sir

Mordred flemed.  Sir, said Bedivere, what man is there

interred that ye pray so fast for?  Fair son, said the

hermit, I wot not verily, but by deeming.  But this night,

at midnight, here came a number of ladies, and brought

hither a dead corpse, and prayed me to bury him; and

here they offered an hundred tapers, and they gave me an

hundred besants.  Alas, said Sir Bedivere, that was my

lord King Arthur, that here lieth buried in this chapel.

Then Sir Bedivere swooned; and when he awoke he

prayed the hermit he might abide with him still there, to

live with fasting and prayers.  For from hence will I

never go, said Sir Bedivere, by my will, but all the days

of my life here to pray for my lord Arthur.  Ye are

welcome to me, said the hermit, for I know ye better

than ye ween that I do.  Ye are the bold Bedivere, and

the full noble duke, Sir Lucan the Butler, was your

brother.  Then Sir Bedivere told the hermit all as ye

have heard to-fore.  So there bode Sir Bedivere with the

hermit that was to-fore Bishop of Canterbury, and there

Sir Bedivere put upon him poor clothes, and served the

hermit full lowly in fasting and in prayers.



Thus of Arthur I find never more written in books

that be authorised, nor more of the very certainty of his

death heard I never read, but thus was he led away in a

ship wherein were three queens; that one was King

Arthur's sister, Queen Morgan le Fay; the other was the

Queen of Northgalis; the third was the Queen of the

Waste Lands.  Also there was Nimue, the chief lady of

the lake, that had wedded Pelleas the good knight; and

this lady had done much for King Arthur, for she would

never suffer Sir Pelleas to be in no place where he should

be in danger of his life; and so he lived to the uttermost

of his days with her in great rest.  More of the death of

King Arthur could I never find, but that ladies brought

him to his burials; and such one was buried there, that

the hermit bare witness that sometime was Bishop of

Canterbury, but yet the hermit knew not in certain that

he was verily the body of King Arthur: for this tale Sir

Bedivere, knight of the Table Round, made it to be

written.







CHAPTER VII



Of the opinion of some men of the death of King Arthur;

and how Queen Guenever made her a nun in Almesbury





YET some men say in many parts of England that King

Arthur is not dead, but had by the will of our Lord Jesu

into another place; and men say that he shall come again,

and he shall win the holy cross.  I will not say it shall be

so, but rather I will say: here in this world he changed

his life.  But many men say that there is written upon his

tomb this verse:  <oe Hic jacet Arthurus, Rex quondam,

Rexque futurus.> Thus leave I here Sir Bedivere with the

hermit, that dwelled that time in a chapel beside Glastonbury,

and there was his hermitage.  And so they lived in

their prayers, and fastings, and great abstinence.  And

when Queen Guenever understood that King Arthur was

slain, and all the noble knights, Sir Mordred and all the

remnant, then the queen stole away, and five ladies with

her, and so she went to Almesbury; and there she let

make herself a nun, and ware white clothes and black,

and great penance she took, as ever did sinful lady in this

land, and never creature could make her merry; but lived

in fasting, prayers, and alms-deeds, that all manner of

people marvelled how virtuously she was changed.  Now

leave we Queen Guenever in Almesbury, a nun in white

clothes and black, and there she was Abbess and ruler

as reason would; and turn we from her, and speak we of

Sir Launcelot du Lake.







CHAPTER VIII



How when Sir Lancelot heard of the death of King

Arthur, and of Sir Gawaine, and other matters, he

came into England





AND when he heard in his country that Sir Mordred was

crowned king in England, and made war against King

Arthur, his own father, and would let him to land in his

own land; also it was told Sir Launcelot how that Sir Mordred

had laid siege about the Tower of London, because the

queen would not wed him; then was Sir Launcelot wroth

out of measure, and said to his kinsmen:  Alas, that

double traitor Sir Mordred, now me repenteth that ever he

escaped my hands, for much shame hath he done unto my

lord Arthur; for all I feel by the doleful letter that my

lord Sir Gawaine sent me, on whose soul Jesu have mercy

that my lord Arthur is full hard bestead.  Alas, said Sir

Launcelot, that ever I should live to hear that most noble

king that made me knight thus to be overset with his subject

in his own realm.  And this doleful letter that my

lord, Sir Gawaine, hath sent me afore his death, praying

me to see his tomb, wit you well his doleful words shall

never go from mine heart, for he was a full noble knight

as ever was born; and in an unhappy hour was I born

that ever I should have that unhap to slay first Sir

Gawaine, Sir Gaheris the good knight, and mine own

friend Sir Gareth, that full noble knight.  Alas, I may

say I am unhappy, said Sir Launcelot, that ever I should

do thus unhappily, and, alas, yet might I never have hap

to slay that traitor, Sir Mordred.



Leave your complaints, said Sir Bors, and first revenge

you of the death of Sir Gawaine; and it will be well done

that ye see Sir Gawaine's tomb, and secondly that ye

revenge my lord Arthur, and my lady, Queen Guenever

I thank you, said Sir Launcelot, for ever ye will my

worship.



Then they made them ready in all the haste that

might be, with ships and galleys, with Sir Launcelot and

his host to pass into England.  And so he passed over

the sea till he came to Dover, and there he landed with

seven kings, and the number was hideous to behold.

Then Sir Launcelot spered of men of Dover where was

King Arthur become.  Then the people told him how

that he was slain, and Sir Mordred and an hundred thousand

died on a day; and how Sir Mordred gave King

Arthur there the first battle at his landing, and there was

good Sir Gawaine slain; and on the morn Sir Mordred

fought with the king upon Barham Down, and there the

king put Sir Mordred to the worse.  Alas, said Sir

Launcelot, this is the heaviest tidings that ever came to

me.  Now, fair sirs, said Sir Launcelot, shew me the

tomb of Sir Gawaine.  And then certain people of the

town brought him into the castle of Dover, and shewed

him the tomb.  Then Sir Launcelot kneeled down and

wept, and prayed heartily for his soul.  And that night he

made a dole, and all they that would come had as much

flesh, fish, wine and ale, and every man and woman had

twelve pence, come who would.  Thus with his own hand

dealt he this money, in a mourning gown; and ever he

wept, and prayed them to pray for the soul of Sir

Gawaine.  And on the morn all the priests and clerks that

might be gotten in the country were there, and sang mass

of Requiem; and there offered first Sir Launcelot, and he

offered an hundred pound; and then the seven kings

offered forty pound apiece; and also there was a thousand

knights, and each of them offered a pound; and the

offering dured from morn till night, and Sir Launcelot lay

two nights on his tomb in prayers and weeping.



Then on the third day Sir Launcelot called the kings,

dukes, earls, barons, and knights, and said thus:  My fair

lords, I thank you all of your coming into this country

with me, but we came too late, and that shall repent me

while I live, but against death may no man rebel.  But

sithen it is so, said Sir Launcelot, I will myself ride and

seek my lady, Queen Guenever, for as I hear say she hath

had great pain and much disease; and I heard say that

she is fled into the west.  Therefore ye all shall abide me

here, and but if I come again within fifteen days, then

take your ships and your fellowship, and depart into your

country, for I will do as I say to you.







CHAPTER IX



How Sir Launcelot departed to seek the Queen Guenever, and

how he found her at Almesbury





THEN came Sir Bors de Ganis, and said:  My lord Sir

Launcelot, what think ye for to do, now to ride in this

realm? wit ye well ye shall find few friends.  Be as be

may, said Sir Launcelot, keep you still here, for I will

forth on my journey, and no man nor child shall go with

me.  So it was no boot to strive, but he departed and

rode westerly, and there he sought a seven or eight days;

and at the last he came to a nunnery, and then was Queen

Guenever ware of Sir Launcelot as he walked in the

cloister.  And when she saw him there she swooned

thrice, that all the ladies and gentlewomen had work

enough to hold the queen up.  So when she might speak,

she called ladies and gentlewomen to her, and said:  Ye

marvel, fair ladies, why I make this fare.  Truly, she

said, it is for the sight of yonder knight that yonder

standeth; wherefore I pray you all call him to me.



When Sir Launcelot was brought to her, then she said

to all the ladies:  Through this man and me hath all this

war been wrought, and the death of the most noblest

knights of the world; for through our love that we have

loved together is my most noble lord slain.  Therefore,

Sir Launcelot, wit thou well I am set in such a plight to

get my soul-heal; and yet I trust through God's grace

that after my death to have a sight of the blessed face of

Christ, and at domesday to sit on his right side, for as

sinful as ever I was are saints in heaven.  Therefore, Sir

Launcelot, I require thee and beseech thee heartily, for all

the love that ever was betwixt us, that thou never see me

more in the visage; and I command thee, on God's

behalf, that thou forsake my company, and to thy kingdom

thou turn again, and keep well thy realm from war and

wrack; for as well as I have loved thee, mine heart will

not serve me to see thee, for through thee and me is

the flower of kings and knights destroyed; therefore, Sir

Launcelot, go to thy realm, and there take thee a wife,

and live with her with joy and bliss; and I pray thee

heartily, pray for me to our Lord that I may amend

my misliving.  Now, sweet madam, said Sir Launcelot,

would ye that I should now return again unto my country,

and there to wed a lady?  Nay, madam, wit you well that

shall I never do, for I shall never be so false to you of

that I have promised; but the same destiny that ye have

taken you to, I will take me unto, for to please Jesu, and

ever for you I cast me specially to pray.  If thou wilt do

so, said the queen, hold thy promise, but I may never

believe but that thou wilt turn to the world again.  Well,

madam, said he, ye say as pleaseth you, yet wist you me

never false of my promise, and God defend but I should

forsake the world as ye have done.  For in the quest of

the Sangreal I had forsaken the vanities of the world had

not your lord been.  And if I had done so at that time,

with my heart, will, and thought, I had passed all the

knights that were in the Sangreal except Sir Galahad, my

son.  And therefore, lady, sithen ye have taken you to

perfection, I must needs take me to perfection, of right.

For I take record of God, in you I have had mine earthly

joy; and if I had found you now so disposed, I had cast

me to have had you into mine own realm.







CHAPTER X



How Sir Launcelot came to the hermitage where the Archbishop

of Canterbury was, and how he took the habit on

him





BUT sithen I find you thus disposed, I ensure you faithfully,

I will ever take me to penance, and pray while my life

lasteth, if I may find any hermit, either gray or white, that

will receive me.  Wherefore, madam, I pray you kiss me

and never no more.  Nay, said the queen, that shall I

never do, but abstain you from such works: and they

departed.  But there was never so hard an hearted man

but he would have wept to see the dolour that they made;

for there was lamentation as they had been stung with

spears; and many times they swooned, and the ladies bare

the queen to her chamber.



And Sir Launcelot awoke, and went and took his horse,

and rode all that day and all night in a forest, weeping.

And at the last he was ware of an hermitage and a chapel

stood betwixt two cliffs; and then he heard a little bell

ring to mass, and thither he rode and alighted, and tied his

horse to the gate, and heard mass.  And he that sang

mass was the Bishop of Canterbury.  Both the Bishop and

Sir Bedivere knew Sir Launcelot, and they spake together

after mass.  But when Sir Bedivere had told his tale all

whole, Sir Launcelot's heart almost brast for sorrow, and

Sir Launcelot threw his arms abroad, and said:  Alas, who

may trust this world.  And then he kneeled down on his

knee, and prayed the Bishop to shrive him and assoil him.

And then he besought the Bishop that he might be his

brother.  Then the Bishop said:  I will gladly; and there

he put an habit upon Sir Launcelot, and there he served God

day and night with prayers and fastings.



Thus the great host abode at Dover.  And then Sir

Lionel took fifteen lords with him, and rode to London to

seek Sir Launcelot; and there Sir Lionel was slain and

many of his lords.  Then Sir Bors de Ganis made the

great host for to go home again; and Sir Bors, Sir Ector

de Maris, Sir Blamore, Sir Bleoberis, with more other of

Sir Launcelot's kin, took on them to ride all England

overthwart and endlong, to seek Sir Launcelot.  So Sir

Bors by fortune rode so long till he came to the same

chapel where Sir Launcelot was; and so Sir Bors heard a

little bell knell, that rang to mass; and there he alighted

and heard mass.  And when mass was done, the Bishop

Sir Launcelot, and Sir Bedivere, came to Sir Bors.  And

when Sir Bors saw Sir Launcelot in that manner clothing,

then he prayed the Bishop that he might be in the same

suit.  And so there was an habit put upon him, and there

he lived in prayers and fasting.  And within half a year,

there was come Sir Galihud, Sir Galihodin, Sir Blamore, Sir

Bleoberis, Sir Villiars, Sir Clarras, and Sir Gahalantine.  So

all these seven noble knights there abode still.  And when

they saw Sir Launcelot had taken him to such perfection,

they had no lust to depart, but took such an habit as he

had.



Thus they endured in great penance six year; and then

Sir Launcelot took the habit of priesthood of the Bishop,

and a twelvemonth he sang mass.  And there was none

of these other knights but they read in books, and holp

for to sing mass, and rang bells, and did bodily all manner

of service.  And so their horses went where they would,

for they took no regard of no worldly riches.  For when

they saw Sir Launcelot endure such penance, in prayers, and

fastings, they took no force what pain they endured, for to

see the noblest knight of the world take such abstinence

that he waxed full lean.  And thus upon a night, there

came a vision to Sir Launcelot, and charged him, in remission

of his sins, to haste him unto Almesbury:  And by

then thou come there, thou shalt find Queen Guenever

dead.  And therefore take thy fellows with thee, and

purvey them of an horse bier, and fetch thou the corpse of

her, and bury her by her husband, the noble King Arthur.

So this avision came to Sir Launcelot thrice in one

night.







CHAPTER XI



How Sir Launcelot went with his seven fellows to Almesbury,

and found there Queen Guenever dead, whom they

brought to Glastonbury





THEN Sir Launcelot rose up or day, and told the

hermit.  It were well done, said the hermit, that ye made

you ready, and that you disobey not the avision.  Then

Sir Launcelot took his eight fellows with him, and on foot

they yede from Glastonbury to Almesbury, the which is

little more than thirty mile.  And thither they came

within two days, for they were weak and feeble to go.

And when Sir Launcelot was come to Almesbury within

the nunnery, Queen Guenever died but half an hour afore.

And the ladies told Sir Launcelot that Queen Guenever

told them all or she passed, that Sir Launcelot had been

priest near a twelvemonth, And hither he cometh as fast

as he may to fetch my corpse; and beside my lord, King

Arthur, he shall bury me.  Wherefore the queen said in

hearing of them all:  I beseech Almighty God that I may

never have power to see Sir Launcelot with my worldly

eyen; and thus, said all the ladies, was ever her prayer

these two days, till she was dead.  Then Sir Launcelot

saw her visage, but he wept not greatly, but sighed.  And

so he did all the observance of the service himself, both

the dirige, and on the morn he sang mass.  And there

was ordained an horse bier; and so with an hundred

torches ever brenning about the corpse of the queen, and

ever Sir Launcelot with his eight fellows went about the

horse bier, singing and reading many an holy orison, and

frankincense upon the corpse incensed.  Thus Sir Launcelot

and his eight fellows went on foot from Almesbury

unto Glastonbury.



And when they were come to the chapel and the

hermitage, there she had a dirige, with great devotion.

And on the morn the hermit that sometime was Bishop of

Canterbury sang the mass of Requiem with great devotion.

And Sir Launcelot was the first that offered, and then also

his eight fellows.  And then she was wrapped in cered

cloth of Raines, from the top to the toe, in thirtyfold,

and after she was put in a web of lead, and then in a coffin

of marble.  And when she was put in the earth Sir Launcelot

swooned, and lay long still, while the hermit came

and awaked him, and said:  Ye be to blame, for ye

displease God with such manner of sorrow-making.  Truly,

said Sir Launcelot, I trust I do not displease God, for He

knoweth mine intent.  For my sorrow was not, nor is not

for any rejoicing of sin, but my sorrow may never have

end.  For when I remember of her beauty, and of her

noblesse, that was both with her king and with her, so

when I saw his corpse and her corpse so lie together, truly

mine heart would not serve to sustain my careful body.

Also when I remember me how by my default, mine orgule

and my pride, that they were both laid full low, that were

peerless that ever was living of Christian people, wit you

well, said Sir Launcelot, this remembered, of their kindness

and mine unkindness, sank so to mine heart, that I

might not sustain myself.  So the French book maketh

mention.







CHAPTER XII



How Sir Launcelot began to sicken, and after died, whose

body was borne to Joyous Gard for to be buried





THEN Sir Launcelot never after ate but little meat, ne

drank, till he was dead.  For then he sickened more and

more, and dried, and dwined away.  For the Bishop nor

none of his fellows might not make him to eat, and little

he drank, that he was waxen by a cubit shorter than he

was, that the people could not know him.  For evermore,

day and night, he prayed, but sometime he slumbered a

broken sleep; ever he was lying grovelling on the tomb

of King Arthur and Queen Guenever.  And there was no

comfort that the Bishop, nor Sir Bors, nor none of his

fellows, could make him, it availed not.  So within six

weeks after, Sir Launcelot fell sick, and lay in his bed; and

then he sent for the Bishop that there was hermit, and all

his true fellows.  Then Sir Launcelot said with dreary

steven:  Sir Bishop, I pray you give to me all my rites that

longeth to a Christian man.  It shall not need you, said

the hermit and all his fellows, it is but heaviness of your

blood, ye shall be well mended by the grace of God

to-morn.  My fair lords, said Sir Launcelot, wit you well

my careful body will into the earth, I have warning more

than now I will say; therefore give me my rites.  So

when he was houseled and anealed, and had all that a

Christian man ought to have, he prayed the Bishop that his

fellows might bear his body to Joyous Gard.  Some men

say it was Alnwick, and some men say it was Bamborough.

Howbeit, said Sir Launcelot, me repenteth sore, but I made

mine avow sometime, that in Joyous Gard I would be

buried.  And because of breaking of mine avow, I pray

you all, lead me thither.  Then there was weeping and

wringing of hands among his fellows.



So at a season of the night they all went to their beds,

for they all lay in one chamber.  And so after midnight,

against day, the Bishop [that] then was hermit, as he lay in

his bed asleep, he fell upon a great laughter.  And

therewith all the fellowship awoke, and came to the Bishop, and

asked him what he ailed.  Ah Jesu mercy, said the Bishop,

why did ye awake me?  I was never in all my life so merry

and so well at ease.  Wherefore? said Sir Bors.  Truly

said the Bishop, here was Sir Launcelot with me with mo

angels than ever I saw men in one day.  And I saw the

angels heave up Sir Launcelot unto heaven, and the gates

of heaven opened against him.  It is but dretching of

swevens, said Sir Bors, for I doubt not Sir Launcelot aileth

nothing but good.  It may well be, said the Bishop; go

ye to his bed, and then shall ye prove the sooth.  So when

Sir Bors and his fellows came to his bed they found him

stark dead, and he lay as he had smiled, and the sweetest

savour about him that ever they felt.



Then was there weeping and wringing of hands, and

the greatest dole they made that ever made men.  And

on the morn the Bishop did his mass of Requiem,

and after, the Bishop and all the nine knights put Sir

Launcelot in the same horse bier that Queen Guenever

was laid in to-fore that she was buried.  And so the Bishop

and they all together went with the body of Sir Launcelot

daily, till they came to Joyous Gard; and ever they had

an hundred torches brenning about him.  And so within

fifteen days they came to Joyous Gard.  And there they

laid his corpse in the body of the quire, and sang and

read many psalters and prayers over him and about him.



And ever his visage was laid open and naked, that all

folks might behold him.  For such was the custom in

those days, that all men of worship should so lie with

open visage till that they were buried.  And right thus

as they were at their service, there came Sir Ector de

Maris, that had seven years sought all England, Scotland,

and Wales, seeking his brother, Sir Launcelot.







CHAPTER XIII



How Sir Ector found Sir Launcelot his brother dead, and

how Constantine reigned next after Arthur; and of the

end of this book





AND when Sir Ector heard such noise and light in the

quire of Joyous Gard, he alighted and put his horse from

him, and came into the quire, and there he saw men sing

and weep.  And all they knew Sir Ector, but he knew

not them.  Then went Sir Bors unto Sir Ector, and told

him how there lay his brother, Sir Launcelot, dead; and

then Sir Ector threw his shield, sword, and helm from

him.  And when he beheld Sir Launcelot's visage, he fell

down in a swoon.  And when he waked it were hard any

tongue to tell the doleful complaints that he made for his

brother.  Ah Launcelot, he said, thou were head of all

Christian knights, and now I dare say, said Sir Ector,

thou Sir Launcelot, there thou liest, that thou were never

matched of earthly knight's hand.  And thou were the

courteoust knight that ever bare shield.  And thou were

the truest friend to thy lover that ever bestrad horse.

And thou were the truest lover of a sinful man that ever

loved woman.  And thou were the kindest man that ever

struck with sword.  And thou were the goodliest person

that ever came among press of knights.  And thou was

the meekest man and the gentlest that ever ate in hall

among ladies.  And thou were the sternest knight to thy

mortal foe that ever put spear in the rest.  Then there

was weeping and dolour out of measure.



Thus they kept Sir Launcelot's corpse aloft fifteen

days, and then they buried it with great devotion.  And

then at leisure they went all with the Bishop of Canterbury

to his hermitage, and there they were together more than

a month.  Then Sir Constantine, that was Sir Cador's

son of Cornwall, was chosen king of England.  And he

was a full noble knight, and worshipfully he ruled this

realm.  And then this King Constantine sent for the

Bishop of Canterbury, for he heard say where he was.

And so he was restored unto his Bishopric, and left that

hermitage.  And Sir Bedivere was there ever still hermit

to his life's end.  Then Sir Bors de Ganis, Sir Ector de

Maris, Sir Gahalantine, Sir Galihud, Sir Galihodin, Sir

Blamore, Sir Bleoberis, Sir Villiars le Valiant, Sir Clarrus

of Clermont, all these knights drew them to their

countries.  Howbeit King Constantine would have had

them with him, but they would not abide in this realm.

And there they all lived in their countries as holy men.

And some English books make mention that they went

never out of England after the death of Sir Launcelot,

but that was but favour of makers.  For the French book

maketh mention, and is authorised, that Sir Bors, Sir

Ector, Sir Blamore, and Sir Bleoberis, went into the Holy

Land thereas Jesu Christ was quick and dead, and anon as

they had stablished their lands.  For the book saith, so

Sir Launcelot commanded them for to do, or ever he passed

out of this world.  And these four knights did many

battles upon the miscreants or Turks.  And there they

died upon a Good Friday for God's sake.



<oe Here is the end of the book of King Arthur, and of his

noble knights of the Round Table, that when they

were whole together there was ever an hundred and

forty.  And here is the end of the death of Arthur. 

I pray you all, gentlemen and gentlewomen that>

<oe readeth this book of Arthur and his knights, from

the beginning to the ending, pray for me while I

am alive, that God send me good deliverance, and

when I am dead, I pray you all pray for my soul. 

For this book was ended the ninth year of the

reign of King Edward the Fourth, by Sir Thomas

Maleore, knight, as Jesu help him for his great

might, as he is the servant of Jesu both day and

night.>



<oe Thus endeth this noble and joyous book entitled Le Morte

Darthur.  Notwithstanding it treateth of the birth,

life, and acts of the said King Arthur, of his noble

knights of the Round Table, their marvellous enquests

and adventures, the achieving of the Sangreal,

and in the end the dolorous death and departing out

of this world of them all.  Which book was reduced

into English by Sir Thomas Malory, knight, as

afore is said, and by me divided into twenty-one

books, chaptered and emprinted, and finished in the

abbey, Westminster, the last day of July the year of

our Lord MCCCCLXXX{?}.>



<oe Caxton me fieri fecit.>







GLOSSARY



Abashed, abased, lowered, 9 34

Abate, depress, calm, 7 IS, 18 I9

Abought, paid for, 7 }7

Abraid, started, 9 32

Accompted, counted, 13 2

Accorded, agreed, 1 z

Accordment, agreement, 20 Ir

Acquit, repay, 4 26

Actually, actively, 4 20

Adoubted, afraid, 10 4

Advision, vision, 14 7

Afeard, afraid, 1 z3

Afterdeal, disadvantage, 5 8

Againsay, retract, 13 7

Aknown, known, 8 I4

Aligement, alleviation, 16 1 6

Allegeance, alleviation, 18 I9

Allow, approve, 7 5

Almeries, chests, 17 23

Alther, gen.  pl., of all, 4 I I, 20 6

Amounted, mounted, 10 3

Anealed, anointed, 21 IZ

Anguishly, in pain, ]6 IS

Anon, at once, 5 g

Apair, weaken, 3 3

Apparelled, fitted up, 4 6

Appeach, impeach, 10 7

Appealed, challenged, accused, 18 4

Appertices, displays, 5 8

Araged, enraged, 5 2, 9 34; confused, 18 3

Araised, raised, 21 I

Arase, obliterate, 18 25

Areared, reared, 10 64

Armyvestal, martial, 4 I S

Array, plight, state of affairs, 19 7

Arrayed, situated, 17 3

Arson, saddle-bow, 6 7, 18 23

Askance, casually, 8 I4

Assoiled, absolved, 13 20

Assotted, infatuated, 4 I

Assummon, summon, 7 26

Astonied, amazed, stunned, 10 57

At, of, by, 7 3I, 19 8

At-after, after, 7 iI, 12 4

Attainta overcome, 16 8

Aumbries, chests, 17 23

Avail (at), at an advantage, 20 r3

Avaled, lowered, 5 I2

Avaunt, boast, 5 g

Aventred, couched, 2 I8, 4 A

Avised, be advised, take thought, 9 IO

Avision, vision, 21 II

Avoid, quit, 9 3I

Avoided, got clear off, 7 I7

Avow, vow, 10 63

Await of (in), in watch for, 9 A

Awayward, away, 7 I9

Awke, sideways, 5 IO

Bachelors, probationers for knighthood 1 IS

Bain, bath, 18 II, I7

Barbican, gate-tower, 5 5, 7 3t

Barget, little ship, 8 38

Battle, division of an army, 1 IS

Bawdy, dirty, 7 5

Beams, trumpets, 214

Be-closed, enclosed, 12 6

Become, pp., befallen, gone to, 13 I8

Bedashed, splashed, 19 2

Behests, promises, 916

Behight, promised, 17 23

Beholden (beholding) to, obliged to, 7 2I, 13 I9

Behote, promised, 8 8

Benome, deprived, taken away, 14 8, 16 8

Besants, gold coins, 4 25

Beseek, beseech, 15 4

Beseen, appointed, arrayed, 1 18, 116

Beskift, shove off, 4

Bested, beset, 21 2

Betaken, entrusted, 16

Betaught, entrusted, recommended, 6 7

Betid, happened, 7 I S

Betook, committed, entrusted, 123,1069

Bevered, quivered, 1 IS

Board, sb., deck, 14 7

Bobaunce, boasting, pride, 10 63, 15 6, 18 IS

Boishe, bush, branch of a tree, 6 I6

Boistous, rough, 2 8, 14 6

Bole, trunk of a tree, 6 I6

Boot, remedy, 9 I7

Borrow out, redeem, 10 30

Borrows, pledges, 7 I8

Bote, remedy, 8 I, 6

Bound, ready, 1 2

Bourded, jested, 9 43

Bourder, jester, 10 z5

Braced, embraced, 10 78

Brachet, little hound, 3 6

Braide, quick movement, 20 2I

Brast, burst, break, 1 I4, 18 z

Breaths, breathing holes, 8 7

Brief, shorten, 9 I2

Brim, fierce, furious, 20 13

Brised, broke, 9 +, 10 I

Broached, pierced, 1 I6

Broaches, spits, 6 5

Bur, hand-guard of a spear, 214

Burble, bubble, 18 22

Burbling, bubbling, 10 2

Burgenetts, buds, blossoms, 20 I

Bushrnent, ambush, 5 5

By and by, immediately, 18 4

Bywaryed, expended, bestowed, 7 2I

Canel bone, collar bone, 4 27

Cankered, inveterate, 212

Cantel, slice, strip, 1 I6

Careful, sorrowful, full of troubles, 5 5, 21 II

Cast (of bread), loaves baked at the same time, 7 I 4

Cast, rei propose, 13 20

Cedle, schedule, note, 212

Cere, wax over, embalm, 5 8; cered, 21 1 I

Certes, certainly, 14 7

Chafe, heat, decompose, 4 8; chafed, heated, 149

Chaflet, platform, scaffold, 213

Champaign, open country, 1 I4


Chariot (Fr c/iarette), cart, 19 4

Cheer, countenance, 7 IS, 13 20; entertainment, 3 8

Chierte, dearness, 13 8

Chrism, anointing oil, 9 39

Clatter, talk confusedly, 118

Cleight, clutched, 6 2

Cleped, called, 9 6

Clipping, embracing, 4 22, 8 36

Cog, small boat, 5 3

Cognisance, badge, mark of distinction, 11 3

Coif, head-piece, 8 7

Comfort, strengtten, help, 16 7

Cominal, common, 4 25

Complished, complete, 7 I

Con, know, be able, 5 I6 j con thank, be

grateful, 20 I 3

Conserve, preserve, 17 I4

Conversant, abiding in, 17 3

Cording, agreement, 1 II

Coronal, circlet, 5 S

Cost, side, 7 I2

Costed, kept up with, 18 2x

Couched, lay, 14 6

Courage, encourage, 19 I0

Courtelage, courtyard, 4 24

Covert, sheltered, 20 22

Covetise, covetousness, 13

Covin, deceit, 13 15

Cream, oil, 9 39

Credence, faith, 5 z

Croup, crupper, 8 I6

Curteist, most courteous, 6 IC

Daffish, foolish, 9 42

Danger (in), under obligation to, in the power of, 7 8, 19 4

Dawed, v tr,, revived, 11 lo; lttr,9 dawned, 17 2

Deadly, mortal, human, 17, 9, 20

Deal, part, portion, 16 I I

Debate, quarrel, strife, 3 6

Debonair, courteous, 17 4

Deceivable, deceitful, 10 6 I

Defaded, faded, 10 86

Default, fault, 3 8

Defend, forbid, 1 23; deferded, forbade, 7 I; forbidden, 18 2

Defoiled, trodden down, fouled, deflowered, 1 I4, 7 I2, 9 32

Degree (win the), rank, superiority, 8 9

Delibered, determined, 5 2

Deliverly, adroitly, 20 22

Departed, divided, 9 7

Departition, departure, 9 36

Dere, harm, 1 17, 13 IZ

Descrive, describe, 10 I

Despoiled, stripped, 15 2

Detrenched, cut to pieces, 5 7

Devised, looked carefully at, 17 13

Devoir, duty, service, 7 23, 20 18

Did off, doffed, 13 B

Dight, prepared, 4 6

Dindled, trembled, 5 8

Disadventure, misfortune, 13 20

Discover, reveal, 13 20

Disherited, disinherited, 13 IO, 14 8

Disparpled, scattered, 20 I

Dispenses, expenses, 5 2

Disperplyd, scattered, 5 2, 8

Dispoiled, stripped, 7 2

Distained, sullied, dishonoured, 184

Disworship, shame, 9 3

Dole, gift of alms, 21 3

Dole, sorrow, 1 IS, 11 B

Domineth, dominatesj rules, 5 I

Don, gift, 7 2

Doted, foolish, 10 55

Doubted, redoubtable, 167

Draughts, privities, secret interviews, recesses, 18 IX 19 6

Drenched, drowned, 14 8

Dress, make ready, 1 I6

Dressed up, raised, 13 I8

Dretched, troubled in sleep, 20 5

Dretching, being troubled in sleep, 21 I

Dromounds, war vessels, 5 3

Dure, endure, last, 4 I; dared, 8 29;

during, 10 7 I

Duresse, bondage, hardship, 13 I2X 14 7

Dwined, dwindled, 21 IZ

Eased, entertained, 17 I x

Eft, after, again, 8 13

Eftures, passages, 19 7

Embattled, ranged for battle, 5 8

Embushed, concealed in the woods, 1 I9, 46

Eme, uncle, 8 S

Empoison, poison, 18 3

Emprised, undertook, 9 2

Enbraid, 20 I2

Enchafe, heat, 18 IS; enchafed, heated, 149, 185

Enchieve, achieve, 9 2X 13 2

Endlong, alongside of, ff 7

Enewed, painted, 3 9

Enforce, constrain, 10 74, 18 18

Engine, device, 10 I7

Enow, enough, 1 23

Enquest, enterprise, 9 2

Ensured, assured, 7 I7

Entermete, intermeddle, 10 26

Errant, wandering, 4 I2

Estates, ranks, 10 6I

Even hand, at an equality, 92

Evenlong, along, 10 6 I

Everych, each, every one, 16 3

Faiter, vagabond, 2 IO

Fare, sb., ado, commotion, 219

Faren, pp., treated, 7 x 5

FautS v., lack, 3 I; fagted, lacked, 9 32

Fealty, oath of fidelity, 7 I7

Fear, frighten, 7 I6

Feute, trace, track, 6 I4, 18 2I

Feuter, set in rest, couch, ff 2

Feutred, set in socket, 20 I3

Fiaunce, affiance, promise, 1 3

Flang, flung, 6 7, 10 41; rushed, 9 6

Flatling, prostrate, 18 7

Fleet, float, 13 2

Flemed, put to flight, 20 D

Flittered, fluttered, 5 4

Foiled, defeated, shamed, 18 25

Foined, thrust, 20 22

Foining, thrusting, 7 4

Foins, thrusts, 9 8

Foot-hot, hastily, 5> 28, 33

For-bled, spent with bleeding, 9 8, 20 7

Force (no), no concern, 3 7, 21 IO

Fordeal, advantage, 5 8

Fordo, destroy, 8 26; ferdid, 2 I9

Forecast, preconcerted plot, 20 5

For-fared, worsted, 6 6

Forfend, forbid, 18 2

Forfoughten, weary with fighting, 2 IO

Forhewn, hewn to pieces, 7 I2, I7

Forjousted, tired with jousting, 8 39, 10 58

Forthinketh, repents, 2 3

Fortuned, happened, 7 x

Forward, vanguard, 20 I3

Forwounded, sorely wounded, 9 8

Free, noble, 10 6 I

Fr shed,

Froward, away from, 3 x4, 104

Gad, wedge or spike of iron, 15 2

Gainest, readiest, 7 20

Gar, cause, 20 I6

Gart, compelled, 3 IO, 8 I S

Gentily, like a gentleman, 9 5

Gerfalcon, a fine hawk, 4 26

Germane, closely allied, 2 I I, 14 2

Gest, deed, story, 6 I3

Gisarm, halberd, battle-axe, 4 25X 7 22

Glaive, sword, 20 6

Glastings barking, 10 53

Glatisant, barking, yelping, 10 13

Gobbets, lumps, 7 23

Graithed, made ready, 5 7

Gree, degree, superiority, 5 IO, 6 7

Greed, pp., pleased, content, 16 IS

Greses, steps, 17 I8

Grimly, ugly, 6 8, 19 2

Grovelling, on his face, 8 26

Guerdonless, without reward, 10 86

Guise, fashion,

Habergeon, hauberk with leggings attached, 16 IO

Hair, a hair-shirt, 152

Hale and how, a sailor's cry, 7 IS

Halp, helped, 10 64

Halsed, embraced, 8 I4

Halsing, embracing, 2 I6

Handfast, betrothed, 10 37

Handsel, earnest-money, 8 I6

Hangers, testicles, 10 38

Harbingers, messengers sent to prepare

lodgings, 7 27

Harness, armour, 9 I I

Hart of greese, fat deer, 10 86

Hauberk, coat of mail, 1 I6

Haut, high, noble, 2 I9, 8 27

Hauteyn, haughty, 4 IO

Heavy, sad, 14 4, 6

Hete, command, 1] 9

Hide, skin, 11 I4

Hied, hurried, 17 19

High (on), aloud, 6 II

Higher hand, the uppermost, 16 I4

Hight, called, 1 I8

Hilled, covered, concealed, 10 59, 17 22

Holden, held, 18

Holp, helped, B 12

Holts, woods, 6 9

Hough-bone, back part of knee-joillt, 12 3

Houselled, to be given the Eucharist, 21 12

Hoved, hovered, waited about, 2 I9, 4 20 18 Io

Hurled, dashed, staggered, 8 26, 9 4X 6, 104I; hvrSig, 7 H

Hurtle, dash, 7 H

Incontinent, forthwith, 5 z

Ind, dark blue, 1 IS

Infellowship, join in fellowship, 8 27

In like, alike, 1214

Intermit, interpose, 16 15

Japer, jester, 10 44

Japes, jests, 3 II

Jesseraunt, a short cuirass, 19

Keep, sb., care, 7 20

Keep, v., care reck, 9 I4

Kemps, champions, 7 8

Kind, nature, 118

Kindly, natural, 118

Knights partcrs, marshals.  199

Know, acknowledge, 5 I2

Knowledging, acknowledgment, confession, 19 I

Lain, conceal, 20 I

Langering, sauntering, 9 20

Lapped, took in her lap, 8 r

Large, generous, 1061

Largeness, liberality, 4 H

Laton, latten, brass, 2 II

Laund, waste plain, 4

Layne, conceal, 18 }3

Lazar-cot, leper-house, 8 35

Learn, teach, 6 IO

Lears, cheeks, 9 20

Leaved, leafy, 18 IO

Lecher, fornicator, 18 2

Leech, physician, 125

Lesnan, lover, 6 5

Let, caused to, 10 6 I

Let, hinder, 5 7

Lewdest, most ignorant, 126

Licours, lecherous, 18 25

Lief, dear, 215

Liefer, more gladly, 9 4

Lieve, believe, 20 I

Limb-meal, limb from limb, 8 37

List, desire, pleasure, 9 2421039

Lithe, joint, 3 H

Longing unto, belonging to, 1 H

Long on (upon), because of, 15 2X20 r

Loos, praise, 5 lo, 16 I I

Lotless, without a share, 10 4

Loveday, day for settling disputes, 10 I5

Loving, praising, 11 I, 19

Lunes, leashes, strings, 6 16

Lusk, lubber, 7 5

Lusts, inclinations, 8 36

Maims, wounds, 1 IS

Makeless, matchless, 6 II, 1O 73

Makers, authors, poets, 21 H

Mal-ease, discomfort, 8 4I

Mal engine, evil design, 18 5, I8, 204

Mal-fortune, ill-luck, mishap, 912

Marches, berders, 1 H8, 9

Mass-penay, offering at mass for the dead, 18 20

Matchecold, machicolated, with holes for defence, 7 lo

Maugre, Jb, despite, 1 2 3, 20 6X I1

Measle, disease, 17 I I

Medled, mingled, 10 59

Medley, melee, general encounter, 1 IS

Meiny, retinue, 5 5

Mickle, much, 10 63

Minever, ermine, 12 I ,.

Mischieved, hurt, 9 I I

Mischievous, painful, 20 6

Miscomfort, discomfort, 10 29

Miscreature, unbeliever, 17 2

Missay, revile, 9 3; missaid, 9 2

Mo, more, 8 34,10 58

More and less, rich and poor, 7 27

Motes, notes on a horn, 7 8

Mountenance, amount of, extent, 7 4

Much, great, 20 4

Naked, unarmed, 12 I2

Namely, especially, 13 20

Ne, nor, 5 8

Near-hand, nearly, 5 7, 8 I4; near, 19 I

Needly, needs, on your own compulsion, 10 67

Nesh, soft, tender, 13 20

Nigh-hand, nearly, 9 35

Nill, will not, 10 55

Nilt, will not, 13 20

Nis, ne is, is not, 6 I6

Nist, ne wist, knew not, 1614

Nolulesse, nobleness, 119

Nobley, nobility, splendour, 10 6

Noised; reported, 10 46

Nold, would not, 13 IO

Noseling, on his nose, 17 4

Not for then, nevertheless, 10 30,

Notoyrly, notoriously, Pre95

Noyous, hurtful, 17 8

Obeissance, obedience, 18

Or, before, 9 N

Orgule, haughtiness, 21 I I

Orgulist, haughtiest, 21 I

Orgulite, pride, arrogance, 10 I

Orgulous, proud, 2 4

Other, or, 1 23

Ouches, jewels, 20 I4

Ought, owned, 6 5, 9 2

Outcept, except, 10 72

Outher, or, 9 N7, 10

Out-taken, except, 10 7 3

Over-evening, last night, 9

Overget, overtake, 12 3

Overhylled, covered, 10 9

Over-led, domineered over, 20 I I

Overlong, the length of, 10 60

Overslip, s., pass, 8 I4

Overthwart, alj., cross, 9 IS

Overthwart, sb., mischance, 7 17

Overthwart and endlong, by the breadth and length, 13 N

Painture, painting, 6 6

Paitrelles, breastplate of a horse, 7 16

Paltocks, short coats, 5

Parage, descent, 7 S

Pareil, like, 6 2

Passing, surpassingly, 18 t

Paynim, pagan, 9 38

Pensel, pennon, 10 47

Perclos, partition, 14 3

Perdy, par Dieu, 7 }9

Perigot, falcon, 6 16

Perish, destroy, 17 2

Peron, tombstone, 10 2

Pight, pitched, 1 I, 5 5, 9 20

Pike, steal away, 20 I7

Piked, stole, 9 44

Pillers, plunderers, 214

Pilling, plundering, 13 15

Pleasaunce, pleasure, 8 36

Plenour, complete, 7 1

Plump, b., cluster, 1 16

Pointling, aiming, 114

Pont, bridge, 11 I

Port, gate, 7 No

Posseded, possessed, 8 12

Potestate, governor, 5 8

Precessours, predecessors, 51

Press, throng, 1 N

Pretendeth, belongs to, 1 N

Pricker, hard rider, 5 IO

Pricking, spurring, 14 5

Prime, 6.o A.M., 6 49 1319

Prise, capture, 4 6

Puissance, power, 126

Purfle, trimming, 1 26

Purfled, embroidered, 1 26

Purvey, provide, 4 l, 18 3

Quarrels, arrowheads, 115

Questing, barking, 1 N

Quick, alive, N 1

Quit, repaid, 4 28; acquitted, behaved, 5 11

Raced (rased), tore, 1 23, 10 41 18 23

Rack (of bulls), herd, 16 I, 3

Raines, a town in Brittany famous for its cloth, 21

Ramping, raging, 9

Range, rank, station, 10

Ransacked, searched, 13 N

Rashed, fell headlong, 9 6

Rashing, rushing, 6 8

Rasing, rushing, 6 8, 7 4

Rasure, 18 25

Raundon, impetuosity, l lo, 39

Rear, raise, 4 2

Rechate, note of recall, 10 52

Recomforted, comforted, cheered, 733

Recounter, rencontre, encounter, 4 24X 10 3

Recover, rescue, 20 N

Rede, advise, 1 23; sb, counsel, 214

Redounded, glanced back, 1 N

Religion, religious order, 15

Reneye, deny, 8 37

Report, refer, 18 4

Resemblaunt, semblance, 14 6

Retrayed, drew back, 7 12

Rightwise, rightly, 15

Rivage, shore, 7 2I

Romed, roared, 5 4

Roted, practised, 10 36

Rove, cleft, 217

Rownsepyk, a branch, 6 I6

Sacring, consecrating, 14 3

Sad, serious, 9 7

Sadly, heartily, earnestly, 7 2

Salle, room, 17 16

SamitS N silk stuff with gold or

threads, 1 25

Sangreal, Holy Grail, 12 4

Sarps, girdles, 20 14

Saw, proverb, 10 61

Scathes, harms, hurts, 10 30

Scripture, writing, 17 2 1

Search, probe wounds, 8 8

Selar, canopy, I7 6

Semblabk, like, 6 IO

Semblant, semblance, 8 8

Sendal, fine cloth, 5 8

Sennight, week, 418

Servage, slavery, 13 15

Sewer, officer who set on dishes and tasted them, 7 36

Shaft-mon, hand breadth, 7 22

Shaw, thicket, .9 39

Sheef, thrust, 13 9

Sheer-Thursday, Thursday in Holy Week, 1720

Shend, harm, 20 I9

Shenship, disgrace, 7 IS

Shent, undone, blamed, 7 15

Shour, attack, 20 I4

Shrew, rascal, 10 47

Shrewd, knavish, 9 I8, 24

Sib, akin to, 3 3

Sideling, sideways, 1064

Siege, seat, 13 4

Signified, likened, 17 9

Siker, sure, 7 I 8, 11 I3

Sikerness, assurance, 4 27

Sith, since, 1 Se

Sithen, afterwards, since, 5 9

Skift, changed, 9 40

Slade, valley, 6 5, # 7

Slake, glen, 6 5

Soil (to go to), hunting term for taking the water, 18 2I

Sonds, messages, 21 I

Sort, company, 9 J I

Sperd, bolted, 8 34

Spere, ask, inquire, 13 17

Spered, asked, 7 30, 218

Sperhawk, sparrothawk, 12 7

Sprent, sprinkled, 17 7

Stale, station, 5 IO

Stark, thoroughly, 4 I7

Stead, place, 4 I4

Stert, started, rose quickly, 2 I6, 14 IO

Steven, appointment, 2 14; stefven setf appointment made, 8 I3

Steven, voice, 21 I2

Stigh, path, 7 3 I

Stilly, silently, 7 I9

Stint, fixed revenue, 1 24

Stonied, astonished, 6 8; became confused, 934

Stour, battle, 9 34, 16 8

Strain, race, descent, 13 8

Strait, narrow, 1 IO

Straked, blew a horn, 9 2I, 10 52

Sue, pursue, 16 20

Sued, pursued, 3 IO

Surcingles, saddle girths, 7 I6

Swang, swung, 8 14

Sweven, dream, 1 I3; PlS 21 I2

Swough, sound of wind, 5 4

Talent, desire, 10 20

Tallages, taxes, 5 2

Tallies, taxes, 5 2

Tamed, crusheda 2 I8, 3 lo, 15 2

Tatches, qualities, 2 2, 8 3

Tene, sorrow, 2 I6

Term, period of time, 21 I

Thilk, that same, 5 S

Tho, then, 17 I

Thrang, pushed, 7 30X 20 8

Thrulled, pushed, 9 4

Till, to, 9 26

To-brast, burst, 6 I3

Ta-fore, before, 1 4, 16 I4

To-morn, to-morrow, 4 24

Took, gave, 7 30, 16 6

To-rove, broke up, 8 38

To-shivered, broken to pieces, 1 22

Traced, advanced and retreated, 20 2r

Trains, devices, wiles, 9 25

Trating, pressing forward, 6 8 7 4

Travers (met at), came across, 17 I9

Traverse, slantwise, 10 65, 17 I9

Traversed, moved sideways, 20 21

Tray, grief, 2 I6

Treatise, treaty, 4 24

Tree, timber, 17 19

Trenchant, cutting, sharp, 19 I r

Trest, hunting term, 18 2 I

Truage, tribute, 1 23X 5 I

Trussed, packed, 20 I 8

Ubblie, wafer, Host, 17 20

Umbecast, cast about, 18 21

Umberere, the part of the hel et which shaded the eyes, 8 4I

Umbre, shade, 8 I

Unavised, thoughtlessly, 9 I7

Uncouth, strange, 3 6

Underne, 9-I2 A.M., 7

Ungoodly, rudely, 7 3I

Unhappy, unlucky, 20 I I

Unhilled, uncovered, 12 4

Unnethe, scarcely, 1 IS, 182

Unsicker, unstable, 17 23

Unwimpled, uncovered, 10 39

Unwrast, untwisted, unbound, 8 34

Upright, flat on the back, 16 8

Up-so-down, upside down, 10 60, 14 9} 213

Ure, usage, 1 I6

Utas, octave of a festival, 5 3

Utterance, uttermost, 9 3

Varlet, servant, 10 60

Venery, hunting, 8 3

Ventails, breathing holes, 10 60

Villain, man of low birth, 10 6

Visors, the perforated parts of helmets, 8 7

Voided, slipped away from, 1 I6

Wagging, shaking, 19 9

Waited, watched, 6 S

Waits, watches, 7 30

Wallop, gallop, 1 22

Wanhope, despair, 16 to, 13

Wap, ripple, 215

Ware, aware, 14 7

Warison, reward, 9 IZ

Warn, forbid, refuse, 610, 16 I1

Weeds, garments, 10 7 I

Weltered, rolled about, 5 5, 118

Wend, thought, 4 27

Wer-wolf, a man turned into a wolf by magic, 19 II

Where, whereas, 9 7

Wide-where, over wide space, 9 z

Wield, possess, have power over, 7 26

Wield himself, come to himself, 8 I3

Wight.  brave, strong, 7 9, 9 4, 20 z

Wightly, swiftly, 213

Wildsome, desolate, 7 22

Wimpled, with the head covered, 10 68

Win, make way, 9 4

Wite, v., blame, 126, 4 I I

Within-forth, on the inside, 16 I 3, 20 22

Without-forth, on the outside, 16 I3, 2022

Wittiest, cleverest, 17 3

Wittily, cleverly, 10 36

Witting, knowledge, 11 I4

Wold or nold, would or would not, 13 IO

Wonder, adj., wondrous, 17 I

Wonder, alv., wondrously, 10 68, 20 22

Wonderly, wonderfully, 9 4

Wood, mad, 1 IS, 9 3

Woodness, madness, 1 IS

Wood shaw, thicket of the wood, 9 12

Worship, honour, 7 z 3

Worshipped, cause to be honoured, 18 5

Worts, roots, 16 3

Wot, know, 116

Wrack, destruction, 20 I

Wroken, wreaked, 3 7

Wrothe, twisted, 12 z

Yede, ran, 2 I8

Yelden, yielded, 20 20

Yerde, stick, stem, 17 5

Yode, went, 6 z

Yolden, yielded, 5 IZ

Y-wis, certainly7 10 58











END OF VOL.  II




