




Appendix.  -- Book Review in Harper's New Monthly Magazine, February, 1858.







Livingstone's Travels in South Africa.










These two works, each embodying the results of years of travel and research,

entirely revolutionize all our theories as to the geographical and physical

character of Central Africa.  Instead of lofty mountains and sandy deserts,

we have a wide basin, or rather series of basins, with lakes and great rivers,

and a soil fertile even when compared with the abounding exuberance

of our own Western valleys and prairies.



Barth, traveling southward from the Mediterranean, explored this region

till within eight degrees of the equator.  Livingstone, traveling northward

from the Cape of Good Hope, approached the equator from the south

as nearly as Barth did from the north.  He then traversed

the whole breadth of the continent diagonally from the west to the east.

His special researches cover the entire space between

the eighth and fifteenth parallels of south latitude.  Between the regions

explored by Barth and Livingstone lies an unexplored tract

extending eight degrees on each side of the equator, and occupying

the whole breadth of the continent from east to west.  Lieutenant Burton,

famous for his expedition to Mecca and Medina, set out from Zanzibar

a few months since, with the design of traversing this very region.

If he succeeds in his purpose his explorations will fill up the void

between those of Barth and Livingstone.



Dr. Livingstone, with whose travels we are at present specially concerned,

is no ordinary man.  The son of a Presbyterian deacon and small trader

in Glasgow; set to work in a cotton factory at ten years old;

buying a Latin grammar with his first earnings; working from six

in the morning till eight at night, then attending evening-school till ten,

and pursuing his studies till midnight; at sixteen a fair classical scholar,

with no inconsiderable reading in books of science and travels, gained,

sentence by sentence, with the book open before him on his spinning-jenny;

botanizing and geologizing on holidays and at spare hours;

poring over books of astrology till he was startled by inward suggestions

to sell his soul to the Evil One as the price of the mysterious knowledge

of the stars; soundly flogged by the good deacon his father

by way of imparting to him a liking for Boston's "Fourfold State"

and Wilberforce's "Practical Christianity"; then convinced

by the writings of the worthy Thomas Dick that there was no hostility

between Science and Religion, embracing with heart and mind

the doctrines of evangelical Christianity, and resolving to devote his life

to their extension among the heathen -- such are the leading features

of the early life of David Livingstone.



He would equip himself for the warfare and afterward fight

with the powers of darkness at his own cost.  So at the age of nineteen

-- a slim, loose-jointed lad -- he commenced the study of medicine and Greek,

and afterward of theology, in the University of Glasgow, attending lectures

in the winter, paying his expenses by working as a cotton-spinner

during the summer, without receiving a farthing of aid from any one.



His purpose was to go to China as a medical missionary,

and he would have accomplished his object solely by his own efforts

had not some friends advised him to join the London Missionary Society.

He offered himself, with a half hope that his application would be rejected,

for it was not quite agreeable to one accustomed to work his own way

to become dependent in a measure upon others.



By the time when his medical and theological studies were completed,

the Opium War had rendered it inexpedient to go to China,

and his destination was fixed for Southern Africa.



He reached his field of labor in 1840.  Having tarried

for three months at the head station at Kuruman, and taken to wife

a daughter of the well-known missionary Mr. Moffat, he pushed still farther

into the country, and attached himself to the band of Sechele,

chief of the Bakwains, or "Alligators", a Bechuana tribe.

Here, cutting himself for six months wholly off from all European society,

he gained an insight into the language, laws, modes of life,

and habits of the Bechuanas, which proved of incalculable advantage

in all his subsequent intercourse with them.



Sechele gave a ready ear to the missionary's instructions.



"Did your forefathers know of a future judgment?" he asked.



"They knew of it," replied the missionary, who proceeded to describe

the scenes of the last great day.



"You startle me:  these words make all my bones to shake;

I have no more strength in me.  But my forefathers were living

at the same time yours were; and how is it that they did not send them word

about these terrible things?  They all passed away into darkness

without knowing whither they were going."



Mr. Moffat had translated the Bible into the Bechuana language,

which he had reduced to writing, and Sechele set himself to learn to read,

with so much assiduity that he began to grow corpulent

from lack of his accustomed exercise.  His great favorite was Isaiah.

"He was a fine man, that Isaiah; he knew how to speak," he was wont to say,

using the very words applied by the Glasgow Professor to the Apostle Paul.

Having become convinced of the truth of Christianity, he wished his people

also to become Christians.  "I will call them together," he said, "and with

our rhinoceros-skin whips we will soon make them all believe together."

Livingstone, mindful, perhaps, of the ill success of his worthy father

in the matter of Wilberforce on "Practical Christianity",

did not favor the proposed line of argument.  He was, in fact,

in no great haste to urge Sechele to make a full profession of faith

by receiving the ordinance of baptism; for the chief had,

in accordance with the customs of his people, taken a number of wives,

of whom he must, in this case, put away all except one.

The head-wife was a greasy old jade, who was in the habit of attending church

without her gown, and when her husband sent her home to make her toilet,

she would pout out her thick lips in unutterable disgust

at his new-fangled notions, while some of the other wives

were the best scholars in the school.  After a while Sechele took the matter

into his own hands, sent his supernumerary wives back to their friends

-- not empty-handed -- and was baptized.



Mr. Livingstone's station was in the region since rendered famous

by the hunting exploits of Gordon Cumming.  He vouches for the truth

of the wonderful stories told by that redoubtable Nimrod,

who visited him during each of his excursions.  He himself, indeed,

had an adventure with a lion quite equal to any thing narrated

by Cumming or Andersson, the result of which was one dead lion, two Bechuanas

fearfully wounded, his own arm marked with eleven distinct teeth-marks,

the bone crunched to splinters, and the formation of a false joint,

which marred his shooting ever after.



Mr. Livingstone has a republican contempt for the "King of Beasts".

He is nothing better than an overgrown hulking dog, not a match,

in fair fight, for a buffalo.  If a traveler encounter him by daylight,

he turns tail and sneaks out of sight like a scared greyhound.

All the talk about his majestic roar is sheer twaddle.  It takes a keen ear

to distinguish the voice of the lion from that of the silly ostrich.

When he is gorged he falls asleep, and a couple of natives approach him

without fear.  One discharges an arrow, the point of which has been anointed

with a subtle poison, made of the dried entrails of a species of caterpillar,

while the other flings his skin cloak over his head.  The beast

bolts away incontinently, but soon dies, howling and biting the ground

in agony.  In the dark, or at all hours when breeding,

the lion is an ugly enough customer; but if a man will stay at home by night,

and does not go out of his way to attack him, he runs less risk in Africa

of being devoured by a lion than he does in our cities of being run over

by an omnibus -- so says Mr. Livingstone.



When the lion grows old he leads a miserable life.  Unable to master

the larger game, he prowls about the villages in the hope of picking up

a stray goat.  A woman of child venturing out at night does not then

come amiss.  When the natives hear of one prowling about the villages,

they say, "His teeth are worn; he will soon kill men,"

and thereupon turn out to kill him.  This is the only foundation

for the common belief that when the lion has once tasted human flesh

he will eat nothing else.  A "man-eater" is always an old lion,

who takes to cannibalism to avoid starvation.  When he lives

far from human habitations, and so can not get goats or children,

an old lion is often reduced to such straits as to be obliged

to live upon mice, and such small deer.



Mr. Livingstone's strictly missionary life among the Bakwains

lasted eight or nine years.  The family arose early,

and, after prayers and breakfast, went to the school-room,

where men, women, and children were assembled.  School was over at eleven,

when the husband set about his work as gardener, smith, or carpenter,

while his wife busied herself with domestic matters --

baking bread, a hollow in a deserted ant-hill serving for an oven;

churning butter in an earthen jar; running candles; making soap from ashes

containing so little alkaline matter that the ley had to be kept boiling

for a month or six weeks before it was strong enough for use.  The wife was

maid-of-all-work in doors, while the husband was Jack-at-all-trades outside.

Three several times the tribe removed their place of residence,

and he was so many times compelled to build for himself a house,

every stick and brick of which was put in place by his own hands.

The heat of the day past, and dinner over, the wife betook herself

to the infant and sewing schools, while the husband walked down to the village

to talk with the natives.  Three nights in the week, after the cows

had been milked, public meetings were held for instruction

in religious and secular matters.  All these multifarious duties

were diversified by attendance upon the sick, and in various ways

aiding the poor and wretched.  Being in so many ways helpful to them,

and having, besides, shown from the first that he could knock them up

at hard work or traveling, we can not wonder that Livingstone was popular

among the Bakwains, though conversions seem to have been of the rarest.

Indeed, we are not sure but Sechele's was the only case.



A great drought set in the very first year of his residence among them,

which increased year by year.  The river ran dry; the canals which

he had induced them to dig for the purpose of irrigating their gardens

were useless; the fish died in such numbers that the congregated

hyenas of the country were unable to devour the putrid masses.

The rain-makers tried their spells in vain.  The clouds sometimes gathered

promisingly overhead, but only to roll away without discharging a drop

upon the scorched plains.  The people began to suspect some connection between

the new religion and the drought.  "We like you," they said, "but we wish

you would give up this everlasting preaching and praying.  You see that

we never get any rain, while the tribes who never pray have an abundance."

Livingstone could not deny the fact, and he was sometimes disposed

to attribute it to the malevolence of the "Prince of the Power of the Air",

eager to frustrate the good work.



The people behaved wonderfully well, though the scarcity amounted

almost to famine.  The women sold their ornaments to buy corn

from the more fortunate tribes around; the children scoured the country

for edible roots; the men betook themselves to hunting.  They constructed

great traps, called `hopos', consisting of two lines of hedges, a mile long,

far apart at the extremities, but converging like the sides of the letter V,

with a deep pit at the narrow end.  Then forming a circuit for miles around,

they drove the game -- buffaloes, zebras, gnus, antelopes, and the like --

into the mouth of the hopo, and along its narrowing lane,

until they plunged pell-mell in one confused, writhing, struggling mass

into the pit, where they were speared at leisure.



The precarious mode of life occasioned by the long drought interfered sadly

with the labors of the mission.  Still worse was the conduct of Boers

who had pushed their way into the Bechuana country.  Their theory

was very simple:  "We are the people of God, and the heathen are given to us

for an inheritance."  Of this inheritance they proceeded to make the most.

They compelled the natives to work for them without pay,

in consideration of the privilege of living in "their country".

They made regular forays, carrying off the women and children as slaves.

They were cowardly as well as brutal, compelling friendly tribes

to accompany them on their excursions, putting them in front as a shield,

and coolly firing over their heads, till the enemy fled in despair,

leaving their women, children, and cattle as a prey.



So long as fire-arms could be kept from the natives the Boers

were sure of having it all their own way.  But traders came

in the train of the missionaries, and sold guns and powder to the Bechuanas.

Sechele's tribe procured no less than five muskets.  The Boers were alarmed,

and determined to drive missionaries and traders from the country.



In course of time Mr. Livingstone became convinced that

Bibles and preaching were not all that was necessary.

Civilization must accompany Christianization; and commerce was essential

to civilization; for commerce, more speedily than any thing else,

would break down the isolation of the tribes, by making them

mutually dependent upon and serviceable to each other.



It was well known that northward, beyond the desert, lay a great lake,

in the midst of a country rich in ivory and other articles of commerce.

In former years, when rains had been more abundant, the natives

had frequently crossed this desert; and somewhere near the lake

dwelt a famous chief, named Sebituane, who had once lived on friendly terms

in the neighborhood of Sechele, who was anxious to renew the old acquaintance.

Mr. Livingstone determined to open intercourse with this region,

in spite of the threats and opposition of the Boers.



So the missionary became a traveler and explorer.  While laying his plans

and gathering information, the opportune arrival of Messrs. Oswell and Murray,

two wealthy Englishmen who had become enamored with African hunting,

enabled him to undertake the proposed expedition, Mr. Oswell agreeing

to pay the guides, who were furnished by Sechele.



This expedition, which resulted in the discovery of Lake Ngami,

set out from the missionary station at Kolobeng on the 1st of June, 1849.

The way lay across the great Kalahari desert, seven hundred miles in breadth.

This is a singular region.  Though it has no running streams,

and few and scanty wells, it abounds in animal and vegetable life.

Men, animals, and plants accommodate themselves singularly

to the scarcity of water.  Grass is abundant, growing in tufts;

bulbous plants abound, among which are the `leroshua', which sends up

a slender stalk not larger than a crow quill, with a tuber,

a foot or more below the surface, as large as a child's head, consisting of

a mass of cellular tissue filled with a cool and refreshing fluid;

and the `mokuri', which deposits under ground, within a circle of a yard

from its stem, a mass of tubers of the size of a man's head.

During years when the rains are unusually abundant, the Kalahari is covered

with the `kengwe', a species of water-melon.  Animals and men rejoice

in the rich supply; antelopes, lions, hyenas, jackals, mice, and men

devour it with equal avidity.



The people of the desert conceal their wells with jealous care.

They fill them with sand, and place their dwellings at a distance,

that their proximity may not betray the precious secret.

The women repair to the wells with a score or so of ostrich shells

in a bag slung over their shoulders.  Digging down an arm's-length,

they insert a hollow reed, with a bunch of grass tied to the end,

then ram the sand firmly around the tube.  The water slowly filters

into the bunch of grass, and is sucked up through the reed,

and squirted mouthful by mouthful into the shells.  When all are filled,

the women gather up their load and trudge homeward.



Elands, springbucks, koodoos, and ostriches somehow seem to get along

very well without any moisture, except that contained in the grass

which they eat.  They appear to live for months without drinking;

but whenever rhinoceroses, buffaloes, or gnus are seen,

it is held to be certain proof that water exists within a few miles.



The passage of the Kalahari was effected, not without considerable difficulty,

in two months, the expedition reaching Lake Ngami on the 1st of August.

As they approached it, they came upon a considerable river.



"Whence does this come?" asked Livingstone.



"From a country full of rivers," was the reply; "so many that no man

can tell their number, and full of large trees."



This was the first actual confirmation of the report of the Bakwains

that the country beyond was not the large "sandy plateau" of geographers.

The prospect of a highway capable of being traversed by boats

to an unexplored fertile region so filled the mind of Livingstone that,

when he came to the lake, this discovery seemed of comparatively

little importance.  To us, indeed, whose ideas of a lake are formed

from Superior and Huron, the Ngami seems but an insignificant affair.

Its circumference may be seventy or a hundred miles, and its mean depth

is but a few feet.  It lies two thousand feet above the level of the sea,

and as much below the southern border of the Kalahari, which slopes gradually

toward the interior.



Their desire to visit Sebituane, whose residence was considerably farther

in the interior, was frustrated by the jealousy of Lechulatebe,

a chief near the lake, and the expedition returned to the station at Kolobeng.

The attempt was renewed the following year.  Mrs. Livingstone,

their three children, and Sechele accompanied him.  The lake was reached.

Lechulatebe, propitiated by the present of a valuable gun, agreed to furnish

guides to Sebituane's country; but the children and servants fell ill,

and the attempt was for the time abandoned.



A third expedition was successful, although the whole party

came near perishing for want of water, and their cattle,

which had been bitten by the `Tsetse', died.



This insect -- the `Glossina moritans' of the naturalists --

deserves a special paragraph.  It is a brown insect about as large

as our common house-fly, with three or four yellow bars

across its hinder part.  A lively, buzzing, harmless-looking fellow

is the tsetse.  Its bite produces a slight itching similar to that

caused by the mosquito, and in the case of men and some species of animals

no further ill effects follow.  But woe to the horse, the ox, and the dog,

when once bitten by the tsetse.  No immediate harm appears;

the animal is not startled as by the gad-fly; but in a few days

the eyes and the nose begin to run; the jaws and navel swell;

the animal grazes for a while as usual, but grows emaciated and weak,

and dies, it may be, weeks or months after.  When dissected,

the cellular tissue seems injected with air, the fat is green and oily,

the muscles are flabby, the heart is so soft that the finger

may be pushed through it.  The antelope and buffalo, the zebra and goat,

are not affected by its bite; while to the ox, the horse, and the dog

it is certain death.  The mule and donkey are not troubled by it,

nor are sucking calves, while dogs, though fed upon milk, perish.

Such different effects produced upon animals whose nature is similar,

constitute one of the most curious phenomena in natural history.



Sebituane, who had heard of the approach of his visitors,

came more than a hundred miles to meet them.  He was a tall, wiry,

coffee-and-milk colored man, of five-and-forty.  His original home

was a thousand miles to the south, in the Bakwain country,

whence he had been driven by the Griquas a quarter of a century before.

He fled northward, fighting his way, sometimes reduced to the utmost straits,

but still keeping his people together.  At length he crossed the desert,

and conquered the country around Lake Ngami; then having heard of white men

living on the west coast, he passed southwestward into the desert,

hoping to be able to open intercourse with them.  There suffering

from the thirst, he came to a small well; the water was not sufficient

for his men and his cattle; one or the other must perish; he ordered the men

to drink, for if they survived they could fight for more cattle.

In the morning his cattle were all gone, and he returned to the north.

Here a long course of warfare awaited him, but in the end

he triumphed over his enemies, and established himself for a time

on the great river Zambesi.  Haunted with a longing for intercourse

with the whites, he proposed to descend the river to the eastern coast.

He was dissuaded from this purpose by the warnings of a native prophet.

"The gods say, Go not thither!" he cried; then turning to the west,

"I see a city and a nation of black men -- men of the water;

their cattle are red; thine own tribe are perishing, and will all be consumed;

thou wilt govern black men, and when thy warriors have captured

the red cattle, let not their owners be killed; they are thy future tribe;

let them be spared to cause thee to build."  So Sebituane went westward,

conquered the blacks of an immense region, spared the lives of the men,

and made them his subjects, ruling them gently.  His original people

are called the Makololo; the subject tribes are styled Makalaka.



Sebituane, though the greatest warrior in the south, always leading his men

to battle in person, was still anxious for peace.  He had heard of cannon,

and had somehow acquired the idea that if he could only procure one

he might live in quiet.  He received his visitors with much favor.

"Your cattle have all been bitten by the tsetse," he said,

"and will die; but never mind, I will give you as many as you want."

He offered to conduct them through his country that they might choose

a site for a missionary station.  But at this moment he fell ill

of an inflammation of the lungs, from which he soon died.



"He was," writes Mr. Livingstone, "the best specimen of a native chief

I ever met; and it was impossible not to follow him in thought

into the world of which he had just heard when he was called away,

and to realize somewhat of the feeling of those who pray for the dead.

The deep, dark question of what is to become of such as he must be left

where we find it, believing that assuredly the Judge of all the earth

will do right."



Although he had sons, Sebituane left the chieftainship

to his daughter Mamochisane, who confirmed her father's permission

that the missionaries might visit her country.  They proceeded

a hundred and thirty miles farther, and were rewarded by the discovery

of the great river Zambesi, the very existence of which, in Central Africa,

had never been suspected.  It was the dry season, and the river

was at its lowest; but it was from three to six hundred yards broad,

flowing with a deep current toward the east.



A grander idea than the mere founding of a missionary station

now developed itself in the mind of Mr. Livingstone.  European goods had

just begun to be introduced into this region from the Portuguese settlements

on the coast; at present slaves were the only commodity received

in payment for them.  Livingstone thought if a great highway could be opened,

ivory, and the other products of the country, might be bartered

for these goods, and the traffic in slaves would come to an end.



He therefore resolved to take his family to Cape Town,

and thence send them to England, while he returned alone to the interior,

with the purpose of making his way either to the east or the west coast.



He reached the Cape in April, 1852, being the first time during eleven years

that he had visited the scenes of civilization, and placed his family

on board a ship bound for England, promising to rejoin them in two years.



In June he set out from Cape Town upon that long journey which was to occupy

five years.  When he approached the missionary stations in the interior,

he learned that the long-threatened attack by the Boers had taken place.

A letter from Sechele to Mr. Moffat told the story.  Thus it ran:





"Friend of my heart's love and of all the confidence of my heart,

I am Sechele.  I am undone by the Boers, who attacked me,

though I had no guilt with them.  They demanded that I should be

in their kingdom, and I refused.  They demanded that I should prevent

the English and Griquas from passing.  I replied, These are my friends,

and I can not prevent them.  They came on Saturday, and I besought them

not to fight on Sunday, and they assented.  They began on Monday morning

at twilight, and fired with all their might, and burned the town with fire,

and scattered us.  They killed sixty of my people, and captured women,

and children, and men.  They took all the cattle and all the goods

of the Bakwains; and the house of Livingstone they plundered,

taking away all his goods.  Of the Boers we killed twenty-eight."





Two hundred children, who had been gathered into schools, were carried away

as slaves.  Mr. Livingstone's library was wantonly destroyed,

not carried away; his stock of medicines was smashed, and his furniture

and clothing sold at auction to defray the expenses of the foray.

Mr. Pretorius, the leader of the marauding party, died not long after,

and an obituary notice of him was published, ending with the words,

"Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord."



Leaving his desolate home, Livingstone proceeded on his journey.  On the way

he met Sechele, who was going, he said, to see the Queen of England.

Livingstone tried to dissuade him.



"Will not the Queen listen to me?" asked the chief.



"I believe she would listen, but the difficulty is to get to her."



"Well, I shall reach her."



And so they parted.  Sechele actually made his way to the Cape,

a distance of a thousand miles, but could get no farther,

and returned to his own country.  The remnants of the tribes

who had formerly lived among the Boers gathered around him,

and he is now more powerful than ever.



It is slow traveling in Africa.  Livingstone was almost a year

in accomplishing the 1500 miles between Cape Town and the country

of the Makololo.  He found that Mamochisane, the daughter of Sebituane,

had voluntarily resigned the chieftainship to her younger brother, Sekeletu.

She wished to be married, she said, and have a family like other women.

The young chief Sekeletu was very friendly, but showed no disposition

to become a convert.  He refused to learn to read the Bible,

for fear it might change his heart, and make him content with only one wife,

like Sechele.  For his part he wanted at least five.



Some months were passed in this country, which is described

as fertile and well-cultivated -- producing millet, maize, yams,

sweet potatoes, cassava, beans, pumpkins, water-melons, and the like.

The sugar-cane grows plentifully, but the people had never learned

the process of making sugar.  They have great numbers of cattle,

and game of various species abounds.  On one occasion

a troop of eighty-one buffaloes defiled slowly before their evening fire,

while herds of splendid elands stood, without fear,

at two hundred yards' distance.  The country is rather unhealthy,

from the mass of decayed vegetation exposed to the torrid sun.



After due consideration, Livingstone resolved to make his way to Loanda,

a Portuguese settlement on the western coast.  Sekeletu, anxious to open

a trade with the coast, appointed twenty-seven men to accompany the traveler;

and on the 11th of November, 1853, he set out on his journey.



Three or four small boxes contained all the baggage of the party.

The only provisions were a few pounds of biscuits, coffee, tea, and sugar;

their main reliance being upon the game which they expected to kill,

and, this failing, upon the proceeds of about ten dollars' worth of beads.

They also took with them a few elephants' tusks, which Sekeletu sent

by way of a trading venture.



The river up which they paddled abounds in hippopotami.

These are in general harmless, though now and then a solitary old bull

who has been expelled from the herd vents his spleen by pitching into

every canoe that passes.  Once their canoe was attacked by a female whose calf

had been speared, and nearly overturned.  The female carries her young

upon her back, its little round head first appearing above the surface

when she comes up to breathe.



By the order of the chief the party had been furnished with eight oxen

for riding, and seven intended for slaughter.  Some of the troop

paddled the canoes, while others drove the cattle along the bank.



African etiquette requires that a company of travelers,

when they come in sight of a village, shall seat themselves under a tree,

and send forward a messenger to announce their arrival and state their object.

The chief then gives them a ceremonious reception, with abundance

of speech-making and drumming.  It is no easy matter to get away

from these villages, for the chiefs esteem it an honor

to have strangers with them.  These delays, and the frequent heavy rains,

greatly retarded the progress of the travelers.



They had traveled four months, and accomplished half of their journey

before encountering any show of hostility from the tribes

through which they passed.  A chief, named Njambi, then demanded tribute

for passing through his country; when this was refused he said

that one of Livingstone's men had spit on the leg of one of his people,

and this crime must be paid for by a fine of a man, an ox, or a gun.

This reasonable demand was likewise refused, and the natives seemed

about to commence hostilities; but changed their minds upon witnessing

the determined attitude of the strangers.  Livingstone at last yielded

to the entreaties of his men and gave them an ox, upon the promise

that food should be sent in exchange.  The niggardly chief sent them only

a small bag of meal, and two or three pounds of the meat of their own ox.



From this time they were subject to frequent attempts at extortion.

The last of these was made on the banks of the River Quango,

the boundary of the Portuguese possessions.  A Bashinje chief, whose portrait

is given by Mr. Livingstone, made the usual demand of a man, a gun, or an ox,

otherwise they must return the way they came.  While negotiations

were in progress the opportune arrival of a Portuguese sergeant

freed the travelers from their troubles.  The river was crossed,

and once on Portuguese territory their difficulties were over.



At Cassange, the frontier settlement, they sold Sekeletu's ivory.

The Makololo, who had been accustomed to give two tusks for one gun,

were delighted at the prices they obtained.  For one tusk

they got two muskets, three kegs of powder, large bunches of beads,

and calico and baize enough to clothe all the party.



On the 31st of May, after more than six months' travel,

Livingstone and his companions reached the Portuguese sea-port of Loanda.

The Makololo were lost in wonder when they first caught sight of the sea.

"We marched along," they said, "believing that what the ancients had told us

was true, that the world has no end; but all at once the world said to us,

I am finished, there is no more of me."  Still greater was their wonder

when they beheld the large stone houses of the town.  "These are not huts,"

they said, "but mountains with caves in them."  Livingstone had

in vain tried to make them comprehend a house of two stories.

They knew of no dwellings except their own conical huts, made of poles

stuck into the ground, and could not conceive how one hut could be built

on the top of another, or how people could live in the upper story,

with the pointed roof of the lower one sticking up in the middle of the floor.

The vessels in the harbor were, they said, not canoes, but towns,

into which one must climb by a rope.



At Loanda Livingstone was attacked by a fever, which reduced him

to a skeleton, and for a while rendered him unable to attend

to his companions.  But they managed very well alone.

Some went to the forest, cut firewood, and brought it to town for sale;

others unloaded a coal-vessel in the harbor, at the magnificent wages

of a sixpence a day.  The proceeds of their labor were shrewdly invested

in cloth and beads which they would take home with them

in confirmation of the astounding stories they would have to tell;

"for," said they, "in coming to the white man's country, we have accomplished

what no other people in the world could have done; we are the true ancients,

who can tell wonderful things."



The two years, at the close of which Livingstone had promised to rejoin

his family, had almost expired, and he was offered a passage home from Loanda.

But the great object of his expedition was only partially attained.

Though he had reached the west coast in safety, he had found that the forests,

swamps, and rivers must render a wagon-road from the interior impracticable.

He feared also that his native attendants would not be able to make

their way alone back to their own country, through the unfriendly tribes.

So he resolved, feeble as he was, to return to Sekeletu's dominions,

and thence proceed to the eastern coast.



In September he started on his return journey, bearing considerable presents

for Sekeletu from the Portuguese, who were naturally anxious to open a trade

with the rich ivory region of the interior.  The Board of Public Works

sent a colonel's uniform and a horse, which unfortunately died on the way.

The merchants contributed specimens of all their articles of trade,

and a couple of donkeys, which would have a special value on account of

their immunity from the bite of the tsetse.  The men were made happy

by the acquisition of a suit of European clothes and a gun apiece,

in addition to their own purchases.



In the Bashinje country he again encountered hostile demonstrations.

One chief, who came riding into the camp upon the shoulders of an attendant,

was especially annoying in his demands for tribute.  Another, who had

quarreled with one of Livingstone's attendants, waylaid and fired upon

the party.  Livingstone, who was ill of a fever, staggered up to the chief,

revolver in hand.  The sight of the six mouths of that convenient implement

gaping at his breast wrought an instant revolution in his martial ideas;

he fell into a fit of trembling, protesting that he had just come

to have a quiet talk, and wanted only peace.



These Bashinje have more of the low negro character and physiognomy

than any tribe encountered by Livingstone.  Their color is a dirty black;

they have low foreheads and flat noses, artificially enlarged

by sticks run through the septum, and file their teeth down to a point.

A little further to the south the complexion of the natives is much lighter,

and their features are strikingly like those depicted upon

the Egyptian monuments, the resemblance being still further increased

by some of their modes of wearing the hair.  Livingstone indeed affirms

that the Egyptian paintings and sculptures present the best type

of the general physiognomy of the central tribes.



The return journey was still slower than the advance had been;

and it was not till late in the summer of 1855 that they reached

the villages of the Makololo, having been absent more than eighteen months.

They were received as men risen from the dead, for the diviners had declared

that they had perished long ago.  The returned adventurers

were the lions of the day.  They strutted around in their gay European suits,

with their guns over their shoulders, to the abounding admiration

of the women and children, calling themselves Livingstone's "braves",

who had gone over the whole world, turning back only when

there was no more land.  To be sure they returned about as poor as they went,

for their gun and their one suit of red and white cotton

were all that they had saved, every thing else having been expended

during their long journey.  "But never mind," they said;

"we have not gone in vain, you have opened a path for us."



There was one serious drawback from their happiness.  Some of their wives,

like those of the companions of Ulysses of old, wearied by their long absence,

had married other husbands.  They took this misfortune much to heart.

"Wives," said one of the bereaved husbands, "are as plenty as grass --

I can get another; but," he added bitterly, "if I had that fellow

I would slit his ears for him."  Livingstone did the best he could for them.

He induced the chiefs to compel the men who had taken the only wife of any one

to give her up to her former husband.  Those -- and they were the majority --

who had still a number left, he consoled by telling them that they had

quite as many as was good for them -- more than he himself had.

So, undeterred by this single untoward result of their experiment,

the adventurers one and all set about gathering ivory for another adventure

to the west.



Livingstone had satisfied himself that the great River Leeambye,

up which he had paddled so many miles on his way to the west,

was identical with the Zambesi, which he had discovered four years previously.

The two names are indeed the same, both meaning simply "The River",

in different dialects spoken on its banks.  This great river

is an object of wonder to the natives.  They have a song which runs,

  

    "The Leeambye!  Nobody knows

    Whence it comes, and whither it goes."

  

Livingstone had pursued it far up toward its source, and knew whence it came;

and now he resolved to follow it down to the sea, trusting that

it would furnish a water communication into the very heart of the continent.



It was now October -- the close of the hot season.  The thermometer stood

at 100 Deg. in the shade; in the sun it sometimes rose to 130 Deg.

During the day the people kept close in their huts, guzzling a kind of beer

called `boyola', and seeming to enjoy the copious perspiration

which it induces.  As evening set in the dance began,

which was kept up in the moonlight till long after midnight.

Sekeletu, proud of his new uniform, and pleased with the prospect of trade

which had been opened, entertained Livingstone hospitably, and promised

to fit him out for his eastern journey as soon as the rains had commenced,

and somewhat cooled the burning soil.



He set out early in November, the chief with a large body of retainers

accompanying him as far as the Falls of Mosioatunye, the most remarkable

piece of natural scenery in all Africa, which no European

had ever seen or heard of.  The Zambesi, here a thousand yards broad,

seems all at once to lose itself in the earth.  It tumbles into

a fissure in the hard basaltic rock, running at a right-angle

with the course of the stream, and prolonged for thirty miles

through the hills.  This fissure, hardly eighty feet broad,

with sides perfectly perpendicular, is fully a hundred feet in depth

down to the surface of the water, which shows like a white thread

at its bottom.  The noise made by the descent of such a mass of water

into this seething abyss is heard for miles, and five distinct

columns of vapor rise like pillars of smoke to an enormous height.

Hence the Makololo name for the cataract, `Mosi oa tunye' --

"Smoke sounds there!" -- for which Livingstone, with questionable taste,

proposes to substitute the name of "Victoria Falls" -- a change which we trust

the world will not sanction.



From these falls the country gradually ascends toward the east,

the river finding its way by this deep fissure through the hills.

Every thing shows that this whole region, for hundreds of miles, was once

the bed of an immense fresh-water lake.  By some convulsion of nature,

occurring at a period geologically recent, this fissure was formed,

and through it the lake was drained, with the exception of its deepest part,

which constitutes the present Lake Ngami.  Similar indications exist

of the former existence of other immense bodies of water, which have

in like manner been drained by fissures through the surrounding elevations,

leaving shallow lakes at the lowest points.  Such are, undoubtedly,

Tsad at the north, Ngami at the south, Dilolo at the west,

and Taganyika and Nyanja, of which we have only vague reports, at the east.

This great lake region of former days seems to have extended 2500 miles

from north to south, with an average breadth, from east to west,

of 600 or 700 miles.



The true theory of the African continent is, that it consists

of a well-watered trough, surrounded on all sides by an elevated rim,

composed in part of mountain ranges, and in part of high sandy deserts.

Livingstone, who had wrought out this theory from his own

personal observations, was almost disappointed when, on returning to England,

he found that the same theory had been announced on purely geological grounds

by Sir Roderick Murchison, the same philosopher who had averred

that gold must exist in Australia, long before the first diggings

had been discovered there.



Sekeletu had commissioned Livingstone, when he reached his own country,

to purchase for him a sugar-mill, a good rifle, different kinds of clothing,

brass wire, beads, and, in a word, "any other beautiful thing he might see,"

furnishing him with a considerable quantity of ivory to pay for them.

Their way lay through the country of the Batoka, a fierce tribe

who had a few years before attempted "to eat up" Sebituane, with ill success,

for he dispersed them and took away their cattle.  Their country,

once populous, is now almost desolate.  At one of their ruined villages

Livingstone saw five-and-forty human skulls bleaching upon stakes

stuck in the ground.  In the old times the chiefs used to vie with each other

as to whose village should be ornamented with the greatest number

of these ghastly trophies; and a skull was the most acceptable present

from any one who wished to curry favor with a chief.  The Batoka have

an odd custom of knocking out the front teeth from the upper jaw.

The lower ones, relieved from the attrition and pressure of the upper,

grow long and protruding, forcing the lower lip out in a hideous manner.

They say that they wish their mouths to be like those of oxen,

and not like those of zebras.  No young Batoka female can lay any claim

to being a belle until she has thus acquired an "ox-mouth".

"Look at the great teeth!" is the disparaging criticism made upon those

who neglect to remove their incisors.  The women wear a little clothing,

but the men disdain even the paradisiacal fig-leaf, and go about

in a state of absolute nudity.  Livingstone told them that he should

come back some day with his family, when none of them must come near

without at least putting on a bunch of grass.  They thought it a capital joke.

Their mode of salutation is to fling themselves flat on their backs,

and roll from side to side, slapping the outside of their naked thighs.



The country abounds with game.  Buffaloes and zebras by the hundred

grazed on the open spaces.  At one time their procession was interrupted

by three buffaloes who came dashing through their ranks.  Livingstone's ox

set off at a furious gallop.  Looking back, he saw one of his men

flung up into the air by a toss from one of the beasts, who had carried him

on his horns for twenty yards before giving the final pitch.

The fellow came down flat on his face, but the skin was not pierced,

and no bone was broken.  His comrades gave him a brisk shampooing,

and in a week he was as well as ever.



The border country passed, the natives grew more friendly, and gladly supplied

all the wants of the travelers.  About the middle of December,

when their journey was half over, they came upon the first traces of Europeans

-- a deserted town, a ruined church, and a broken bell

inscribed with a cross and the letters I. H. S., but bearing no date.

A few days after they met a man wearing a hat and jacket.

He had come from the Portuguese settlement of Tete, far down the river.

From him they learned that a war was going on below,

between the Portuguese and the natives.  A chief, named Mpende,

showed signs of hostility.  Livingstone's men, who had become worn and ragged

by their long journey, rejoiced at the prospect of a fight.

"Now," said they, "we shall get corn and clothes in plenty.

You have seen us with elephants, but you don't know what we can do with men."

After a while two old men made their appearance, to find out

who the strangers were.  "I am a Lekoa (Englishman)," said Livingstone.

"We don't know that tribe," they replied; "we suppose you are

a Mozunga (Portuguese)."  Upon Livingstone's showing them

his long hair and the white skin of his bosom they exclaimed,

"We never saw so white a skin as that.  You must be one of that tribe

that loves the black men."  Livingstone eagerly assured him

that such was the case.  Sekwebu, the leader of his men, put in a word:

"Ah, if you only knew him as well as we do, who have lived with him,

you would know how highly he values your friendship; and as he is a stranger

he trusts in you to direct him."  The chief, convinced that

he was an Englishman, received the party hospitably and forwarded them

on their way.



The frequent appearance of English goods showed that they were approaching

the coast, and not long afterward Livingstone met a couple of native traders,

from whom, for two small tusks, he bought a quantity of American cotton

marked "Lawrence Mills, Lowell", which he distributed among his men.



For another month they traveled slowly on through a fertile country,

abounding in animal life, bagging an elephant or a buffalo

when short of meat.  Lions are numerous, but the natives, believing that

the souls of their dead chiefs enter the bodies of these animals, into which

they also have the power, when living, of transforming themselves at will,

never kill them.  When they meet a lion they salute him

by clapping their hands -- a courtesy which his Highness frequently returns

by making a meal of them.



In this region the women are decidedly in the ascendant.

The bridegroom is obliged to come to the village of the bride to live.

Here he must perform certain services for his mother-in-law,

such as keeping her always supplied with fire-wood.  Above all things,

he must always, when in her presence, sit with his legs bent under him,

it being considered a mark of disrespect to present his feet toward her.

If he wishes to leave the village, he must not take his children with him;

they belong to his wife, or, rather, to her family.  He can, however,

by the payment of a certain number of cattle, "buy up" his wife and children.

When a man is desired to perform any service he always asks

his wife's consent; if she refuses, no amount of bribery or coaxing

will induce him to disobey her.



On the evening of March 2, Livingstone, tired and hungry,

came within eight miles of the Portuguese settlement of Tete.

He sent forward the letters of recommendation which he had received

from the Portuguese on the other side of the continent.

Before daylight the following morning he was aroused

by two officers and a company of soldiers, who brought the materials

for a civilized breakfast -- the first of which he had partaken

since he left Loanda, eighteen months before.  "It was," he says,

"the most refreshing breakfast of which I ever partook."



Tete stands on the Zambesi, three hundred miles from its mouth.

The commandant received Livingstone kindly, supplied his men with provisions

for immediate use, gave them land upon which to raise future supplies,

and granted them permission to hunt elephants in the neighborhood

on their own account.  Before long they had established

a brisk trade in fire-wood, as their countrymen had done at Loanda.

They certainly manifested none of the laziness which has been said

to be characteristic of the African races.  Thirty elephant tusks remained

of those forwarded by Sekeletu.  Ten of these were sold for cotton cloth

for the men.  The others were deposited with the authorities,

with directions that in case Livingstone should never return

they should be sold, and the proceeds given to the men.

He told them that death alone should prevent him from coming back.

"Nay, father," said the men, "you will not die; you will return,

and take us back to Sekeletu."



He remained at Tete a month, waiting for the close of the sickly season

in the low delta at the mouths of the river, and then descended

to the Portuguese town of Kilimane.  Here he remained six weeks,

when an English vessel arrived with supplies and money for him.

Two of his attendants only had come down the river.  They begged hard

to be allowed to accompany him to England.  In vain Livingstone told them

that they would die if they went to so cold a country.

"That is nothing," said one; "let me die at your feet."

He at last decided to take with him Sekwebu, the leader of the party,

to whose good sense, bravery, and tact he owed much of his success.

The sea-waves rose high, as the boat conveyed them to the ship.  Sekwebu,

who had never seen a larger body of water than the shallow Lake Ngami,

was terrified.



"Is this the way you go?" he inquired.



"Yes; don't you see it is?" replied Livingstone, encouragingly.



When Livingstone reached his countrymen on the ship he could scarcely speak

his native language; the words would not come at his call.

He had spoken it but little for thirteen years; and for three and a half,

except for a short time at Loanda, not at all.



Sekwebu became a great favorite on shipboard, but he was bewildered

by the crowd of new ideas that rushed upon his mind.

"What a strange country this is," he said, "all water!"

When they reached Mauritius, he became insane, and tried to jump overboard.

Livingstone's wife had, during her visit to their country,

become a great favorite with the Makololo, who called her `Ma Robert'

-- "Robert's Mother" -- in honor of her young son.



"Come, Sekwebu," said Livingstone, "we are going to Ma Robert."

This struck a chord in his bosom.



"Oh yes," said he; "where is she?  Where is Robert?"  And for the moment

he seemed to recover.



But in the evening a fresh accession of insanity occurred.

He attempted to spear one of the crew, and then leaped overboard,

and, though he could swim well, pulled himself down, hand over hand,

by the cable.  His body was never recovered.



From Mauritius Livingstone sailed for England, which he reached

on the 12th of December, 1856 -- four and a half years after he had parted

from his family at Cape Town.



He was received with unwonted honors.  The President of

the Royal Geographical Society, at a special meeting held to welcome him,

formally invited him to give to the world a narrative of his travels.

Some knavish booksellers paid him the less acceptable compliment

of putting forth spurious accounts of his adventures, one at least of which

has been republished in this country.  Livingstone, so long accustomed

to a life of action, found the preparation of his book a harder task

than he had imagined.  "I think," he says, "that I would rather

cross the African continent again than undertake to write another book."

We trust that he will yet do both.  He would indeed have set out

on another African journey nearly a year ago to conduct

his faithful Makololo attendants back to their own country,

had not the King of Portugal relieved him from all anxiety on their account,

by sending out directions that they should be supported at Tete

until his return.



Our abstract does, at best, but scanty justice to the most interesting,

as well as most valuable, of modern works of travel.  It has revolutionized

our ideas of African character as well as of African geography.

It shows that Central Africa is peopled by tribes barbarous, indeed,

but far from manifesting those savage and degrading traits which

we are wont to associate with the negro race.  In all his long pilgrimage

Livingstone saw scarcely a trace of the brutal rites and bloody superstitions

of Dahomey and Ashanti.  The natives every where long for intercourse

with the whites, and eagerly seek the products of civilized labor.  In regions

where no white men had ever been seen the cottons of Lowell and Manchester,

passed from tribe to tribe, are even now the standard currency.

Civilized nations have an equal interest in opening intercourse

with these countries, for they are capable of supplying those

great tropical staples which the industrious temperate zones must have,

but can not produce.  Livingstone found cotton growing wild all along

his route from Loanda to Kilimane; the sugar-cane flourishes spontaneously

in the valley of "The River"; coffee abounds on the west coast; and indigo

is a weed in the delta of the Zambesi.  Barth also finds these products

abundant on the banks of the Benuwe and Shari, and around Lake Tsad.

The prevalent idea of the inherent laziness of the Africans must be abandoned,

for, scattered through the narratives of both these intrepid explorers

are abundant testimonies of the industrious disposition of the natives.



Livingstone, as befits his profession, regards his discoveries

from a religious stand-point.  "The end of the geographical feat," he says,

"is the beginning of the missionary enterprise."  But he is a philosopher

as well as a preacher, recognizing as true missionaries the man of science

who searches after hidden truths, the soldier who fights against tyranny,

the sailor who puts down the slave-trade, and the merchant

who teaches practically the mutual dependence of the nations of the earth.

His idea of missionary labor looks to this world as well as the next.

Had the Bakwains possessed rifles as well as Bibles -- had they raised cotton

as well as attended prayer-meetings -- it would have been better for them.

He is clearly of the opinion that decent clothing is of more immediate use

to the heathen than doctrinal sermons.  "We ought," he says, "to encourage

the Africans to cultivate for our markets, as the most effectual means,

next to the Gospel, of their elevation."  His practical turn of mind

suffers him to present no fancy pictures of barbarous nations

longing for the Gospel.  His Makololo friends, indeed, listened respectfully

when he discoursed of the Saviour, but were all earnestness

when he spoke of cotton cloths and muskets.  Sekeletu favored the missionary,

not as the man who could give him Bibles and tracts, but as the one

by whose help he hoped to sell his ivory for a rifle, a sugar-mill,

and brass wire.



Livingstone's missionary scheme is accommodated to the actual state of things.

It rests quite as much upon traders as preachers.  He would open

a communication by the Zambesi to the heart of the continent.

Upon the healthy, elevated region overlooking the low, fertile basin

he would establish trading posts, supplied with European wares.

We can not wonder that the directors of the Missionary Society

looked coldly upon this scheme, and wrote to him that they were

"restricted in their power of aiding plans connected only remotely

with the spread of the Gospel;" nor can we regret that Livingstone,

feeling his old love of independence revive, withdrew from his connection

with the Society, for the purpose of carrying out his own plans.

With all respect for the worthy persons who manage missionary societies,

we can not but believe that the man who led so large a party

across the African continent will accomplish more for the good cause

when working out his own plans than he would do by following out their ideas.










End 
