





Chapter 15.



  Message to Masiko, the Barotse Chief, regarding the Captives --

  Navigation of the Leeambye -- Capabilities of this District --

  The Leeba -- Flowers and Bees -- Buffalo-hunt -- Field for a Botanist --

  Young Alligators; their savage Nature -- Suspicion of the Balonda --

  Sekelenke's Present -- A Man and his two Wives -- Hunters --

  Message from Manenko, a female Chief -- Mambari Traders -- A Dream --

  Sheakondo and his People -- Teeth-filing -- Desire for Butter --

  Interview with Nyamoana, another female Chief -- Court Etiquette --

  Hair versus Wool -- Increase of Superstition -- Arrival of Manenko;

  her Appearance and Husband -- Mode of Salutation -- Anklets --

  Embassy, with a Present from Masiko -- Roast Beef -- Manioc --

  Magic Lantern -- Manenko an accomplished Scold:  compels us to wait --

  Unsuccessful Zebra-hunt.







On the 27th of December we were at the confluence of the Leeba and Leeambye

(lat. 14d 10' 52" S., long. 23d 35' 40" E.).  Masiko, the Barotse chief,

for whom we had some captives, lived nearly due east of this point.  They were

two little boys, a little girl, a young man, and two middle-aged women.

One of these was a member of a Babimpe tribe, who knock out

both upper and lower front teeth as a distinction.  As we had been informed

by the captives on the previous Sunday that Masiko was in the habit of seizing

all orphans, and those who have no powerful friend in the tribe

whose protection they can claim, and selling them for clothing to the Mambari,

we thought the objection of the women to go first to his town

before seeing their friends quite reasonable, and resolved to send

a party of our own people to see them safely among their relatives.

I told the captive young man to inform Masiko that he was very unlike

his father Santuru, who had refused to sell his people to Mambari.

He will probably be afraid to deliver such a message himself,

but it is meant for his people, and they will circulate it pretty widely,

and Masiko may yet feel a little pressure from without.  We sent Mosantu,

a Batoka man, and his companions, with the captives.  The Barotse whom we had

were unwilling to go to Masiko, since they owe him allegiance

as the son of Santuru, and while they continue with the Makololo

are considered rebels.  The message by Mosantu was, that "I was sorry to find

that Santuru had not borne a wiser son.  Santuru loved to govern men,

but Masiko wanted to govern wild beasts only, as he sold his people

to the Mambari;" adding an explanation of the return of the captives,

and an injunction to him to live in peace, and prevent his people kidnapping

the children and canoes of the Makololo, as a continuance in these deeds

would lead to war, which I wished to prevent.  He was also instructed to say,

if Masiko wanted fuller explanation of my views, he must send a sensible man

to talk with me at the first town of the Balonda, to which I was

about to proceed.



We ferried Mosantu over to the left bank of the Leeba.

The journey required five days, but it could not have been at a quicker rate

than ten or twelve miles per day; the children were between

seven and eight years of age, and unable to walk fast in a hot sun.



Leaving Mosantu to pursue his course, we shall take but one glance

down the river, which we are now about to leave, for it comes at this point

from the eastward, and our course is to be directed to the northwest,

as we mean to go to Loanda in Angola.  From the confluence,

where we now are, down to Mosioatunya, there are many long reaches,

where a vessel equal to the Thames steamers plying between the bridges

could run as freely as they do on the Thames.  It is often, even here,

as broad as that river at London Bridge, but, without accurate

measurement of the depth, one could not say which contained most water.

There are, however, many and serious obstacles to a continued navigation

for hundreds of miles at a stretch.  About ten miles below

the confluence of the Loeti, for instance, there are many large sand-banks

in the stream; then you have a hundred miles to the River Simah,

where a Thames steamer could ply at all times of the year;

but, again, the space between Simah and Katima-molelo

has five or six rapids with cataracts, one of which, Gonye,

could not be passed at any time without portage.  Between these rapids

there are reaches of still, deep water, of several miles in length.

Beyond Katima-molelo to the confluence of the Chobe you have nearly

a hundred miles again, of a river capable of being navigated in the same way

as in the Barotse valley.



Now I do not say that this part of the river presents a very inviting prospect

for extemporaneous European enterprise; but when we have a pathway

which requires only the formation of portages to make it equal to our canals

for hundreds of miles, where the philosophers supposed there was naught

but an extensive sandy desert, we must confess that the future partakes

at least of the elements of hope.  My deliberate conviction was and is

that the part of the country indicated is as capable of supporting

millions of inhabitants as it is of its thousands.  The grass

of the Barotse valley, for instance, is such a densely-matted mass that,

when "laid", the stalks bear each other up, so that one feels as if walking

on the sheaves of a hay-stack, and the leches nestle under it

to bring forth their young.  The soil which produces this,

if placed under the plow, instead of being mere pasturage,

would yield grain sufficient to feed vast multitudes.



We now began to ascend the Leeba.  The water is black in color

as compared with the main stream, which here assumes the name of Kabompo.

The Leeba flows placidly, and, unlike the parent river,

receives numbers of little rivulets from both sides.  It winds slowly

through the most charming meadows, each of which has either

a soft, sedgy centre, large pond, or trickling rill down the middle.

The trees are now covered with a profusion of the freshest foliage,

and seem planted in groups of such pleasant, graceful outline

that art could give no additional charm.  The grass, which had been burned off

and was growing again after the rains, was short and green,

and all the scenery so like that of a carefully-tended gentleman's park,

that one is scarcely reminded that the surrounding region

is in the hands of simple nature alone.  I suspect that the level meadows

are inundated annually, for the spots on which the trees stand

are elevated three or four feet above them, and these elevations,

being of different shapes, give the strange variety of outline

of the park-like woods.  Numbers of a fresh-water shell are scattered

all over these valleys.  The elevations, as I have observed elsewhere,

are of a soft, sandy soil, and the meadows of black, rich alluvial loam.

There are many beautiful flowers, and many bees to sip their nectar.

We found plenty of honey in the woods, and saw the stages on which

the Balonda dry their meat, when they come down to hunt and gather

the produce of the wild hives.  In one part we came upon

groups of lofty trees as straight as masts, with festoons of orchilla-weed

hanging from the branches.  This, which is used as a dye-stuff,

is found nowhere in the dry country to the south.  It prefers

the humid climate near the west coast.



A large buffalo was wounded, and ran into the thickest part of the forest,

bleeding profusely.  The young men went on his trail;

and, though the vegetation was so dense that no one could have run

more than a few yards, most of them went along quite carelessly,

picking and eating a fruit of the melon family called Mponko.

When the animal heard them approach he always fled,

shifting his stand and doubling on his course in the most cunning manner.

In other cases I have known them to turn back to a point

a few yards from their own trail, and then lie down in a hollow

waiting for the hunter to come up.  Though a heavy, lumbering-looking animal,

his charge is then rapid and terrific.  More accidents happen

by the buffalo and the black rhinoceros than by the lion.

Though all are aware of the mischievous nature of the buffalo when wounded,

our young men went after him quite carelessly.  They never lose

their presence of mind, but, as a buffalo charges back in a forest,

dart dexterously out of his way behind a tree, and, wheeling round,

stab him as he passes.



A tree in flower brought the pleasant fragrance of hawthorn hedges

back to memory; its leaves, flowers, perfumes, and fruit

resembled those of the hawthorn, only the flowers were as large as dog-roses,

and the "haws" like boys' marbles.  Here the flowers smell sweetly,

while few in the south emit any scent at all, or only a nauseous odor.

A botanist would find a rich harvest on the banks of the Leeba.

This would be his best season, for the flowers all run rapidly to seed,

and then insects of every shape spring into existence to devour them.

The climbing plants display great vigor of growth, being not only

thick in the trunk, but also at the very point, in the manner of

quickly-growing asparagus.  The maroro or malolo now appears,

and is abundant in many parts between this and Angola.  It is a small bush

with a yellow fruit, and in its appearance a dwarf "anona".

The taste is sweet, and the fruit is wholesome:  it is full of seeds,

like the custard-apple.



On the 28th we slept at a spot on the right bank from which had just emerged

two broods of alligators.  We had seen many young ones as we came up,

so this seems to be their time of coming forth from the nests,

for we saw them sunning themselves on sand-banks in company with the old ones.

We made our fire in one of the deserted nests, which were strewed all over

with the broken shells.  At the Zouga we saw sixty eggs taken

out of one such nest alone.  They are about the size of those of a goose,

only the eggs of the alligator are of the same diameter at both ends,

and the white shell is partially elastic, from having a strong

internal membrane and but little lime in its composition.  The distance

from the water was about ten feet, and there were evidences of the same place

having been used for a similar purpose in former years.  A broad path led up

from the water to the nest, and the dam, it was said by my companions,

after depositing the eggs, covers them up, and returns afterward

to assist the young out of the place of confinement and out of the egg.

She leads them to the edge of the water, and then leaves them

to catch small fish for themselves.  Assistance to come forth

seems necessary, for here, besides the tough membrane of the shell,

they had four inches of earth upon them; but they do not require

immediate aid for food, because they all retain a portion of yolk,

equal to that of a hen's egg, in a membrane in the abdomen,

as a stock of nutriment, while only beginning independent existence

by catching fish.  Fish is the principal food of both small and large,

and they are much assisted in catching them by their broad, scaly tails.

Sometimes an alligator, viewing a man in the water from the opposite bank,

rushes across the stream with wonderful agility, as is seen

by the high ripple he makes on the surface caused by his rapid motion

at the bottom; but in general they act by stealth, sinking underneath

as soon as they see man.  They seldom leave the water to catch prey,

but often come out by day to enjoy the pleasure of basking in the sun.

In walking along the bank of the Zouga once, a small one,

about three feet long, made a dash at my feet, and caused me

to rush quickly in another direction; but this is unusual,

for I never heard of a similar case.  A wounded leche,

chased into any of the lagoons in the Barotse valley,

or a man or dog going in for the purpose of bringing out a dead one,

is almost sure to be seized, though the alligators may not appear

on the surface.  When employed in looking for food they keep out of sight;

they fish chiefly by night.  When eating, they make a loud, champing noise,

which when once heard is never forgotten.



The young, which had come out of the nests where we spent the night,

did not appear wary; they were about ten inches long, with yellow eyes,

and pupil merely a perpendicular slit.  They were all marked

with transverse slips of pale green and brown, half an inch broad.

When speared, they bit the weapon savagely, though their teeth

were but partially developed, uttering at the same time a sharp bark

like that of a whelp when it first begins to use its voice.

I could not ascertain whether the dam devours them, as reported,

or whether the ichneumon has the same reputation here as in Egypt.

Probably the Barotse and Bayeiye would not look upon it as a benefactor;

they prefer to eat the eggs themselves, and be their own ichneumons.

The white of the egg does not coagulate, but the yolk does,

and this is the only part eaten.



As the population increases, the alligators will decrease, for their nests

will be oftener found; the principal check on their inordinate multiplication

seems to be man.  They are more savage and commit more mischief

in the Leeambye than in any other river.  After dancing long

in the moonlight nights, young men run down to the water to wash off the dust

and cool themselves before going to bed, and are thus often carried away.

One wonders they are not afraid; but the fact is, they have as little

sense of danger impending over them as the hare has when not actually pursued

by the hound, and in many rencounters, in which they escape,

they had not time to be afraid, and only laugh at the circumstance afterward:

there is a want of calm reflection.  In many cases, not referred to

in this book, I feel more horror now in thinking on dangers I have run

than I did at the time of their occurrence.



When we reached the part of the river opposite to the village of Manenko,

the first female chief whom we encountered, two of the people called Balunda,

or Balonda, came to us in their little canoe.  From them we learned

that Kolimbota, one of our party, who had been in the habit of visiting

these parts, was believed by the Balonda to have acted as a guide

to the marauders under Lerimo, whose captives we were now returning.

They very naturally suspected this, from the facility with which

their villages had been found, and, as they had since removed them

to some distance from the river, they were unwilling to lead us

to their places of concealment.  We were in bad repute, but,

having a captive boy and girl to show in evidence of Sekeletu and ourselves

not being partakers in the guilt of inferior men, I could freely express

my desire that all should live in peace.  They evidently felt

that I ought to have taught the Makololo first, before coming to them,

for they remarked that what I advanced was very good, but guilt lay

at the door of the Makololo for disturbing the previously existing peace.

They then went away to report us to Manenko.



When the strangers visited us again in the evening, they were accompanied

by a number of the people of an Ambonda chief named Sekelenke.

The Ambonda live far to the N.W.; their language, the Bonda,

is the common dialect in Angola.  Sekelenke had fled, and was now living

with his village as a vassal of Masiko.  As notices of such men

will perhaps convey the best idea of the state of the inhabitants

to the reader, I shall hereafter allude to the conduct of Sekelenke,

whom I at present only introduce.  Sekelenke had gone with his villagers

to hunt elephants on the right bank of the Leeba, and was now on his way

back to Masiko.  He sent me a dish of boiled zebra's flesh, and a request

that I should lend him a canoe to ferry his wives and family across the river

to the bank on which we were encamped.  Many of Sekelenke's people came

to salute the first white man they ever had an opportunity of seeing;

but Sekelenke himself did not come near.  We heard he was offended

with some of his people for letting me know he was among the company.  He said

that I should be displeased with him for not coming and making some present.

This was the only instance in which I was shunned in this quarter.



As it would have been impolitic to pass Manenko, or any chief,

without at least showing so much respect as to call and explain

the objects of our passing through the country, we waited two entire days

for the return of the messengers to Manenko; and as I could not hurry matters,

I went into the adjacent country to search for meat for the camp.



The country is furnished largely with forest, having occasionally open lawns

covered with grass, not in tufts as in the south, but so closely planted that

one can not see the soil.  We came upon a man and his two wives and children,

burning coarse rushes and the stalks of tsitla, growing in a brackish marsh,

in order to extract a kind of salt from the ashes.  They make

a funnel of branches of trees, and line it with grass rope,

twisted round until it is, as it were, a beehive-roof inverted.

The ashes are put into water, in a calabash, and then it is allowed

to percolate through the small hole in the bottom and through the grass.

When this water is evaporated in the sun, it yields sufficient salt

to form a relish with food.  The women and children fled with precipitation,

but we sat down at a distance, and allowed the man time to gain

courage enough to speak.  He, however, trembled excessively

at the apparition before him; but when we explained that our object

was to hunt game, and not men, he became calm, and called back his wives.

We soon afterward came to another party on the same errand with ourselves.

The man had a bow about six feet long, and iron-headed arrows about

thirty inches in length; he had also wooden arrows neatly barbed, to shoot

in cases where he might not be quite certain of recovering them again.

We soon afterward got a zebra, and gave our hunting acquaintances

such a liberal share that we soon became friends.  All whom we saw that day

then came with us to the encampment to beg a little meat;

and as they have so little salt, I have no doubt they felt grateful

for what we gave.



Sekelenke and his people, twenty-four in number, defiled past our camp

carrying large bundles of dried elephants' meat.  Most of them came

to say good-by, and Sekelenke himself sent to say that he had gone to visit

a wife living in the village of Manenko.  It was a mere African manoeuvre

to gain information, and not commit himself to either one line of action

or another with respect to our visit.  As he was probably

in the party before us, I replied that it was all right,

and when my people came up from Masiko I would go to my wife too.

Another zebra came to our camp, and, as we had friends near, it was shot.

It was the `Equus montanus', though the country is perfectly flat,

and was finely marked down to the feet, as all the zebras are in these parts.



To our first message, offering a visit of explanation to Manenko,

we got an answer, with a basket of manioc roots, that we must remain

where we were till she should visit us.  Having waited two days already

for her, other messengers arrived with orders for me to come to her.

After four days of rains and negotiation, I declined going at all,

and proceeded up the river to the small stream Makondo (lat. 13d 23' 12" S.),

which enters the Leeba from the east, and is between twenty and thirty

yards broad.



JANUARY 1ST, 1854.  We had heavy rains almost every day; indeed,

the rainy season had fairly set in.  Baskets of the purple fruit called mawa

were frequently brought to us by the villagers; not for sale,

but from a belief that their chiefs would be pleased to hear

that they had treated us well; we gave them pieces of meat in return.



When crossing at the confluence of the Leeba and Makondo,

one of my men picked up a bit of a steel watch-chain of English manufacture,

and we were informed that this was the spot where the Mambari cross

in coming to Masiko.  Their visits explain why Sekelenke kept his tusks

so carefully.  These Mambari are very enterprising merchants:

when they mean to trade with a town, they deliberately begin the affair

by building huts, as if they knew that little business could be transacted

without a liberal allowance of time for palaver.  They bring Manchester goods

into the heart of Africa; these cotton prints look so wonderful

that the Makololo could not believe them to be the work of mortal hands.

On questioning the Mambari they were answered that English manufactures

came out of the sea, and beads were gathered on its shore.

To Africans our cotton mills are fairy dreams.  "How can the irons spin,

weave, and print so beautifully?"  Our country is like what Taprobane was

to our ancestors -- a strange realm of light, whence came the diamond,

muslin, and peacocks; an attempt at explanation of our manufactures

usually elicits the expression, "Truly ye are gods!"



When about to leave the Makondo, one of my men had dreamed that Mosantu

was shut up a prisoner in a stockade:  this dream depressed the spirits

of the whole party, and when I came out of my little tent in the morning,

they were sitting the pictures of abject sorrow.  I asked if we were

to be guided by dreams, or by the authority I derived from Sekeletu,

and ordered them to load the boats at once; they seemed ashamed to confess

their fears; the Makololo picked up courage and upbraided the others

for having such superstitious views, and said this was always their way;

if even a certain bird called to them, they would turn back

from an enterprise, saying it was unlucky.  They entered the canoes at last,

and were the better of a little scolding for being inclined

to put dreams before authority.  It rained all the morning, but about eleven

we reached the village of Sheakondo, on a small stream named Lonkonye.

We sent a message to the head man, who soon appeared with two wives,

bearing handsome presents of manioc:  Sheakondo could speak

the language of the Barotse well, and seemed awestruck when told

some of the "words of God".  He manifested no fear, always spoke frankly,

and when he made an asseveration, did so by simply pointing up to the sky

above him.  The Balonda cultivate the manioc or cassava extensively;

also dura, ground-nuts, beans, maize, sweet potatoes, and yams,

here called "lekoto", but as yet we see only the outlying villages.



The people who came with Sheakondo to our bivouac had their teeth filed

to a point by way of beautifying them, though those which were left untouched

were always the whitest; they are generally tattooed in various parts,

but chiefly on the abdomen:  the skin is raised in small elevated cicatrices,

each nearly half an inch long and a quarter of an inch in diameter,

so that a number of them may constitute a star, or other device.

The dark color of the skin prevents any coloring matter being deposited

in these figures, but they love much to have the whole surface of their bodies

anointed with a comfortable varnish of oil.  In their unassisted state

they depend on supplies of oil from the Palma Christi, or castor-oil plant,

or from various other oliferous seeds, but they are all

excessively fond of clarified butter or ox fat.  Sheakondo's old wife

presented some manioc roots, and then politely requested

to be anointed with butter:  as I had been bountifully supplied

by the Makololo, I gave her as much as would suffice, and as they have

little clothing, I can readily believe that she felt her comfort

greatly enhanced thereby.



The favorite wife, who was also present, was equally anxious for butter.

She had a profusion of iron rings on her ankles, to which were attached

little pieces of sheet iron, to enable her to make a tinkling as she walked

in her mincing African style; the same thing is thought pretty

by our own dragoons in walking jauntingly.



We had so much rain and cloud that I could not get a single observation

for either longitude or latitude for a fortnight.  Yet the Leeba

does not show any great rise, nor is the water in the least discolored.

It is slightly black, from the number of mossy rills which fall into it.

It has remarkably few birds and fish, while the Leeambye swarms with both.

It is noticeable that alligators here possess more of the fear of man

than in the Leeambye.  The Balonda have taught them, by their poisoned arrows,

to keep out of sight.  We did not see one basking in the sun.

The Balonda set so many little traps for birds that few appear.

I observed, however, many (to me) new small birds of song on its banks.

More rain has been falling in the east than here, for the Leeambye

was rising fast and working against the sandy banks so vigorously

that a slight yellow tinge was perceptible in it.



One of our men was bitten by a non-venomous serpent, and of course

felt no harm.  The Barotse concluded that this was owing to many of them

being present and seeing it, as if the sight of human eyes

could dissolve the poison and act as a charm.



On the 6th of January we reached the village of another female chief,

named Nyamoana, who is said to be the mother of Manenko,

and sister of Shinte or Kabompo, the greatest Balonda chief

in this part of the country.  Her people had but recently come

to the present locality, and had erected only twenty huts.

Her husband, Samoana, was clothed in a kilt of green and red baize,

and was armed with a spear and a broadsword of antique form,

about eighteen inches long and three broad.  The chief and her husband

were sitting on skins placed in the middle of a circle thirty paces

in diameter, a little raised above the ordinary level of the ground,

and having a trench round it.  Outside the trench sat about a hundred persons

of all ages and both sexes.  The men were well armed with bows, arrows,

spears, and broadswords.  Beside the husband sat a rather aged woman,

having a bad outward squint in the left eye.  We put down our arms

about forty yards off, and I walked up to the centre of the circular bench,

and saluted him in the usual way by clapping the hands together

in their fashion.  He pointed to his wife, as much as to say,

the honor belongs to her.  I saluted her in the same way,

and a mat having been brought, I squatted down in front of them.



The talker was then called, and I was asked who was my spokesman.

Having pointed to Kolimbota, who knew their dialect best,

the palaver began in due form.  I explained the real objects I had in view,

without any attempt to mystify or appear in any other character than my own,

for I have always been satisfied that, even though there were

no other considerations, the truthful way of dealing with the uncivilized

is unquestionably the best.  Kolimbota repeated to Nyamoana's talker

what I had said to him.  He delivered it all verbatim to her husband,

who repeated it again to her.  It was thus all rehearsed four times over,

in a tone loud enough to be heard by the whole party of auditors.

The response came back by the same roundabout route, beginning at the lady

to her husband, etc.



After explanations and re-explanations, I perceived that our new friends

were mixing up my message of peace and friendship with Makololo affairs,

and stated that it was not delivered on the authority of any one less

than that of their Creator, and that if the Makololo did again

break His laws and attack the Balonda, the guilt would rest with the Makololo

and not with me.  The palaver then came to a close.



By way of gaining their confidence, I showed them my hair,

which is considered a curiosity in all this region.  They said,

"Is that hair?  It is the mane of a lion, and not hair at all."

Some thought that I had made a wig of lion's mane, as they sometimes do

with fibres of the "ife", and dye it black, and twist it so as to resemble

a mass of their own wool.  I could not return the joke by telling them

that theirs was not hair, but the wool of sheep, for they have none of these

in the country; and even though they had, as Herodotus remarked,

"the African sheep are clothed with hair, and men's heads with wool."

So I had to be content with asserting that mine was the real original hair,

such as theirs would have been had it not been scorched and frizzled

by the sun.  In proof of what the sun could do, I compared

my own bronzed face and hands, then about the same in complexion

as the lighter-colored Makololo, with the white skin of my chest.

They readily believed that, as they go nearly naked and fully exposed

to that influence, we might be of common origin after all.

Here, as every where, when heat and moisture are combined, the people

are very dark, but not quite black.  There is always a shade of brown

in the most deeply colored.  I showed my watch and pocket compass,

which are considered great curiosities; but, though the lady

was called on by her husband to look, she would not be persuaded

to approach near enough.



These people are more superstitious than any we had yet encountered;

though still only building their village, they had found time to erect

two little sheds at the chief dwelling in it, in which were placed two pots

having charms in them.  When asked what medicine they contained,

they replied, "Medicine for the Barimo;" but when I rose and looked into them,

they said they were medicine for the game.  Here we saw

the first evidence of the existence of idolatry in the remains of an old idol

at a deserted village.  It was simply a human head carved on a block of wood.

Certain charms mixed with red ochre and white pipe-clay are dotted over them

when they are in use; and a crooked stick is used in the same way for an idol

when they have no professional carver.



As the Leeba seemed still to come from the direction in which we wished to go,

I was desirous of proceeding farther up with the canoes;

but Nyamoana was anxious that we should allow her people

to conduct us to her brother Shinte; and when I explained

the advantage of water-carriage, she represented that her brother

did not live near the river, and, moreover, there was a cataract in front,

over which it would be difficult to convey the canoes.  She was afraid, too,

that the Balobale, whose country lies to the west of the river,

not knowing the objects for which we had come, would kill us.

To my reply that I had been so often threatened with death

if I visited a new tribe that I was now more afraid of killing any one

than of being killed, she rejoined that the Balobale would not kill me,

but the Makololo would all be sacrificed as their enemies.

This produced considerable effect on my companions, and inclined them

to the plan of Nyamoana, of going to the town of her brother

rather than ascending the Leeba.  The arrival of Manenko herself on the scene

threw so much weight into the scale on their side that I was forced

to yield the point.



Manenko was a tall, strapping woman about twenty, distinguished by

a profusion of ornaments and medicines hung round her person;

the latter are supposed to act as charms.  Her body was smeared all over

with a mixture of fat and red ochre, as a protection against the weather;

a necessary precaution, for, like most of the Balonda ladies,

she was otherwise in a state of frightful nudity.  This was not

from want of clothing, for, being a chief, she might have been as well clad

as any of her subjects, but from her peculiar ideas of elegance in dress.

When she arrived with her husband, Sambanza, they listened for some time

to the statements I was making to the people of Nyamoana, after which

the husband, acting as spokesman, commenced an oration, stating the reasons

for their coming, and, during every two or three seconds of the delivery,

he picked up a little sand, and rubbed it on the upper part

of his arms and chest.  This is a common mode of salutation in Londa;

and when they wish to be excessively polite, they bring

a quantity of ashes or pipe-clay in a piece of skin, and, taking up handfuls,

rub it on the chest and upper front part of each arm; others, in saluting,

drum their ribs with their elbows; while others still touch the ground

with one cheek after the other, and clap their hands.  The chiefs go through

the manoeuvre of rubbing the sand on the arms, but only make a feint

at picking up some.  When Sambanza had finished his oration,

he rose up, and showed his ankles ornamented with a bundle of copper rings;

had they been very heavy, they would have made him adopt a straggling walk.

Some chiefs have really so many as to be forced, by the weight and size,

to keep one foot apart from the other, the weight being

a serious inconvenience in walking.  The gentlemen like Sambanza,

who wish to imitate their betters, do so in their walk;

so you see men, with only a few ounces of ornament on their legs,

strutting along as if they had double the number of pounds.

When I smiled at Sambanza's walk, the people remarked, "That is the way

in which they show off their lordship in these parts."



Manenko was quite decided in the adoption of the policy of friendship

with the Makololo which we recommended; and, by way of cementing the bond,

she and her counselors proposed that Kolimbota should take a wife among them.

By this expedient she hoped to secure his friendship,

and also accurate information as to the future intentions of the Makololo.

She thought that he would visit the Balonda more frequently afterward,

having the good excuse of going to see his wife; and the Makololo

would never, of course, kill the villagers among whom

so near a relative of one of their own children dwells.

Kolimbota, I found, thought favorably of the proposition,

and it afterward led to his desertion from us.



On the evening of the day in which Manenko arrived, we were delighted

by the appearance of Mosantu and an imposing embassy from Masiko.

It consisted of all his under-chiefs, and they brought a fine elephant's tusk,

two calabashes of honey, and a large piece of blue baize, as a present.

The last was intended perhaps to show me that he was a truly great chief,

who had such stores of white men's goods at hand that he could afford

to give presents of them; it might also be intended for Mosantu,

for chiefs usually remember the servants; I gave it to him.

Masiko expressed delight, by his principal men, at the return of the captives,

and at the proposal of peace and alliance with the Makololo.

He stated that he never sold any of his own people to the Mambari,

but only captives whom his people kidnapped from small neighboring tribes.

When the question was put whether his people had been in the habit

of molesting the Makololo by kidnapping their servants and stealing canoes,

it was admitted that two of his men, when hunting, had gone

to the Makololo gardens, to see if any of their relatives were there.

As the great object in all native disputes is to get both parties to turn over

a new leaf, I explained the desirableness of forgetting past feuds,

accepting the present Makololo professions as genuine, and avoiding in future

to give them any cause for marauding.  I presented Masiko with an ox,

furnished by Sekeletu as provision for ourselves.  All these people

are excessively fond of beef and butter, from having been accustomed to them

in their youth, before the Makololo deprived them of cattle.

They have abundance of game, but I am quite of their opinion that,

after all, there is naught in the world equal to roast beef, and that

in their love for it the English show both good taste and sound sense.

The ox was intended for Masiko, but his men were very anxious

to get my sanction for slaughtering it on the spot.  I replied

that when it went out of my hands I had no more to do with it.

They, however, wished the responsibility of slaughtering it to rest with me;

if I had said they might kill it, not many ounces would have remained

in the morning.  I would have given permission, but had nothing else to offer

in return for Masiko's generosity.



We were now without any provisions except a small dole of manioc roots

each evening from Nyamoana, which, when eaten raw, produce poisonous effects.

A small loaf, made from nearly the last morsel of maize-meal from Libonta,

was my stock, and our friends from Masiko were still more destitute;

yet we all rejoiced so much at their arrival that we resolved

to spend a day with them.  The Barotse of our party, meeting with

relatives and friends among the Barotse of Masiko, had many old tales to tell;

and, after pleasant hungry converse by day, we regaled our friends with

the magic lantern by night, and, in order to make the thing of use to all,

we removed our camp up to the village of Nyamoana.  This is a good means

of arresting the attention, and conveying important facts

to the minds of these people.



When erecting our sheds at the village, Manenko fell upon

our friends from Masiko in a way that left no doubt on our minds

but that she is a most accomplished scold.  Masiko had, on a former occasion,

sent to Samoana for a cloth, a common way of keeping up intercourse,

and, after receiving it, sent it back, because it had the appearance

of having had "witchcraft medicine" on it; this was a grave offense,

and now Manenko had a good excuse for venting her spleen,

the embassadors having called at her village, and slept in one of the huts

without leave.  If her family was to be suspected of dealing in evil charms,

why were Masiko's people not to be thought guilty of leaving the same

in her hut?  She advanced and receded in true oratorical style,

belaboring her own servants as well for allowing the offense,

and, as usual in more civilized feminine lectures, she leaned over

the objects of her ire, and screamed forth all their faults and failings

ever since they were born, and her despair of ever seeing them become better,

until they were all "killed by alligators".  Masiko's people

followed the plan of receiving this torrent of abuse in silence,

and, as neither we nor they had any thing to eat, we parted next morning.

In reference to Masiko selling slaves to the Mambari, they promised to explain

the relationship which exists between even the most abject of his people

and our common Father; and that no more kidnapping ought to be allowed,

as he ought to give that peace and security to the smaller tribes

on his eastern borders which he so much desired to obtain himself

from the Makololo.  We promised to return through his town

when we came back from the sea-coast.



Manenko gave us some manioc roots in the morning, and had determined

to carry our baggage to her uncle's, Kabompo or Shinte.

We had heard a sample of what she could do with her tongue;

and as neither my men nor myself had much inclination to encounter

a scolding from this black Mrs. Caudle, we made ready the packages;

but she came and said the men whom she had ordered for the service had not

yet come; they would arrive to-morrow.  Being on low and disagreeable diet,

I felt annoyed at this further delay, and ordered the packages

to be put into the canoes to proceed up the river without her servants;

but Manenko was not to be circumvented in this way; she came forward

with her people, and said her uncle would be angry if she did not

carry forward the tusks and goods of Sekeletu, seized the luggage,

and declared that she would carry it in spite of me.  My men succumbed sooner

to this petticoat government than I felt inclined to do, and left me no power;

and, being unwilling to encounter her tongue, I was moving off to the canoes,

when she gave me a kind explanation, and, with her hand on my shoulder,

put on a motherly look, saying, "Now, my little man, just do

as the rest have done."  My feelings of annoyance of course vanished,

and I went out to try and get some meat.



The only game to be found in these parts are the ZEBRA,

the KUALATA or tahetsi (`Aigoceros equina'), kama (`Bubalus caama'),

buffaloes, and the small antelope hakitenwe (`Philantomba').



The animals can be seen here only by following on their trail for many miles.

Urged on by hunger, we followed that of some zebras during the greater part

of the day:  when within fifty yards of them, in a dense thicket,

I made sure of one, but, to my infinite disgust, the gun missed fire,

and off they bounded.  The climate is so very damp, from daily heavy rains,

that every thing becomes loaded with moisture, and the powder

in the gun-nipples can not be kept dry.  It is curious to mark

the intelligence of the game; in districts where they are much annoyed

by fire-arms, they keep out on the most open spots of country they can find,

in order to have a widely-extended range of vision, and a man armed

is carefully shunned.  From the frequency with which I have been allowed

to approach nearer without than with a gun, I believe they know

the difference between safety and danger in the two cases.  But here,

where they are killed by the arrows of the Balonda, they select for safety

the densest forest, where the arrow can not be easily shot.

The variation in the selection of standing-spots during the day may, however,

be owing partly to the greater heat of the sun, for here it is particularly

sharp and penetrating.  However accounted for, the wild animals here do select

the forests by day, while those farther south generally shun these covers,

and, on several occasions, I have observed there was no sunshine

to cause them to seek for shade.
