





Chapter 5.



  Start in June, 1852, on the last and longest Journey from Cape Town --

  Companions -- Wagon-traveling -- Physical Divisions of Africa --

  The Eastern, Central, and Western Zones -- The Kalahari Desert --

  Its Vegetation -- Increasing Value of the Interior for Colonization --

  Our Route -- Dutch Boers -- Their Habits -- Sterile Appearance

  of the District -- Failure of Grass -- Succeeded by other Plants --

  Vines -- Animals -- The Boers as Farmers -- Migration of Springbucks --

  Wariness of Animals -- The Orange River -- Territory of

  the Griquas and Bechuanas -- The Griquas -- The Chief Waterboer --

  His wise and energetic Government -- His Fidelity -- Ill-considered Measures

  of the Colonial Government in regard to Supplies of Gunpowder --

  Success of the Missionaries among the Griquas and Bechuanas --

  Manifest Improvement of the native Character -- Dress of the Natives --

  A full-dress Costume -- A Native's Description of the Natives --

  Articles of Commerce in the Country of the Bechuanas --

  Their Unwillingness to learn, and Readiness to criticise.







Having sent my family home to England, I started in the beginning of June,

1852, on my last journey from Cape Town.  This journey extended

from the southern extremity of the continent to St. Paul de Loando,

the capital of Angola, on the west coast, and thence across

South Central Africa in an oblique direction to Kilimane (Quilimane)

in Eastern Africa.  I proceeded in the usual conveyance of the country,

the heavy, lumbering Cape wagon drawn by ten oxen, and was accompanied

by two Christian Bechuanas from Kuruman -- than whom I never saw

better servants any where -- by two Bakwain men, and two young girls,

who, having come as nurses with our children to the Cape,

were returning to their home at Kolobeng.  Wagon-traveling in Africa

has been so often described that I need say no more than that

it is a prolonged system of picnicking, excellent for the health,

and agreeable to those who are not over-fastidious about trifles,

and who delight in being in the open air.



Our route to the north lay near the centre of the cone-shaped mass of land

which constitutes the promontory of the Cape.  If we suppose this cone

to be divided into three zones or longitudinal bands, we find each presenting

distinct peculiarities of climate, physical appearance and population.

These are more marked beyond than within the colony.  At some points

one district seems to be continued in and to merge into the other,

but the general dissimilarity warrants the division, as an aid to memory.

The eastern zone is often furnished with mountains, well wooded

with evergreen succulent trees, on which neither fire nor droughts can have

the smallest effect (`Strelitzia', `Zamia horrida', `Portulacaria afra',

`Schotia speciosa', `Euphorbias', and `Aloes arborescens');

and its seaboard gorges are clad with gigantic timber.

It is also comparatively well watered with streams and flowing rivers.

The annual supply of rain is considerable, and the inhabitants

(Caffres or Zulus) are tall, muscular, and well made;

they are shrewd, energetic, and brave; altogether they merit the character

given them by military authorities, of being "magnificent savages".

Their splendid physical development and form of skull show that,

but for the black skin and woolly hair, they would take rank

among the foremost Europeans.



The next division, that which embraces the centre of the continent,

can scarcely be called hilly, for what hills there are are very low.

It consists for the most part of extensive, slightly undulating plains.

There are no lofty mountains, but few springs, and still fewer

flowing streams.  Rain is far from abundant, and droughts

may be expected every few years.  Without artificial irrigation

no European grain can be raised, and the inhabitants (Bechuanas),

though evidently of the same stock, originally, with those already mentioned,

and closely resembling them in being an agricultural as well as

a pastoral people, are a comparatively timid race, and inferior to the Caffres

in physical development.



The western division is still more level than the middle one, being rugged

only near the coast.  It includes the great plain called the Kalahari Desert,

which is remarkable for little water and very considerable vegetation.



The reason, probably, why so little rain falls on this extensive plain

is that the prevailing winds of most of the interior country are easterly,

with a little southing.  The moisture taken up by the atmosphere

from the Indian Ocean is deposited on the eastern hilly slope;

and when the moving mass of air reaches its greatest elevation, it is then

on the verge of the great valley, or, as in the case of the Kalahari,

the great heated inland plains; there, meeting with the rarefied air

of that hot, dry surface, the ascending heat gives it greater capacity

for retaining all its remaining humidity, and few showers can be given

to the middle and western lands in consequence of the increased

hygrometric power.



This is the same phenomenon, on a gigantic scale, as that

which takes place on Table Mountain, at the Cape, in what is called

the spreading of the "table-cloth".  The southeast wind causes a mass of air,

equal to the diameter of the mountain, suddenly to ascend

at least three thousand feet; the dilatation produced by altitude,

with its attendant cold, causes the immediate formation of a cloud

on the summit; the water in the atmosphere becomes visible;

successive masses of gliding-up and passing-over air cause the continual

formation of clouds, but the top of the vapory mass, or "table-cloth",

is level, and seemingly motionless; on the lee side, however,

the thick volumes of vapor curl over and descend, but when they reach

the point below, where greater density and higher temperature

impart enlarged capacity for carrying water, they entirely disappear.



Now if, instead of a hollow on the lee side of Table Mountain,

we had an elevated heated plain, the clouds which curl over that side,

and disappear as they do at present when a "southeaster" is blowing,

might deposit some moisture on the windward ascent and top;

but the heat would then impart the increased capacity

the air now receives at the lower level in its descent to leeward,

and, instead of an extended country with a flora of the `Disa grandiflora',

`gladiolus', `rushes', and `lichens', which now appear on Table Mountain,

we should have only the hardy vegetation of the Kalahari.



Why there should be so much vegetation on the Kalahari may be explained

by the geological formation of the country.  There is a rim or fringe

of ancient rocks round a great central valley, which, dipping inward,

form a basin, the bottom of which is composed of the oldest silurian rocks.

This basin has been burst through and filled up in many parts

by eruptive traps and breccias, which often bear in their substances

angular fragments of the more ancient rocks, as shown in the fossils

they contain.  Now, though large areas have been so dislocated

that but little trace of the original valley formation appears,

it is highly probable that the basin shape prevails over

large tracts of the country; and as the strata on the slopes,

where most of the rain falls, dip in toward the centre, they probably

guide water beneath the plains but ill supplied with moisture from the clouds.

The phenomenon of stagnant fountains becoming by a new and deeper outlet

never-failing streams may be confirmatory of the view that water is conveyed

from the sides of the country into the bottom of the central valley;

and it is not beyond the bounds of possibility that the wonderful river system

in the north, which, if native information be correct, causes a considerable

increase of water in the springs called Matlomagan-yana (the Links),

extends its fertilizing influence beneath the plains of the Kalahari.



The peculiar formation of the country may explain why there is

such a difference in the vegetation between the 20th and 30th

parallels of latitude in South Africa and the same latitudes

in Central Australia.  The want of vegetation is as true

of some parts too in the centre of South America as of Australia;

and the cause of the difference holds out a probability

for the success of artesian wells in extensive tracts of Africa now unpeopled

solely on account of the want of surface water.  We may be allowed

to speculate a little at least on the fact of much greater vegetation,

which, from whatever source it comes, presents for South Africa

prospects of future greatness which we can not hope for

in Central Australia.  As the interior districts of the Cape Colony

are daily becoming of higher value, offering to honest industry

a fair remuneration for capital, and having a climate unequaled

in salubrity for consumptive patients, I should unhesitatingly

recommend any farmer at all afraid of that complaint in his family

to try this colony.  With the means of education already possessed,

and the onward and upward movement of the Cape population,

he need entertain no apprehensions of his family sinking into barbarism.



The route we at this time followed ran along the middle,

or skirted the western zone before alluded to, until we reached

the latitude of Lake Ngami, where a totally different country begins.

While in the colony, we passed through districts inhabited by

the descendants of Dutch and French refugees who had fled

from religious persecution.  Those living near the capital differ but little

from the middle classes in English counties, and are distinguished

by public spirit and general intelligence; while those situated

far from the centres of civilization are less informed,

but are a body of frugal, industrious, and hospitable peasantry.

A most efficient system of public instruction was established

in the time of Governor Sir George Napier, on a plan drawn up

in a great measure by that accomplished philosopher, Sir John Herschel.

The system had to contend with less sectarian rancor than elsewhere;

indeed, until quite recently, that spirit, except in a mild form, was unknown.



The population here described ought not to be confounded with some Boers

who fled from British rule on account of the emancipation of

their Hottentot slaves, and perhaps never would have been so

had not every now and then some Rip Van Winkle started forth at the Cape

to justify in the public prints the deeds of blood and slave-hunting

in the far interior.  It is therefore not to be wondered at if the whole race

is confounded and held in low estimation by those who do not know

the real composition of the Cape community.



Population among the Boers increases rapidly; they marry soon,

are seldom sterile, and continue to have children late.

I once met a worthy matron whose husband thought it right to imitate

the conduct of Abraham while Sarah was barren; she evidently agreed

in the propriety of the measure, for she was pleased to hear the children

by a mother of what has been thought an inferior race address her

as their mother.  Orphans are never allowed to remain long destitute;

and instances are frequent in which a tender-hearted farmer has adopted

a fatherless child, and when it came of age portioned it as his own.



Two centuries of the South African climate have not had much effect

upon the physical condition of the Boers.  They are a shade darker,

or rather ruddier, than Europeans, and are never cadaverous-looking,

as descendants of Europeans are said to be elsewhere.

There is a tendency to the development of steatopyga,

so characteristic of Arabs and other African tribes; and it is probable

that the interior Boers in another century will become in color

what the learned imagine our progenitors, Adam and Eve, to have been.



The parts of the colony through which we passed were of sterile aspect;

and, as the present winter had been preceded by a severe drought,

many farmers had lost two thirds of their stock.  The landscape

was uninviting; the hills, destitute of trees, were of a dark brown color,

and the scanty vegetation on the plains made me feel that they deserved

the name of Desert more than the Kalahari.  When first taken possession of,

these parts are said to have been covered with a coating of grass,

but that has disappeared with the antelopes which fed upon it,

and a crop of mesembryanthemums and crassulas occupies its place.

It is curious to observe how, in nature, organizations the most dissimilar

are mutually dependent on each other for their perpetuation.

Here the original grasses were dependent for dissemination

on the grass-feeding animals, which scattered the seeds.

When, by the death of the antelopes, no fresh sowing was made,

the African droughts proved too much for this form of vegetation.

But even this contingency was foreseen by the Omniscient One;

for, as we may now observe in the Kalahari Desert, another family of plants,

the mesembryanthemums, stood ready to neutralize the aridity

which must otherwise have followed.  This family of plants

possesses seed-vessels which remain firmly shut on their contents

while the soil is hot and dry, and thus preserve the vegetative power intact

during the highest heat of the torrid sun; but when rain falls,

the seed-vessel opens and sheds its contents just when there is

the greatest probability of their vegetating.  In other plants

heat and drought cause the seed-vessels to burst and shed their charge.



One of this family is edible (`Mesembryanthemum edule'); another possesses

a tuberous root, which may be eaten raw; and all are furnished with thick,

fleshy leaves, having pores capable of imbibing and retaining moisture

from a very dry atmosphere and soil, so that, if a leaf is broken

during a period of the greatest drought, it shows abundant circulating sap.

The plants of this family are found much farther north,

but the great abundance of the grasses prevents them from making any show.

There, however, they stand ready to fill up any gap which may occur

in the present prevailing vegetation; and should the grasses disappear,

animal life would not necessarily be destroyed, because a reserve supply,

equivalent to a fresh act of creative power, has been provided.



One of this family, `M. turbiniforme', is so colored as to blend in well with

the hue of the soil and stones around it; and a `gryllus' of the same color

feeds on it.  In the case of the insect, the peculiar color is given as

compensation for the deficiency of the powers of motion to enable it to elude

the notice of birds.  The continuation of the species is here the end in view.

In the case of the plant the same device is adopted for a sort of double end,

viz., perpetuation of the plant by hiding it from animals, with the view

that ultimately its extensive appearance will sustain that race.



As this new vegetation is better adapted for sheep and goats in a dry country

than grass, the Boers supplant the latter by imitating the process

by which graminivorous antelopes have so abundantly disseminated

the seed of grasses.  A few wagon-loads of mesembryanthemum plants, in seed,

are brought to a farm covered with a scanty crop of coarse grass,

and placed on a spot to which the sheep have access in the evenings.

As they eat a little every night, the seeds are dropped

over the grazing grounds in this simple way, with a regularity

which could not be matched except at the cost of an immense amount of labor.

The place becomes in the course of a few years a sheep-farm,

as these animals thrive on such herbage.  As already mentioned,

some plants of this family are furnished with an additional contrivance

for withstanding droughts, viz., oblong tubers, which, buried deep enough

beneath the soil for complete protection from the scorching sun,

serve as reservoirs of sap and nutriment during those rainless periods

which recur perpetually in even the most favored spots of Africa.  I have

adverted to this peculiarity as often seen in the vegetation of the Desert;

and, though rather out of place, it may be well -- while noticing

a clever imitation of one process in nature by the Cape farmers --

to suggest another for their consideration.  The country beyond

south lat. 18 Deg. abounds in three varieties of grape-bearing vines,

and one of these is furnished with oblong tubers every three or four inches

along the horizontal root.  They resemble closely those of the asparagus.

This increase of power to withstand the effects of climate

might prove of value in the more arid parts of the Cape colony,

grapes being well known to be an excellent restorative in the debility

produced by heat:  by ingrafting, or by some of those curious manipulations

which we read of in books on gardening, a variety might be secured

better adapted to the country than the foreign vines at present cultivated.

The Americans find that some of their native vines yield wines superior

to those made from the very best imported vines from France and Portugal.

What a boon a vine of the sort contemplated would have been

to a Rhenish missionary I met at a part in the west of the colony

called Ebenezer, whose children had never seen flowers, though old enough

to talk about them!



The slow pace at which we wound our way through the colony

made almost any subject interesting.  The attention is attracted

to the names of different places, because they indicate

the former existence of buffaloes, elands, and elephants,

which are now to be found only hundreds of miles beyond.

A few blesbucks (`Antilope pygarga'), gnus, bluebucks (`A. cerulea'),

steinbucks, and the ostrich (`Struthio camelus'), continue, like the Bushmen,

to maintain a precarious existence when all the rest are gone.

The elephant, the most sagacious, flees the sound of fire-arms first;

the gnu and ostrich, the most wary and the most stupid, last.

The first emigrants found the Hottentots in possession of

prodigious herds of fine cattle, but no horses, asses, or camels.

The original cattle, which may still be seen in some parts of the frontier,

must have been brought south from the north-northeast, for from this point

the natives universally ascribe their original migration.

They brought cattle, sheep, goats, and dogs; why not the horse,

the delight of savage hordes?  Horses thrive well in the Cape Colony

when imported.  Naturalists point out certain mountain ranges

as limiting the habitat of certain classes of animals;

but there is no Cordillera in Africa to answer that purpose, there being

no visible barrier between the northeastern Arabs and the Hottentot tribes

to prevent the different hordes, as they felt their way southward,

from indulging their taste for the possession of this noble animal.



I am here led to notice an invisible barrier, more insurmountable

than mountain ranges, but which is not opposed to the southern progress

of cattle, goats, and sheep.  The tsetse would prove a barrier

only until its well-defined habitat was known, but the disease

passing under the term of horse-sickness (peripneumonia) exists

in such virulence over nearly seven degrees of latitude that no precaution

would be sufficient to save these animals.  The horse is so liable

to this disease, that only by great care in stabling can he be kept any where

between 20 Deg. and 27 Deg. S. during the time between December and April.

The winter, beginning in the latter month, is the only period

in which Englishmen can hunt on horseback, and they are in danger

of losing all their studs some months before December.  To this disease

the horse is especially exposed, and it is almost always fatal.

One attack, however, seems to secure immunity from a second.  Cattle, too,

are subject to it, but only at intervals of a few, sometimes many years;

but it never makes a clean sweep of the whole cattle of a village,

as it would do of a troop of fifty horses.  This barrier, then,

seems to explain the absence of the horse among the Hottentots,

though it is not opposed to the southern migration of cattle,

sheep, and goats.



When the flesh of animals that have died of this disease is eaten,

it causes a malignant carbuncle, which, when it appears over

any important organ, proves rapidly fatal.  It is more especially dangerous

over the pit of the stomach.  The effects of the poison

have been experienced by missionaries who had eaten properly cooked food,

the flesh of sheep really but not visibly affected by the disease.

The virus in the flesh of the animal is destroyed neither by boiling

nor roasting.  This fact, of which we have had innumerable examples,

shows the superiority of experiments on a large scale

to those of acute and able physiologists and chemists in the laboratory,

for a well known physician of Paris, after careful investigation,

considered that the virus in such cases was completely neutralized by boiling.



This disease attacks wild animals too.  During our residence at Chonuan

great numbers of tolos, or koodoos, were attracted to the gardens

of the Bakwains, abandoned at the usual period of harvest because

there was no prospect of the corn (`Holcus sorghum') bearing that year.

The koodoo is remarkably fond of the green stalks of this kind of millet.

Free feeding produced that state of fatness favorable for

the development of this disease, and no fewer than twenty-five died

on the hill opposite our house.  Great numbers of gnus and zebras perished

from the same cause, but the mortality produced no sensible diminution

in the numbers of the game, any more than the deaths of many of the Bakwains

who persisted, in spite of every remonstrance, in eating the dead meat,

caused any sensible decrease in the strength of the tribe.



The farms of the Boers consist generally of a small patch of cultivated land

in the midst of some miles of pasturage.  They are thus less an agricultural

than a pastoral people.  Each farm must have its fountain;

and where no such supply of water exists, the government lands

are unsalable.  An acre in England is thus generally more valuable

than a square mile in Africa.  But the country is prosperous,

and capable of great improvement.  The industry of the Boers augurs well

for the future formation of dams and tanks, and for the greater fruitfulness

that would certainly follow.



As cattle and sheep farmers the colonists are very successful.

Larger and larger quantities of wool are produced annually,

and the value of colonial farms increases year by year.

But the system requires that with the increase of the population

there should be an extension of territory.  Wide as the country is,

and thinly inhabited, the farmers feel it to be too limited,

and they are gradually spreading to the north.  This movement proves

prejudicial to the country behind, for labor, which would be directed

to the improvement of the colony, is withdrawn and expended in a mode of life

little adapted to the exercise of industrial habits.  That, however,

does not much concern the rest of mankind.  Nor does it seem much of an evil

for men who cultivate the soil to claim a right to appropriate lands

for tillage which other men only hunt over, provided some compensation

for the loss of sustenance be awarded.  The original idea of a title

seems to have been that "subduing" or cultivating gave that right.

But this rather Chartist principle must be received with limitations,

for its recognition in England would lead to the seizure of all

our broad ancestral acres by those who are willing to cultivate them.

And, in the case under consideration, the encroachments lead at once

to less land being put under the plow than is subjected to the native hoe,

for it is a fact that the Basutos and Zulus, or Caffres of Natal,

cultivate largely, and undersell our farmers wherever they have

a fair field and no favor.



Before we came to the Orange River we saw the last portion

of a migration of springbucks (`Gazella euchore', or tsepe).

They come from the great Kalahari Desert, and, when first seen after crossing

the colonial boundary, are said often to exceed forty thousand in number.

I can not give an estimate of their numbers, for they appear spread

over a vast expanse of country, and make a quivering motion as they feed,

and move, and toss their graceful horns.  They feed chiefly on grass;

and as they come from the north about the time when the grass most abounds,

it can not be want of food that prompts the movement.

Nor is it want of water, for this antelope is one of the most abstemious

in that respect.  Their nature prompts them to seek as their favorite haunts

level plains with short grass, where they may be able to watch

the approach of an enemy.  The Bakalahari take advantage of this feeling,

and burn off large patches of grass, not only to attract the game

by the new crop when it comes up, but also to form bare spots

for the springbuck to range over.



It is not the springbuck alone that manifests this feeling.  When oxen are

taken into a country of high grass, they are much more ready to be startled;

their sense of danger is increased by the increased power of concealment

afforded to an enemy by such cover, and they will often start off in terror

at the ill-defined outlines of each other.  The springbuck,

possessing this feeling in an intense degree, and being eminently gregarious,

becomes uneasy as the grass of the Kalahari becomes tall.

The vegetation being more sparse in the more arid south,

naturally induces the different herds to turn in that direction.

As they advance and increase in numbers, the pasturage becomes more scarce;

it is still more so the further they go, until they are at last obliged,

in order to obtain the means of subsistence, to cross the Orange River,

and become the pest of the sheep-farmer in a country which contains

scarcely any of their favorite grassy food.  If they light on a field of wheat

in their way, an army of locusts could not make a cleaner sweep of the whole

than they will do.  It is questionable whether they ever return,

as they have never been seen as a returning body.  Many perish

from want of food, the country to which they have migrated

being unable to support them; the rest become scattered over the colony;

and in such a wide country there is no lack of room for all.

It is probable that, notwithstanding the continued destruction by fire-arms,

they will continue long to hold their place.



On crossing the Orange River we come into independent territory

inhabited by Griquas and Bechuanas.  By Griquas is meant

any mixed race sprung from natives and Europeans.  Those in question

were of Dutch extraction, through association with Hottentot and Bushwomen.

Half-castes of the first generation consider themselves superior

to those of the second, and all possess in some degree the characteristics

of both parents.  They were governed for many years by an elected chief,

named Waterboer, who, by treaty, received a small sum per annum

from the colonial government for the support of schools in his country,

and proved a most efficient guard of our northwest boundary.

Cattle-stealing was totally unknown during the whole period

of this able chief's reign; and he actually drove back, single-handed,

a formidable force of marauding Mantatees that threatened

to invade the colony.*  But for that brave Christian man, Waterboer,

there is every human probability that the northwest

would have given the colonists as much trouble as the eastern frontier;

for large numbers among the original Griquas had as little scruple

about robbing farmers of cattle as the Caffres are reputed to have.

On the election of Waterboer to the chieftainship, he distinctly declared

THAT NO MARAUDING SHOULD BE ALLOWED.  As the government

of none of these tribes is despotic, some of his principal men,

in spite of this declaration, plundered some villages of Corannas

living to the south of the Orange River.  He immediately seized

six of the ringleaders, and, though the step put his own position in jeopardy,

he summoned his council, tried, condemned, and publicly executed

the whole six.  This produced an insurrection, and the insurgents

twice attacked his capital, Griqua Town, with the intention of deposing him;

but he bravely defeated both attempts, and from that day forth,

during his long reign of thirty years, not a single plundering expedition

ever left his territory.  Having witnessed the deleterious effects

of the introduction of ardent spirits among his people,

he, with characteristic energy, decreed that any Boer or Griqua

bringing brandy into the country should have his property in ardent spirits

confiscated and poured out on the ground.  The Griqua chiefs

living farther east were unable to carry this law into effect as he did,

hence the greater facility with which Boers in that direction

got the Griquas to part with their farms.



--

* For an account of this, see Moffat's "Scenes and Labors in South Africa".

--



Ten years after he was firmly established in power he entered into a treaty

with the colonial government, and during the twenty years which followed

not a single charge was ever brought against either him or his people;

on the contrary, his faithful adherence to the stipulated provisions

elicited numerous expressions of approbation from successive governments.

A late governor, however, of whom it is impossible to speak without respect,

in a paroxysm of generalship which might have been good,

had it not been totally inappropriate to the case, set about conciliating

a band of rebellious British subjects (Boers), who murdered

the Honorable Captain Murray, by proclaiming their independence

while still in open rebellion, and not only abrogated the treaty

with the Griquas, but engaged to stop the long-accustomed

supplies of gunpowder for the defense of the frontier,

and even to prevent them from purchasing it for their own defense

by lawful trade.



If it had been necessary to prevent supplies of ammunition

from finding their way into the country, as it probably was,

one might imagine that the exception should not have been made

in favor of either Boers or Caffres, our openly-avowed enemies;

but, nevertheless, the exception was made, and is still continued

in favor of the Boers, while the Bechuanas and Griquas,

our constant friends, are debarred from obtaining a single ounce

for either defense or trade; indeed, such was the state of ignorance

as to the relation of the border tribes with the English, even at Cape Town,

that the magistrates, though willing to aid my researches,

were sorely afraid to allow me to purchase more than ten pounds of gunpowder,

lest the Bechuanas should take it from me by force.  As it turned out,

I actually left more than that quantity for upward of two years

in an open box in my wagon at Linyanti.



The lamented Sir George Cathcart, apparently unconscious of what he was doing,

entered into a treaty with the Transvaal Boers, in which articles

were introduced for the free passage of English traders to the north,

and for the entire prohibition of slavery in the free state.

Then passed the "gunpowder ordinance", by which the Bechuanas,

whom alone the Boers dare attempt to enslave, were rendered quite defenseless.

The Boers never attempt to fight with Caffres, nor to settle in Caffreland.

We still continue to observe the treaty.  The Boers never did,

and never intended to abide by its provisions; for, immediately on

the proclamation of their independence, a slave-hunt was undertaken

against the Bechuanas of Sechele by four hundred Boers, under Mr. Peit Scholz,

and the plan was adopted which had been cherished in their hearts

ever since the emancipation of the Hottentots.  Thus, from unfortunate

ignorance of the country he had to govern, an able and sagacious governor

adopted a policy proper and wise had it been in front of our enemies,

but altogether inappropriate for our friends against whom

it has been applied.  Such an error could not have been committed by

a man of local knowledge and experience, such as that noble of colonial birth,

Sir Andries Stockenstrom; and such instances of confounding friend and foe,

in the innocent belief of thereby promoting colonial interests,

will probably lead the Cape community, the chief part of which

by no means feels its interest to lie in the degradation of the native tribes,

to assert the right of choosing their own governors.

This, with colonial representation in the Imperial Parliament,

in addition to the local self-government already so liberally conceded,

would undoubtedly secure the perpetual union of the colony

to the English crown.



Many hundreds of both Griquas and Bechuanas have become Christians

and partially civilized through the teaching of English missionaries.

My first impressions of the progress made were that the accounts

of the effects of the Gospel among them had been too highly colored.

I expected a higher degree of Christian simplicity and purity

than exists either among them or among ourselves.  I was not anxious

for a deeper insight in detecting shams than others, but I expected character,

such as we imagine the primitive disciples had -- and was disappointed.*

When, however, I passed on to the true heathen in the countries beyond

the sphere of missionary influence, and could compare the people there

with the Christian natives, I came to the conclusion that,

if the question were examined in the most rigidly severe or scientific way,

the change effected by the missionary movement would be considered

unquestionably great.



--

* The popular notion, however, of the primitive Church

  is perhaps not very accurate.  Those societies especially

  which consisted of converted Gentiles -- men who had been accustomed

  to the vices and immoralities of heathenism -- were certainly

  any thing but pure.  In spite of their conversion, some of them carried

  the stains and vestiges of their former state with them when they passed

  from the temple to the church.  If the instructed and civilized Greek

  did not all at once rise out of his former self, and understand and realize

  the high ideal of his new faith, we should be careful,

  in judging of the work of missionaries among savage tribes,

  not to apply to their converts tests and standards of too great severity.

  If the scoffing Lucian's account of the impostor Peregrinus may be believed,

  we find a church probably planted by the apostles manifesting

  less intelligence even than modern missionary churches.  Peregrinus,

  a notoriously wicked man, was elected to the chief place among them,

  while Romish priests, backed by the power of France, could not find

  a place at all in the mission churches of Tahiti and Madagascar.

--



We can not fairly compare these poor people with ourselves,

who have an atmosphere of Christianity and enlightened public opinion,

the growth of centuries, around us, to influence our deportment;

but let any one from the natural and proper point of view behold

the public morality of Griqua Town, Kuruman, Likatlong, and other villages,

and remember what even London was a century ago, and he must confess

that the Christian mode of treating aborigines is incomparably the best.



The Griquas and Bechuanas were in former times clad much like the Caffres,

if such a word may be used where there is scarcely any clothing at all.

A bunch of leather strings about eighteen inches long hung

from the lady's waist in front, and a prepared skin of a sheep or antelope

covered the shoulders, leaving the breast and abdomen bare:

the men wore a patch of skin, about the size of the crown of one's hat,

which barely served for the purposes of decency, and a mantle

exactly like that of the women.  To assist in protecting the pores of the skin

from the influence of the sun by day and of the cold by night,

all smeared themselves with a mixture of fat and ochre;

the head was anointed with pounded blue mica schist mixed with fat;

and the fine particles of shining mica, falling on the body

and on strings of beads and brass rings, were considered as highly ornamental,

and fit for the most fastidious dandy.  Now these same people come to church

in decent though poor clothing, and behave with a decorum certainly superior

to what seems to have been the case in the time of Mr. Samuel Pepys in London.

Sunday is well observed, and, even in localities where no missionary lives,

religious meetings are regularly held, and children and adults taught to read

by the more advanced of their own fellow-countrymen; and no one is allowed

to make a profession of faith by baptism unless he knows how to read,

and understands the nature of the Christian religion.



The Bechuana Mission has been so far successful that,

when coming from the interior, we always felt, on reaching Kuruman,

that we had returned to civilized life.  But I would not give any one

to understand by this that they are model Christians -- we can not claim

to be model Christians ourselves -- or even in any degree superior

to the members of our country churches.  They are more stingy and greedy

than the poor at home; but in many respects the two are exactly alike.

On asking an intelligent chief what he thought of them, he replied,

"You white men have no idea of how wicked we are; we know each other

better than you; some feign belief to ingratiate themselves

with the missionaries; some profess Christianity because they like

the new system, which gives so much more importance to the poor,

and desire that the old system may pass away; and the rest --

a pretty large number -- profess because they are really true believers."

This testimony may be considered as very nearly correct.



There is not much prospect of this country ever producing

much of the materials of commerce except wool.  At present

the chief articles of trade are karosses or mantles --

the skins of which they are composed come from the Desert;

next to them, ivory, the quantity of which can not now be great,

inasmuch as the means of shooting elephants is sedulously debarred entrance

into the country.  A few skins and horns, and some cattle,

make up the remainder of the exports.  English goods, sugar, tea, and coffee

are the articles received in exchange.  All the natives of these parts

soon become remarkably fond of coffee.  The acme of respectability

among the Bechuanas is the possession of cattle and a wagon.

It is remarkable that, though these latter require frequent repairs,

none of the Bechuanas have ever learned to mend them.  Forges and tools

have been at their service, and teachers willing to aid them,

but, beyond putting together a camp-stool, no effort has ever been made

to acquire a knowledge of the trades.  They observe most carefully

a missionary at work until they understand whether a tire

is well welded or not, and then pronounce upon its merits with great emphasis,

but there their ambition rests satisfied.  It is the same peculiarity

among ourselves which leads us in other matters, such as book-making,

to attain the excellence of fault-finding without the wit to indite a page.

It was in vain I tried to indoctrinate the Bechuanas with the idea

that criticism did not imply any superiority over the workman,

or even equality with him.
