





Chapter 22.



  Leave Pungo Andongo -- Extent of Portuguese Power --

  Meet Traders and Carriers -- Red Ants; their fierce Attack;

  Usefulness; Numbers -- Descend the Heights of Tala Mungongo --

  Fruit-trees in the Valley of Cassange -- Edible Muscle --

  Birds -- Cassange Village -- Quinine and Cathory --

  Sickness of Captain Neves' Infant -- A Diviner thrashed --

  Death of the Child -- Mourning -- Loss of Life from the Ordeal --

  Wide-spread Superstitions -- The Chieftainship -- Charms --

  Receive Copies of the "Times" -- Trading Pombeiros --

  Present for Matiamvo -- Fever after westerly Winds -- Capabilities of Angola

  for producing the raw Materials of English Manufacture --

  Trading Parties with Ivory -- More Fever -- A Hyaena's Choice --

  Makololo Opinion of the Portuguese -- Cypriano's Debt -- A Funeral --

  Dread of disembodied Spirits -- Beautiful Morning Scenes --

  Crossing the Quango -- Ambakistas called "The Jews of Angola" --

  Fashions of the Bashinje -- Approach the Village of Sansawe --

  His Idea of Dignity -- The Pombeiros' Present -- Long Detention --

  A Blow on the Beard -- Attacked in a Forest -- Sudden Conversion

  of a fighting Chief to Peace Principles by means of a Revolver --

  No Blood shed in consequence -- Rate of Traveling -- Slave Women --

  Way of addressing Slaves -- Their thievish Propensities --

  Feeders of the Congo or Zaire -- Obliged to refuse Presents --

  Cross the Loajima -- Appearance of People; Hair Fashions.







JANUARY 1, 1855.  Having, through the kindness of Colonel Pires,

reproduced some of my lost papers, I left Pungo Andongo

the first day of this year, and at Candumba, slept in

one of the dairy establishments of my friend, who had sent forward orders

for an ample supply of butter, cheese, and milk.  Our path lay along

the right bank of the Coanza.  This is composed of the same sandstone rock,

with pebbles, which forms the flooring of the country.  The land is level,

has much open forest, and is well adapted for pasturage.



On reaching the confluence of the Lombe, we left the river,

and proceeded in a northeasterly direction, through a fine open green country,

to the village of Malange, where we struck into our former path.

A few miles to the west of this a path branches off to a new district named

the Duke Braganza.  This path crosses the Lucalla and several of its feeders.

The whole of the country drained by these is described as extremely fertile.

The territory west of Braganza is reported to be mountainous,

well wooded and watered; wild coffee is abundant, and the people

even make their huts of coffee-trees.  The rivers Dande, Senza, and Lucalla

are said to rise in one mountain range.  Numerous tribes inhabit the country

to the north, who are all independent.  The Portuguese power

extends chiefly over the tribes through whose lands we have passed.

It may be said to be firmly seated only between the rivers Dande and Coanza.

It extends inland about three hundred miles to the River Quango;

and the population, according to the imperfect data afforded by the census,

given annually by the commandants of the fifteen or sixteen districts

into which it is divided, can not be under 600,000 souls.



Leaving Malange, we passed quickly, without deviation, along the path

by which we had come.  At Sanza (lat. 9d 37' 46" S., long. 16d 59' E.)

we expected to get a little seed-wheat, but this was not now to be found

in Angola.  The underlying rock of the whole of this section

is that same sandstone which we have before noticed, but it gradually

becomes finer in the grain, with the addition of a little mica,

the farther we go eastward; we enter upon clay shale at Tala Mungongo

(lat. 9d 42' 37" S., long. 17d 27' E.), and find it dipping

a little to the west.  The general geological structure

is a broad fringe of mica and sandstone schist (about 15 Deg. E.),

dipping in toward the centre of the country, beneath these

horizontal and sedimentary rocks of more recent date, which form

an inland basin.  The fringe is not, however, the highest in altitude,

though the oldest in age.



While at this latter place we met a native of Bihe who has visited

the country of Shinte three times for the purposes of trade.  He gave us

some of the news of that distant part, but not a word of the Makololo,

who have always been represented in the countries to the north

as a desperately savage race, whom no trader could visit with safety.

The half-caste traders whom we met at Shinte's had returned to Angola

with sixty-six slaves and upward of fifty tusks of ivory.

As we came along the path, we daily met long lines of carriers

bearing large square masses of beeswax, each about a hundred pounds weight,

and numbers of elephants' tusks, the property of Angolese merchants.

Many natives were proceeding to the coast also on their own account,

carrying beeswax, ivory, and sweet oil.  They appeared to travel

in perfect security; and at different parts of the road

we purchased fowls from them at a penny each.  My men took care

to celebrate their own daring in having actually entered ships,

while the natives of these parts, who had endeavored to frighten them

on their way down, had only seen them at a distance.  Poor fellows!

they were more than ever attentive to me; and, as they were not obliged

to erect sheds for themselves, in consequence of finding them already built

at the different sleeping-places, all their care was bestowed

in making me comfortable.  Mashauana, as usual, made his bed

with his head close to my feet, and never during the entire journey

did I have to call him twice for any thing I needed.



During our stay at Tala Mungongo, our attention was attracted

to a species of red ant which infests different parts of this country.

It is remarkably fond of animal food.  The commandant of the village

having slaughtered a cow, slaves were obliged to sit up the whole night,

burning fires of straw around the meat, to prevent them from devouring

most of it.  These ants are frequently met with in numbers like a small army.

At a little distance they appear as a brownish-red band,

two or three inches wide, stretched across the path, all eagerly pressing on

in one direction.  If a person happens to tread upon them,

they rush up his legs and bite with surprising vigor.  The first time

I encountered this by no means contemptible enemy was near Cassange.

My attention being taken up in viewing the distant landscape, I accidentally

stepped upon one of their nests.  Not an instant seemed to elapse

before a simultaneous attack was made on various unprotected parts,

up the trowsers from below, and on my neck and breast above.

The bites of these furies were like sparks of fire, and there was no retreat.

I jumped about for a second or two, then in desperation

tore off all my clothing, and rubbed and picked them off seriatim

as quickly as possible.  Ugh! they would make the most lethargic mortal

look alive.  Fortunately, no one observed this rencounter,

or word might have been taken back to the village that I had become mad.

I was once assaulted in a similar way when sound asleep at night in my tent,

and it was only by holding my blanket over the fire that I could

get rid of them.  It is really astonishing how such small bodies

can contain so large an amount of ill-nature.  They not only bite,

but twist themselves round after the mandibles are inserted, to produce

laceration and pain, more than would be effected by the single wound.

Frequently, while sitting on the ox, as he happened to tread near a band,

they would rush up his legs to the rider, and soon let him know

that he had disturbed their march.  They possess no fear,

attacking with equal ferocity the largest as well as the smallest animals.

When any person has leaped over the band, numbers of them leave the ranks

and rush along the path, seemingly anxious for a fight.  They are very useful

in ridding the country of dead animal matter, and, when they visit

a human habitation, clear it entirely of the destructive white ants

and other vermin.  They destroy many noxious insects and reptiles.

The severity of their attack is greatly increased by their vast numbers,

and rats, mice, lizards, and even the `Python natalensis',

when in a state of surfeit from recent feeding, fall victims

to their fierce onslaught.  These ants never make hills like the white ant.

Their nests are but a short distance beneath the soil,

which has the soft appearance of the abodes of ants in England.

Occasionally they construct galleries over their path

to the cells of the white ant, in order to secure themselves

from the heat of the sun during their marauding expeditions.



JANUARY 15TH, 1855.  We descended in one hour from the heights

of Tala Mungongo.  I counted the number of paces made on the slope downward,

and found them to be sixteen hundred, which may give a perpendicular height

of from twelve to fifteen hundred feet.  Water boiled at 206 Degrees

at Tala Mungongo above, and at 208 Deg. at the bottom of the declivity,

the air being at 72 Deg. in the shade in the former case,

and 94 Deg. in the latter.  The temperature generally throughout the day

was from 94 Deg. to 97 Deg. in the coolest shade we could find.



The rivulets which cut up the valley of Cassange were now dry,

but the Lui and Luare contained abundance of rather brackish water.

The banks are lined with palm, wild date-trees, and many guavas,

the fruit of which was now becoming ripe.  A tree much like the mango abounds,

but it does not yield fruit.  In these rivers a kind of edible muscle

is plentiful, the shells of which exist in all the alluvial beds

of the ancient rivers as far as the Kuruman.  The brackish nature of the water

probably enables it to exist here.  On the open grassy lawns

great numbers of a species of lark are seen.  They are black,

with yellow shoulders.  Another black bird, with a long tail

(`Centropus Senegalensis'), floats awkwardly, with its tail

in a perpendicular position, over the long grass.  It always chooses

the highest points, and is caught on them with bird-lime,

the long black tail-feathers being highly esteemed by the natives for plumes.

We saw here also the "Lehututu" (`Tragopan Leadbeaterii'),

a large bird strongly resembling a turkey; it is black on the ground,

but when it flies the outer half of the wings are white.  It kills serpents,

striking them dexterously behind the head.  It derives its native name

from the noise it makes, and it is found as far as Kolobeng.

Another species like it is called the Abyssinian hornbill.



Before we reached Cassange we were overtaken by the commandant,

Senhor Carvalho, who was returning, with a detachment of fifty men

and a field-piece, from an unsuccessful search after some rebels.

The rebels had fled, and all he could do was to burn their huts.

He kindly invited me to take up my residence with him; but, not wishing

to pass by the gentleman (Captain Neves) who had so kindly received me

on my first arrival in the Portuguese possessions, I declined.

Senhor Rego had been superseded in his command, because the Governor Amaral,

who had come into office since my departure from Loanda,

had determined that the law which requires the office of commandant

to be exclusively occupied by military officers of the line

should once more come into operation.  I was again most kindly welcomed

by my friend, Captain Neves, whom I found laboring under

a violent inflammation and abscess of the hand.  There is nothing

in the situation of this village to indicate unhealthiness,

except, perhaps, the rank luxuriance of the vegetation.

Nearly all the Portuguese inhabitants suffer from enlargement of the spleen,

the effects of frequent intermittents, and have generally a sickly appearance.

Thinking that this affection of the hand was simply an effort of nature

to get rid of malarious matter from the system, I recommended

the use of quinine.  He himself applied the leaf of a plant called cathory,

famed among the natives as an excellent remedy for ulcers.

The cathory leaves, when boiled, exude a gummy juice,

which effectually shuts out the external air.  Each remedy, of course,

claimed the merit of the cure.



Many of the children are cut off by fever.  A fine boy of Captain Neves' had,

since my passage westward, shared a similar fate.  Another child died

during the period of my visit.  During his sickness, his mother,

a woman of color, sent for a diviner in order to ascertain

what ought to be done.  The diviner, after throwing his dice,

worked himself into the state of ecstasy in which they pretend to be

in communication with the Barimo.  He then gave the oracular response

that the child was being killed by the spirit of a Portuguese trader

who once lived at Cassange.  The case was this:  on the death of the trader,

the other Portuguese merchants in the village came together,

and sold the goods of the departed to each other, each man accounting

for the portion received to the creditors of the deceased at Loanda.

The natives, looking on, and not understanding the nature of written

mercantile transactions, concluded that the merchants of Cassange

had simply stolen the dead man's goods, and that now the spirit was killing

the child of Captain Neves for the part he had taken in the affair.

The diviner, in his response, revealed the impression made on his own mind

by the sale, and likewise the native ideas of departed souls.

As they give the whites credit for greater stupidity than themselves

in all these matters, the mother of the child came, and told the father

that he ought to give a slave to the diviner as a fee to make a sacrifice

to appease the spirit and save the life of the child.  The father

quietly sent for a neighbor, and, though the diviner pretended to remain

in his state of ecstasy, the brisk application of two sticks to his back

suddenly reduced him to his senses and a most undignified flight.



The mother of this child seemed to have no confidence in European wisdom,

and, though I desired her to keep the child out of currents of wind,

she preferred to follow her own custom, and even got it cupped on the cheeks.

The consequence was that the child was soon in a dying state,

and the father wishing it to be baptized, I commended its soul to

the care and compassion of Him who said, "Of such is the kingdom of heaven."

The mother at once rushed away, and commenced that doleful wail

which is so affecting, as it indicates sorrow without hope.

She continued it without intermission until the child was buried.

In the evening her female companions used a small musical instrument,

which produced a kind of screeching sound, as an accompaniment

of the death wail.



In the construction of this instrument they make use of caoutchouc, which,

with a variety of other gums, is found in different parts of this country.



The intercourse which the natives have had with white men

does not seem to have much ameliorated their condition.

A great number of persons are reported to lose their lives annually

in different districts of Angola by the cruel superstitions

to which they are addicted, and the Portuguese authorities either

know nothing of them, or are unable to prevent their occurrence.

The natives are bound to secrecy by those who administer the ordeal,

which generally causes the death of the victim.  A person,

when accused of witchcraft, will often travel from distant districts

in order to assert her innocency and brave the test.  They come to a river

on the Cassange called Dua, drink the infusion of a poisonous tree,

and perish unknown.



A woman was accused by a brother-in-law of being the cause of his sickness

while we were at Cassange.  She offered to take the ordeal,

as she had the idea that it would but prove her conscious innocence.

Captain Neves refused his consent to her going, and thus saved her life,

which would have been sacrificed, for the poison is very virulent.

When a strong stomach rejects it, the accuser reiterates his charge;

the dose is repeated, and the person dies.  Hundreds perish thus every year

in the valley of Cassange.



The same superstitious ideas being prevalent through the whole of the country

north of the Zambesi, seems to indicate that the people must originally

have been one.  All believe that the souls of the departed still mingle

among the living, and partake in some way of the food they consume.

In sickness, sacrifices of fowls and goats are made to appease the spirits.

It is imagined that they wish to take the living away from earth

and all its enjoyments.  When one man has killed another, a sacrifice is made,

as if to lay the spirit of the victim.  A sect is reported to exist

who kill men in order to take their hearts and offer them to the Barimo.



The chieftainship is elective from certain families.

Among the Bangalas of the Cassange valley the chief is chosen

from three families in rotation.  A chief's brother inherits

in preference to his son.  The sons of a sister belong to her brother;

and he often sells his nephews to pay his debts.  By this and other

unnatural customs, more than by war, is the slave-market supplied.



The prejudices in favor of these practices are very deeply rooted

in the native mind.  Even at Loanda they retire out of the city in order

to perform their heathenish rites without the cognizance of the authorities.

Their religion, if such it may be called, is one of dread.  Numbers of charms

are employed to avert the evils with which they feel themselves

to be encompassed.  Occasionally you meet a man, more cautious or more timid

than the rest, with twenty or thirty charms round his neck.  He seems to act

upon the principle of Proclus, in his prayer to all the gods and goddesses:

among so many he surely must have the right one.  The disrespect

which Europeans pay to the objects of their fear is to their minds

only an evidence of great folly.



While here, I reproduced the last of my lost papers and maps;

and as there is a post twice a month from Loanda, I had the happiness

to receive a packet of the "Times", and, among other news,

an account of the Russian war up to the terrible charge of the light cavalry.

The intense anxiety I felt to hear more may be imagined by every true patriot;

but I was forced to brood on in silent thought, and utter my poor prayers

for friends who perchance were now no more, until I reached

the other side of the continent.



A considerable trade is carried on by the Cassange merchants with all the

surrounding territory by means of native traders, whom they term "Pombeiros".

Two of these, called in the history of Angola "the trading blacks"

(os feirantes pretos), Pedro Joao Baptista and Antonio Jose,

having been sent by the first Portuguese trader that lived at Cassange,

actually returned from some of the Portuguese possessions in the East

with letters from the governor of Mozambique in the year 1815,

proving, as is remarked, "the possibility of so important a communication

between Mozambique and Loanda."  This is the only instance

of native Portuguese subjects crossing the continent.  No European

ever accomplished it, though this fact has lately been quoted

as if the men had been "PORTUGUESE".



Captain Neves was now actively engaged in preparing a present,

worth about fifty pounds, to be sent by Pombeiros to Matiamvo.

It consisted of great quantities of cotton cloth, a large carpet,

an arm-chair with a canopy and curtains of crimson calico, an iron bedstead,

mosquito curtains, beads, etc., and a number of pictures rudely painted in oil

by an embryo black painter at Cassange.



Matiamvo, like most of the natives in the interior of the country,

has a strong desire to possess a cannon, and had sent ten large tusks

to purchase one; but, being government property, it could not be sold:

he was now furnished with a blunderbuss, mounted as a cannon,

which would probably please him as well.



Senhor Graca and some other Portuguese have visited this chief

at different times; but no European resides beyond the Quango;

indeed, it is contrary to the policy of the government of Angola

to allow their subjects to penetrate further into the interior.  The present

would have been a good opportunity for me to have visited that chief,

and I felt strongly inclined to do so, as he had expressed dissatisfaction

respecting my treatment by the Chiboque, and even threatened to punish them.

As it would be improper to force my men to go thither, I resolved

to wait and see whether the proposition might not emanate from themselves.

When I can get the natives to agree in the propriety of any step, they go

to the end of the affair without a murmur.  I speak to them and treat them

as rational beings, and generally get on well with them in consequence.



I have already remarked on the unhealthiness of Cassange;

and Captain Neves, who possesses an observing turn of mind, had noticed

that always when the west wind blows much fever immediately follows.

As long as easterly winds prevail, all enjoy good health;

but in January, February, March, and April, the winds are variable,

and sickness is general.  The unhealthiness of the westerly winds

probably results from malaria, appearing to be heavier than common air,

and sweeping down into the valley of Cassange from the western plateau,

somewhat in the same way as the carbonic acid gas from bean-fields

is supposed by colliers to do into coal-pits.  In the west of Scotland

strong objections are made by that body of men to farmers planting beans

in their vicinity, from the belief that they render the mines unhealthy.

The gravitation of the malaria from the more elevated land of Tala Mungongo

toward Cassange is the only way the unhealthiness of this spot

on the prevalence of the westerly winds can be accounted for.

The banks of the Quango, though much more marshy, and covered with

ranker vegetation, are comparatively healthy; but thither the westerly wind

does not seem to convey the noxious agent.



FEB. 20TH.  On the day of starting from Cassange, the westerly wind

blew strongly, and on the day following we were brought to a stand

by several of our party being laid up with fever.  This complaint

is the only serious drawback Angola possesses.  It is in every other respect

an agreeable land, and admirably adapted for yielding

a rich abundance of tropical produce for the rest of the world.

Indeed, I have no hesitation in asserting that, had it been

in the possession of England, it would now have been yielding

as much or more of the raw material for her manufactures

as an equal extent of territory in the cotton-growing states of America.

A railway from Loanda to this valley would secure the trade

of most of the interior of South Central Africa.*



--

* The following statistics may be of interest to mercantile men.

  They show that since the repression of the slave-trade in Angola

  the value of the exports in lawful commerce has steadily augmented.

  We have no returns since 1850, but the prosperity of legitimate trade

  has suffered no check.  The duties are noted in Portuguese money, "milreis",

  each of which is about three shillings in value.





    Return of the Quantities and Value of the Staple Articles,

    the Produce of the Province of ANGOLA, exported from

    ST. PAUL DE LOANDA between July 1, 1848, and June 30, 1849,

    specifying the Quantities and Value of those exported

    in Portuguese Ships and in Ships of other Nations.



  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

  |                 |  In Portuguese Ships.  || In Ships of other Nations. |

  |    Articles.    |------------------------||----------------------------|

  |                 | Amount. |    Value.    ||   Amount.   |    Value.    |

  |-----------------|---------|--------------||-------------|--------------|

  |                 |         |   L.   s. d. ||             |   L.   s. d. |

  | Ivory. . . Cwt. |   1454  | 35,350  0  0 ||  515        | 12,875  0  0 |

  | Palm oil .  "   |   1440  |  2,160  0  0 || 6671  1 qr. | 10,036 17  6 |

  | Coffee . .  "   |    152  |    304  0  0 ||  684        |  1,368  0  0 |

  | Hides. . . No.  |   1837  |    633 17  6 ||  849        |    318 17  6 |

  | Gum. . . . Cwt. |    147  |    205 16  0 || 4763        |  6,668  4  0 |

  | Beeswax. .  "   |   1109  |  6,654  0  0 ||  544        |  3,264  0  0 |

  | Orchella . Tons |    630  | 23,940  0  0 || ....        |   ....       |

  |                 |         |--------------||             |--------------|

  |                 |         | 69,247 13  6 ||             | 34,530 19  0 |

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------





      TOTAL Quantity and Value of Exports from LOANDA.



                                             L.   s. d.

    Ivory . . . Cwt.  1969        . . . .  48,225  0  0

    Palm oil. .  "    8111 1 qr.  . . . .  12,196 17  6

    Coffee. . .  "     836        . . . .   1,672  0  0

    Hides . . . No.   2686        . . . .     952 15  0

    Gum . . . . Cwt.  4910        . . . .   6,874  0  0

    Beeswax . .  "    1653        . . . .   9,918  0  0

    Orchella. . Tons   630        . . . .  23,940  0  0

                                          -------------

                                       L. 103,778 12  6





    ABSTRACT VIEW of the Net Revenue of the Customs at St. Paul de Loanda

    in quinquennial periods from 1818-19 to 1843-44, both included;

    and thence in each year to 1848-49.



  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

  |         |             |            |          |            |Tonnage Dues,|

  |         |  Duties on  | Duties on  |Duties on | Duties on  |Store Rents, |

  |  Years. | Importation.|Exportation.|Re-export-|  Slaves.   |  and other  |

  |         |             |            |  ation.  |            | incidental  |

  |         |             |            |          |            |  Receipts.  |

  |---------|-------------|------------|----------|------------|-------------|

  |         |   Mil. reis.|  Mil. reis.|Mil. reis.|  Mil. reis.|   Mil. reis.|

  | 1818-19 |     573 876 |    ...     |   ....   |137,320 800 | 148,608 661 |

  | 1823-24 |   3,490 752 |    460 420 |   ....   |120,843 000 | 133,446 892 |

  | 1828-29 |   4,700 684 |    800 280 |   ....   |125,330 000 | 139,981 364 |

  | 1833-34 |   7,490 000 |  1,590 000 |   ....   |139,280 000 | 158,978 640 |

  | 1838-39 |  25,800 590 |  2,720 000 |   ....   |135,470 320 | 173,710 910 |

  | 1843-44 |  53,240 000 |  4,320 000 |   ....   | 72,195 230 | 138,255 230 |

  | 1844-45 |  99,380 264 |  6,995 095 |   ....   | 17,676 000 | 134,941 359 |

  | 1845-46 | 150,233 789 |  9,610 735 |   ....   |  5,116 500 | 181,423 550 |

  | 1846-47 | 122,501 186 |  8,605 821 |   ....   |    549 000 | 114,599 235 |

  | 1847-48 | 119,246 826 |  9,718 676 | 4097 868 |  1,231 200 | 146,321 476 |

  | 1848-49 | 131,105 453 |  9,969 960 | 1164 309 |  1,183 500 | 157,152 400 |

  |         |-------------|------------|          |------------|             |

  |         | 717,763 420*| 54,790 987 |          |756,195 550 |             |

  |         | = L.102,680 |  = L.7827  |          |= L.108,028 |             |

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

  * This figure was originally miscalculated as 718,763 420,

    which probably affected its conversion into Pounds.  -- A. L., 1997.



  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

  |         | Net Revenue  |  Revenue from  |  Total Net   | Total Amount |

  |  Years. |  of Customs. | other Sources. |   Revenue.   |  of Charges. |

  |---------|--------------|----------------|--------------|--------------|

  |         |   L.   s. d. |    L.   s. d.  |   L.   s. d. |   L.   s. d. |

  | 1844-45 | 26,988  5  5 |   9,701 10  8  | 36,689 16  1 | 53,542  5  4 |

  | 1845-46 | 36,284 14  2 |  24,580  4 10  | 60,864 19  0 | 56,695  9  7 |

  | 1846-47 | 28,919 16 11 |  23,327  9 11  | 52,247  6 10 | 52,180  9  7 |

  | 1847-48 | 29,264  5 10 |  24,490 11  8  | 53,754 17  6 | 53,440  8  8 |

  | 1848-49 | 31,430  9  7 |  18,868  3 10  | 51,298 13  5 | 50,686  3  3 |

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------





  The above account exhibits the total revenue and charges of the government

  of St. Paul de Loanda in each year, from 1844-45 to 1848-49, both included.

  The above three tables are copied from the appendix to a dispatch

  sent by Mr. Gabriel to Viscount Palmerston, dated the 5th of August, 1850,

  and, among other facts of interest, show a very satisfactory diminution

  in the duties upon slaves.



  The returns from 1818 to 1844 have been obtained from different sources

  as the average revenue; those from 1844 to 1849 are from

  the Custom-house records.

--



As soon as we could move toward the Quango we did so, meeting in our course

several trading-parties, both native and Portuguese.  We met two of the latter

carrying a tusk weighing 126 lbs.  The owner afterward informed us

that its fellow on the left side of the same elephant was 130 lbs.

It was 8 feet 6-1/2 inches long, and 21 inches in circumference

at the part on which the lip of the animal rests.  The elephant was

rather a small one, as is common in this hot central region.

Some idea may be formed of the strength of his neck when it is recollected

that he bore a weight of 256 lbs.  The ivory which comes

from the east and northeast of Cassange is very much larger

than any to be found further south.  Captain Neves had one weighing 120 lbs.,

and this weight is by no means uncommon.  They have been found

weighing even 158 lbs.



Before reaching the Quango we were again brought to a stand

by fever in two of my companions, close to the residence of a Portuguese

who rejoiced in the name of William Tell, and who lived here

in spite of the prohibition of the government.  We were using

the water of a pond, and this gentleman, having come to invite me to dinner,

drank a little of it, and caught fever in consequence.  If malarious matter

existed in water, it would have been a wonder had we escaped;

for, traveling in the sun, with the thermometer from 96 Degrees to 98 Degrees

in the shade, the evaporation from our bodies causing much thirst,

we generally partook of every water we came to.  We had probably thus

more disease than others might suffer who had better shelter.



Mr. Tell remarked that his garden was rather barren, being still,

as he said, wild; but when more worked it would become better,

though no manure be applied.  My men were busy collecting

a better breed of fowls and pigeons than those in their own country.

Mr. Tell presented them with some large specimens from Rio Janeiro.

Of these they were wonderfully proud, and bore the cock in triumph

through the country of the Balonda, as evidence of having been to the sea.

But when at the village of Shinte, a hyaena came into our midst

when we were all sound asleep, and picked out the giant in his basket

from eighty-four others, and he was lost, to the great grief of my men.

The anxiety these people have always shown to improve the breed

of their domestic animals is, I think, a favorable point in their character.

On looking at the common breeds in the possession of the Portuguese,

which are merely native cattle, and seeing them slaughter

both heifer-calves and cows, which they themselves never do,

and likewise making no use of the milk, they concluded that the Portuguese

must be an inferior race of white men.  They never ceased remarking

on the fine ground for gardens over which we were passing; and when

I happened to mention that most of the flour which the Portuguese consumed

came from another country, they exclaimed, "Are they ignorant of tillage?"

"They know nothing but buying and selling:  they are not men."

I hope it may reach the ears of my Angolese friends, and that they

may be stirred up to develop the resources of their fine country.



On coming back to Cypriano's village on the 28th, we found

that his step-father had died after we had passed, and, according to

the custom of the country, he had spent more than his patrimony

in funeral orgies.  He acted with his wonted kindness, though, unfortunately,

drinking has got him so deeply in debt that he now keeps out of the way

of his creditors.  He informed us that the source of the Quango is eight days,

or one hundred miles, to the south of this, and in a range called Mosamba,

in the country of the Basongo.  We can see from this a sort of break

in the high land which stretches away round to Tala Mongongo,

through which the river comes.



A death had occurred in a village about a mile off, and the people were busy

beating drums and firing guns.  The funeral rites are half festive,

half mourning, partaking somewhat of the character of an Irish wake.

There is nothing more heart-rending than their death wails.

When the natives turn their eyes to the future world, they have a view

cheerless enough of their own utter helplessness and hopelessness.

They fancy themselves completely in the power of the disembodied spirits,

and look upon the prospect of following them as the greatest of misfortunes.

Hence they are constantly deprecating the wrath of departed souls,

believing that, if they are appeased, there is no other cause of death

but witchcraft, which may be averted by charms.  The whole of the colored

population of Angola are sunk in these gross superstitions,

but have the opinion, notwithstanding, that they are wiser in these matters

than their white neighbors.  Each tribe has a consciousness of following

its own best interests in the best way.  They are by no means

destitute of that self-esteem which is so common in other nations;

yet they fear all manner of phantoms, and have half-developed

ideas and traditions of something or other, they know not what.

The pleasures of animal life are ever present to their minds

as the supreme good; and, but for the innumerable invisibilities, they might

enjoy their luxurious climate as much as it is possible for man to do.

I have often thought, in traveling through their land, that it presents

pictures of beauty which angels might enjoy.  How often have I beheld,

in still mornings, scenes the very essence of beauty, and all bathed

in a quiet air of delicious warmth! yet the occasional soft motion

imparted a pleasing sensation of coolness as of a fan.  Green grassy meadows,

the cattle feeding, the goats browsing, the kids skipping,

the groups of herd-boys with miniature bows, arrows, and spears;

the women wending their way to the river with watering-pots

poised jauntily on their heads; men sewing under the shady banians;

and old gray-headed fathers sitting on the ground, with staff in hand,

listening to the morning gossip, while others carry trees or branches to

repair their hedges; and all this, flooded with the bright African sunshine,

and the birds singing among the branches before the heat of the day

has become intense, form pictures which can never be forgotten.



We were informed that a chief named Gando, living on the other side

of the river, having been accused of witchcraft, was killed by the ordeal,

and his body thrown into the Quango.



The ferrymen demanded thirty yards of calico, but received six thankfully.

The canoes were wretched, carrying only two persons at a time;

but my men being well acquainted with the water, we all got over

in about two hours and a half.  They excited the admiration of the inhabitants

by the manner in which they managed the cattle and donkeys in crossing.

The most stubborn of beasts found himself powerless in their hands.

Five or six, seizing hold on one, bundled him at once into the stream,

and, in this predicament, he always thought it best policy

to give in and swim.  The men sometimes swam along with the cattle,

and forced them to go on by dashing water at their heads.  The difference

between my men and those of the native traders who accompanied us

was never more apparent than now; for, while my men felt an interest

in every thing we possessed in common, theirs were rather glad when the oxen

refused to cross, for, being obliged to slaughter them on such occasions,

the loss to their masters was a welcome feast to themselves.



On the eastern side of the Quango we passed on, without visiting

our friend of the conical head-dress, to the residence of some Ambakistas who

had crossed the river in order to secure the first chances of trade in wax.

I have before remarked on the knowledge of reading and writing that these

Ambakistas possess; they are famed for their love of all sorts of learning

within their reach, a knowledge of the history of Portugal, Portuguese law,

etc., etc.  They are remarkably keen in trade, and are sometimes called

the Jews of Angola.  They are employed as clerks and writers,

their feminine delicacy of constitution enabling them to write

a fine lady's hand, a kind of writing much esteemed among the Portuguese.

They are not physically equal to the European Portuguese, but possess

considerable ability; and it is said that half-castes, in the course

of a few generations, return to the black color of the maternal ancestor.

The black population of Angola has become much deteriorated.

They are not so strongly formed as the independent tribes.

A large quantity of aguardiente, an inferior kind of spirit,

is imported into the country, which is most injurious in its effects.

We saw many parties carrying casks of this baneful liquor

to the independent chiefs beyond; and were informed that it is difficult for

any trader to convey it far, carriers being in the habit of helping themselves

by means of a straw, and then injecting an equal amount of water

when near the point of delivery.  To prevent this, it is common to see

large demijohns with padlocks on the corks.  These are frequently stolen.

In fact, the carriers are much addicted to both lying and thieving,

as might be expected from the lowest class of a people on whom

the debasing slave system has acted for two centuries.



The Bashinje, in whose country we now are, seem to possess

more of the low negro character and physiognomy than either

the Balonda or Basongo; their color is generally dirty black,

foreheads low and compressed, noses flat and much expanded laterally,

though this is partly owing to the alae spreading over the cheeks,

by the custom of inserting bits of sticks or reeds in the septum;

their teeth are deformed by being filed to points; their lips are large.

They make a nearer approach to a general negro appearance

than any tribes I met; but I did not notice this on my way down.

They cultivate pretty largely, and rely upon their agricultural products

for their supplies of salt, flesh, tobacco, etc., from Bangalas.

Their clothing consists of pieces of skin, hung loosely from the girdle

in front and behind.  They plait their hair fantastically.  We saw

some women coming with their hair woven into the form of a European hat,

and it was only by a closer inspection that its nature was detected.

Others had it arranged in tufts, with a threefold cord along the ridge

of each tuft; while others, again, follow the ancient Egyptian fashion,

having the whole mass of wool plaited into cords, all hanging down as far

as the shoulders.  This mode, with the somewhat Egyptian cast of countenance

in other parts of Londa, reminded me strongly of the paintings of that nation

in the British Museum.



We had now rain every day, and the sky seldom presented

that cloudless aspect and clear blue so common in the dry lands of the south.

The heavens are often overcast by large white motionless masses,

which stand for hours in the same position, and the intervening spaces

are filled with a milk-and-water-looking haze.  Notwithstanding these

unfavorable circumstances, I obtained good observations

for the longitude of this important point on both sides of the Quango,

and found the river running in 9d 50' S. lat., 18d 33' E. long.



On proceeding to our former station near Sansawe's village,

he ran to meet us with wonderful urbanity, asking if we had seen Moene Put,

king of the white men (or Portuguese); and added, on parting,

that he would come to receive his dues in the evening.  I replied that,

as he had treated us so scurvily, even forbidding his people

to sell us any food, if he did not bring us a fowl and some eggs

as part of his duty as a chief, he should receive no present from me.

When he came, it was in the usual Londa way of showing

the exalted position he occupies, mounted on the shoulders of his spokesman,

as schoolboys sometimes do in England, and as was represented

to have been the case in the southern islands when Captain Cook visited them.

My companions, amused at his idea of dignity, greeted him with a hearty laugh.

He visited the native traders first, and then came to me with two cocks

as a present.  I spoke to him about the impolicy of treatment we had received

at his hands, and quoted the example of the Bangalas, who had been conquered

by the Portuguese, for their extortionate demands of payment for firewood,

grass, water, etc., and concluded by denying his right to any payment

for simply passing through uncultivated land.  To all this he agreed;

and then I gave him, as a token of friendship, a pannikin of coarse powder,

two iron spoons, and two yards of coarse printed calico.

He looked rather saucily at these articles, for he had just received

a barrel containing 18 lbs. of powder, 24 yards of calico,

and two bottles of brandy, from Senhor Pascoal the Pombeiro.

Other presents were added the next day, but we gave nothing more;

and the Pombeiros informed me that it was necessary to give largely,

because they are accompanied by slaves and carriers who are

no great friends to their masters; and if they did not secure

the friendship of these petty chiefs, many slaves and their loads

might be stolen while passing through the forests.  It is thus

a sort of black-mail that these insignificant chiefs levy;

and the native traders, in paying, do so simply as a bribe

to keep them honest.  This chief was a man of no power,

but in our former ignorance of this he plagued us a whole day in passing.



Finding the progress of Senhor Pascoal and the other Pombeiros

excessively slow, I resolved to forego his company to Cabango

after I had delivered to him some letters to be sent back to Cassange.

I went forward with the intention of finishing my writing, and leaving

a packet for him at some village.  We ascended the eastern acclivity

that bounds the Cassange valley, which has rather a gradual ascent

up from the Quango, and we found that the last ascent, though apparently

not quite so high as that at Tala Mungongo, is actually much higher.

The top is about 5000 feet above the level of the sea,

and the bottom 3500 feet; water boiling on the heights at 202 Deg.,

the thermometer in the air showing 96 Deg.; and at the bottom at 205 Deg.,

the air being 75 Deg.  We had now gained the summit of the western

subtending ridge, and began to descend toward the centre of the country,

hoping soon to get out of the Chiboque territory, which, when we ascended

from the Cassange valley, we had entered; but, on the 19th of April,

the intermittent, which had begun on the 16th of March, was changed into

an extremely severe attack of rheumatic fever.  This was brought on

by being obliged to sleep on an extensive plain covered with water.

The rain poured down incessantly, but we formed our beds

by dragging up the earth into oblong mounds, somewhat like graves

in a country church-yard, and then placing grass upon them.

The rain continuing to deluge us, we were unable to leave for two days,

but as soon as it became fair we continued our march.

The heavy dew upon the high grass was so cold as to cause shivering,

and I was forced to lie by for eight days, tossing and groaning

with violent pain in the head.  This was the most severe attack I had endured.

It made me quite unfit to move, or even know what was passing outside

my little tent.  Senhor Pascoal, who had been detained by the severe rain

at a better spot, at last came up, and, knowing that leeches abounded

in the rivulets, procured a number, and applied some dozens

to the nape of the neck and the loins.  This partially relieved the pain.

He was then obliged to move forward, in order to purchase food

for his large party.  After many days I began to recover,

and wished to move on, but my men objected to the attempt

on account of my weakness.  When Senhor Pascoal had been some time

at the village in front, as he had received instructions from his employer,

Captain Neves, to aid me as much as possible, and being himself

a kindly-disposed person, he sent back two messengers to invite me to come on,

if practicable.



It happened that the head man of the village where I had lain twenty-two days,

while bargaining and quarreling in my camp for a piece of meat,

had been struck on the mouth by one of my men.  My principal men

paid five pieces of cloth and a gun as an atonement;

but the more they yielded, the more exorbitant he became,

and he sent word to all the surrounding villages to aid him in avenging

the affront of a blow on the beard.  As their courage usually

rises with success, I resolved to yield no more, and departed.

In passing through a forest in the country beyond, we were startled

by a body of men rushing after us.  They began by knocking down

the burdens of the hindermost of my men, and several shots were fired,

each party spreading out on both sides of the path.  I fortunately had

a six-barreled revolver, which my friend Captain Henry Need,

of her majesty's brig "Linnet", had considerately sent to Golungo Alto

after my departure from Loanda.  Taking this in my hand, and forgetting fever,

I staggered quickly along the path with two or three of my men,

and fortunately encountered the chief.  The sight of the six barrels

gaping into his stomach, with my own ghastly visage looking daggers

at his face, seemed to produce an instant revolution in his martial feelings,

for he cried out, "Oh! I have only come to speak to you, and wish peace only."

Mashauana had hold of him by the hand, and found him shaking.

We examined his gun, and found that it had been discharged.

Both parties crowded up to their chiefs.  One of the opposite party

coming too near, one of mine drove him back with a battle-axe.

The enemy protested their amicable intentions, and my men asserted

the fact of having the goods knocked down as evidence of the contrary.

Without waiting long, I requested all to sit down, and Pitsane,

placing his hand upon the revolver, somewhat allayed their fears.

I then said to the chief, "If you have come with peaceable intentions,

we have no other; go away home to your village."  He replied, "I am afraid

lest you shoot me in the back."  I rejoined, "If I wanted to kill you,

I could shoot you in the face as well."  Mosantu called out to me,

"That's only a Makalaka trick; don't give him your back."

But I said, "Tell him to observe that I am not afraid of him;"

and, turning, mounted my ox.  There was not much danger

in the fire that was opened at first, there being so many trees.

The enemy probably expected that the sudden attack would make us

forsake our goods, and allow them to plunder with ease.

The villagers were no doubt pleased with being allowed to retire unscathed,

and we were also glad to get away without having shed a drop of blood,

or having compromised ourselves for any future visit.  My men were delighted

with their own bravery, and made the woods ring with telling each other

how "brilliant their conduct before the enemy" would have been,

had hostilities not been brought to a sudden close.



I do not mention this little skirmish as a very frightful affair.

The negro character in these parts, and in Angola, is essentially cowardly,

except when influenced by success.  A partial triumph over any body of men

would induce the whole country to rise in arms, and this is the chief danger

to be feared.  These petty chiefs have individually but little power,

and with my men, now armed with guns, I could have easily

beaten them off singly; but, being of the same family, they would readily

unite in vast numbers if incited by prospects of successful plunder.

They are by no means equal to the Cape Caffres in any respect whatever.



In the evening we came to Moena Kikanje, and found him a sensible man.

He is the last of the Chiboque chiefs in this direction,

and is in alliance with Matiamvo, whose territory commences

a short distance beyond.  His village is placed on the east bank of the Quilo,

which is here twenty yards wide, and breast deep.



The country was generally covered with forest, and we slept every night

at some village.  I was so weak, and had become so deaf

from the effects of the fever, that I was glad to avail myself

of the company of Senhor Pascoal and the other native traders.

Our rate of traveling was only two geographical miles per hour,

and the average number of hours three and a half per day, or seven miles.

Two thirds of the month was spent in stoppages, there being

only ten traveling days in each month.  The stoppages were caused by sickness,

and the necessity of remaining in different parts to purchase food;

and also because, when one carrier was sick, the rest refused

to carry his load.



One of the Pombeiros had eight good-looking women in a chain

whom he was taking to the country of Matiamvo to sell for ivory.

They always looked ashamed when I happened to come near them,

and must have felt keenly their forlorn and degraded position.

I believe they were captives taken from the rebel Cassanges.

The way in which slaves are spoken of in Angola and eastern Africa

must sound strangely even to the owners when they first come from Europe.

In Angola the common appellation is "o diabo", or "brutu";

and it is quite usual to hear gentlemen call out, "O diabo! bring fire."

In eastern Africa, on the contrary, they apply the term "bicho" (an animal),

and you hear the phrase, "Call the ANIMAL to do this or that."

In fact, slave-owners come to regard their slaves as not human,

and will curse them as the "race of a dog".  Most of the carriers

of my traveling companions were hired Basongo, and required

constant vigilance to prevent them stealing the goods they carried.

Salt, which is one of the chief articles conveyed into the country,

became considerably lighter as we went along, but the carriers

shielded themselves by saying that it had been melted by the rain.

Their burdens were taken from them every evening, and placed in security

under the guardianship of Senhor Pascoal's own slaves.  It was pitiable

to observe the worrying life he led.  There was the greatest contrast possible

between the conduct of his people and that of my faithful Makololo.



We crossed the Loange, a deep but narrow stream, by a bridge.

It becomes much larger, and contains hippopotami, lower down.

It is the boundary of Londa on the west.  We slept also

on the banks of the Pezo, now flooded, and could not but admire

their capabilities for easy irrigation.  On reaching the River Chikapa

(lat. 10d 10' S., long. 19d 42' E.), the 25th of March,

we found it fifty or sixty yards wide, and flowing E.N.E. into the Kasai.

The adjacent country is of the same level nature as that part of Londa

formerly described; but, having come farther to the eastward

than our previous course, we found that all the rivers had worn for themselves

much deeper valleys than at the points we had formerly crossed them.



Surrounded on all sides by large gloomy forests, the people of these parts

have a much more indistinct idea of the geography of their country than those

who live in hilly regions.  It was only after long and patient inquiry

that I became fully persuaded that the Quilo runs into the Chikapa.

As we now crossed them both considerably farther down,

and were greatly to the eastward of our first route, there can be no doubt

that these rivers take the same course as the others, into the Kasai,

and that I had been led into a mistake in saying that any of them flowed

to the westward.  Indeed, it was only at this time that I began to perceive

that all the western feeders of the Kasai, except the Quango,

flow first from the western side toward the centre of the country,

then gradually turn, with the Kasai itself, to the north;

and, after the confluence of the Kasai with the Quango,

an immense body of water, collected from all these branches,

finds its way out of the country by means of the River Congo or Zaire

on the west coast.



The people living along the path we are now following were quite accustomed

to the visits of native traders, and did not feel in any way bound

to make presents of food except for the purpose of cheating:

thus, a man gave me a fowl and some meal, and, after a short time, returned.

I offered him a handsome present of beads; but these he declined,

and demanded a cloth instead, which was far more than the value of his gift.

They did the same with my men, until we had to refuse presents altogether.

Others made high demands because I slept in a "house of cloth",

and must be rich.  They seemed to think that they had a perfect right

to payment for simply passing through the country.



Beyond the Chikapa we crossed the Kamaue, a small deep stream

proceeding from the S.S.W., and flowing into the Chikapa.



On the 30th of April we reached the Loajima, where we had to form a bridge

to effect our passage.  This was not so difficult an operation

as some might imagine; for a tree was growing in a horizontal position across

part of the stream, and, there being no want of the tough climbing plants

which admit of being knitted like ropes, Senhor P. soon constructed a bridge.

The Loajima was here about twenty-five yards wide, but very much deeper

than where I had crossed before on the shoulders of Mashauana.

The last rain of this season had fallen on the 28th, and had

suddenly been followed by a great decrease of the temperature.

The people in these parts seemed more slender in form, and their color

a lighter olive, than any we had hitherto met.  The mode of dressing

the great masses of woolly hair which lay upon their shoulders, together with

their general features, again reminded me of the ancient Egyptians.

Several were seen with the upward inclination of the outer angles of the eye,

but this was not general.  A few of the ladies adopt a curious custom

of attaching the hair to a hoop which encircles the head, giving it somewhat

the appearance of the glory round the head of the Virgin (wood-cut No. 1*).

Some have a small hoop behind that represented in the wood-cut.

Others wear an ornament of woven hair and hide adorned with beads.

The hair of the tails of buffaloes, which are to be found farther east,

is sometimes added.  This is represented in No. 2.  While others, as in No. 3,

weave their own hair on pieces of hide into the form of buffalo horns;

or, as in No. 4, make a single horn in front.  The features given

are frequently met with, but they are by no means universal.

Many tattoo their bodies by inserting some black substance beneath the skin,

which leaves an elevated cicatrix about half an inch long:  these are made

in the form of stars, and other figures of no particular beauty.



--

* Unfortunately these wood-cuts can not be represented in this ASCII text.

  No. 1 appears like a wheel with spokes of hair connecting it to the head.

  No. 2 appears somewhat like a tiara sloped forward, as the bow of a ship.

  No. 3 appears like gently curving horns.  There is a part in the middle,

  and the hair, on leather frames, curls outward and upward at the temples.

  No. 4 is likewise, but the single horn curves outward and upward

  from the forehead -- it is labelled "A Young Man's Fashion".

  Except for No. 1, all are represented as having the rest of their hair

  hanging in braids around the sides and back.  All of the faces,

  as Livingstone asserts, appear much like paintings of ancient Egyptians,

  and could easily be European except for the shading and the slanted eyes.

  They are all handsome.  -- A. L., 1997.

--

