





Missionary Travels and Researches in South Africa



By Dr. David Livingstone








Missionary Travels and Researches in South Africa.

Also called, Travels and Researches in South Africa;

or, Journeys and Researches in South Africa.









Missionary Travels and Researches in South Africa;

Including a Sketch of Sixteen Years' Residence in the Interior of Africa,

and a Journey from the Cape of Good Hope to Loanda on the West Coast;

Thence Across the Continent, Down the River Zambesi, to the Eastern Ocean.



By David Livingstone, LL.D., D.C.L.,

Fellow of the Faculty of Physicians and Surgeons, Glasgow;

Corresponding Member of the Geographical and Statistical Society of New York;

Gold Medalist and Corresponding Member of the Royal Geographical Societies

of London and Paris F.S.A., Etc., Etc.











Dedication.







                                   To

                     SIR RODERICK IMPEY MURCHISON,

        President Royal Geographical Society, F.R.S., V.P.G.S.,

 Corr. Inst. of France, and Member of the Academies of St. Petersburg,

             Berlin, Stockholm, Copenhagen, Brussels, Etc.,

  

                               This Work

  

is affectionately offered as a Token of Gratitude for the kind interest

he has always taken in the Author's pursuits and welfare;

and to express admiration of his eminent scientific attainments,

nowhere more strongly evidenced than by the striking hypothesis

respecting the physical conformation of the African continent,

promulgated in his Presidential Address to the Royal Geographic Society

in 1852, and verified three years afterward by the Author of these Travels.



                                             DAVID LIVINGSTONE.

  London, Oct., 1857.











Preface.







When honored with a special meeting of welcome by the Royal

Geographical Society a few days after my arrival in London in December last,

Sir Roderick Murchison, the President, invited me to give the world

a narrative of my travels; and at a similar meeting of the Directors

of the London Missionary Society I publicly stated my intention of sending

a book to the press, instead of making many of those public appearances

which were urged upon me.  The preparation of this narrative* has taken

much longer time than, from my inexperience in authorship, I had anticipated.



--

* Several attempts having been made to impose upon the public, as mine,

  spurious narratives of my travels, I beg to tender my thanks

  to the editors of the `Times' and of the `Athenaeum' for aiding

  to expose them, and to the booksellers of London for refusing to SUBSCRIBE

  for any copies.

--



Greater smoothness of diction and a saving of time might have been secured

by the employment of a person accustomed to compilation;

but my journals having been kept for my own private purposes,

no one else could have made use of them, or have entered with intelligence

into the circumstances in which I was placed in Africa,

far from any European companion.  Those who have never carried a book

through the press can form no idea of the amount of toil it involves.

The process has increased my respect for authors and authoresses

a thousand-fold.



I can not refrain from referring, with sentiments of admiration and gratitude,

to my friend Thomas Maclear, Esq., the accomplished Astronomer Royal

at the Cape.  I shall never cease to remember his instructions and help

with real gratitude.  The intercourse I had the privilege to enjoy

at the Observatory enabled me to form an idea of the almost infinite

variety of acquirements necessary to form a true and great astronomer,

and I was led to the conviction that it will be long before the world

becomes overstocked with accomplished members of that profession.

Let them be always honored according to their deserts;

and long may Maclear, Herschel, Airy, and others live to make known

the wonders and glory of creation, and to aid in rendering

the pathway of the world safe to mariners, and the dark places of the earth

open to Christians!



I beg to offer my hearty thanks to my friend Sir Roderick Murchison,

and also to Dr. Norton Shaw, the secretary of the Royal Geographical Society,

for aiding my researches by every means in their power.



His faithful majesty Don Pedro V., having kindly sent out orders

to support my late companions until my return, relieved my mind of anxiety

on their account.  But for this act of liberality, I should certainly

have been compelled to leave England in May last; and it has afforded me

the pleasure of traveling over, in imagination, every scene again,

and recalling the feelings which actuated me at the time.

I have much pleasure in acknowledging my deep obligations

to the hospitality and kindness of the Portuguese on many occasions.



I have not entered into the early labors, trials, and successes

of the missionaries who preceded me in the Bechuana country,

because that has been done by the much abler pen of my father-in-law,

Rev. Robert Moffat, of Kuruman, who has been an energetic and devoted

actor in the scene for upward of forty years.  A slight sketch only

is given of my own attempts, and the chief part of the book

is taken up with a detail of the efforts made to open up a new field

north of the Bechuana country to the sympathies of Christendom.

The prospects there disclosed are fairer than I anticipated,

and the capabilities of the new region lead me to hope

that by the production of the raw materials of our manufactures,

African and English interests will become more closely linked

than heretofore, that both countries will be eventually benefited,

and that the cause of freedom throughout the world will in some measure

be promoted.



Dr. Hooker, of Kew, has had the kindness to name and classify for me,

as far as possible, some of the new botanical specimens which I brought over;

Dr. Andrew Smith (himself an African traveler) has aided me in the zoology;

and Captain Need has laid open for my use his portfolio of African sketches,

for all which acts of liberality my thanks are deservedly due,

as well as to my brother, who has rendered me willing aid as an amanuensis.



Although I can not profess to be a draughtsman, I brought home with me a few

rough diagram-sketches, from one of which the view of the Falls of the Zambesi

has been prepared by a more experienced artist.



  October, 1857.
