






XVIII. "WOULD YOU BE A PARSON?"



After this I gave up my experiments in conversation. So that by

the final afternoon of our journey, with Sunk Creek actually in

sight, and the great grasshoppers slatting their dry song over

the sage-brush, and the time at hand when the Virginian and

Trampas would be "man to man," my thoughts rose to a considerable

pitch of speculation.



And now that talking part of the Virginian, which had been nine

days asleep, gave its first yawn and stretch of waking. Without

preface, he suddenly asked me, "Would you be a parson?"



I was mentally so far away that I couldn't get back in time to

comprehend or answer before he had repeated:"What would yu' take

to be a parson?"



He drawled it out in his gentle way, precisely as if no nine days

stood between it and our last real intercourse.



"Take?" I was still vaguely moving in my distance. "How?"



His next question brought me home.



"I expect the Pope's is the biggest of them parson jobs?"



It was with an "Oh!" that I now entirely took his idea. "Well,

yes; decidedly the biggest."



"Beats the English one? Archbishop--ain't it?--of Canterbury? The

Pope comes ahead of him?"



"His Holiness would say so if his Grace did not."



The Virginian turned half in his saddle to see my face--I was, at

the moment, riding not quite abreast of him--and I saw the gleam

of his teeth beneath his mustache. It was seldom I could make him

smile, even to this slight extent. But his eyes grew, with his

next words, remote again in their speculation.



"His Holiness and his Grace. Now if I was to hear 'em namin' me

that-a-way every mawnin', I'd sca'cely get down to business."



"Oh, you'd get used to the pride of it."



"'Tisn't the pride. The laugh is what would ruin me. 'Twould take

'most all my attention keeping a straight face. The

Archbishop"--here he took one of his wide mental turns--"is apt

to be a big man in them Shakespeare plays. Kings take talk from

him they'd not stand from anybody else; and he talks fine,

frequently. About the bees, for instance, when Henry is going to

fight France. He tells him a beehive is similar to a kingdom. I

learned that piece." The Virginian could not have expected to

blush at uttering these last words. He knew that his sudden color

must tell me in whose book it was he had learned the piece Was

not her copy of Kenilworth even now In his cherishing pocket? So

he now, to cover his blush, very deliberately recited to me the

Archbishop's discourse upon bees and their kingdom:



     "'Where some, like magistrates, correct at home...

      Others, like soldiers, armed in their stings,

      Make loot upon the summer's velvet buds;

      Which pillage they with merry march bring home

      To the tent-royal of their emperor:

      He, busied in his majesty, surreys

      The singing masons building roofs of gold.'



"Ain't that a fine description of bees a-workin'? 'The singing

masons building roofs of gold!' Puts 'em right before yu', and is

poetry without bein' foolish. His Holiness and his Grace. Well,

they could not hire me for either o' those positions. How many

religions are there?"



"All over the earth?"



"Yu' can begin with ourselves. Right hyeh at home I know there's

Romanists, and Episcopals--"



"Two kinds!" I put in. "At least two of Episcopals."



"That's three. Then Methodists and Baptists, and--"



"Three Methodists!"



"Well, you do the countin'."



I accordingly did it, feeling my revolving memory slip cogs all

the way round. "Anyhow, there are safely fifteen."



"Fifteen." He held this fact a moment. "And they don't worship a

whole heap o' different gods like the ancients did?"



"Oh, no!"



"It's just the same one?"



"The same one."



The Virginian folded his hands over the horn of his saddle, and

leaned forward upon them in contemplation of the wide, beautiful

landscape.



"One God and fifteen religions," was his reflection. "That's a

right smart of religions for just one God."



This way of reducing it was, if obvious to him, so novel to me

that my laugh evidently struck him as a louder and livelier

comment than was required. He turned on me as if I had somehow

perverted the spirit of his words.



"I ain't religious. I know that. But I ain't unreligious. And I

know that too."



"So do I know it, my friend."



"Do you think there ought to be fifteen varieties of good

people?" His voice, while it now had an edge that could cut

anything it came against, was still not raised. "There ain't

fifteen. There ain't two. There's one kind. And when I meet it, I

respect it. It is not praying nor preaching that has ever caught

me and made me ashamed of myself, but one or two people I have

knowed that never said a superior word to me They thought more o'

me than I deserved, and that made me behave better than I

naturally wanted to. Made me quit a girl onced in time for her

not to lose her good name. And so that's one thing I have never

done. And if ever I was to have a son or somebody I set store by,

I would wish their lot to be to know one or two good folks mighty

well--men or women--women preferred."



He had looked away again to the hills behind Sunk Creek ranch, to

which our walking horses had now almost brought us.



"As for parsons "--the gesture of his arm was a disclaiming

one--"I reckon some parsons have a right to tell yu' to be good.

The bishop of this hyeh Territory has a right. But I'll tell yu'

this: a middlin' doctor is a pore thing, and a middlin' lawyer is

a pore thing; but keep me from a middlin' man of God."



Once again he had reduced it, but I did not laugh this time. I

thought there should in truth be heavy damages for malpractice on

human souls. But the hot glow of his words, and the vision of his

deepest inner man it revealed, faded away abruptly.



"What do yu' make of the proposition yondeh?" As he pointed to

the cause of this question he had become again his daily,

engaging, saturnine self.



Then I saw over in a fenced meadow, to which we were now close,

what he was pleased to call "the proposition." Proposition in the

West does, in fact, mean whatever you at the moment please,--an

offer to sell you a mine, a cloud-burst, a glass of whiskey, a

steamboat. This time it meant a stranger clad in black, and of a

clerical deportment which would in that atmosphere and to a

watchful eye be visible for a mile or two.



"I reckoned yu' hadn't noticed him," was the Virginian's reply to

my ejaculation. "Yes. He set me goin' on the subject a while

back. I expect he is another missionary to us pore cow-boys."



I seemed from a hundred yards to feel the stranger's forceful

personality. It was in his walk--I should better say stalk--as he

promenaded along the creek. His hands were behind his back, and

there was an air of waiting, of displeased waiting, in his

movement.



"Yes, he'll be a missionary," said the Virginian, conclusively;

and he took to singing, or rather to whining, with his head

tilted at an absurd angle upward at the sky:



     "'Dar is a big Car'lina nigger,

      About de size of dis chile or p'raps a little bigger,

      By de name of Jim Crow.

      Dat what de white folks call him.

      If ever I sees hint I 'tends for to maul him,

      Just to let de white folks see

      Such an animos as he

      Can't walk around the streets and scandalize me.'"



The lane which was conducting us to the group of ranch buildings

now turned a corner of the meadow, and the Virginian went on with

his second verse:



    "'Great big fool, he hasn't any knowledge.

    Gosh! how could he, when he's never been to scollege?

    Neither has I.

    But I'se come mighty nigh;

    I peaked through de door as I went by.'"



He was beginning a third stanza, but stopped short; a horse had

neighed close behind us.



"Trampas," said he, without turning his head, "we are home."



"It looks that way." Some ten yards were between ourselves and

Trampas, where he followed.



"And I'll trouble yu' for my rope yu' took this mawnin' instead

o' your own."



"I don't know as it's your rope I've got." Trampas skilfully

spoke this so that a precisely opposite meaning flowed from his

words.



If it was discussion he tried for, he failed. The Virginian's

hand moved, and for one thick, flashing moment my thoughts were

evidently also the thoughts of Trampas. But the Virginian only

held out to Trampas the rope which he had detached from his

saddle.



"Take your hand off your gun, Trampas. If I had wanted to kill

yu' you'd be lying nine days back on the road now. Here's your

rope. Did yu' expect I'd not know it? It's the only one in camp

the stiffness ain't all drug out of yet. Or maybe yu' expected me

to notice and--not take notice?"



"I don't spend my time in expectations about you. If--"



The Virginian wheeled his horse across the road. "Yu're talkin'

too soon after reachin' safety, Trampas. I didn't tell yu' to

hand me that rope this mawnin', because I was busy. I ain't

foreman now; and I want that rope."



Trampas produced a smile as skilful as his voice. "Well, I guess

your having mine proves this one is yours." He rode up and

received the coil which the Virginian held out, unloosing the

disputed one on his saddle. If he had meant to devise a slippery,

evasive insult, no small trick in cow-land could be more

offensive than this taking another man's rope. And it is the

small tricks which lead to the big bullets. Trampas put a smooth

coating of plausibility over the whole transaction. "After the

rope corral we had to make this morning"--his tone was mock

explanatory--"the ropes was all strewed round camp, and in the

hustle I--"



"Pardon me," said a sonorous voice behind us, "do you happen to

have seen Judge Henry?" It was the reverend gentleman in his

meadow, come to the fence. As we turned round to him he spoke on,

with much rotund authority in his eye. "From his answer to my

letter, Judge Henry undoubtedly expects me here. I have arrived

from Fetterman according to my plan which I announced to him, to


find that he has been absent all day--absent the whole day."



The Virginian sat sidewise to talk, one long, straight leg

supporting him on one stirrup, the other bent at ease, the boot

half lifted from its dangling stirrup. He made himself the

perfection of courtesy. "The Judge is frequently absent all

night, seh."



"Scarcely to-night, I think. I thought you might know something

about him."



"I have been absent myself, seh."



"Ah! On a vacation, perhaps?" The divine had a ruddy facet. His

strong glance was straight and frank and fearless; but his smile

too much reminded me of days bygone, when we used to return to

school from the Christmas holidays, and the masters would shake

our hands and welcome us with: "Robert, John, Edward, glad to see

you all looking so well! Rested, and ready for hard work, I'm

sure!"



That smile does not really please even good, tame little boys;

and the Virginian was nearing thirty.



"It has not been vacation this trip, seh," said he, settling

straight in his saddle. "There's the Judge driving in now, in

time for all questions yu' have to ask him."



His horse took a step, but was stopped short. There lay the

Virginian's rope on the ground. I had been aware of Trampas's

quite proper departure during the talk; and as he was leaving, I

seemed also to be aware of his placing the coil across the cantle

of its owner's saddle. Had he intended it to fall and have to be

picked up? It was another evasive little business, and quite

successful, if designed to nag the owner of the rope. A few

hundred yards ahead of us Trampas was now shouting loud cow-boy

shouts. Were they to announce his return to those at home, or did

they mean derision? The Virginian leaned, keeping his seat, and,

swinging down his arm, caught up the rope, and hung it on his

saddle somewhat carefully. But the hue of rage spread over his

face.



From his fence the divine now spoke, in approbation, but with

another strong, cheerless smile. "You pick up that rope as if you

were well trained to it."



"It's part of our business, seh, and we try to mind it like the

rest." But this, stated in a gentle drawl, did not pierce the

missionary's armor; his superiority was very thick.



We now rode on, and I was impressed by the reverend gentleman's

robust, dictatorial back as he proceeded by a short cut through

the meadow to the ranch. You could take him for nothing but a

vigorous, sincere, dominating man, full of the highest purpose.

But whatever his creed, I already doubted if he were the right

one to sow it and make it grow in these new, wild fields. He

seemed more the sort of gardener to keep old walks and vines

pruned in their antique rigidity. I admired him for coming all

this way with his clean, short, gray whiskers and his black,

well-brushed suit. And he made me think of a powerful locomotive

stuck puffing on a grade.



Meanwhile, the Virginian rode beside me, so silent in his

volcanic wrath that I did not perceive it. The missionary coming

on top of Trampas had been more than he could stand. But I did

not know, and I spoke with innocent cheeriness.



"Is the parson going to save us?" I asked; and I fairly jumped at

his voice:"Don't talk so much!" he burst out. I had got the whole

accumulation!



"Who's been talking?" I in equal anger screeched back. "I'm not

trying to save you. I didn't take your rope." And having poured

this out, I whipped up my pony.



But he spurred his own alongside of me; and glancing at him, I

saw that he was now convulsed with internal mirth. I therefore

drew down to a walk, and he straightened into gravity.



"I'm right obliged to yu'," he laid his hand in its buckskin

gauntlet upon my horse's mane as he spoke, "for bringing me back

out o' my nonsense. I'll be as serene as a bird now--whatever

they do. A man," he stated reflectively, "any full-sized man,

ought to own a big lot of temper. And like all his valuable

possessions, he'd ought to keep it and not lose any." This was

his full apology. "As for salvation, I have got this far:

somebody," he swept an arm at the sunset and the mountains, "must

have made all that, I know. But I know one more thing I would

tell Him to His face: if I can't do nothing long enough and good

enough to earn eternal happiness, I can't do nothing long enough

and bad enough to be damned. I reckon He plays a square game with

us if He plays at all, and I ain't bothering my haid about other

worlds."



As we reached the stables, he had become the serene bird he

promised, and was sentimentally continuing:



     "'De sun is made of mud from de bottom of de river;

     De moon is made o' fox-fire, as you might disciver;

     De stars like de ladies' eyes,

     All round de world dey flies,

     To give a little light when de moon don't rise.'"



If words were meant to conceal our thoughts, melody is perhaps a

still thicker veil for them. Whatever temper he had lost, he had

certainly found again; but this all the more fitted him to deal

with Trampas, when the dealing should begin. I had half a mind to

speak to the Judge, only it seemed beyond a mere visitor's

business. Our missionary was at this moment himself speaking to

Judge Henry at the door of the home ranch.



"I reckon he's explaining he has been a-waiting." The Virginian

was throwing his saddle off as I loosened the cinches of mine.

"And the Judge don't look like he was hopelessly distressed."



I now surveyed the distant parley, and the Judge, from the

wagonful of guests whom he had evidently been driving upon a

day's excursion, waved me a welcome, which I waved back. "He's

got Miss Molly Wood there!" I exclaimed.



"Yes." The Virginian was brief about this fact. "I'll look afteh

your saddle. You go and get acquainted with the company."



This favor I accepted; it was the means he chose for saying he

hoped, after our recent boiling over, that all was now more than

right between us. So for the while I left him to his horses, and

his corrals, and his Trampas, and his foreman, and his imminent

problem.

