





XIX. DR. MACBRIDE BEGS PARDON



Judge and Mrs. Henry, Molly Wood, and two strangers, a lady and a

gentleman, were the party which had been driving in the large

three-seated wagon. They had seemed a merry party. But as I came

within hearing of their talk, it was a fragment of the minister's

sonority which reached me first: "--more opportunity for them to

have the benefit of hearing frequent sermons," was the sentence I

heard him bring to completion.



"Yes, to be sure, sir." Judge Henry gave me (it almost seemed)

additional warmth of welcome for arriving to break up the present

discourse. "Let me introduce you to the Rev. Dr. Alexander

MacBride. Doctor, another guest we have been hoping for about

this time," was my host's cordial explanation to him of me. There

remained the gentleman with his wife from New York, and to these

I made my final bows. But I had not broken up the discourse.



"We may be said to have met already." Dr. MacBride had fixed upon

me his full, mastering eye; and it occurred to me that if they

had policemen in heaven, he would be at least a centurion in the

force. But he did not mean to be unpleasant; it was only that in

a mind full of matters less worldly, pleasure was left out. "I

observed your friend was a skilful horseman," he continued. "I

was saying to Judge Henry that I could wish such skilful horsemen

might ride to a church upon the Sabbath. A church, that is, of

right doctrine, where they would have opportunity to hear

frequent sermons."



"Yes," said Judge Henry, "yes. It would be a good thing."



Mrs. Henry, with some murmur about the kitchen, here went into

the house.



"I was informed," Dr. MacBride held the rest of us, "before

undertaking my journey that I should find a desolate and mainly

godless country. But nobody gave me to understand that from

Medicine Bow I was to drive three hundred miles and pass no

church of any faith."



The Judge explained that there had been a few a long way to the

right and left of him. "Still," he conceded, "you are quite

right. But don't forget that this is the newest part of a new

world."



"Judge," said his wife, coming to the door, "how can you keep

them standing in the dust with your talking?"



This most efficiently did break up the discourse. As our little

party, with the smiles and the polite holdings back of new

acquaintanceship, moved into the house, the Judge detained me

behind all of them long enough to whisper dolorously, "He's going

to stay a whole week."



I had hopes that he would not stay a whole week when I presently

learned of the crowded arrangements which our hosts, with many

hospitable apologies, disclosed to us. They were delighted to

have us, but they hadn't foreseen that we should all be

simultaneous. The foreman's house had been prepared for two of

us, and did we mind? The two of us were Dr. MacBride and myself;

and I expected him to mind. But I wronged him grossly. It would

be much better, he assured Mrs. Henry, than straw in a stable,

which he had tried several times, and was quite ready for. So I

saw that though he kept his vigorous body clean when he could, he

cared nothing for it in the face of his mission. How the foreman

and his wife relished being turned out during a week for a

missionary end myself was not my concern, although while he and I

made ready for supper over there, it struck me as hard on them.

The room with its two cots and furniture was as nice as possible;

and we closed the door upon the adjoining room, which, however,

seemed also untenanted.



Mrs. Henry gave us a meal so good that I have remembered it, and

her husband the Judge strove his best that we should eat it in

merriment. He poured out his anecdotes like wine, and we should

have quickly warmed to them; but Dr. MacBride sat among us,

giving occasional heavy ha-ha's, which produced, as Miss Molly

Wood whispered to me, a "dreadfully cavernous effect." Was it his

sermon, we wondered, that he was thinking over? I told her of the

copious sheaf of them I had seen him pull from his wallet over at

the foreman's. "Goodness!" said she. "Then are we to hear one

every evening?" This I doubted; he had probably been picking one

out suitable for the occasion. "Putting his best foot foremost,"

was her comment; "I suppose they have best feet, like the rest of

us." Then she grew delightfully sharp. "Do you know, when I first

heard him I thought his voice was hearty. But if you listen,

you'll find it's merely militant. He never really meets you with

it. He's off on his hill watching the battle-field the whole

time."



"He will find a hardened pagan here."



"Judge Henry?"



"Oh, no! The wild man you're taming brought you Kenilworth safe

back."



She was smooth. "Oh, as for taming him! But don't you find him

intelligent?"



Suddenly I somehow knew that she didn't want to tame him. But

what did she want to do? The thought of her had made him blush

this afternoon. No thought of him made her blush this evening.



A great laugh from the rest of the company made me aware that the

Judge had consummated his tale of the "Sole Survivor."



"And so," he finished, "they all went off as mad as hops because

it hadn't been a massacre." Mr. and Mrs. Ogden--they were the New

Yorkers-gave this story much applause, and Dr. MacBride half a

minute later laid his "ha-ha," like a heavy stone, upon the

gayety.



"I'll never be able to stand seven sermons," said Miss Wood to

me.



"Talking of massacres,"--I now hastened to address the already

saddened table,--"I have recently escaped one myself."



The Judge had come to an end of his powers. "Oh, tell us!" he

implored.



"Seriously, sir, I think we grazed pretty wet tragedy but your

extraordinary man brought us out into comedy safe and dry."



This gave me their attention; and, from that afternoon in Dakota

when I had first stepped aboard the caboose, I told them the

whole tale of my experience: how I grew immediately aware that

all was not right, by the Virginian's kicking the cook off the

train; how, as we journeyed, the dark bubble of mutiny swelled

hourly beneath my eyes; and how, when it was threatening I know

not what explosion, the Virginian had pricked it with humor, so

that it burst in nothing but harmless laughter.



Their eyes followed my narrative: the New Yorkers, because such

events do not happen upon the shores of the Hudson; Mrs. Henry,

because she was my hostess; Miss Wood followed for whatever her

reasons were--I couldn't see her eyes; rather, I FELT her

listening intently to the deeds and dangers of the man she didn't

care to tame. But it was the eyes of the Judge and the missionary

which I saw riveted upon me indeed until the end; and they

forthwith made plain their quite dissimilar opinions.



Judge Henry struck the table lightly with his fist. "I knew it!"

And he leaned back in his chair with a face of contentment. He

had trusted his man, and his man had proved worthy.



"Pardon me." Dr. MacBride had a manner of saying "pardon me,"

which rendered forgiveness well-nigh impossible.



The Judge waited for him.



"Am I to understand that these--a--cow-boys attempted to mutiny,

and were discouraged in this attempt upon finding themselves less

skilful at lying than the man they had plotted to depose?"



I began an answer. "It was other qualities, sir, that happened to

be revealed and asserted by what you call his lying that--"



"And what am I to call it, if it is not lying? A competition in

deceit in which, I admit, he out did them.



"It's their way to--"



"Pardon me. Their way to lie? They bow down to the greatest in

this?"



"Oh," said Miss Wood in my ear, "give him up."



The Judge took a turn. "We-ell, Doctor--" He seemed to stick

here.



Mr. Ogden handsomely assisted him. "You've said the word

yourself, Doctor. It's the competition, don't you see? The trial

of strength by no matter what test."



"Yes," said Miss Wood, unexpectedly. "And it wasn't that George

Washington couldn't tell a lie. He just wouldn't. I'm sure if

he'd undertaken to he'd have told a much better one than

Cornwall's."



"Ha-ha, madam! You draw an ingenious subtlety from your books."



"It's all plain to me," Ogden pursued. "The men were morose. This

foreman was in the minority. He cajoled them into a bout of tall

stories, and told the tallest himself. And when they found they

had swallowed it whole--well, it would certainly take the starch

out of me," he concluded. "I couldn't be a serious mutineer after

that."



Dr. MacBride now sounded his strongest bass. "Pardon me. I cannot

accept such a view, sir. There is a levity abroad in our land

which I must deplore. No matter how leniently you may try to put

it, in the end we have the spectacle of a struggle between men

where lying decides the survival of the fittest. Better, far

better, if it was to come, that they had shot honest bullets.

There are worse evils than war."



The Doctor's eye glared righteously about him. None of us, I

think, trembled; or, if we did, it was with emotions other than

fear. Mrs. Henry at once introduced the subject of trout-fishing,

and thus happily removed us from the edge of whatever sort of

precipice we seemed to have approached; for Dr. MacBride had

brought his rod. He dilated upon this sport with fervor, and we

assured him that the streams upon the west slope of the Bow Leg

Mountains would afford him plenty of it. Thus we ended our meal

in carefully preserved amity.


