




CHAPTER XI



HARD IT IS FOR THE OLD WORLD TO

SEE THE NEW



He held his peace awhile, and then he said:  "But no man selleth

himself and his children into thraldom uncompelled; nor is any

fool so great a fool as willingly to take the name of freeman and

the life of a thrall as payment for the very life of a freeman. 

Now would I ask thee somewhat else; and I am the readier to do so

since I perceive that thou art a wondrous seer; for surely no man

could of his own wit have imagined a tale of such follies as thou

hast told me.  Now well I wot that men having once shaken

themselves clear of the burden of villeinage, as thou sayest we

shall do (and I bless thee for the word), shall never bow

down to this worser tyranny without sore strife in the

world; and surely so sore shall it be, before our valiant sons

give way, that maids and little lads shall take the sword and the

spear, and in many a field men's blood and not water shall turn

the gristmills of England.  But when all this is over, and the

tyranny is established, because there are but few men in the land

after the great war, how shall it be with you then?  Will there

not be many soldiers and sergeants and few workers?  Surely in

every parish ye shall have the constables to see that the men

work; and they shall be saying every day, `Such an one, hast thou

yet sold thyself for this day or this week or this year?  Go to

now, and get thy bargain done, or it shall be the worse for

thee.'  And wheresoever work is going on there shall be

constables again, and those that labour shall labour under the

whip like the Hebrews in the land of Egypt.  And every man that

may, will steal as a dog snatches at a bone; and there again

shall ye need more soldiers and more constables till the land is

eaten up by them; nor shall the lords and the masters even be

able to bear the burden of it; nor will their gains be so great,

since that which each man may do in a day is not right great when

all is said."



"Friend," said I, "from thine own valiancy and high heart thou

speakest, when thou sayest that they who fall under this tyranny

shall fight to the death against it.  Wars indeed there shall be

in the world, great and grievous, and yet few on this score;

rather shall men fight as they have been fighting in France at

the bidding of some lord of the manor, or some king, or at last

at the bidding of some usurer and forestaller of the market. 

Valiant men, forsooth, shall arise in the beginning of these evil

times, but though they shall die as ye shall, yet shall not their

deaths be fruitful as yours shall be; because ye, forsooth, are

fighting against villeinage which is waning, but they shall

fight against usury which is waxing.  And, moreover, I have been

telling thee how it shall be when the measure of the time is

full; and we, looking at these things from afar, can see them as

they are indeed; but they who live at the beginning of those

times and amidst them, shall not know what is doing around them;

they shall indeed feel the plague and yet not know the remedy; by

little and by little they shall fall from their better

livelihood, and weak and helpless shall they grow, and have no

might to withstand the evil of this tyranny; and then again when

the times mend somewhat and they have but a little more ease,

then shall it be to them like the kingdom of heaven, and they

shall have no will to withstand any tyranny, but shall think

themselves happy that they be pinched somewhat less.  Also

whereas thou sayest that there shall be for ever constables and

sergeants going to and fro to drive men to work, and that

they will not work save under the lash, thou art wrong and it

shall not be so; for there shall ever be more workers than the

masters may set to work, so that men shall strive eagerly for

leave to work; and when one says, I will sell my hours at such

and such a price, then another will say, and I for so much less;

so that never shall the lords lack slaves willing to work, but

often the slaves shall lack lords to buy them."



"Thou tellest marvels indeed," said he; "but how then? if all the

churls work not, shall there not be famine and lack of wares?"



"Famine enough," said I, "yet not from lack of wares; it shall be

clean contrary.  What wilt thou say when I tell thee that in the

latter days there shall be such traffic and such speedy travel

across the seas that most wares shall be good cheap, and bread of

all things the cheapest?"



Quoth he:  "I should say that then there would be better

livelihood for men, for in times of plenty it is well; for then

men eat that which their own hands have harvested, and need

not to spend of their substance in buying of others.  Truly, it

is well for honest men, but not so well for forestallers and

regraters;[2] but who heeds what befalls such foul swine, who

filch the money from people's purses, and do not one hair's turn

of work to help them?"







[2] Forestaller, one who buys up goods when they are cheap, and

so raises the price for his own benefit; forestalls the due and

real demand.  Regrater, one who both buys and sells in the same

market, or within five miles thereof; buys, say a ton of cheese

at 10 A.M. and sells it at 5 P.M. a penny a pound dearer without

moving from his chair.  The word "monopolist" will cover both

species of thief.







"Yea, friend," I said, "but in those latter days all power shall

be in the hands of these foul swine, and they shall be the rulers

of all; therefore, hearken, for I tell thee that times of plenty

shall in those days be the times of famine, and all shall pray

for the prices of wares to rise, so that the forestallers and

regraters may thrive, and that some of their well-doing may

overflow on to those on whom they live."



"I am weary of thy riddles," he said.  "Yet at least I hope that

there may be fewer and fewer folk in the land; as may well be, if

life is then so foul and wretched."



"Alas, poor man!" I said; "nor mayst thou imagine how foul and

wretched it may be for many of the folk; and yet I tell thee that

men shall increase and multiply, till where there is one man in

the land now, there shall be twenty in those days--yea, in some

places ten times twenty."



"I have but little heart to ask thee more questions," said he;

"and when thou answerest, thy words are plain, but the things

they tell of I may scarce understand.  But tell me this: in those

days will men deem that so it must be for ever, as great men even

now tell us of our ills, or will they think of some remedy?"



I looked about me.  There was but a glimmer of light in the

church now, but what there was, was no longer the strange

light of the moon, but the first coming of the kindly day.



"Yea," said John Ball, "'tis the twilight of the dawn.  God and

St. Christopher send us a good day!"



"John Ball," said I, "I have told thee that thy death will bring

about that which thy life has striven for: thinkest thou that the

thing which thou strivest for is worth the labour? or dost thou

believe in the tale I have told thee of the days to come?"



He said:  "I tell thee once again that I trust thee for a seer;

because no man could make up such a tale as thou; the things

which thou tellest are too wonderful for a minstrel, the tale too

grievous.  And whereas thou askest as to whether I count my

labour lost, I say nay; if so be that in those latter times (and

worser than ours they will be) men shall yet seek a remedy:

therefore again I ask thee, is it so that they shall?"





"Yea," said I, "and their remedy shall be the same as thine,

although the days be different: for if the folk be enthralled,

what remedy save that they be set free? and if they have tried

many roads towards freedom, and found that they led no-whither,

then shall they try yet another.  Yet in the days to come they

shall be slothful to try it, because their masters shall be so

much mightier than thine, that they shall not need to show the

high hand, and until the days get to their evilest, men shall be

cozened into thinking that it is of their own free will that they

must needs buy leave to labour by pawning their labour that is to

be.  Moreover, your lords and masters seem very mighty to you,

each one of them, and so they are, but they are few; and the

masters of the days to come shall not each one of them seem very

mighty to the men of those days, but they shall be very many, and

they shall be of one intent in these matters without knowing it;

like as one sees the oars of a galley when the rowers are

hidden, that rise and fall as it were with one will."



"And yet," he said, "shall it not be the same with those that

these men devour? shall not they also have one will?"



"Friend," I said, "they shall have the will to live, as the

wretchedest thing living has: therefore shall they sell

themselves that they may live, as I told thee; and their hard

need shall be their lord's easy livelihood, and because of it he

shall sleep without fear, since their need compelleth them not to

loiter by the way to lament with friend or brother that they are

pinched in their servitude, or to devise means for ending it. 

And yet indeed thou sayest it: they also shall have one will if

they but knew it: but for a long while they shall have but a

glimmer of knowledge of it: yet doubt it not that in the end they

shall come to know it clearly, and then shall they bring about

the remedy; and in those days shall it be seen that thou

hast not wrought for nothing, because thou hast seen beforehand

what the remedy should be, even as those of later days have seen

it."



We both sat silent a little while.  The twilight was gaining on

the night, though slowly.  I looked at the poppy which I still

held in my hand, and bethought me of Will Green, and said:



"Lo, how the light is spreading: now must I get me back to Will

Green's house as I promised."



"Go, then," said he, "if thou wilt.  Yet meseems before long he

shall come to us; and then mayst thou sleep among the trees on

the green grass till the sun is high, for the host shall not be

on foot very early; and sweet it is to sleep in shadow by the sun

in the full morning when one has been awake and troubled through

the night-tide."



"Yet I will go now," said I; "I bid thee good-night, or rather

good-morrow."



Therewith I half rose up; but as I did so the will to depart left

me as though I had never had it, and I sat down again, and heard

the voice of John Ball, at first as one speaking from far away,

but little by little growing nearer and more familiar to me, and

as if once more it were coming from the man himself whom I had

got to know.

