





CHAPTER III



THEY MEET AT THE CROSS



The street was pretty full of men by then we were out in it, and

all faces turned toward the cross.  The song still grew nearer

and louder, and even as we looked we saw it turning the corner

through the hedges of the orchards and closes, a good clump of

men, more armed, as it would seem, than our villagers, as the low

sun flashed back from many points of bright iron and steel.  The

words of the song could now be heard, and amidst them I could

pick out Will Green's late challenge to me and my answer; but as

I was bending all my mind to disentangle more words from the

music, suddenly from the new white tower behind us clashed out

the church bells, harsh and hurried at first, but

presently falling into measured chime; and at the first sound of

them a great shout went up from us and was echoed by the new-

comers, "John Ball hath rung our bell!"  Then we pressed on, and

presently we were all mingled together at the cross.



Will Green had good-naturedly thrust and pulled me forward, so

that I found myself standing on the lowest step of the cross, his

seventy-two inches of man on one side of me.  He chuckled while I

panted, and said:



"There's for thee a good hearing and seeing stead, old lad.  Thou

art tall across thy belly and not otherwise, and thy wind,

belike, is none of the best, and but for me thou wouldst have

been amidst the thickest of the throng, and have heard words

muffled by Kentish bellies and seen little but swinky woollen

elbows and greasy plates and jacks.  Look no more on the ground,

as though thou sawest a hare, but let thine eyes and thine

ears be busy to gather tidings to bear back to Essex--or heaven!"



I grinned good-fellowship at him but said nothing, for in truth

my eyes and ears were as busy as he would have them to be.  A

buzz of general talk went up from the throng amidst the regular

cadence of the bells, which now seemed far away and as it were

that they were not swayed by hands, but were living creatures

making that noise of their own wills.



I looked around and saw that the newcomers mingled with us must

have been a regular armed band; all had bucklers slung at their

backs, few lacked a sword at the side.  Some had bows, some

"staves"--that is, bills, pole-axes, or pikes.  Moreover, unlike

our villagers, they had defensive arms.  Most had steel-caps on

their heads, and some had body armour, generally a "jack," or

coat into which pieces of iron or horn were quilted; some had

also steel or steel-and-leather arm or thigh pieces.  There were

a few mounted men among them, their horses being big-boned

hammer-headed beasts, that looked as if they had been taken from

plough or waggon, but their riders were well armed with steel

armour on their heads, legs, and arms.  Amongst the horsemen I

noted the man that had ridden past me when I first awoke; but he

seemed to be a prisoner, as he had a woollen hood on his head

instead of his helmet, and carried neither bill, sword, nor

dagger.  He seemed by no means ill-at-ease, however, but was

laughing and talking with the men who stood near him.



Above the heads of the crowd, and now slowly working towards the

cross, was a banner on a high-raised cross-pole, a picture of a

man and woman half-clad in skins of beasts seen against a

background of green trees, the man holding a spade and the woman

a distaff and spindle rudely done enough, but yet with a certain

spirit and much meaning; and underneath this symbol of the

early world and man's first contest with nature were the written

words:



            When Adam delved and Eve span

            Who was then the gentleman?





The banner came on and through the crowd, which at last opened

where we stood for its passage, and the banner-bearer turned and

faced the throng and stood on the first step of the cross beside

me.



A man followed him, clad in a long dark-brown gown of coarse

woollen, girt with a cord, to which hung a "pair of beads" (or

rosary, as we should call it to-day) and a book in a bag.  The

man was tall and big-boned, a ring of dark hair surrounded his

priest's tonsure; his nose was big but clear cut and with wide

nostrils; his shaven face showed a longish upper lip and a big

but blunt chin; his mouth was big and the lips closed firmly; a

face not very noteworthy but for his grey eyes well opened and

wide apart, at whiles lighting up his whole face with a

kindly smile, at whiles set and stern, at whiles resting in that

look as if they were gazing at something a long way off, which is

the wont of the eyes of the poet or enthusiast.



He went slowly up the steps of the cross and stood at the top

with one hand laid on the shaft, and shout upon shout broke forth

from the throng.  When the shouting died away into a silence of

the human voices, the bells were still quietly chiming with that

far-away voice of theirs, and the long-winged dusky swifts, by no

means scared by the concourse, swung round about the cross with

their wild squeals; and the man stood still for a little, eyeing

the throng, or rather looking first at one and then another man

in it, as though he were trying to think what such an one was

thinking of, or what he were fit for.  Sometimes he caught the

eye of one or other, and then that kindly smile spread over his

face, but faded off it into the sternness and sadness of a man

who has heavy and great thoughts hanging about him.

But when John Ball first mounted the steps of the cross a lad at

some one's bidding had run off to stop the ringers, and so

presently the voice of the bells fell dead, leaving on men's

minds that sense of blankness or even disappointment which is

always caused by the sudden stopping of a sound one has got used

to and found pleasant.  But a great expectation had fallen by now

on all that throng, and no word was spoken even in a whisper, and

all men's hearts and eyes were fixed upon the dark figure

standing straight up now by the tall white shaft of the cross,

his hands stretched out before him, one palm laid upon the other.



And for me, as I made ready to hearken, I felt a joy in my soul

that I had never yet felt.

