




CHAPTER IV



THE VOICE OF JOHN BALL



SO now I heard John Ball; how he lifted up his voice and said:



"Ho, all ye good people!  I am a priest of God, and in my day's

work it cometh that I should tell you what ye should do, and what

ye should forbear doing, and to that end I am come hither: yet

first, if I myself have wronged any man here, let him say wherein

my wrongdoing lieth, that I may ask his pardon and his pity."



A great hum of good-will ran through the crowd as he spoke; then

he smiled as in a kind of pride, and again he spoke:



"Wherefore did ye take me out of the archbishop's prison but

three days agone, when ye lighted the archbishop's house for

the candle of Canterbury, but that I might speak to you and

pray you: therefore I will not keep silence, whether I have done

ill, or whether I have done well.  And herein, good fellows and

my very brethren, I would have you to follow me; and if there be

such here, as I know full well there be some, and may be a good

many, who have been robbers of their neighbours (`And who is my

neighbour?' quoth the rich man), or lechers, or despiteful

haters, or talebearers, or fawners on rich men for the hurt of

the poor (and that is the worst of all)--Ah, my poor brethren who

have gone astray, I say not to you, go home and repent lest you

mar our great deeds, but rather come afield and there repent. 

Many a day have ye been fools, but hearken unto me and I shall

make you wise above the wisdom of the earth; and if ye die in

your wisdom, as God wot ye well may, since the fields ye wend to

bear swords for daisies, and spears for bents, then shall ye be,

though men call you dead, a part and parcel of the living

wisdom of all things, very stones of the pillars that uphold the

joyful earth.



"Forsooth, ye have heard it said that ye shall do well in this

world that in the world to come ye may live happily for ever; do

ye well then, and have your reward both on earth and in heaven;

for I say to you that earth and heaven are not two but one; and

this one is that which ye know, and are each one of you a part

of, to wit, the Holy Church, and in each one of you dwelleth the

life of the Church, unless ye slay it.  Forsooth, brethren, will

ye murder the Church any one of you, and go forth a wandering man

and lonely, even as Cain did who slew his brother?  Ah, my

brothers, what an evil doom is this, to be an outcast from the

Church, to have none to love you and to speak with you, to be

without fellowship!  Forsooth, brothers, fellowship is heaven,

and lack of fellowship is hell: fellowship is life, and lack

of fellowship is death: and the deeds that ye do upon the earth,

it is for fellowship's sake that ye do them, and the life that is

in it, that shall live on and on for ever, and each one of you

part of it, while many a man's life upon the earth from the earth

shall wane.



"Therefore, I bid you not dwell in hell but in heaven, or while

ye must, upon earth, which is a part of heaven, and forsooth no

foul part.



"Forsooth, he that waketh in hell and feeleth his heart fail him,

shall have memory of the merry days of earth, and how that when

his heart failed him there, he cried on his fellow, were it his

wife or his son or his brother or his gossip or his brother sworn

in arms, and how that his fellow heard him and came and they

mourned together under the sun, till again they laughed together

and were but half sorry between them.  This shall he think on in

hell, and cry on his fellow to help him, and shall find that

therein is no help because there is no fellowship, but every

man for himself.  Therefore, I tell you that the proud,

despiteous rich man, though he knoweth it not, is in hell

already, because he hath no fellow; and he that hath so hardy a

heart that in sorrow he thinketh of fellowship, his sorrow is

soon but a story of sorrow--a little change in the life that

knows not ill."



He left off for a little; and indeed for some time his voice had


fallen, but it was so clear and the summer evening so soft and

still, and the silence of the folk so complete, that every word

told.  His eyes fell down to the crowd as he stopped speaking,

since for some little while they had been looking far away into

the blue distance of summer; and the kind eyes of the man had a

curious sight before him in that crowd, for amongst them were

many who by this time were not dry-eyed, and some wept outright

in spite of their black beards, while all had that look as if

they were ashamed of themselves, and did not want others to

see how deeply they were moved, after the fashion of their race

when they are strongly stirred.  I looked at Will Green beside

me: his right hand clutched his bow so tight, that the knuckles

whitened; he was staring straight before him, and the tears were

running out of his eyes and down his big nose as though without

his will, for his face was stolid and unmoved all the time till

he caught my eye, and then he screwed up the strangest face, of

scowling brow, weeping eyes, and smiling mouth, while he dealt me

a sounding thump in the ribs with his left elbow, which, though

it would have knocked me down but for the crowd, I took as an

esquire does the accolade which makes a knight of him.



But while I pondered all these things, and how men fight and lose

the battle, and the thing that they fought for comes about in

spite of their defeat, and when it comes turns out not to be what

they meant, and other men have to fight for what they meant

under another name--while I pondered all this, John Ball began to

speak again in the same soft and dear voice with which he had

left off.



"Good fellows, it was your fellowship and your kindness that took

me out of the archbishop's prison three days agone, though God

wot ye had nought to gain by it save outlawry and the gallows;

yet lacked I not your fellowship before ye drew near me in the

body, and when between me and Canterbury street was yet a strong

wall, and the turnkeys and sergeants and bailiffs.



"For hearken, my friends and helpers; many days ago, when April

was yet young, I lay there, and the heart that I had strung up to

bear all things because of the fellowship of men and the blessed

saints and the angels and those that are, and those that are to

be, this heart, that I had strung up like a strong bow, fell into

feebleness, so that I lay there a-longing for the green

fields and the white-thorn bushes and the lark singing over

the corn, and the talk of good fellows round the ale-house bench,

and the babble of the little children, and the team on the road

and the beasts afield, and all the life of earth; and I alone all

the while, near my foes and afar from my friends, mocked and

flouted and starved with cold and hunger; and so weak was my

heart that though I longed for all these things yet I saw them

not, nor knew them but as names; and I longed so sore to be gone

that I chided myself that I had once done well; and I said to

myself:



"Forsooth, hadst thou kept thy tongue between thy teeth thou

mightest have been something, if it had been but a parson of a

town, and comfortable to many a poor man; and then mightest thou

have clad here and there the naked back, and filled the empty

belly, and holpen many, and men would have spoken well of thee,

and of thyself thou hadst thought well; and all this hast

thou lost for lack of a word here and there to some great

man, and a little winking of the eyes amidst murder and wrong and

unruth; and now thou art nought and helpless, and the hemp for

thee is sown and grown and heckled and spun, and lo there, the

rope for thy gallows-tree!--all for nought, for nought.



"Forsooth, my friends, thus I thought and sorrowed in my

feebleness that I had not been a traitor to the Fellowship of the

Church, for e'en so evil was my foolish imagination.



"Yet, forsooth, as I fell a-pondering over all the comfort and

help that I might have been and that I might have had, if I had

been but a little of a trembling cur to creep and crawl before

abbot and bishop and baron and bailiff, came the thought over me

of the evil of the world wherewith I, John Ball, the rascal

hedge-priest, had fought and striven in the Fellowship of the

saints in heaven and poor men upon earth.





"Yea, forsooth, once again I saw as of old, the great treading

down the little, and the strong beating down the weak, and cruel

men fearing not, and kind men daring not, and wise men caring

not; and the saints in heaven forbearing and yet bidding me not

to forbear; forsooth, I knew once more that he who doeth well in

fellowship, and because of fellowship, shall not fail though he

seem to fail to-day, but in days hereafter shall he and his work

yet be alive, and men be holpen by them to strive again and yet

again; and yet indeed even that was little, since, forsooth, to

strive was my pleasure and my life.



"So I became a man once more, and I rose up to my feet and went

up and down my prison what I could for my hopples, and into my

mouth came words of good cheer, even such as we to-day have sung,

and stoutly I sang them, even as we now have sung them; and then

did I rest me, and once more thought of those pleasant fields

where I would be, and all the life of man and beast about

them, and I said to myself that I should see them once more

before I died, if but once it were.



"Forsooth, this was strange, that whereas before I longed for

them and yet saw them not, now that my longing was slaked my

vision was cleared, and I saw them as though the prison walls

opened to me and I was out of Canterbury street and amidst the

green meadows of April; and therewithal along with me folk that I

have known and who are dead, and folk that are living; yea, and

all those of the Fellowship on earth and in heaven; yea, and all

that are here this day.  Overlong were the tale to tell of them,

and of the time that is gone.



"So thenceforward I wore through the days with no such faint

heart, until one day the prison opened verily and in the

daylight, and there were ye, my fellows, in the door--your faces

glad, your hearts light with hope, and your hands heavy with

wrath; then I saw and understood what was to do.  Now, therefore,

do ye understand it!"



His voice was changed, and grew louder than loud now, as he cast

his hands abroad towards that company with those last words of

his; and I could feel that all shame and fear was falling from

those men, and that mere fiery manhood was shining through their

wonted English shamefast stubbornness, and that they were moved

indeed and saw the road before them.  Yet no man spoke, rather

the silence of the men-folk deepened, as the sun's rays grew more

level and more golden, and the swifts wheeled about shriller and

louder than before.

Then again John Ball spoke and said, "In good sooth, I deem ye

wot no worse than I do what is to do--and first that somewhat we

shall do--since it is for him that is lonely or in prison to

dream of fellowship, but for him that is of a fellowship to do

and not to dream.



"And next, ye know who is the foeman, and that is the proud man,

the oppressor, who scorneth fellowship, and himself is a world to

himself and needeth no helper nor helpeth any, but, heeding no

law, layeth law on other men because he is rich; and surely every

one that is rich is such an one, nor may be other.



"Forsooth, in the belly of every rich man dwelleth a devil of

hell, and when the man would give his goods to the poor, the

devil within him gainsayeth it, and saith, `Wilt thou then be of

the poor, and suffer cold and hunger and mocking as they suffer,

then give thou thy goods to them, and keep them not.'  And when

he would be compassionate, again saith the devil to him, `If thou

heed these losels and turn on them a face like to their faces,

and deem of them as men, then shall they scorn thee, and evil

shall come of it, and even one day they shall fall on thee to

slay thee when they have learned that thou art but as they be.'



"Ah, woe worth the while! too oft he sayeth sooth, as the wont of

the devil is, that lies may be born of the barren truth; and

sooth it is that the poor deemeth the rich to be other than he,

and meet to be his master, as though, forsooth, the poor were

come of Adam, and the rich of him that made Adam, that is God;

and thus the poor man oppresseth the poor man, because he feareth

the oppressor.  Nought such are ye, my brethren; or else why are

ye gathered here in harness to bid all bear witness of you that

ye are the sons of one man and one mother, begotten of the

earth?"



As he said the words there came a stir among the weapons of the

throng, and they pressed closer round the cross, yet with held

the shout as yet which seemed gathering in their bosoms.



And again he said:



"Forsooth, too many rich men there are in this realm; and yet if

there were but one, there would be one too many, for all should

be his thralls.  Hearken, then, ye men of Kent.  For overlong

belike have I held you with words; but the love of you

constrained me, and the joy that a man hath to babble to his

friends and his fellows whom he hath not seen for a long season.



"Now, hearken, I bid you:  To the rich men that eat up a realm

there cometh a time when they whom they eat up, that is the poor,

seem poorer than of wont, and their complaint goeth up louder to

the heavens; yet it is no riddle to say that oft at such times

the fellowship of the poor is waxing stronger, else would no man

have heard his cry.  Also at such times is the rich man become

fearful, and so waxeth in cruelty, and of that cruelty do people

misdeem that it is power and might waxing.  Forsooth, ye are

stronger than your fathers, because ye are more grieved than

they, and ye should have been less grieved than they had ye been

horses and swine; and then, forsooth, would ye have been stronger

to bear; but ye, ye are not strong to bear, but to do.



"And wot ye why we are come to you this fair eve of holiday? and

wot ye why I have been telling of fellowship to you?  Yea,

forsooth, I deem ye wot well, that it is for this cause, that ye

might bethink you of your fellowship with the men of Essex."



His last word let loose the shout that had been long on all men's

lips, and great and fierce it was as it rang shattering through

the quiet upland village.  But John Ball held up his hand, and

the shout was one and no more.



Then he spoke again:



"Men of Kent, I wot well that ye are not so hard bested as those

of other shires, by the token of the day when behind the screen

of leafy boughs ye met Duke William with bill and bow as he

wended Londonward from that woeful field of Senlac; but I have

told of fellowship, and ye have hearkened and understood what the

Holy Church is, whereby ye know that ye are fellows of the

saints in heaven and the poor men of Essex; and as one day the

saints shall call you to the heavenly feast, so now do the poor

men call you to the battle.



"Men of Kent, ye dwell fairly here, and your houses are framed of

stout oak beams, and your own lands ye till; unless some accursed

lawyer with his false lying sheepskin and forged custom of the

Devil's Manor hath stolen it from you; but in Essex slaves they

be and villeins, and worse they shall be, and the lords swear

that ere a year be over ox and horse shall go free in Essex, and

man and woman shall draw the team and the plough; and north away

in the east countries dwell men in poor halls of wattled reeds

and mud, and the north-east wind from off the fen whistles

through them; and poor they be to the letter; and there him whom

the lord spareth, the bailiff squeezeth, and him whom the bailiff

forgetteth, the Easterling Chapman sheareth; yet be these

stout men and valiant, and your very brethren.



"And yet if there be any man here so base as to think that a

small matter, let him look to it that if these necks abide under

the yoke, Kent shall sweat for it ere it be long; and ye shall

lose acre and close and woodland, and be servants in your own

houses, and your sons shall be the lords' lads, and your

daughters their lemans, and ye shall buy a bold word with many

stripes, and an honest deed with a leap from the gallows-tree.



"Bethink ye, too, that ye have no longer to deal with Duke

William, who, if he were a thief and a cruel lord, was yet a

prudent man and a wise warrior; but cruel are these, and

headstrong, yea, thieves and fools in one--and ye shall lay their

heads in the dust."



A shout would have arisen again, but his eager voice rising

higher yet, restrained it as he said:



"And how shall it be then when these are gone?  What else shall

ye lack when ye lack masters?  Ye shall not lack for the fields

ye have tilled, nor the houses ye have built, nor the cloth ye

have woven; all these shall be yours, and whatso ye will of all

that the earth beareth; then shall no man mow the deep grass for

another, while his own kine lack cow-meat; and he that soweth

shall reap, and the reaper shall eat in fellowship the harvest

that in fellowship he hath won; and he that buildeth a house

shall dwell in it with those that he biddeth of his free will;

and the tithe barn shall garner the wheat for all men to eat of

when the seasons are untoward, and the rain-drift hideth the

sheaves in August; and all shall be without money and without

price.  Faithfully and merrily then shall all men keep the

holidays of the Church in peace of body and joy of heart.  And

man shall help man, and the saints in heaven shall be glad,

because men no more fear each other; and the churl shall be

ashamed, and shall hide his churlishness till it be gone, and he

be no more a churl; and fellowship shall be established in heaven

and on the earth."

