





CHAPTER XII



ILL WOULD CHANGE BE AT WHILES WERE

IT NOT FOR THE CHANGE BEYOND THE

CHANGE

He said:  "Many strange things hast thou told me that I could not

understand; yea, some my wit so failed to compass, that I cannot

so much as ask thee questions concerning them; but of some

matters would I ask thee, and I must hasten, for in very sooth

the night is worn old and grey.  Whereas thou sayest that in the

days to come, when there shall be no labouring men who are not

thralls after their new fashion, that their lords shall be many

and very many, it seemeth to me that these same lords, if they be

many, shall hardly be rich, or but very few of them,

since they must verily feed and clothe and house their thralls,

so that that which they take from them, since it will have to be

dealt out amongst many, will not be enough to make many rich;

since out of one man ye may get but one man's work; and pinch him

never so sorely, still as aforesaid ye may not pinch him so

sorely as not to feed him.  Therefore, though the eyes of my mind

may see a few lords and many slaves, yet can they not see many

lords as well as many slaves; and if the slaves be many and the

lords few, then some day shall the slaves make an end of that

mastery by the force of their bodies.  How then shall thy

mastership of the latter days endure?"



"John Ball," said I, "mastership hath many shifts whereby it

striveth to keep itself alive in the world.  And now hear a

marvel: whereas thou sayest these two times that out of one man

ye may get but one man's work, in days to come one man shall

do the work of a hundred men--yea, of a thousand or more: and

this is the shift of mastership that shall make many masters and

many rich men."



John Ball laughed.  "Great is my harvest of riddles to-night,"

said he; "for even if a man sleep not, and eat and drink while he

is a-working, ye shall but make two men, or three at the most,

out of him."



Said I:  "Sawest thou ever a weaver at his loom?"



"Yea," said he, "many a time."



He was silent a little, and then said:  "Yet I marvelled not at

it; but now I marvel, because I know what thou wouldst say.  Time

was when the shuttle was thrust in and out of all the thousand

threads of the warp, and it was long to do; but now the spring-

staves go up and down as the man's feet move, and this and that

leaf of the warp cometh forward and the shuttle goeth in one

shot through all the thousand warps.  Yea, so it is that this

multiplieth a man many times.  But look you, he is so multiplied

already; and so hath he been, meseemeth, for many hundred years."



"Yea," said I, "but what hitherto needed the masters to multiply

him more?  For many hundred years the workman was a thrall bought

and sold at the cross; and for other hundreds of years he hath

been a villein--that is, a working-beast and a part of the stock

of the manor on which he liveth; but then thou and the like of

thee shall free him, and then is mastership put to its shifts;

for what should avail the mastery then, when the master no longer

owneth the man by law as his chattel, nor any longer by law

owneth him as stock of his land, if the master hath not that

which he on whom he liveth may not lack and live withal, and

cannot have without selling himself?"



He said nothing, but I saw his brow knitted and his lips

pressed together as though in anger; and again I said:



"Thou hast seen the weaver at his loom: think how it should be if

he sit no longer before the web and cast the shuttle and draw

home the sley, but if the shed open of itself and the shuttle of

itself speed through it as swift as the eye can follow, and the

sley come home of itself; and the weaver standing by and

whistling The Hunt's Up! the while, or looking to half-a-dozen

looms and bidding them what to do.  And as with the weaver so

with the potter, and the smith, and every worker in metals, and

all other crafts, that it shall be for them looking on and

tending, as with the man that sitteth in the cart while the horse

draws.  Yea, at last so shall it be even with those who are mere

husbandmen; and no longer shall the reaper fare afield in the

morning with his hook over his shoulder, and smite and bind and

smite again till the sun is down and the moon is up; but he

shall draw a thing made by men into the field with one or two

horses, and shall say the word and the horses shall go up and

down, and the thing shall reap and gather and bind, and do the

work of many men.  Imagine all this in thy mind if thou canst, at

least as ye may imagine a tale of enchantment told by a minstrel,

and then tell me what shouldst thou deem that the life of men

would be amidst all this, men such as these men of the township

here, or the men of the Canterbury gilds."



"Yea," said he; "but before I tell thee my thoughts of thy tale

of wonder, I would ask thee this:  In those days when men work so

easily, surely they shall make more wares than they can use in

one countryside, or one good town, whereas in another, where

things have not gone as well, they shall have less than they

need; and even so it is with us now, and thereof cometh scarcity

and famine; and if people may not come at each other's

goods, it availeth the whole land little that one country-side

hath more than enough while another hath less; for the goods

shall abide there in the storehouses of the rich place till they

perish.  So if that be so in the days of wonder ye tell of (and I

see not how it can be otherwise), then shall men be but little

holpen by making all their wares so easily and with so little

labour."



I smiled again and said:  "Yea, but it shall not be so; not only

shall men be multiplied a hundred and a thousand fold, but the

distance of one place from another shall be as nothing; so that

the wares which lie ready for market in Durham in the evening may

be in London on the morrow morning; and the men of Wales may eat

corn of Essex and the men of Essex wear wool of Wales; so that,

so far as the flitting of goods to market goes, all the land

shall be as one parish.  Nay, what say I?  Not as to this

land only shall it be so, but even the Indies, and far countries

of which thou knowest not, shall be, so to say, at every man's

door, and wares which now ye account precious and dear-bought,

shall then be common things bought and sold for little price at

every huckster's stall.  Say then, John, shall not those days be

merry, and plentiful of ease and contentment for all men?"



"Brother," said he, "meseemeth some doleful mockery lieth under

these joyful tidings of thine; since thou hast already partly

told me to my sad bewilderment what the life of man shall be in

those days.  Yet will I now for a little set all that aside to

consider thy strange tale as of a minstrel from over sea, even as

thou biddest me.  Therefore I say, that if men still abide men as

I have known them, and unless these folk of England change as,

the land changeth--and forsooth of the men, for good and for

evil, I can think no other than I think now, or behold them other

than I have known them and loved them--I say if the men be still

men, what will happen except that there should be all plenty in

the land, and not one poor man therein, unless of his own free

will he choose to lack and be poor, as a man in religion or such

like; for there would then be such abundance of all good things,

that, as greedy as the lords might be, there would be enough to

satisfy their greed and yet leave good living for all who

laboured with their hands; so that these should labour far less

than now, and they would have time to learn knowledge, so that

there should be no learned or unlearned, for all should be

learned; and they would have time also to learn how to order the

matters of the parish and the hundred, and of the parliament of

the realm, so that the king should take no more than his own; and

to order the rule of the realm, so that all men, rich and

unrich, should have part therein; and so by undoing of evil laws

and making of good ones, that fashion would come to an end

whereof thou speakest, that rich men make laws for their own

behoof; for they should no longer be able to do thus when all had

part in making the laws; whereby it would soon come about that

there would be no men rich and tyrannous, but all should have

enough and to spare of the increase of the earth and the work of

their own hands.  Yea surely, brother, if ever it cometh about

that men shall be able to make things, and not men, work for

their superfluities, and that the length of travel from one place

to another be made of no account, and all the world be a market

for all the world, then all shall live in health and wealth; and

envy and grudging shall perish.  For then shall we have conquered

the earth and it shall be enough; and then shall the kingdom

of heaven be come down to the earth in very deed.  Why lookest

thou so sad and sorry? what sayest thou?"



I said:  "Hast thou forgotten already what I told thee, that in

those latter days a man who hath nought save his own body (and

such men shall be far the most of men) must needs pawn his labour

for leave to labour?  Can such a man be wealthy?  Hast thou not

called him a thrall?"



"Yea," he said; "but how could I deem that such things could be

when those days should be come wherein men could make things work

for them?"



"Poor man!" said I.  "Learn that in those very days, when it

shall be with the making of things as with the carter in the

cart, that there he sitteth and shaketh the reins and the horse

draweth and the cart goeth; in those days, I tell thee, many men

shall be as poor and wretched always, year by year, as they are

with thee when there is famine in the land; nor shall any

have plenty and surety of livelihood save those that shall sit by

and look on while others labour; and these, I tell thee, shall be

a many, so that they shall see to the making of all laws, and in

their hands shall be all power, and the labourers shall think

that they cannot do without these men that live by robbing them,

and shall praise them and wellnigh pray to them as ye pray to the

saints, and the best worshipped man in the land shall be he who

by forestalling and regrating hath gotten to him the most money."



"Yea," said he, "and shall they who see themselves robbed worship

the robber?  Then indeed shall men be changed from what they are

now, and they shall be sluggards, dolts, and cowards beyond all

the earth hath yet borne.  Such are not the men I have known in

my life-days, and that now I love in my death."



"Nay," I said, "but the robbery shall they not see; for have

I not told thee that they shall hold themselves to be free men? 

And for why?  I will tell thee: but first tell me how it fares

with men now; may the labouring man become a lord?"



He said:  "The thing hath been seen that churls have risen from

the dortoir of the monastery to the abbot's chair and the

bishop's throne; yet not often; and whiles hath a bold sergeant

become a wise captain, and they have made him squire and knight;

and yet but very seldom.  And now I suppose thou wilt tell me

that the Church will open her arms wider to this poor people, and

that many through her shall rise into lordship.  But what

availeth that?  Nought were it to me if the Abbot of St. Alban's

with his golden mitre sitting guarded by his knights and

sergeants, or the Prior of Merton with his hawks and his hounds,

had once been poor men, if they were now tyrants of poor men; nor

would it better the matter if there were ten times as many

Houses of Religion in the land as now are, and each with a

churl's son for abbot or prior over it."



I smiled and said:  "Comfort thyself; for in those days shall

there be neither abbey nor priory in the land, nor monks nor

friars, nor any religious."  (He started as I spoke.)  "But thou

hast told me that hardly in these days may a poor man rise to be

a lord: now I tell thee that in the days to come poor men shall

be able to become lords and masters and do-nothings; and oft will

it be seen that they shall do so; and it shall be even for that

cause that their eyes shall be blinded to the robbing of

themselves by others, because they shall hope in their souls that

they may each live to rob others: and this shall be the very

safeguard of all rule and law in those days."



"Now am I sorrier than thou hast yet made me," said he; "for when

once this is established, how then can it be changed? 

Strong shall be the tyranny of the latter days.  And now meseems,

if thou sayest sooth, this time of the conquest of the earth

shall not bring heaven down to the earth, as erst I deemed it

would, but rather that it shall bring hell up on to the earth. 

Woe's me, brother, for thy sad and weary foretelling!  And yet

saidst thou that the men of those days would seek a remedy. 

Canst thou yet tell me, brother, what that remedy shall be, lest

the sun rise upon me made hopeless by thy tale of what is to be? 

And, lo you, soon shall she rise upon the earth."



In truth the dawn was widening now, and the colours coming into

the pictures on wall and in window; and as well as I could see

through the varied glazing of these last (and one window before

me had as yet nothing but white glass in it), the ruddy glow,

which had but so little a while quite died out in the west, was

now beginning to gather in the east--the new day was

beginning.  I looked at the poppy that I still carried in my

hand, and it seemed to me to have withered and dwindled.  I felt

anxious to speak to my companion and tell him much, and withal I

felt that I must hasten, or for some reason or other I should be

too late; so I spoke at last loud and hurriedly:



"John Ball, be of good cheer; for once more thou knowest, as I

know, that the Fellowship of Men shall endure, however many

tribulations it may have to wear through.  Look you, a while ago

was the light bright about us; but it was because of the moon,

and the night was deep notwithstanding, and when the moonlight

waned and died, and there was but a little glimmer in place of

the bright light, yet was the world glad because all things knew

that the glimmer was of day and not of night.  Lo you, an image

of the times to betide the hope of the Fellowship of Men. 

Yet forsooth, it may well be that this bright day of summer which

is now dawning upon us is no image of the beginning of the day

that shall be; but rather shall that day-dawn be cold and grey

and surly; and yet by its light shall men see things as they

verily are, and no longer enchanted by the gleam of the moon and

the glamour of the dream-tide.  By such grey light shall wise men

and valiant souls see the remedy, and deal with it, a real thing

that may be touched and handled, and no glory of the heavens to

be worshipped from afar off.  And what shall it be, as I told

thee before, save that men shall be determined to be free; yea,

free as thou wouldst have them, when thine hope rises the

highest, and thou art thinking not of the king's uncles, and

poll-groat bailiffs, and the villeinage of Essex, but of the end

of all, when men shall have the fruits of the earth and the

fruits of their toil thereon, without money and without

price.  The time shall come, John Ball, when that dream of thine

that this shall one day be, shall be a thing that men shall talk

of soberly, and as a thing soon to come about, as even with thee

they talk of the villeins becoming tenants paying their lord

quit-rent; therefore, hast thou done well to hope it; and, if

thou heedest this also, as I suppose thou heedest it little, thy

name shall abide by thy hope in those days to come, and thou

shalt not be forgotten."



I heard his voice come out of the twilight, scarcely seeing him,

though now the light was growing fast, as he said:



"Brother, thou givest me heart again; yet since now I wot well

that thou art a sending from far-off times and far-off things:

tell thou, if thou mayest, to a man who is going to his death how

this shall come about."



"Only this may I tell thee " said I; "to thee, when thou

didst try to conceive of them, the ways of the days to come

seemed follies scarce to be thought of; yet shall they come to be

familiar things, and an order by which every man liveth, ill as

he liveth, so that men shall deem of them, that thus it hath been

since the beginning of the world, and that thus it shall be while

the world endureth; and in this wise so shall they be thought of

a long while; and the complaint of the poor the rich man shall

heed, even as much and no more as he who lieth in pleasure under

the lime-trees in the summer heedeth the murmur of his toiling

bees.  Yet in time shall this also grow old, and doubt shall

creep in, because men shall scarce be able to live by that order,

and the complaint of the poor shall be hearkened, no longer as a

tale not utterly grievous, but as a threat of ruin, and a fear. 

Then shall these things, which to thee seem follies, and to the

men between thee and me mere wisdom and the bond of

stability, seem follies once again; yet, whereas men have so long

lived by them, they shall cling to them yet from blindness and

from fear; and those that see, and that have thus much conquered

fear that they are furthering the real time that cometh and not

the dream that faileth, these men shall the blind and the fearful

mock and missay, and torment and murder: and great and grievous

shall be the strife in those days, and many the failures of the

wise, and too oft sore shall be the despair of the valiant; and

back-sliding, and doubt, and contest between friends and fellows

lacking time in the hubbub to understand each other, shall grieve

many hearts and hinder the Host of the Fellowship: yet shall all

bring about the end, till thy deeming of folly and ours shall be

one, and thy hope and our hope; and then--the Day will have

come."



Once more I heard the voice of John Ball:  "Now, brother, I say

farewell; for now verily hath the Day of the Earth come, and

thou and I are lonely of each other again; thou hast been a dream

to me as I to thee, and sorry and glad have we made each other,

as tales of old time and the longing of times to come shall ever

make men to be.  I go to life and to death, and leave thee; and

scarce do I know whether to wish thee some dream of the days

beyond thine to tell what shall be, as thou hast told me, for I

know not if that shall help or hinder thee; but since we have

been kind and very friends, I will not leave thee without a wish

of good-will, so at least I wish thee what thou thyself wishest

for thyself, and that is hopeful strife and blameless peace,

which is to say in one word, life.  Farewell, friend."



For some little time, although I had known that the daylight was

growing and what was around me, I had scarce seen the things I

had before noted so keenly; but now in a flash I saw all--the

east crimson with sunrise through the white window on my

right hand; the richly-carved stalls and gilded screen work, the

pictures on the walls, the loveliness of the faultless colour of

the mosaic window lights, the altar and the red light over it

looking strange in the daylight, and the biers with the hidden

dead men upon them that lay before the high altar.  A great pain

filled my heart at the sight of all that beauty, and withal I

heard quick steps coming up the paved church-path to the porch,

and the loud whistle of a sweet old tune therewith; then the

footsteps stopped at the door; I heard the latch rattle, and knew

that Will Green's hand was on the ring of it.



Then I strove to rise up, but fell back again; a white light,

empty of all sights, broke upon me for a moment, and lo I behold,

I was lying in my familiar bed, the south-westerly gale rattling

the Venetian blinds and making their hold-fasts squeak.



I got up presently, and going to the window looked out on

the winter morning; the river was before me broad between outer

bank and bank, but it was nearly dead ebb, and there was a wide

space of mud on each side of the hurrying stream, driven on the

faster as it seemed by the push of the south-west wind.  On the

other side of the water the few willow-trees left us by the

Thames Conservancy looked doubtfully alive against the bleak sky

and the row of wretched-looking blue-slated houses, although, by

the way, the latter were the backs of a sort of street of

"villas" and not a slum; the road in front of the house was sooty

and muddy at once, and in the air was that sense of dirty

discomfort which one is never quit of in London.  The morning was

harsh, too, and though the wind was from the south-west it was as

cold as a north wind; and yet amidst it all, I thought of the

corner of the next bight of the river which I could not quite see

from where I was, but over which one can see clear of houses and

into Richmond Park, looking like the open country; and dirty

as the river was, and harsh as was the January wind, they seemed

to woo me toward the country-side, where away from the miseries

of the "Great Wen" I might of my own will carry on a daydream of

the friends I had made in the dream of the night and against my

will.



But as I turned away shivering and downhearted, on a sudden came

the frightful noise of the "hooters," one after the other, that

call the workmen to the factories, this one the after-breakfast

one, more by token.  So I grinned surlily, and dressed and got

ready for my day's "work" as I call it, but which many a man

besides John Ruskin (though not many in his position) would call

"play."






End of A Dream of John Ball

