





A DREAM OF JOHN BALL



CHAPTER I



THE MEN OF KENT



Sometimes I am rewarded for fretting myself so much about present

matters by a quite unasked-for pleasant dream.  I mean when I am

asleep.  This dream is as it were a present of an architectural

peep-show.  I see some beautiful and noble building new made, as

it were for the occasion, as clearly as if I were awake; not

vaguely or absurdly, as often happens in dreams, but with all the

detail clear and reasonable.  Some Elizabethan house with its

scrap of earlier fourteenth-century building, and its later

degradations of Queen Anne and Silly Billy and Victoria,

marring but not destroying it, in an old village once a clearing

amid the sandy woodlands of Sussex.  Or an old and unusually

curious church, much churchwardened, and beside it a fragment of

fifteenth-century domestic architecture amongst the not

unpicturesque lath and plaster of an Essex farm, and looking

natural enough among the sleepy elms and the meditative hens

scratching about in the litter of the farmyard, whose trodden

yellow straw comes up to the very jambs of the richly carved

Norman doorway of the church.  Or sometimes 'tis a splendid

collegiate church, untouched by restoring parson and architect,

standing amid an island of shapely trees and flower-beset

cottages of thatched grey stone and cob, amidst the narrow

stretch of bright green water-meadows that wind between the

sweeping Wiltshire downs, so well beloved of William Cobbett.  Or

some new-seen and yet familiar cluster of houses in a grey

village of the upper Thames overtopped by the delicate tracery

of a fourteenth-century church; or even sometimes the very

buildings of the past untouched by the degradation of the sordid

utilitarianism that cares not and knows not of beauty and

history: as once, when I was journeying (in a dream of the night)

down the well-remembered reaches of the Thames betwixt Streatley

and Wallingford, where the foothills of the White Horse fall back

from the broad stream, I came upon a clear-seen mediaeval town

standing up with roof and tower and spire within its walls, grey

and ancient, but untouched from the days of its builders of old. 

All this I have seen in the dreams of the night clearer than I

can force myself to see them in dreams of the day.  So that it

would have been nothing new to me the other night to fall into an

architectural dream if that were all, and yet I have to tell of

things strange and new that befell me after I had fallen asleep. 

I had begun my sojourn in the Land of Nod by a very confused

attempt to conclude that it was all right for me to have an

engagement to lecture at Manchester and Mitcham Fair Green at

half-past eleven at night on one and the same Sunday, and that I

could manage pretty well.  And then I had gone on to try to make

the best of addressing a large open-air audience in the costume I

was really then wearing--to wit, my night-shirt, reinforced for

the dream occasion by a pair of braceless trousers.  The

consciousness of this fact so bothered me, that the earnest faces

of my audience--who would NOT notice it, but were clearly

preparing terrible anti-Socialist posers for me--began to fade

away and my dream grew thin, and I awoke (as I thought) to find

myself lying on a strip of wayside waste by an oak copse just

outside a country village.



I got up and rubbed my eyes and looked about me, and the

landscape seemed unfamiliar to me, though it was, as to the lie

of the land, an ordinary English low-country, swelling into

rising ground here and there.  The road was narrow, and I was

convinced that it was a piece of Roman road from its

straightness.  Copses were scattered over the country, and there

were signs of two or three villages and hamlets in sight besides

the one near me, between which and me there was some orchard-

land, where the early apples were beginning to redden on the

trees.  Also, just on the other side of the road and the ditch


which ran along it, was a small close of about a quarter of an

acre, neatly hedged with quick, which was nearly full of white

poppies, and, as far as I could see for the hedge, had also a

good few rose-bushes of the bright-red nearly single kind, which

I had heard are the ones from which rose-water used to be

distilled.  Otherwise the land was quite unhedged, but all under

tillage of various kinds, mostly in small strips.  From the other

side of a copse not far off rose a tall spire white and brand-

new, but at once bold in outline and unaffectedly graceful and

also distinctly English in character.  This, together with the

unhedged tillage and a certain unwonted trimness and handiness

about the enclosures of the garden and orchards, puzzled me for a

minute or two, as I did not understand, new as the spire was, how

it could have been designed by a modern architect; and I was of

course used to the hedged tillage and tumbledown bankrupt-looking

surroundings of our modern agriculture.  So that the garden-like

neatness and trimness of everything surprised me.  But after a

minute or two that surprise left me entirely; and if what I saw

and heard afterwards seems strange to you, remember that it did

not seem strange to me at the time, except where now and again I

shall tell you of it.  Also, once for all, if I were to give you

the very words of those who spoke to me you would scarcely

understand them, although their language was English too, and at

the time I could understand them at once.



Well, as I stretched myself and turned my face toward the

village, I heard horse-hoofs on the road, and presently a man and

horse showed on the other end of the stretch of road and drew

near at a swinging trot with plenty of clash of metal.  The man

soon came up to me, but paid me no more heed than throwing me a

nod.  He was clad in armour of mingled steel and leather, a sword

girt to his side, and over his shoulder a long-handled bill-hook.



His armour was fantastic in form and well wrought; but by this

time I was quite used to the strangeness of him, and merely

muttered to myself, "He is coming to summon the squire to the

leet;" so I turned toward the village in good earnest.  Nor,

again, was I surprised at my own garments, although I might well

have been from their unwontedness.  I was dressed in a black

cloth gown reaching to my ankles, neatly embroidered about the

collar and cuffs, with wide sleeves gathered in at the wrists; a

hood with a sort of bag hanging down from it was on my head, a

broad red leather girdle round my waist, on one side of which

hung a pouch embroidered very prettily and a case made of hard

leather chased with a hunting scene, which I knew to be a pen and

ink case; on the other side a small sheath-knife, only an arm in

case of dire necessity.



Well, I came into the village, where I did not see (nor by this

time expected to see) a single modern building, although many of

them were nearly new, notably the church, which was large, and

quite ravished my heart with its extreme beauty, elegance, and

fitness.  The chancel of this was so new that the dust of the

stone still lay white on the midsummer grass beneath the carvings

of the windows.  The houses were almost all built of oak frame-

work filled with cob or plaster well whitewashed; though some had

their lower stories of rubble-stone, with their windows and doors

of well-moulded freestone.  There was much curious and

inventive carving about most of them; and though some were old

and much worn, there was the same look of deftness and trimness,

and even beauty, about every detail in them which I noticed

before in the field-work.  They were all roofed with oak

shingles, mostly grown as grey as stone; but one was so newly

built that its roof was yet pale and yellow.  This was a corner

house, and the corner post of it had a carved niche wherein stood

a gaily painted figure holding an anchor--St. Clement to wit, as

the dweller in the house was a blacksmith.  Half a stone's throw

from the east end of the churchyard wall was a tall cross of

stone, new like the church, the head beautifully carved with a

crucifix amidst leafage.  It stood on a set of wide stone steps,

octagonal in shape, where three roads from other villages met and

formed a wide open space on which a thousand people or more could

stand together with no great crowding.



All this I saw, and also that there was a goodish many people

about, women and children, and a few old men at the doors, many

of them somewhat gaily clad, and that men were coming into the

village street by the other end to that by which I had entered,

by twos and threes, most of them carrying what I could see were

bows in cases of linen yellow with wax or oil; they had quivers

at their backs, and most of them a short sword by their left

side, and a pouch and knife on the right; they were mostly

dressed in red or brightish green or blue cloth jerkins, with a

hood on the head generally of another colour.  As they came

nearer I saw that the cloth of their garments was somewhat

coarse, but stout and serviceable.  I knew, somehow, that they

had been shooting at the butts, and, indeed, I could still hear a

noise of men thereabout, and even now and again when the wind set

from that quarter the twang of the bowstring and the plump of the

shaft in the target.



I leaned against the churchyard wall and watched these men,

some of whom went straight into their houses and some loitered

about still; they were rough-looking fellows, tall and stout,

very black some of them, and some red-haired, but most had hair

burnt by the sun into the colour of tow; and, indeed, they were

all burned and tanned and freckled variously.  Their arms and

buckles and belts and the finishings and hems of their garments

were all what we should now call beautiful, rough as the men

were; nor in their speech was any of that drawling snarl or thick

vulgarity which one is used to hear from labourers in

civilisation; not that they talked like gentlemen either, but

full and round and bold, and they were merry and good-tempered

enough; I could see that, though I felt shy and timid amongst

them.



One of them strode up to me across the road, a man some six feet

high, with a short black beard and black eyes and berry-brown

skin, with a huge bow in his hand bare of the case, a knife,

a pouch, and a short hatchet, all clattering together at his

girdle.



"Well, friend," said he, "thou lookest partly mazed; what tongue

hast thou in thine head?"



"A tongue that can tell rhymes," said I.



"So I thought," said he.  "Thirstest thou any?"



"Yea, and hunger," said I.



And therewith my hand went into my purse, and came out again with

but a few small and thin silver coins with a cross stamped on

each, and three pellets in each corner of the cross.  The man

grinned.



"Aha!" said he, "is it so?  Never heed it, mate.  It shall be a

song for a supper this fair Sunday evening.  But first, whose man

art thou?"



"No one's man," said I, reddening angrily; "I am my own master."



He grinned again.



"Nay, that's not the custom of England, as one time belike it

will be.  Methinks thou comest from heaven down, and hast had

a high place there too."



He seemed to hesitate a moment, and then leant forward and

whispered in my ear:  "John the Miller, that ground small,

small, small," and stopped and winked at me, and from between my

lips without my mind forming any meaning came the words, "The

king's son of heaven shall pay for all."



He let his bow fall on to his shoulder, caught my right hand in

his and gave it a great grip, while his left hand fell among the

gear at his belt, and I could see that he half drew his knife.



"Well, brother," said he, "stand not here hungry in the highway

when there is flesh and bread in the Rose yonder.  Come on."



And with that he drew me along toward what was clearly a tavern

door, outside which men were sitting on a couple of benches and

drinking meditatively from curiously shaped earthen pots glazed

green and yellow, some with quaint devices on them.


