





CHAPTER IX



BETWIXT THE LIVING AND THE DEAD



We entered the church through the south porch under a round-

arched door carved very richly, and with a sculpture over the

doorway and under the arch, which, as far as I could see by the

moonlight, figured St. Michael and the Dragon.  As I came into

the rich gloom of the nave I noticed for the first time that I

had one of those white poppies in my hand; I must have taken it

out of the pot by the window as I passed out of Will Green's

house.



The nave was not very large, but it looked spacious too; it was

somewhat old, but well-built and handsome; the roof of curved

wooden rafters with great tie-beams going from wall to wall. 

There was no light in it but that of the moon streaming

through the windows, which were by no means large, and were

glazed with white fretwork, with here and there a little figure

in very deep rich colours.  Two larger windows near the east end

of each aisle had just been made so that the church grew lighter

toward the east, and I could see all the work on the great screen

between the nave and chancel which glittered bright in new paint

and gilding: a candle glimmered in the loft above it, before the

huge rood that filled up the whole space between the loft and the

chancel arch.  There was an altar at the east end of each aisle,

the one on the south side standing against the outside wall, the

one on the north against a traceried gaily-painted screen, for

that aisle ran on along the chancel.  There were a few oak

benches near this second altar, seemingly just made, and well

carved and moulded; otherwise the floor of the nave, which was

paved with a quaint pavement of glazed tiles like the crocks

I had seen outside as to ware, was quite clear, and the shafts of

the arches rose out of it white and beautiful under the moon as

though out of a sea, dark but with gleams struck over it.



The priest let me linger and look round, when he had crossed

himself and given me the holy water; and then I saw that the

walls were figured all over with stories, a huge St. Christopher

with his black beard looking like Will Green, being close to the

porch by which we entered, and above the chancel arch the Doom of

the last Day, in which the painter had not spared either kings or

bishops, and in which a lawyer with his blue coif was one of the

chief figures in the group which the Devil was hauling off to

hell.



"Yea," said John Ball, "'tis a goodly church and fair as you may

see 'twixt Canterbury and London as for its kind; and yet do I

misdoubt me where those who are dead are housed, and where those

shall house them after they are dead, who built this house

for God to dwell in.  God grant they be cleansed at last;

forsooth one of them who is now alive is a foul swine and a cruel

wolf.  Art thou all so sure, scholar, that all such have souls?

and if it be so, was it well done of God to make them?  I speak

to thee thus, for I think thou art no delator; and if thou be,

why should I heed it, since I think not to come back from this

journey."



I looked at him and, as it were, had some ado to answer him; but

I said at last, "Friend, I never saw a soul, save in the body; I

cannot tell."



He crossed himself and said, "Yet do I intend that ere many days

are gone by my soul shall be in bliss among the fellowship of the

saints, and merry shall it be, even before my body rises from the

dead; for wisely I have wrought in the world, and I wot well of

friends that are long ago gone from the world, as St. Martin, and

St. Francis, and St. Thomas of Canterbury, who shall speak

well of me to the heavenly Fellowship, and I shall in no wise

lose my reward."



I looked shyly at him as he spoke; his face looked sweet and calm

and happy, and I would have said no word to grieve him; and yet

belike my eyes looked wonder on him: he seemed to note it and his

face grew puzzled.  "How deemest thou of these things?" said he:

"why do men die else, if it be otherwise than this?"



I smiled:  "Why then do they live?" said I.



Even in the white moonlight I saw his face flush, and he cried

out in a great voice, "To do great deeds or to repent them that

they ever were born."

"Yea," said I, "they live to live because the world liveth."  He

stretched out his hand to me and grasped mine, but said no more;

and went on till we came to the door in the rood-screen; then he

turned to me with his hand on the ring-latch, and said, "Hast

thou seen many dead men?"



"Nay, but few," said I.



"And I a many," said he; "but come now and look on these, our

friends first and then our foes, so that ye may not look to see

them while we sit and talk of the days that are to be on the

earth before the Day of Doom cometh."



So he opened the door, and we went into the chancel; a light

burned on the high altar before the host, and looked red and

strange in the moonlight that came through the wide traceried

windows unstained by the pictures and beflowerings of the

glazing; there were new stalls for the priests and vicars where

we entered, carved more abundantly and beautifully than any of

the woodwork I had yet seen, and everywhere was rich and fair

colour and delicate and dainty form.  Our dead lay just before

the high altar on low biers, their faces all covered with linen

cloths, for some of them had been sore smitten and hacked in the

fray.  We went up to them and John Ball took the cloth from

the face of one; he had been shot to the heart with a shaft and

his face was calm and smooth.  He had been a young man fair and

comely, with hair flaxen almost to whiteness; he lay there in his

clothes as he had fallen, the hands crossed over his breast and

holding a rush cross.  His bow lay on one side of him, his quiver

of shafts and his sword on the other.



John Ball spake to me while he held the corner of the sheet: 

"What sayest thou, scholar? feelest thou sorrow of heart when

thou lookest on this, either for the man himself, or for thyself

and the time when thou shalt be as he is?"



I said, "Nay, I feel no sorrow for this; for the man is not here:

this is an empty house, and the master has gone from it. 

Forsooth, this to me is but as a waxen image of a man; nay, not

even that, for if it were an image, it would be an image of the

man as he was when he was alive.  But here is no life nor

semblance of life, and I am not moved by it; nay, I am more

moved by the man's clothes and war-gear--there is more life in

them than in him."



"Thou sayest sooth," said he; "but sorrowest thou not for thine

own death when thou lookest on him?"



I said, "And how can I sorrow for that which I cannot so much as

think of?  Bethink thee that while I am alive I cannot think that

I shall die, or believe in death at all, although I know well

that I shall die--I can but think of myself as living in some new

way."



Again he looked on me as if puzzled; then his face cleared as he

said, "Yea, forsooth, and that is what the Church meaneth by

death, and even that I look for; and that hereafter I shall see

all the deeds that I have done in the body, and what they really

were, and what shall come of them; and ever shall I be a member

of the Church, and that is the Fellowship; then, even as now."



I sighed as he spoke; then I said, "Yea, somewhat in this fashion

have most of men thought, since no man that is can conceive of

not being; and I mind me that in those stories of the old Danes,

their common word for a man dying is to say, `He changed his

life.'"



"And so deemest thou?"



I shook my head and said nothing.



"What hast thou to say hereon?" said he, "for there seemeth

something betwixt us twain as it were a wall that parteth us."



"This," said I, "that though I die and end, yet mankind yet

liveth, therefore I end not, since I am a man; and even so thou

deemest, good friend; or at the least even so thou doest, since

now thou art ready to die in grief and torment rather than be

unfaithful to the Fellowship, yea rather than fail to work thine

utmost for it; whereas, as thou thyself saidst at the cross, with

a few words spoken and a little huddling-up of the truth, with a

few pennies paid, and a few masses sung, thou mightest have

had a good place on this earth and in that heaven.  And as thou

doest, so now doth many a poor man unnamed and unknown, and shall

do while the world lasteth: and they that do less than this, fail

because of fear, and are ashamed of their cowardice, and make

many tales to themselves to deceive themselves, lest they should

grow too much ashamed to live.  And trust me if this were not so,

the world would not live, but would die, smothered by its own

stink.  Is the wall betwixt us gone, friend?"



He smiled as he looked at me, kindly, but sadly and shamefast,

and shook his head.



Then in a while he said, "Now ye have seen the images of those

who were our friends, come and see the images of those who were

once our foes."



So he led the way through the side screen into the chancel aisle,

and there on the pavement lay the bodies of the foemen, their

weapons taken from them and they stripped of their armour,

but not otherwise of their clothes, and their faces mostly, but

not all, covered.  At the east end of the aisle was another

altar, covered with a rich cloth beautifully figured, and on the

wall over it was a deal of tabernacle work, in the midmost niche

of it an image painted and gilt of a gay knight on horseback,

cutting his own cloak in two with his sword to give a cantle of

it to a half-naked beggar.

"Knowest thou any of these men?" said I.



He said, "Some I should know, could I see their faces; but let

them be."



"Were they evil men?" said I.



"Yea," he said, "some two or three.  But I will not tell thee of

them; let St. Martin, whose house this is, tell their story if he

will.  As for the rest they were hapless fools, or else men who

must earn their bread somehow, and were driven to this bad way of

earning it; God rest their souls!  I will be no tale-bearer, not

even to God."



So we stood musing a little while, I gazing not on the dead men,

but on the strange pictures on the wall, which were richer and

deeper coloured than those in the nave; till at last John Ball

turned to me and laid his hand on my shoulder.  I started and

said, "Yea, brother; now must I get me back to Will Green's

house, as I promised to do so timely."



"Not yet, brother," said he; "I have still much to say to thee,

and the night is yet young.  Go we and sit in the stalls of the

vicars, and let us ask and answer on matters concerning the

fashion of this world of menfolk, and of this land wherein we

dwell; for once more I deem of thee that thou hast seen things

which I have not seen, and could not have seen."  With that word

he led me back into the chancel, and we sat down side by side in

the stalls at the west end of it, facing the high altar and the

great east window.  By this time the chancel was getting dimmer

as the moon wound round the heavens; but yet was there a

twilight of the moon, so that I could still see the things about

me for all the brightness of the window that faced us; and this

moon twilight would last, I knew, until the short summer night

should wane, and the twilight of the dawn begin to show us the

colours of all things about us.



So we sat, and I gathered my thoughts to hear what he would say,

and I myself was trying to think what I should ask of him; for I

thought of him as he of me, that he had seen things which I could

not have seen.

