





CHAPTER VII



MORE WORDS AT THE CROSS



I got into my old place again on the steps of the cross, Will

Green beside me, and above me John Ball and Jack Straw again. 

The moon was half-way up the heavens now, and the short summer

night had begun, calm and fragrant, with just so much noise

outside our quiet circle as made one feel the world alive and

happy.



We waited silently until we had heard John Ball and the story of

what was to do; and presently he began to speak.



"Good people, it is begun, but not ended.  Which of you is hardy

enough to wend the road to London to-morrow?"



"All!  All!" they shouted.



"Yea," said he, "even so I deemed of you.  Yet forsooth

hearken!  London is a great and grievous city; and mayhappen when

ye come thither it shall seem to you overgreat to deal with, when

ye remember the little townships and the cots ye came from.



"Moreover, when ye dwell here in Kent ye think forsooth of your

brethren in Essex or Suffolk, and there belike an end.  But from

London ye may have an inkling of all the world, and over-

burdensome maybe shall that seem to you, a few and a feeble

people.



"Nevertheless I say to you, remember the Fellowship, in the hope

of which ye have this day conquered; and when ye come to London

be wise and wary; and that is as much as to say, be bold and

hardy; for in these days are ye building a house which shall not

be overthrown, and the world shall not be too great or too little

to hold it: for indeed it shall be the world itself, set free

from evil-doers for friends to dwell in."



He ceased awhile, but they hearkened still, as if something

more was coming.  Then he said:



"To-morrow we shall take the road for Rochester; and most like it

were well to see what Sir John Newton in the castle may say to

us: for the man is no ill man, and hath a tongue well-shapen for

words; and it were well that we had him out of the castle and

away with us, and that we put a word in his mouth to say to the

King.  And wot ye well, good fellows, that by then we come to

Rochester we shall be a goodly company, and ere we come to

Blackheath a very great company; and at London Bridge who shall

stay our host?



"Therefore there is nought that can undo us except our own selves

and our hearkening to soft words from those who would slay us. 

They shall bid us go home and abide peacefully with our wives and

children while they, the lords and councillors and lawyers,

imagine counsel and remedy for us; and even so shall our own

folly bid us; and if we hearken thereto we are undone indeed;

for they shall fall upon our peace with war, and our wives and

children they shall take from us, and some of us they shall hang,

and some they shall scourge, and the others shall be their yoke-

beasts--yea, and worse, for they shall lack meat more.



"To fools hearken not, whether they be yourselves or your foemen,

for either shall lead you astray.



"With the lords parley not, for ye know already what they would

say to you, and that is, `Churl, let me bridle thee and saddle

thee, and eat thy livelihood that thou winnest, and call thee

hard names because I eat thee up; and for thee, speak not and do

not, save as I bid thee.'



"All that is the end of their parleying.



"Therefore be ye bold, and again bold, and thrice bold!  Grip the

bow, handle the staff, draw the sword, and set on in the name of

the Fellowship!"



He ended amid loud shouts; but straight-way answering shouts

were heard, and a great noise of the winding of horns, and I

misdoubted a new onslaught; and some of those in the throng began

to string their bows and handle their bills; but Will Green

pulled me by the sleeve and said:



"Friends are these by the winding of their horns; thou art quit

for this night, old lad."  And then Jack Straw cried out from the

cross:  "Fair and softly, my masters!  These be men of our

Fellowship, and are for your guests this night; they are from the

bents this side of Medway, and are with us here because of the

pilgrimage road, and that is the best in these parts, and so the

shortest to Rochester.  And doubt ye nothing of our being taken

unawares this night; for I have bidden and sent out watchers of

the ways, and neither a man's son nor a mare's son may come in on

us without espial.  Now make we our friends welcome.  Forsooth, I

looked for them an hour later; and had they come an hour

earlier yet, some heads would now lie on the cold grass which

shall lie on a feather bed to-night.  But let be, since all is

well!



"Now get we home to our houses, and eat and drink and slumber

this night, if never once again, amid the multitude of friends

and fellows; and yet soberly and without riot, since so much work

is to hand.  Moreover the priest saith, bear ye the dead men,

both friends and foes, into the chancel of the church, and there

this night he will wake them: but after to-morrow let the dead

abide to bury their dead!"



Therewith he leapt down from the cross, and Will and I bestirred

ourselves and mingled with the new-comers.  They were some three

hundred strong, clad and armed in all ways like the people of our

township, except some half-dozen whose armour shone cold like ice

under the moonbeams.  Will Green soon had a dozen of them by the

sleeve to come home with him to board and bed, and then I lost

him for some minutes, and turning about saw John Ball

standing behind me, looking pensively on all the stir and merry

humours of the joyous uplanders.



"Brother from Essex," said he, "shall I see thee again to-night? 

I were fain of speech with thee; for thou seemest like one that

has seen more than most."



"Yea," said I, "if ye come to Will Green's house, for thither am

I bidden."



"Thither shall I come," said he, smiling kindly, "or no man I

know in field.  Lo you, Will Green looking for something, and

that is me.  But in his house will be song and the talk of many

friends; and forsooth I have words in me that crave to come out

in a quiet place where they may have each one his own answer.  If

thou art not afraid of dead men who were alive and wicked this

morning, come thou to the church when supper is done, and there

we may talk all we will."



Will Green was standing beside us before he had done, with

his hand laid on the priest's shoulder, waiting till he had

spoken out; and as I nodded Yea to John Ball he said:



"Now, master priest, thou hast spoken enough this two or three

hours, and this my new brother must tell and talk in my house;

and there my maid will hear his wisdom which lay still under the

hedge e'en now when the bolts were abroad.  So come ye, and ye

good fellows, come!"



So we turned away together into the little street.  But while

John Ball had been speaking to me I felt strangely, as though I

had more things to say than the words I knew could make clear: as

if I wanted to get from other people a new set of words. 

Moreover, as we passed up the street again I was once again

smitten with the great beauty of the scene; the houses, the

church with its new chancel and tower, snow-white in the

moonbeams now; the dresses and arms of the people, men and women

(for the latter were now mixed up with the men); their grave

sonorous language, and the quaint and measured forms of speech,

were again become a wonder to me and affected me almost to tears.
