





CHAPTER V



THEY HEAR TIDINGS OF BATTLE AND

MAKE THEM READY



He left off as one who had yet something else to say; and,

indeed, I thought he would give us some word as to the trysting-

place, and whither the army was to go from it; because it was now

clear to me that this gathering was but a band of an army.  But

much happened before John Ball spoke again from the cross, and it

was on this wise.



When there was silence after the last shout that the crowd had

raised a while ago, I thought I heard a thin sharp noise far

away, somewhat to the north of the cross, which I took rather for

the sound of a trumpet or horn, than for the voice of a man or

any beast.  Will Green also seemed to have heard it,

for he turned his head sharply and then back again, and looked

keenly into the crowd as though seeking to catch some one's eye. 

There was a very tall man standing by the prisoner on the horse

near the outskirts of the crowd, and holding his bridle.  This

man, who was well-armed, I saw look up and say something to the

prisoner, who stooped down and seemed to whisper him in turn. 

The tall man nodded his head and the prisoner got off his horse,

which was a cleaner-limbed, better-built beast than the others

belonging to the band, and the tall man quietly led him a little

way from the crowd, mounted him, and rode off northward at a

smart pace.



Will Green looked on sharply at all this, and when the man rode

off, smiled as one who is content, and deems that all is going

well, and settled himself down again to listen to the priest.



But now when John Ball had ceased speaking, and after another

shout, and a hum of excited pleasure and hope that followed it,

there was silence again, and as the priest addressed himself to

speaking once more, he paused and turned his head towards the

wind, as if he heard something, which certainly I heard, and

belike every one in the throng, though it was not over-loud, far

as sounds carry in clear quiet evenings.  It was the thump-a-

thump of a horse drawing near at a hand-gallop along the grassy

upland road; and I knew well it was the tall man coming back with

tidings, the purport of which I could well guess.



I looked up at Will Green's face.  He was smiling as one pleased,

and said softly as he nodded to me, "Yea, shall we see the grey-

goose fly this eve?"



But John Ball said in a great voice from the cross, "Hear ye the

tidings on the way, fellows!  Hold ye together and look to your

gear; yet hurry not, for no great matter shall this be.  I wot

well there is little force between Canterbury and Kingston,

for the lords are looking north of Thames toward Wat Tyler and

his men.  Yet well it is, well it is!"



The crowd opened and spread out a little, and the men moved about

in it, some tightening a girdle, some getting their side arms

more within reach of their right hands, and those who had bows

stringing them.



Will Green set hand and foot to the great shapely piece of

polished red yew, with its shining horn tips, which he carried,

and bent it with no seeming effort; then he reached out his hand

over his shoulder and drew out a long arrow, smooth, white,

beautifully balanced, with a barbed iron head at one end, a horn

nock and three strong goose feathers at the other.  He held it

loosely between the finger and thumb of his right hand, and there

he stood with a thoughtful look on his face, and in his hands one

of the most terrible weapons which a strong man has ever

carried, the English long-bow and cloth-yard shaft.



But all this while the sound of the horse's hoofs was growing

nearer, and presently from the corner of the road amidst the

orchards broke out our long friend, his face red in the sun near

sinking now.  He waved his right hand as he came in sight of us,

and sang out, "Bills and bows! bills and bows!" and the whole

throng turned towards him and raised a great shout.



He reined up at the edge of the throng, and spoke in a loud

voice, so that all might hear him:



"Fellows, these are the tidings; even while our priest was

speaking we heard a horn blow far off; so I bade the sergeant we

have taken, and who is now our fellow-in-arms, to tell me where

away it was that there would be folk a-gathering, and what they

were; and he did me to wit that mayhappen Sir John Newton was

stirring from Rochester Castle; or, maybe, it was the sheriff

and Rafe Hopton with him; so I rode off what I might towards

Hartlip, and I rode warily, and that was well, for as I came

through a little wood between Hartlip and Guildstead, I saw

beyond it a gleam of steel, and lo in the field there a company,

and a pennon of Rafe Hopton's arms, and that is blue and thereon

three silver fish: and a pennon of the sheriff's arms, and that

is a green tree; and withal another pennon of three red kine, and

whose they be I know not.[1]







[1] Probably one of the Calverlys, a Cheshire family, one of whom

was a noted captain in the French wars.







"There tied I my horse in the middle of the wood, and myself I

crept along the dyke to see more and to hear somewhat; and no

talk I heard to tell of save at whiles a big knight talking to

five or six others, and saying somewhat, wherein came the words

London and Nicholas Bramber, and King Richard; but I saw that of

men-at-arms and sergeants there might be a hundred, and of

bows not many, but of those outland arbalests maybe a fifty; and

so, what with one and another of servants and tipstaves and lads,

some three hundred, well armed, and the men-at-arms of the best. 

Forsooth, my masters, there had I been but a minute, ere the big

knight broke off his talk, and cried out to the music to blow up,

`And let us go look on these villeins,' said he; and withal the

men began to gather in a due and ordered company, and their faces

turned hitherward; forsooth, I got to my horse, and led him out

of the wood on the other side, and so to saddle and away along

the green roads; neither was I seen or chased.  So look ye to it,

my masters, for these men will be coming to speak with us; nor is

there need for haste, but rather for good speed; for in some

twenty or thirty minutes will be more tidings to hand."



By this time one of our best-armed men had got through the throng

and was standing on the cross beside John Ball.  When the

long man had done, there was confused noise of talk for a while,

and the throng spread itself out more and more, but not in a

disorderly manner; the bowmen drawing together toward the

outside, and the billmen forming behind them.  Will Green was

still standing beside me and had hold of my arm, as though he

knew both where he and I were to go.



"Fellows," quoth the captain from the cross, "belike this stour

shall not live to be older than the day, if ye get not into a

plump together for their arbalestiers to shoot bolts into, and

their men-at-arms to thrust spears into.  Get you to the edge of

the crofts and spread out there six feet between man and man, and

shoot, ye bowmen, from the hedges, and ye with the staves keep

your heads below the level of the hedges, or else for all they be

thick a bolt may win its way in."



He grinned as he said this, and there was laughter enough in

the throng to have done honour to a better joke.



Then he sung out, "Hob Wright, Rafe Wood, John Pargetter, and

thou Will Green, bestir ye and marshal the bowshot; and thou

Nicholas Woodyer shall be under me Jack Straw in ordering of the

staves.  Gregory Tailor and John Clerk, fair and fine are ye clad

in the arms of the Canterbury bailiffs; ye shall shine from afar;

go ye with the banner into the highway, and the bows on either

side shall ward you; yet jump, lads, and over the hedge with you

when the bolts begin to fly your way!  Take heed, good fellows

all, that our business is to bestride the highway, and not let

them get in on our flank the while; so half to the right, half to

the left of the highway.  Shoot straight and strong, and waste no

breath with noise; let the loose of the bowstring cry for you!

and look you! think it no loss of manhood to cover your bodies

with tree and bush; for one of us who know is worth a hundred

of those proud fools.  To it, lads, and let them see what the

grey goose bears between his wings!  Abide us here, brother John

Ball, and pray for us if thou wilt; but for me, if God will not

do for Jack Straw what Jack Straw would do for God were he in

like case, I can see no help for it."



"Yea, forsooth," said the priest, "here will I abide you my

fellows if ye come back; or if ye come not back, here will I

abide the foe.  Depart, and the blessing of the Fellowship be

with you."



Down then leapt Jack Straw from the cross, and the whole throng

set off without noise or hurry, soberly and steadily in outward

seeming.  Will Green led me by the hand as if I were a boy, yet

nothing he said, being forsooth intent on his charge.  We were

some four hundred men in all; but I said to myself that without

some advantage of the ground we were lost men before the men-at-

arms that long Gregory Tailor had told us of; for I had not

seen as yet the yard-long shaft at its work.



We and somewhat more than half of our band turned into the

orchards on the left of the road, through which the level rays of

the low sun shone brightly.  The others took up their position on

the right side of it.  We kept pretty near to the road till we

had got through all the closes save the last, where we were

brought up by a hedge and a dyke, beyond which lay a wide-open

nearly treeless space, not of tillage, as at the other side of

the place, but of pasture, the common grazing ground of the

township.  A little stream wound about through the ground, with a

few willows here and there; there was only a thread of water in

it in this hot summer tide, but its course could easily be traced

by the deep blue-green of the rushes that grew plenteously in the

bed.  Geese were lazily wandering about and near this brook, and

a herd of cows, accompanied by the town bull, were feeding on

quietly, their heads all turned one way; while half a dozen

calves marched close together side by side like a plump of

soldiers, their tails swinging in a kind of measure to keep off

the flies, of which there was great plenty.  Three or four lads

and girls were sauntering about, heeding or not heeding the

cattle.  They looked up toward us as we crowded into the last

close, and slowly loitered off toward the village.  Nothing

looked like battle; yet battle sounded in the air; for now we

heard the beat of the horse-hoofs of the men-at-arms coming on

towards us like the rolling of distant thunder, and growing

louder and louder every minute; we were none too soon in turning

to face them.  Jack Straw was on our side of the road, and with a

few gestures and a word or two he got his men into their places. 

Six archers lined the hedge along the road where the banner of

Adam and Eve, rising above the grey leaves of the apple-trees,

challenged the new-comers; and of the billmen also he kept a good

few ready to guard the road in case the enemy should try to

rush it with the horsemen.  The road, not being a Roman one, was,

you must remember, little like the firm smooth country roads that

you are used to; it was a mere track between the hedges and

fields, partly grass-grown, and cut up by the deep-sunk ruts

hardened by the drought of summer.  There was a stack of fagot

and small wood on the other side, and our men threw themselves

upon it and set to work to stake the road across for a rough

defence against the horsemen.



What befell more on the road itself I had not much time to note,

for our bowmen spread themselves out along the hedge that looked

into the pasture-field, leaving some six feet between man and

man; the rest of the billmen went along with the bowmen, and

halted in clumps of some half-dozen along their line, holding

themselves ready to help the bowmen if the enemy should run up

under their shafts, or to run on to lengthen the line in case

they should try to break in on our flank.  The hedge in front of

us was of quick.  It had been strongly plashed in the past

February, and was stiff and stout.  It stood on a low bank;

moreover, the level of the orchard was some thirty inches higher

than that of the field.  and the ditch some two foot deeper than

the face of the field.  The field went winding round to beyond

the church, making a quarter of a circle about the village, and

at the western end of it were the butts whence the folk were

coming from shooting when I first came into the village street.



Altogether, to me who knew nothing of war the place seemed

defensible enough.  I have said that the road down which Long

Gregory came with his tidings went north; and that was its

general direction; but its first reach was nearly east, so that

the low sun was not in the eyes of any of us, and where Will

Green took his stand, and I with him, it was nearly at our backs.

