





CHAPTER II



THE MAN FROM ESSEX



I entered the door and started at first with my old astonishment,

with which I had woke up, so strange and beautiful did this

interior seem to me, though it was but a pothouse parlour.  A

quaintly-carved side board held an array of bright pewter pots

and dishes and wooden and earthen bowls; a stout oak table went

up and down the room, and a carved oak chair stood by the

chimney-corner, now filled by a very old man dim-eyed and white-

bearded.  That, except the rough stools and benches on which the

company sat, was all the furniture.  The walls were panelled

roughly enough with oak boards to about six feet from the floor,

and about three feet of plaster above that was wrought in

a pattern of a rose stem running all round the room, freely and

roughly done, but with (as it seemed to my unused eyes) wonderful

skill and spirit.  On the hood of the great chimney a huge rose

was wrought in the plaster and brightly painted in its proper

colours.  There were a dozen or more of the men I had seen coming

along the street sitting there, some eating and all drinking;

their cased bows leaned against the wall, their quivers hung on

pegs in the panelling, and in a corner of the room I saw half-a-

dozen bill-hooks that looked made more for war than for hedge-

shearing, with ashen handles some seven foot long.  Three or four

children were running about among the legs of the men, heeding

them mighty little in their bold play, and the men seemed little

troubled by it, although they were talking earnestly and

seriously too.  A well-made comely girl leaned up against the

chimney close to the gaffer's chair, and seemed to be in

waiting on the company: she was clad in a close-fitting gown of

bright blue cloth, with a broad silver girdle daintily wrought,

round her loins, a rose wreath was on her head and her hair hung

down unbound; the gaffer grumbled a few words to her from time to

time, so that I judged he was her grandfather.



The men all looked up as we came into the room, my mate leading

me by the hand, and he called out in his rough, good-tempered

voice, "Here, my masters, I bring you tidings and a tale; give it

meat and drink that it may be strong and sweet."



"Whence are thy tidings, Will Green?" said one.



My mate grinned again with the pleasure of making his joke once

more in a bigger company:  "It seemeth from heaven, since this

good old lad hath no master," said he.



"The more fool he to come here," said a thin man with a grizzled

beard, amidst the laughter that followed, "unless he had the

choice given him between hell and England."



"Nay," said I, "I come not from heaven, but from Essex."



As I said the word a great shout sprang from all mouths at once,

as clear and sudden as a shot from a gun.  For I must tell you

that I knew somehow, but I know not how, that the men of Essex

were gathering to rise against the poll-groat bailiffs and the

lords that would turn them all into villeins again, as their

grandfathers had been.  And the people was weak and the lords

were poor; for many a mother's son had fallen in the war in

France in the old king's time, and the Black Death had slain a

many; so that the lords had bethought them:  "We are growing

poorer, and these upland-bred villeins are growing richer, and

the guilds of craft are waxing in the towns, and soon what will

there be left for us who cannot weave and will not dig?  Good it

were if we fell on all who are not guildsmen or men of free

land, if we fell on soccage tenants and others, and brought both

the law and the strong hand on them, and made them all villeins

in deed as they are now in name; for now these rascals make more

than their bellies need of bread, and their backs of homespun,

and the overplus they keep to themselves; and we are more worthy

of it than they.  So let us get the collar on their necks again,

and make their day's work longer and their bever-time shorter, as

the good statute of the old king bade.  And good it were if the

Holy Church were to look to it (and the Lollards might help

herein) that all these naughty and wearisome holidays were done

away with; or that it should be unlawful for any man below the

degree of a squire to keep the holy days of the church, except in

the heart and the spirit only, and let the body labour meanwhile;

for does not the Apostle say, `If a man work not, neither should

he eat'?  And if such things were done, and such an estate of

noble rich men and worthy poor men upholden for ever, then would

it be good times in England, and life were worth the living."



All this were the lords at work on, and such talk I knew was

common not only among the lords themselves, but also among their

sergeants and very serving-men.  But the people would not abide

it; therefore, as I said, in Essex they were on the point of

rising, and word had gone how that at St. Albans they were

wellnigh at blows with the Lord Abbot's soldiers; that north away

at Norwich John Litster was wiping the woad from his arms, as who

would have to stain them red again, but not with grain or madder;

and that the valiant tiler of Dartford had smitten a poll-groat

bailiff to death with his lath-rending axe for mishandling a

young maid, his daughter; and that the men of Kent were on the

move.



Now, knowing all this I was not astonished that they shouted at

the thought of their fellows the men of Essex, but rather

that they said little more about it; only Will Green saying

quietly, "Well, the tidings shall be told when our fellowship is

greater; fall-to now on the meat, brother, that we may the sooner

have thy tale."  As he spoke the blue-clad damsel bestirred

herself and brought me a clean trencher--that is, a square piece

of thin oak board scraped clean--and a pewter pot of liquor.  So

without more ado, and as one used to it, I drew my knife out of

my girdle and cut myself what I would of the flesh and bread on

the table.  But Will Green mocked at me as I cut, and said,

"Certes, brother, thou hast not been a lord's carver, though but

for thy word thou mightest have been his reader.  Hast thou seen

Oxford, scholar?"



A vision of grey-roofed houses and a long winding street and the

sound of many bells came over me at that word as I nodded "Yes"

to him, my mouth full of salt pork and rye-bread; and then I

lifted my pot and we made the clattering mugs kiss and I drank,

and the fire of the good Kentish mead ran through my veins and

deepened my dream of things past, present, and to come, as I

said:  "Now hearken a tale, since ye will have it so.  For last

autumn I was in Suffolk at the good town of Dunwich, and thither

came the keels from Iceland, and on them were some men of

Iceland, and many a tale they had on their tongues; and with

these men I foregathered, for I am in sooth a gatherer of tales,

and this that is now at my tongue's end is one of them."



So such a tale I told them, long familiar to me; but as I told it

the words seemed to quicken and grow, so that I knew not the

sound of my own voice, and they ran almost into rhyme and measure

as I told it; and when I had done there was silence awhile, till

one man spake, but not loudly:



"Yea, in that land was the summer short and the winter long; but

men lived both summer and winter; and if the trees grew ill and

the corn throve not, yet did the plant called man thrive and do

well.  God send us such men even here."



"Nay," said another, "such men have been and will be, and belike

are not far from this same door even now."



"Yea," said a third, "hearken a stave of Robin Hood; maybe that

shall hasten the coming of one I wot of."  And he fell to singing

in a clear voice, for he was a young man, and to a sweet wild

melody, one of those ballads which in an incomplete and degraded

form you have read perhaps.  My heart rose high as I heard him,

for it was concerning the struggle against tyranny for the

freedom of life, how that the wildwood and the heath, despite of

wind and weather, were better for a free man than the court and

the cheaping-town; of the taking from the rich to give to the

poor; of the life of a man doing his own will and not the

will of another man commanding him for the commandment's sake. 

The men all listened eagerly, and at whiles took up as a refrain

a couplet at the end of a stanza with their strong and rough, but

not unmusical voices.  As they sang, a picture of the wild-woods

passed by me, as they were indeed, no park-like dainty glades and

lawns, but rough and tangled thicket and bare waste and heath,

solemn under the morning sun, and dreary with the rising of the

evening wind and the drift of the night-long rain.



When he had done, another began in something of the same strain,

but singing more of a song than a story ballad; and thus much I

remember of it:





        The Sheriff is made a mighty lord,

            Of goodly gold he hath enow,

        And many a sergeant girt with sword;

            But forth will we and bend the bow.

                We shall bend the bow on the lily lea

                Betwixt the thorn and the oaken tree.



        With stone and lime is the burg wall built,

            And pit and prison are stark and strong,

        And many a true man there is spilt,

            And many a right man doomed by wrong.



            So forth shall we and bend the bow

                And the king's writ never the road shall know.



        Now yeomen walk ye warily,

            And heed ye the houses where ye go,

        For as fair and as fine as they may be,

            Lest behind your heels the door clap to.

                Fare forth with the bow to the lily lea

                Betwixt the thorn and the oaken tree.



        Now bills and bows I and out a-gate!

            And turn about on the lily lea!

        And though their company be great

            The grey-goose wing shall set us free.

                Now bent is the bow in the green abode

                And the king's writ knoweth not the road.



        So over the mead and over the hithe,

            And away to the wild-wood wend we forth;

        There dwell we yeomen bold and blithe

            Where the Sheriff's word is nought of worth.

                Bent is the bow on the lily lea

                Betwixt the thorn and the oaken tree.



But here the song dropped suddenly, and one of the men held up

his hand as who would say, Hist!  Then through the open window

came the sound of another song, gradually swelling as though sung

by men on the march.  This time the melody was a piece of the

plain-song of the church, familiar enough to me to bring back to

my mind the great arches of some cathedral in France and the

canons singing in the choir.



All leapt up and hurried to take their bows from wall and corner;

and some had bucklers withal, circles of leather, boiled and then

moulded into shape and hardened: these were some two hand-

breadths across, with iron or brass bosses in the centre.  Will

Green went to the corner where the bills leaned against the wall

and handed them round to the first-comers as far as they would

go, and out we all went gravely and quietly into the village

street and the fair sunlight of the calm afternoon, now beginning

to turn towards evening.  None had said anything since we

first heard the new-come singing, save that as we went out of the

door the ballad-singer clapped me on the shoulder and said:

"Was it not sooth that I said, brother, that Robin Hood should

bring us John Ball?"

