





CHAPTER X



TWO TALK OF THE DAYS TO COME



"Brother," said John Ball, "how deemest thou of our adventure?  I

do not ask thee if thou thinkest we are right to play the play

like men, but whether playing like men we shall fail like men."



"Why dost thou ask me?" said I; "how much further than beyond

this church can I see?"

"Far further," quoth he, "for I wot that thou art a scholar and

hast read books; and withal, in some way that I cannot name, thou

knowest more than we; as though with thee the world had lived

longer than with us.  Hide not, therefore, what thou hast in

thine heart, for I think after this night I shall see thee

no more, until we meet in the heavenly Fellowship."



"Friend," I said, "ask me what thou wilt; or rather ask thou the

years to come to tell thee some little of their tale; and yet

methinks thou thyself mayest have some deeming thereof."



He raised himself on the elbow of the stall and looked me full in

the face, and said to me:  "Is it so after all that thou art no

man in the flesh, but art sent to me by the Master of the

Fellowship, and the King's Son of Heaven, to tell me what shall

be?  If that be so tell me straight out, since I had some deeming

hereof before; whereas thy speech is like ours and yet unlike,

and thy face hath something in it which is not after the fashion

of our day.  And yet take heed, if thou art such an one, I fear

thee not, nay, nor him that sent thee; nor for thy bidding, nor

for his, will I turn back from London Bridge but will press on,

for I do what is meet and right."



"Nay," said I, "did I not tell thee e'en now that I knew life but

not death?  I am not dead; and as to who hath sent me, I say not

that I am come by my own will; for I know not; yet also I know

not the will that hath sent me hither.  And this I say to thee,

moreover, that if I know more than thou, I do far less; therefore

thou art my captain and I thy minstrel."



He sighed as one from whom a weight had been lifted, and said: 

"Well, then, since thou art alive on the earth and a man like

myself, tell me how deemest thou of our adventure: shall we come

to London, and how shall we fare there?"



Said I, "What shall hinder you to come to London, and to fare

there as ye will?  For be sure that the Fellowship in Essex shall

not fail you; nor shall the Londoners who hate the king's uncles

withstand you; nor hath the Court any great force to meet you in

the field; ye shall cast fear and trembling into their hearts."



"Even so, I thought," said he; "but afterwards what shall

betide?"



Said I, "It grieves my heart to say that which I think.  Yet

hearken; many a man's son shall die who is now alive and happy,

and if the soldiers be slain, and of them most not on the field,

but by the lawyers, how shall the captains escape?  Surely thou

goest to thy death."



He smiled very sweetly, yet proudly, as he said:  "Yea, the road

is long, but the end cometh at last.  Friend, many a day have I

been dying; for my sister, with whom I have played and been merry

in the autumn tide about the edges of the stubble-fields; and we

gathered the nuts and bramble-berries there, and started thence

the missel-thrush, and wondered at his voice and thought him big;

and the sparrow-hawk wheeled and turned over the hedges and the

weasel ran across the path, and the sound of the sheep-bells came

to us from the downs as we sat happy on the grass; and she

is dead and gone from the earth, for she pined from famine after

the years of the great sickness; and my brother was slain in the

French wars, and none thanked him for dying save he that stripped

him of his gear; and my unwedded wife with whom I dwelt in love

after I had taken the tonsure, and all men said she was good and

fair, and true she was and lovely; she also is dead and gone from

the earth; and why should I abide save for the deeds of the flesh

which must be done?  Truly, friend, this is but an old tale that

men must die; and I will tell thee another, to wit, that they

live: and I live now and shall live.  Tell me then what shall

befall."



Somehow I could not heed him as a living man as much as I had

done, and the voice that came from me seemed less of me as I

answered:



"These men are strong and valiant as any that have been or shall

be, and good fellows also and kindly; but they are simple,

and see no great way before their own noses.  The victory shall

they have and shall not know what to do with it; they shall fight

and overcome, because of their lack of knowledge, and because of

their lack of knowledge shall they be cozened and betrayed when

their captains are slain, and all shall come to nought by

seeming; and the king's uncles shall prevail, that both they and

the king may come to the shame that is appointed for them.  And

yet when the lords have vanquished, and all England lieth under

them again, yet shall their victory be fruitless; for the free

men that hold unfree lands shall they not bring under the collar

again, and villeinage shall slip from their hands, till there be,

and not long after ye are dead, but few unfree men in England; so

that your lives and your deaths both shall bear fruit."



"Said I not," quoth John Ball, "that thou wert a sending from

other times?  Good is thy message, for the land shall be

free.  Tell on now."



He spoke eagerly, and I went on somewhat sadly:  "The times shall

better, though the king and lords shall worsen, the Gilds of

Craft shall wax and become mightier; more recourse shall there be

of foreign merchants.  There shall be plenty in the land and not

famine.  Where a man now earneth two pennies he shall earn

three."



"Yea," said he, "then shall those that labour become strong and

stronger, and so soon shall it come about that all men shall work

and none make to work, and so shall none be robbed, and at last

shall all men labour and live and be happy, and have the goods of

the earth without money and without price."



"Yea," said I, "that shall indeed come to pass, but not yet for a

while, and belike a long while."



And I sat for long without speaking, and the church grew

darker as the moon waned yet more.



Then I said:  "Bethink thee that these men shall yet have masters

over them, who have at hand many a law and custom for the behoof

of masters, and being masters can make yet more laws in the same

behoof; and they shall suffer poor people to thrive just so long

as their thriving shall profit the mastership and no longer; and

so shall it be in those days I tell of; for there shall be king

and lords and knights and squires still, with servants to do

their bidding, and make honest men afraid; and all these will

make nothing and eat much as aforetime, and the more that is made

in the land the more shall they crave."



"Yea," said he, "that wot I well, that these are of the kin of

the daughters of the horse-leech; but how shall they slake their

greed, seeing that as thou sayest villeinage shall be gone? 

Belike their men shall pay them quit-rents and do them service,

as free men may, but all this according to law and not

beyond it; so that though the workers shall be richer than they

now be, the lords shall be no richer, and so all shall be on the

road to being free and equal."



Said I, "Look you, friend; aforetime the lords, for the most

part, held the land and all that was on it, and the men that were

on it worked for them as their horses worked, and after they were

fed and housed all was the lords'; but in the time to come the

lords shall see their men thriving on the land and shall say once

more, `These men have more than they need, why have we not the

surplus since we are their lords?'  Moreover, in those days shall

betide much chaffering for wares between man and man, and country

and country; and the lords shall note that if there were less

corn and less men on their lands there would be more sheep, that

is to say more wool for chaffer, and that thereof they should

have abundantly more than aforetime; since all the land they

own, and it pays them quit-rent or service, save here and there a

croft or a close of a yeoman; and all this might grow wool for

them to sell to the Easterlings.  Then shall England see a new

thing, for whereas hitherto men have lived on the land and by it,

the land shall no longer need them, but many sheep and a few

shepherds shall make wool grow to be sold for money to the

Easterlings, and that money shall the lords pouch: for, look you,

they shall set the lawyers a-work and the strong hand moreover,

and the land they shall take to themselves and their sheep; and

except for these lords of land few shall be the free men that

shall hold a rood of land whom the word of their lord may not

turn adrift straightway."



"How mean you?" said John Ball: "shall all men be villeins

again?"



"Nay," said I, "there shall be no villeins in England."



"Surely then," said he, "it shall be worse, and all men save

a few shall be thralls to be bought and sold at the cross."



"Good friend," said I, "it shall not be so; all men shall be free

even as ye would have it; yet, as I say, few indeed shall have so

much land as they can stand upon save by buying such a grace of

their masters."



"And now," said he, "I wot not what thou sayest.  I know a

thrall, and he is his master's every hour, and never his own; and

a villein I know, and whiles he is his own and whiles his lord's;

and I know a free man, and he is his own always; but how shall he

be his own if he have nought whereby to make his livelihood?  Or

shall he be a thief and take from others?  Then is he an outlaw. 

Wonderful is this thou tellest of a free man with nought whereby

to live!"



"Yet so it shall be," said I, "and by such free men shall all

wares be made."



"Nay, that cannot be; thou art talking riddles," said he;

"for how shall a woodwright make a chest without the wood and the

tools?"



Said I, "He must needs buy leave to labour of them that own all

things except himself and such as himself."



"Yea, but wherewith shall he buy it?" said John Ball.  "What hath

he except himself?"



"With himself then shall he buy it," quoth I, "with his body and

the power of labour that lieth therein; with the price of his

labour shall he buy leave to labour."



"Riddles again!" said he; "how can he sell his labour for aught

else but his daily bread?  He must win by his labour meat and

drink and clothing and housing!  Can he sell his labour twice

over?"



"Not so," said I, "but this shall he do belike; he shall sell

himself, that is the labour that is in him, to the master that

suffers him to work, and that master shall give to him from out

of the wares he maketh enough to keep him alive, and to

beget children and nourish them till they be old enough to be

sold like himself, and the residue shall the rich man keep to

himself."



John Ball laughed aloud, and said:  "Well, I perceive we are not

yet out of the land of riddles.  The man may well do what thou

sayest and live, but he may not do it and live a free man."



"Thou sayest sooth," said I.

