





VII



BEACH-COMBERS





Wilbur returned aft and joined Moran on the quarterdeck.  She was

already studying the stranger through the glass.



"That's a new build of boat to me," she muttered, giving Wilbur

the glass.  Wilbur looked long and carefully.  The newcomer was of

the size and much the same shape as a caravel of the fifteenth

century--high as to bow and stern, and to all appearances as

seaworthy as a soup-tureen.  Never but in the old prints had

Wilbur seen such an extraordinary boat.  She carried a single

mast, which listed forward; her lugsail was stretched upon dozens

of bamboo yards; she drew hardly any water.  Two enormous red eyes

were painted upon either side of her high, blunt bow, while just

abaft the waist projected an enormous oar, or sweep, full forty

feet in length--longer, in fact, than the vessel herself.  It

acted partly as a propeller, partly as a rudder.



"They're heading for us," commented Wilbur as Moran took the glass

again.



"Right," she answered; adding upon the moment: "Huh! more

Chinamen; the thing is alive with coolies; she's a junk."



"Oh!" exclaimed Wilbur, recollecting some talk of Charlie's he had

overheard.  "I know."



"You know?"



"Yes; these are real beach-combers.  I've heard of them along this

coast--heard our Chinamen speak of them.  They beach that junk

every night and camp on shore.  They're scavengers, as you might

say--pick up what they can find or plunder along shore--abalones,

shark-fins, pickings of wrecks, old brass and copper, seals

perhaps, turtle and shell.  Between whiles they fish for shrimp,

and I've heard Kitchell tell how they make pearls by dropping

bird-shot into oysters.  They are Kai-gingh to a man, and,

according to Kitchell, the wickedest breed of cats that ever cut

teeth."



The junk bore slowly down upon the schooner.  In a few moments she

had hove to alongside.  But for the enormous red eyes upon her bow

she was innocent of paint.  She was grimed and shellacked with

dirt and grease, and smelled abominably.  Her crew were Chinamen;

but such Chinamen! The coolies of the "Bertha Millner" were

pampered and effete in comparison.  The beach-combers, thirteen in

number, were a smaller class of men, their faces almost black with

tan and dirt.  Though they still wore the queue, their heads were

not shaven, and mats and mops of stiff black hair fell over their

eyes from under their broad, basket-shaped hats.



They were barefoot.  None of them wore more than two garments--the

jeans and the blouse.  They were the lowest type of men Wilbur had

ever seen.  The faces were those of a higher order of anthropoid

apes: the lower portion--jaws, lips, and teeth--salient; the

nostrils opening at almost right angles, the eyes tiny and bright,

the forehead seamed and wrinkled--unnaturally old.  Their general

expression was of simian cunning and a ferocity that was utterly

devoid of courage.



"Aye!" exclaimed Moran between her teeth, "if the devil were a

shepherd, here are his sheep.  You don't come aboard this

schooner, my friends! I want to live as long as I can, and die 

when I can't help it.  Boat ahoy!" she called.



An answer in Cantonese sing-song came back from the junk, and the

speaker gestured toward the outside ocean.



Then a long parleying began.  For upward of half an hour Moran and

Wilbur listened to a proposition in broken pigeon English made by

the beach-combers again and again and yet again, and were in no

way enlightened.  It was impossible to understand.  Then at last

they made out that there was question of a whale.  Next it

appeared the whale was dead; and finally, after a prolonged

pantomime of gesturing and pointing, Moran guessed that the beach-

combers wanted the use of the "Bertha Millner" to trice up the

dead leviathan while the oil and whalebone were extracted.



"That must be it," she said to Wilbur.  "That's what they mean by

pointing to our masts and tackle.  You see, they couldn't manage

with that stick of theirs, and they say they'll give us a third of

the loot.  We'll do it, mate, and I'll tell you why.  The wind has

fallen, and they can tow us out.  If it's a sperm-whale they've

found, there ought to be thirty or forty barrels of oil in him,

let alone the blubber and bone.  Oil is at $50 now, and spermaceti

will always bring $100.  We'll take it on, mate.  but we'll keep

our eyes on the rats all the time.  I don't want them aboard at

all.  Look at their belts.  Not three out of the dozen who aren't

carrying those filthy little hatchets.  Faugh!" she exclaimed,

with a shudder of disgust.  "Such vipers!"



What followed proved that Moran had guessed correctly.  A rope was

passed to the "Bertha Millner," the junk put out its sweeps, and

to a wailing, eldrich chanting the schooner was towed out of the

bay.



"I wonder what Charlie and our China boys will think of this?"

said Wilbur, looking shoreward, where the deserters could be seen

gathered together in a silent, observing group.



"We're well shut of them," growled Moran, her thumbs in her belt. 

"Only, now we'll never know what was the matter with the schooner

these last few nights.  Hah!" she exclaimed under her breath, her

scowl thickening, "sometimes I don't wonder the beasts cut."



The dead whale was lying four miles out of the entrance of

Magdalena Bay, and as the junk and the schooner drew near seemed

like a huge black boat floating bottom up.  Over it and upon it

swarmed and clambered thousands of sea-birds, while all around and

below the water was thick with gorging sharks.  A dreadful,

strangling decay fouled all the air.



The whale was a sperm-whale, and fully twice the length of the

"Bertha Millner." The work of tricing him up occupied the beach-

combers throughout the entire day.  It was out of the question to

keep them off the schooner, and Wilbur and Moran were too wise to

try.  They swarmed the forward deck and rigging like a plague of

unclean monkeys, climbing with an agility and nimbleness that made

Wilbur sick to his stomach.  They were unlike any Chinamen he had

ever seen--hideous to a degree that he had imagined impossible in

a human being.  On two occasions a fight developed, and in an

instant the little hatchets were flashing like the flash of a

snake's fangs.  Toward the end of the day one of them returned to

the junk, screaming like a stuck pig, a bit of his chin bitten

off.



Moran and Wilbur kept to the quarter-deck, always within reach of

the huge cutting-in spades, but the Chinese beach-combers were too

elated over their prize to pay them much attention.



And indeed the dead monster proved a veritable treasure-trove.  By

the end of the day he had been triced up to the foremast, and all

hands straining at the windlass had raised the mighty head out of

the water.  The Chinamen descended upon the smooth, black body,

their bare feet sliding and slipping at every step.  They held on

by jabbing their knives into the hide as glacier-climbers do their

ice-picks.  The head yielded barrel after barrel of oil and a fair

quantity of bone.  The blubber was taken aboard the junk, minced

up with hatchets, and run into casks.



Last of all, a Chinaman cut a hole through the "case," and,

actually descending into the inside of the head, stripped away the

spermaceti (clear as crystal), and packed it into buckets, which

were hauled up on the junk's deck.  The work occupied some two or

three days.  During this time the "Bertha Millner" was keeled over

to nearly twenty degrees by the weight of the dead monster. 

However, neither Wilbur nor Moran made protest.  The Chinamen

would do as they pleased; that was said and signed.  And they did

not release the schooner until the whale had been emptied of oil

and blubber, spermaceti and bone.



At length, on the afternoon of the third day, the captain of the

junk, whose name was Hoang, presented himself upon the quarter-

deck.  He was naked to the waist, and his bare brown torso was

gleaming with oil and sweat.  His queue was coiled like a snake

around his neck, his hatchet thrust into his belt.



"Well?" said Moran, coming up.



Wilbur caught his breath as the two stood there facing each other,

so sharp was the contrast.  The man, the Mongolian, small,

weazened, leather-colored, secretive--a strange, complex creature,

steeped in all the obscure mystery of the East, nervous, ill at

ease; and the girl, the Anglo-Saxon, daughter of the Northmen,

huge, blond, big-boned, frank, outspoken, simple of composition,

open as the day, bareheaded, her great ropes of sandy hair falling

over her breast and almost to the top of her knee-boots.  As he

looked at the two, Wilbur asked himself where else but in

California could such abrupt contrasts occur.



"All light," announced Hoang; "catchum all oil, catchum all bone,

catchum all same plenty many.  You help catchum, now you catchum

pay.  Sabe?"



The three principals came to a settlement with unprecedented

directness.  Like all Chinamen, Hoang was true to his promises,

and he had already set apart three and a half barrels of

spermaceti, ten barrels of oil, and some twenty pounds of bone as

the schooner's share in the transaction.  There was no discussion

over the matter.  He called their attention to the discharge of

his obligations, and hurried away to summon his men aboard and get

the junk under way again.



The beach-combers returned to their junk, and Wilbur and Moran set

about cutting the carcass of the whale adrift.  They found it

would be easier to cut away the hide from around the hooks and

loops of the tackle than to unfasten the tackle itself.



"The knots are jammed hard as steel," declared Moran.  "Hand up

that cutting-in spade; stand by with the other and cut loose at

the same time as I do, so we can ease off the strain on these

lines at the same time.  Ready there, cut!" Moran set free the

hook in the loop of black skin in a couple of strokes, but Wilbur

was more clumsy; the skin resisted.  He struck at it sharply with

the heavy spade; the blade hit the iron hook, glanced off, and

opened a large slit in the carcass below the head.  A gush of

entrails started from the slit, and Moran swore under her breath.



"Ease away, quick there! You'll have the mast out of her next--

steady! Hold your spade--what's that?"



Wilbur had nerved himself against the dreadful stench he expected

would issue from the putrid monster, but he was surprised to note

a pungent, sweet, and spicy odor that all at once made thick the

air about him.  It was an aromatic smell, stronger than that of

the salt ocean, stronger even than the reek of oil and blubber

from the schooner's waist--sweet as incense, penetrating as attar,

delicious as a summer breeze.



"It smells pretty good, whatever it is," he answered.  Moran came

up to where he stood, and looked at the slit he had made in the

whale's carcass.  Out of it was bulging some kind of dull white

matter marbled with gray.  It was a hard lump of irregular shape

and about as big as a hogshead.



Moran glanced over to the junk, some forty feet distant.  The

beach-combers were hoisting the lug-sail.  Hoang was at the

steering oar.



"Get that stuff aboard," she commanded quietly.



"That!" exclaimed Wilbur, pointing to the lump.



Moran's blue eyes were beginning to gleam.



"Yes, and do it before the Chinamen see you."



"But--but I don't understand."



Moran stepped to the quarterdeck, unslung the hammock in which

Wilbur slept, and tossed it to him.



"Reeve it up in that; I'll pass you a line, and we'll haul it

aboard.  Godsend, those vermin yonder have got smells enough of

their own without noticing this.  Hurry, mate, I'll talk

afterward."



Wilbur went over the side, and standing as best he could upon the

slippery carcass, dug out the lump and bound it up in the hammock.



"Hoh!" exclaimed Moran, with sudden exultation.  "There's a lot of

it.  That's the biggest lump yet, I'll be bound.  Is that all

there is, mate?--look carefully." Her voice had dropped to a

whisper.



"Yes, yes; that's all.  Careful now when you haul up--Hoang has

got his eye on you, and so have the rest of them.  What do you

call it, anyhow? Why are you so particular about it? Is it worth

anything?"



"I don't know--perhaps.  We'll have a look at it, anyway."



Moran hauled the stuff aboard, and Wilbur followed.



"Whew!" he exclaimed with half-closed eyes.  "It's like the story

of Samson and the dead lion--the sweet coming forth from the

strong."



The schooner seemed to swim in a bath of perfumed air; the

membrane of the nostrils fairly prinkled with the sensation. 

Moran unleashed the hammock, and going down upon one knee examined

the lump attentively.



"It didn't seem possible," Wilbur heard her saying to herself;

"but there can't be any mistake.  It's the stuff, right enough. 

I've heard of such things, but this--but this--" She rose to her

feet, tossing back her hair.



"Well," said Wilbur, "what do you call it?"



"The thing to do now," returned Moran, "is to get clear of here as

quietly and as quickly as we can, and take this stuff with us.  I

can't stop to explain now, but it's big--it's big.  Mate, it's big

as the Bank of England."



"Those beach-combers are right on to the game, I'm afraid," said

Wilbur.  "Look, they're watching us.  This stuff would smell

across the ocean."



"Rot the beach-combers! There's a bit of wind, thank God, and we

can do four knots to their one, just let us get clear once."



Moran dragged the hammock back into the cabin, and, returning upon

deck, helped Wilbur to cut away the last tricing tackle.  The

schooner righted slowly to an even keel.  Meanwhile the junk had

set its one lug-sail and its crew had run out the sweeps.  Hoang

took the steering sweep and worked the junk to a position right

across the "Bertha's" bows, some fifty feet ahead.



"They're watching us, right enough," said Wilbur.



"Up your mains'l," ordered Moran.  The pair set the fore and main

sails with great difficulty.  Moran took the wheel and Wilbur went

forward to cast off the line by which the schooner had been tied

up to one of the whale's flukes.



"Cut it!" cried the girl.  "Don't stop to cast off."



There was a hail from the beach-combers; the port sweeps dipped

and the junk bore up nearer.



"Hurry!" shouted Moran, "don't mind them.  Are we clear for'ard--

what's the trouble? Something's holding her." The schooner listed

slowly to starboard and settled by the head.



"All clear!" cried Wilbur.



"There's something wrong!" exclaimed Moran; "she's settling

for'ard." Hoang hailed the schooner a second time.



"We're still settling," called Wilbur from the bows, "what's the

matter?"



"Matter that she's taking water," answered Moran wrathfully. 

"She's started something below, what with all that lifting and

dancing and tricing up."



Wilbur ran back to the quarterdeck.



"This is a bad fix," he said to Moran.  "Those chaps are coming

aboard again.  They're on to something, and, of course, at just

this moment she begins to leak."



"They are after that ambergris," said Moran between her teeth. 

"Smelled it, of course--the swine!"



"Ambergris?"



"The stuff we found in the whale.  That's ambergris."



"Well?"



"Well!" shouted Moran, exasperated.  "Do you know that we have

found a lump that will weigh close to 250 pounds, and do you know

that ambergris is selling in San Francisco at $40 an ounce? Do you

know that we have picked up nearly $150,000 right out here in the

ocean and are in a fair way to lose it all?"



"Can't we run for it?"



"Run for it in a boat that's taking water like a sack! Our dory's

gone.  Suppose we get clear of the junk, and the 'Bertha' sank?

Then what? If we only had our crew aboard; if we were only ten to

their dozen--if we were only six--by Jupiter! I'd fight them for

it."



The two enormous red eyes of the junk loomed alongside and stared

over into the "Bertha's" waist.  Hoang and seven of the coolies

swarmed aboard.



"What now?" shouted Moran, coming forward to meet them, her scowl

knotting her flashing eyes together.  "Is this ship yours or mine?

We've done your dirty work for you.  I want you clear of my deck."

Wilbur stood at her side, uncertain what to do, but ready for

anything she should attempt.



"I tink you catchum someting, smellum pretty big," said Hoang, his

ferret glance twinkling about the schooner.



"I catchum nothing--nothing but plenty bad stink," said Moran. 

"No, you don't!" she exclaimed, putting herself in Hoang's way as

he made for the cabin.  The other beach-combers came crowding up;

Wilbur even thought he saw one of them loosening his hatchet in

his belt.



"This ship's mine," cried Moran, backing to the cabin door. 

Wilbur followed her, and the Chinamen closed down upon the pair.



"It's not much use, Moran," he muttered.  "They'll rush us in a

minute."



"But the ambergris is mine--is mine," she answered, never taking

her eyes from the confronting coolies.



"We findum w'ale," said Hoang; "you no find w'ale; him b'long to

we--eve'yt'ing in um w'ale b'long to we, savvy?"



"No, you promised us a third of everything you found."



Even in the confusion of the moment it occurred to Wilbur that it

was quite possible that at least two-thirds of the ambergris did

belong to the beach-combers by right of discovery.  After all, it

was the beach-combers who had found the whale.  He could never

remember afterward whether or no he said as much to Moran at the

time.  If he did, she had been deaf to it.  A fury of wrath and

desperation suddenly blazed in her blue eyes.  Standing at her

side, Wilbur could hear her teeth grinding upon each other.  She

was blind to all danger, animated only by a sense of injustice and

imposition.



Hoang uttered a sentence in Cantonese.  One of the coolies jumped

forward, and Moran's fist met him in the face and brought him to

his knees.  Then came the rush Wilbur had foreseen.  He had just

time to catch a sight of Moran at grapples with Hoang when a

little hatchet glinted over his head.  He struck out savagely into

the thick of the group--and then opened his eyes to find Moran

washing the blood from his hair as he lay on the deck with his

head in the hollow of her arm.  Everything was quiet.  The beach-

combers were gone.



"Hello, what--what--what is it?" he asked, springing to his feet,

his head swimming and smarting.  "We had a row, didn't we? Did

they hurt you? Oh, I remember; I got a cut over the head--one of

their hatchet men.  Did they hurt you?"



"They got the loot," she growled.  "Filthy vermin! And just to

make everything pleasant, the schooner's sinking."

