




IX



THE CAPTURE OF HOANG





"What smashed the junk? What wrecked her?" demanded Moran.



The deserting Chinamen huddled around Charlie, drawing close, as

if finding comfort in the feel of each other's elbows.



"No can tell," answered Charlie.  "Him shake, then lif' up all the

same as we.  Bime-by too much lif' up; him smash all to--Four-

piecee Chinamen dlown."



"Drown! Did any of them drown?" exclaimed Moran.



"Four-piecee dlown," reiterated Charlie calmly.  "One, thlee,

five, nine, come asho'.  Him other no come."



"Where are the ones that came ashore?" asked Wilbur.



Charlie waved a hand back into the night.  "Him make um camp

topside ole house."



"That old whaling-camp," prompted Moran.  Then to Wilbur: "You

remember--about a hundred yards north the creek?"



Wilbur, Moran and Charlie had drawn off a little from the "Bertha

Millner's" crew.  The latter squatted in a line along the shore--

silent, reserved, looking vaguely seaward through the night. 

Moran spoke again, her scowl thickening:



"What makes you think the beach-combers want our schooner?"



"Him catch um schooner sure! Him want um boat to go home.  No can

get."



"Let's put off to-night--right away," said Wilbur.



"Low tide," answered Moran; "and besides--Charlie, did you see

them close? Were you near them?"



"No go muchee close."



"Did they have something with them, reeved up in a hammock--

something that smelled sweet?"



"Like a joss-stick, for instance?"



"No savvy; no can tell.  Him try catch um schooner sure.  Him

velly bad China boy.  See Yup China boy, velly bad.  I b'long Sam

Yup.  Savvy?'!



"Ah! the Tongs?"



"Yas.  I Sam Yup.  Him," and he pointed to the "Bertha's" crew,

"Sam Yup.  All we Sam Yup; nisi him," and he waved a hand toward

the beach-combers' camp; "him See Yup.  Savvy?"



"It's a Tong row," said Wilbur.  "They're blood enemies, the See

Yups and Sam Yups."



Moran fell thoughtful, digging her boot-heel into the sand, her

thumbs hooked into her belt, her forehead gathered into a heavy

frown.  There was a silence.



"One thing," she said, at last; "we can't give up the schooner. 

They would take our stores as well, and then where are we?

Marooned, by Jove! How far do you suppose we are from the nearest

town? Three hundred miles wouldn't be a bad guess, and they've got

the loot--our ambergris--I'll swear to that.  They didn't leave

that aboard when the junk sank."



"Look here, Charlie," she said, turning to the Chinaman.  "If the

beach-combers take the schooner--the 'Bertha Millner'--from us

we'll be left to starve on this beach."



"I tink um yass."



"How are we going to get home? Are you going to let them do it?

Are you going to let them have our schooner?"



"I tink no can have."



"Look here," she went on, with sudden energy.  "There are only

nine of them now, to our eight.  We're about even.  We can fight

those swine.  I know we can.  If we jumped their camp and rushed

them hard, believe me, we could run them into the sea.  Mate," she

cried, suddenly facing Wilbur, "are you game? Have you got blood

in you? Those beach-comberes are going to attack us to-morrow,

before high tide--that's flat.  There's going to be a fight

anyway.  We can't let them have the schooner.  It's starvation for

us if we do.



"They mean to make a dash for the 'Bertha,' and we've got to fight

them off.  If there's any attacking to be done I propose to do it!

I propose we jump their camp before it gets light--now--to-night--

right away--run in on them there, take them by surprise, do for

one or two of them if we have to, and get that ambergris.  Then

cut back to the schooner, up our sails, and wait for the tide to

float us off.  We can do it--I know we can.  Mate, will you back

me up?"



"Back you up? You bet I'll back you up, Moran.  But--" Wilbur

hesitated.  "We could fight them so much more to advantage from

the deck of the schooner.  Why not wait for them aboard? We could

have our sails up, anyhow, and we could keep the beach-combers off

till the tide rose high enough to drive them back.  Why not do

that?"



"I tink bes' wait topside boat," assented Charlie.



"Yes; why not, Moran?"



"Because," shouted the girl, "they've got our loot.  I don't

propose to be plundered of $150,000 if I can help it."



"Wassa dat?" demanded Charlie.  "Hunder fiftee tlousand you hab

got?"



"I did have it--we had it, the mate and I.  We triced a sperm

whale for the beach-combers, and when they thought they had

everything out of him we found a lump of ambergris in him that

will weigh close to two hundred pounds.  Now look here, Charlie.

The beach-combers have got the stuff.  It's mine--I'm going to

have it back.  Here's the lay.  Your men can fight--you can fight

yourself.  We'll make it a business proposition.  Help me to get

that ambergris, and if we get it I'll give each one of the men

$1,000, and I'll give you $1,500.  You can take that up and be

independent rich the rest of your life.  You can chuck it and rot

on this beach, for it's fight or lose the schooner; you know that

as well as I do.  If you've got to fight anyhow, why not fight

where it's going to pay the most?"



Charlie hesitated, pursing his lips.



"How about this, Moran?" Wilbur broke forth now, unheard by

Charlie.  "I've just been thinking; have we got a right to this

ambergris, after all? The beach-combers found the whale.  It was

theirs.  How have we the right to take the ambergris away from

them any more than the sperm and the oil and the bone? It's

theirs, if you come to that.  I don't know as we've the right to

it."



"Darn you!" shouted Moran in a blaze of fury, "right to it, right

to it! If I haven't, who has? Who found it? Those dirty monkeys

might have stood some show to a claim if they'd held to the one-

third bargain, and offered to divvy with us when they got me where

I couldn't help myself.  I don't say I'd give in now if they had--

give in to let 'em walk off with a hundred thousand dollars that

I've got as good a claim to as they have! But they've saved me the

trouble of arguing the question.  They've taken it all, all! And

there's no bargain in the game at all now.  Now the stuff belongs

to the strongest of us, and I'm glad of it.  They thought they

were the strongest and now they're going to find out.  We're

dumped down here on this God-forsaken sand, and there's no law and

no policemen.  The strongest of us are going to live and the

weakest are going to die.  I'm going to live and I'm going to have

my loot, too, and I'm not going to split fine hairs with these

robbers at this time of day.  I'm going to have it all, and that's

the law you're under in this case, my righteous friend!"



She turned her back upon him, spinning around upon her heel.  and

Wilbur felt ashamed of himself and proud of her.



"I go talkee-talk to China boy," said Charlie, coming up.



For about five minutes the Chinamen conferred together, squatting

in a circle on the beach.  Moran paced up and down by the stranded

dory.  Wilbur leaned against the bleached whale-skull, his hands

in his pockets.  Once he looked at his watch.  It was nearly one

o'clock.



"All light," said Charlie, coming up from the group at last; "him

fight plenty."



"Now," exclaimed Moran, "we've no time to waste.  What arms have

we got?"



"We've got the cutting-in spades," said Wilbur; "there's five of

them.  They're nearly ten feet long, and the blades are as sharp

as razors; you couldn't want better pikes."



"That's an idea," returned Moran, evidently willing to forget her

outburst of a moment before, perhaps already sorry for it.  The

party took stock of their weapons, and five huge cutting-in

spades, a heavy knife from the galley, and a revolver of doubtful

effectiveness were divided among them.  The crew took the spades,

Charlie the knife, and Wilbur the revolver.  Moran had her own

knife, a haftless dirk, such as is affected by all Norwegians,

whether landsmen or sailors.  They were examining this armament

and Moran was suggesting a plan of attack, when Hoang, the leader

of the beach-combers, and one other Chinaman appeared some little

distance below them on the beach.  The moon was low and there was

no great light, but the two beach-combers caught the flash of the

points of the spades.  They halted and glanced narrowly and

suspiciously at the group.



"Beasts!" muttered Moran.  "They are up to the game--there's no

surprising them now.  Talk to him, Charlie; see what he wants."



Moran, Wilbur, and Charlie came part of the way toward Hoang and

his fellow, and paused some fifteen feet distant, and a long

colloquy ensued.  It soon became evident, however, that in reality

Hoang wanted nothing of them, though with great earnestness he

asserted his willingness to charter the "Bertha Millner" back to

San Francisco.



"That's not his game at all," said Moran to Wilbur, in a low tone,

her eyes never leaving those of the beach-comber.  "He's pretty

sure he could seize the 'Bertha' and never pay us a stiver. 

They've come down to spy on us, and they're doing it, too. 

There's no good trying to rush that camp now.  They'll go back and

tell the crew that we know their lay."



It was still very dark.  Near the hulk of the beached "Bertha

Millner" were grouped her crew, each armed with a long and lance-

like cutting-in spade, watching and listening to the conference of

the chiefs.  The moon, almost down, had flushed blood-red,

violently streaking the gray, smooth surface of the bay with her

reflection.  The tide was far out, rippling quietly along the

reaches of wet sand.  In the pauses of the conference the vast,

muffling silence shut down with the abruptness of a valve suddenly

closed.



How it happened, just who made the first move, in precisely what

manner the action had been planned, or what led up to it, Wilbur

could not afterward satisfactorily explain.  There was a rush

forward--he remembered that much--a dull thudding of feet over the

resounding beach surface, a moment's writhing struggle with a

half-naked brown figure that used knife and nail and tooth, and

then the muffling silence again, broken only by the sound of their

own panting.  In that whirl of swift action Wilbur could

reconstruct but two brief pictures: the Chinaman, Hoang's

companion, flying like one possessed along the shore; Hoang

himself flung headlong into the arms of the "Bertha's" coolies,

and Moran, her eyes blazing, her thick braids flying, brandishing

her fist as she shouted at the top of her deep voice, "We've got

you, anyhow!"



They had taken Hoang prisoner, whether by treachery or not, Wilbur

did not exactly know; and, even if unfair means had been used, he

could not repress a feeling of delight and satisfaction as he told

himself that in the very beginning of the fight that was to follow

he and his mates had gained the first advantage.



As the action of that night's events became more and more

accelerated, Wilbur could not but notice the change in Moran.  It

was very evident that the old Norse fighting blood of her was all

astir; brutal, merciless, savage beyond all control.  A sort of

obsession seized upon her at the near approach of battle, a frenzy

of action that was checked by nothing--that was insensible to all

restraint.  At times it was impossible for him to make her hear

him, or when she heard to understand what he was saying.  Her

vision contracted.  It was evident that she could not see

distinctly.  Wilbur could no longer conceive of her as a woman of

the days of civilization.  She was lapsing back to the eighth

century again--to the Vikings, the sea-wolves, the Berserkers.



"Now you're going to talk," she cried to Hoang, as the bound

Chinaman sat upon the beach, leaning his back against the great

skull.  "Charlie, ask him if they saved the ambergris when the

junk went down--if they've got it now?" Charlie put the question

in Chinese, but the beach-comber only twinkled his vicious eyes

upon them and held his peace.  With the full sweep of her arm, her

fist clinched till the knuckles whitened, Moran struck him in the

face.



"Now will you talk?" she cried.  Hoang wiped the blood from his

face upon his shoulder and set his jaws.  He did not answer.



"You will talk before I'm done with you, my friend; don't get any

wrong notions in your head about that," Moran continued, her teeth

clinched.  "Charlie," she added, "is there a file aboard the

schooner?"



"I tink um yass, boss hab got file."



"In the tool-chest, isn't it?" Charlie nodded, and Moran ordered

it to be fetched.



"If we're to fight that crowd," she said, speaking to herself and

in a rapid voice, thick from excitement and passion, "we've got to

know where they've hid the loot, and what weapons they've got.  If

they have a rifle or a shotgun with them, it's going to make a big

difference for us.  The other fellow escaped and has gone back to

warn the rest.  It's fight now, and no mistake."



The Chinaman who had been sent aboard the schooner returned,

carrying a long, rather coarse-grained file.  Moran took it from

him.



"Now," she said, standing in front of Hoang, "I'll give you one

more chance.  Answer me.  Did you bring off the ambergris, you

beast, when your junk sank? Where is it now? How many men have

you? What arms have you got? Have your men got a rifle?--Charlie,

put that all to him in your lingo, so as to make sure that he

understands.  Tell him if he don't talk I'm going to make him very

sick."



Charlie put the questions in Chinese, pausing after each one. 

Hoang held his peace.



"I gave you fair warning," shouted Moran angrily, pointing at him

with the file.  "Will you answer?"



"Him no tell nuttin," observed Charlie.



"Fetch a cord here," commanded Moran.  The cord was brought, and

despite Hoang's struggles and writhings the file was thrust end-

ways into his mouth and his jaws bound tightly together upon it by

means of the cord passed over his head and under his chin.  Some

four inches of the file portruded from his lips.  Moran took this

end and drew it out between the beach-comber's teeth, then pushed

it back slowly.



The hideous rasp of the operation turned Wilbur's blood cold

within him.  He looked away--out to sea, down the beach--anywhere,

so that he might not see what was going forward.  But the

persistent grind and scrape still assaulted his ears.  He turned

about sharply.



"I--I--I'll go down the beach here a ways," he said quickly.  "I

can't stand--I'll keep watch to see if the beach-combers come up."



A few minutes later he heard Charlie hailing him.



"Chin-chin heap plenty now," said he, with a grin, as Wilbur came

up.



Hoang sat on the sand in the midst of the circle.  The file and

coil of rope lay on the ground near by.  The beach-comber was

talking in a high-keyed sing-song, but with a lisp.  He told them

partly in pigeon English and partly in Cantonese, which Charlie

translated, that their men were eight in number, and that they had

intended to seize the schooner that night, but that probably his

own capture had delayed their plans.  They had no rifle.  A

shotgun had been on board, but had gone down with the sinking of

the junk.  The ambergris had been cut into two lumps, and would be

found in a couple of old flour-sacks in the stern of the boat in

which he and his men had come ashore.  They were all armed with

their little hatchets.  He thought two of the men carried knives

as well.  There was neither pistol nor revolver among them.



"It seems to me," said Wilbur, "that we've got the long end."



"We catch um boss, too!" said Charlie, pointing to Hoang.



"And we are better armed," assented Moran.  "We've got the

cutting-in spades."



"And the revolver, if it will shoot any further than it will

kick."



"They'll give us all the fight we want," declared Moran.



"Oh, him Kai-gingh, him fight all same devil."



"Give the men brandy, Charlie," commanded Moran.  "We'll rush that

camp right away."



The demijohn of spirits was brought down from the "Bertha" and

passed around, Wilbur and Moran drinking from the tin cup, the

coolies from the bottle.  Hoang was fettered and locked in the

"Bertha's" cabin.



"Now, then, are we ready?" cried Moran.



"I tink all light," answered Charlie.



The party set off down the beach.  The moon had long since gone

down, and the dawn was whitening over the eastern horizon. 

Landward, ragged blankets of morning mist lay close in the hollows

here and there.  It was profoundly still.  The stars were still

out.  The surface of Magdalena Bay was smooth as a sheet of gray

silk.



Twenty minutes passed, half an hour, an hour.  The party tramped

steadily forward, Moran, Wilbur, and Charlie leading, the coolies

close behind carrying the cutting-in spades over their shoulders. 

Slowly and in silence they made the half circuit of the bay.  The

"Bertha Millner" was far behind them by now, a vague gray mass in

the early morning light.



"Did you ever fight before?" Moran suddenly demanded of Charlie.



"One time I fight plenty much in San Flancisco in Washington

stleet.  Fight um See Yups."



Another half-hour passed.  At times when they halted they began to

hear the faint murmur of the creek, just beyond which was the

broken and crumbling shanty, relic of an old Portuguese whaling-

camp, where the beach-combers were camped.  At Charlie's

suggestion the party made a circuit, describing a half moon, to

landward, so as to come out upon the enemy sheltered by the sand-

dunes.  Twenty minutes later they crossed the creek about four

hundred yards from the shore.  Here they spread out into a long

line, and, keeping an interval of about fifteen feet between each

of them, moved cautiously forward.  The unevenness of the sand-

breaks hid the shore from view, but Moran, Wilbur, and Charlie

knew that by keeping the creek upon their left they would come out

directly upon the house.



A few moments later Charlie held up his hand, and the men halted. 

The noise of the creek chattering into the tidewater of the bay

was plainly audible just beyond; a ridge of sand, covered thinly

with sage-brush, and a faint column of smoke rose into the air

over the ridge itself.  They were close in.  The coolies were

halted, and dropping upon their hands and knees, the three leaders

crawled to the top of the break.  Sheltered by a couple of sage-

bushes and lying flat to the ground, Wilbur looked over and down

upon the beach.  The first object he made out was a crazy,

roofless house, built of driftwood, the chinks plastered with

'dobe mud, the door fallen in.



Beyond, on the beach, was a flat-bottomed dingy, unpainted and

foul with dirt.  But all around the house the sand had been

scooped and piled to form a low barricade, and behind this

barricade Wilbur saw the beach-combers.  There were eight of them. 

They were alert and ready, their hatchets in their hands.  The

gaze of each of them was fixed directly upon the sand-break which

sheltered the "Bertha Millner's" officers and crew.  They seemed

to Wilbur to look him straight in the eye.  They neither moved nor

spoke.  The silence and absolute lack of motion on the part of

these small, half-naked Chinamen, with their ape-like muzzles and

twinkling eyes, was ominous.



There could be no longer any doubts that the beach-combers had

known of their enemies' movements and were perfectly aware of

their presence behind the sand-break.  Moran rose to her feet, and

Wilbur and Charlie followed her example.



"There's no use hiding," she said; "they know we're here."



Charlie called up the crew.  The two parties were ranged face to

face.  Over the eastern rim of the Pacific the blue whiteness of

the early dawn was turning to a dull, roseate gold at the core of

the sunrise.  The headlands of Magdalena Bay stood black against

the pale glow; overhead, the greater stars still shone.  The

monotonous, faint ripple of the creek was the only sound.  It was

about 3:30 o'clock.

