





XIII



MORAN STERNERSEN





San Francisco once more! For two days the "Bertha Millner" had

been beating up the coast, fighting her way against northerly

winds, butting into head seas.



The warmth, the stillness, the placid, drowsing quiet of Magdalena

Bay, steaming under the golden eye of a tropic heaven, the white,

baked beach, the bay-heads, striated with the mirage in the

morning, the coruscating sunset, the enchanted mystery of the

purple night, with its sheen of stars and riding moon, were now

replaced by the hale and vigorous snorting of the Trades, the roll

of breakers to landward, and the unremitting gallop of the

unnumbered multitudes of gray-green seas, careering silently past

the schooner, their crests occasionally hissing into brusque

eruptions of white froth, or smiting broad on under her counter,

showering her decks with a sprout of icy spray.  It was cold; at

times thick fogs cloaked all the world of water.  To the east a

procession of bleak hills defiled slowly southward; lighthouses

were passed; streamers of smoke on the western horizon marked the

passage of steamships; and once they met and passed close by a

huge Cape Horner, a great deep-sea tramp, all sails set and

drawing, rolling slowly and leisurely in seas that made the

schooner dance.



At last the Farallones looked over the ocean's edge to the north;

then came the whistling-buoy, the Seal Rocks, the Heads, Point

Reyes, the Golden Gate flanked with the old red Presidio, Lime

Point with its watching cannon; and by noon of a gray and

boisterous day, under a lusty wind and a slant of rain, just five

months after her departure, the "Bertha Millner" let go her anchor

in San Francisco Bay some few hundred yards off the Lifeboat

Station.



In this berth the schooner was still three or four miles from the

city and the water-front.  But Moran detested any nearer approach

to civilization, and Wilbur himself was willing to avoid, at least

for one day, the publicity which he believed the "Bertha's"

reappearance was sure to attract.  He remembered, too, that the

little boat carried with her a fortune of $100,000, and decided

that until it could be safely landed and stored it was not

desirable that its existence should be known along "the Front."



For days, weeks even, Wilbur had looked eagerly forward to this

return to his home.  He had seen himself again in his former

haunts, in his club, and in the houses along Pacific avenue where

he was received; but no sooner had the anchor-chain ceased

rattling in the "Bertha's" hawse-pipe than a strange revulsion

came upon him.  The new man that seemed to have so suddenly sprung

to life within him, the Wilbur who was the mate of the "Bertha

Millner," the Wilbur who belonged to Moran, believed that he could

see nothing to be desired in city life.  For him was the unsteady

deck of a schooner, and the great winds and the tremendous wheel

of the ocean's rim, and the horizon that ever fled before his

following prow; so he told himself, so he believed.  What

attractions could the city offer him? What amusements? what

excitements? He had been flung off the smoothly spinning

circumference of well-ordered life out into the void.



He had known romance, and the spell of the great, simple, and

primitive emotions; he had sat down to eat with buccaneers; he had

seen the fierce, quick leap of unleashed passions, and had felt

death swoop close at his nape and pass like a swift spurt of cold

air.  City life, his old life, had no charm for him now.  Wilbur

honestly believed that he was changed to his heart's core.  He

thought that, like Moran, he was henceforth to be a sailor of the

sea, a rover, and he saw the rest of his existence passed with

her, aboard their faithful little schooner.  They would have the

whole round world as their playground; they held the earth and the

great seas in fief; there was no one to let or to hinder.  They

two belonged to each other.  Once outside the Heads again, and

they swept the land of cities and of little things behind them,

and they two were left alone once more; alone in the great world

of romance.



About an hour after her arrival off the station, while Hoang and

the hands were furling the jib and foresail and getting the dory

over the side, Moran remarked to Wilbur:



"It's good we came in when we did, mate; the glass is going down

fast, and the wind's breezing up from the west; we're going to

have a blow; the tide will be going out in a little while, and we

never could have come in against wind and tide."



"Moran," said Wilbur, "I'm going ashore--into the station here;

there's a telephone line there; see the wires? I can't so much as

turn my hand over before I have some shore-going clothes.  What do

you suppose they would do to me if I appeared on Kearney Street in

this outfit? I'll ring up Langley & Michaels--they are the

wholesale chemists in town--and have their agent come out here and

talk business to us about our ambergris.  We've got to pay the men

their prize-money; then as soon as we get our own money in hand we

can talk about overhauling and outfitting the 'Bertha.'"



Moran refused to accompany him ashore and into the Lifeboat

Station.  Roofed houses were an object of suspicion to her. 

Already she had begun to be uneasy at the distant sight of the

city of San Francisco, Nob, Telegraph, Russian, and Rincon hills,

all swarming with buildings and grooved with streets; even the

land-locked harbor fretted her.  Wilbur could see she felt

imprisoned, confined.  When he had pointed out the Palace Hotel to

her--a vast gray cube in the distance, overtopping the surrounding

roofs--she had sworn under her breath.



"And people can live there, good heavens! Why not rabbit-burrows,

and be done with it? Mate, how soon can we be out to sea again? I

hate this place."



Wilbur found the captain of the Lifeboat Station in the act of

sitting down to a dinner of boiled beef and cabbage.  He was a

strongly built well-looking man, with the air more of a soldier

than a sailor.  He had already been studying the schooner through

his front window and had recognized her, and at once asked Wilbur

news of Captain Kitchell.  Wilbur told him as much of his story as

was necessary, but from the captain's talk he gathered that the

news of his return had long since been wired from Coronado, and

that it would be impossible to avoid a nine days' notoriety.  The

captain of the station (his name was Hodgson) made Wilbur royally

welcome, insisted upon his dining with him, and himself called up

Langley & Michaels as soon as the meal was over.



It was he who offered the only plausible solution of the mystery

of the lifting and shaking of the schooner and the wrecking of the

junk.  Though Wilbur was not satisfied with Hodgson's explanation,

it was the only one he ever heard.



When he had spoken of the matter, Hodgson had nodded his head. 

"Sulphur-bottoms," he said.



"Sulphur-bottoms?"



"Yes; they're a kind of right-whale; they get barnacles and a kind

of marine lice on their backs, and come up and scratch them selves

against a ship's keel, just like a hog under a fence."



When Wilbur's business was done, and he was making ready to return

to the schooner, Hodgson remarked suddenly: "Hear you've got a

strapping fine girl aboard with you.  Where did you fall in with

her?" and he winked and grinned.



Wilbur started as though struck, and took himself hurriedly away;

but the man's words had touched off in his brain a veritable mine

of conjecture.  Moran in Magdalena Bay was consistent, congruous,

and fitted into her environment.  But how--how was Wilbur to

explain her to San Francisco, and how could his behavior seem else

than ridiculous to the men of his club and to the women whose

dinner invitations he was wont to receive? They could not

understand the change that had been wrought in him; they did not

know Moran, the savage, half-tamed Valkyrie so suddenly become a

woman.  Hurry as he would, the schooner could not be put to sea

again within a fortnight.  Even though he elected to live aboard

in the meanwhile, the very business of her preparation would call

him to the city again and again.  Moran could not be kept a

secret.  As it was, all the world knew of her by now.  On the

other hand he could easily understand her position; to her it

seemed simplicity itself that they two who loved each other should

sail away and pass their lives together upon the sea, as she and

her father had done before.



Like most men, Wilbur had to walk when he was thinking hard.  He

sent the dory back to the schooner with word to Moran that he

would take a walk around the beach and return in an hour or two. 

He set off along the shore in the direction of Fort Mason, the old

red-brick fort at the entrance to the Golden Gate.  At this point

in the Presidio Government reservation the land is solitary.

Wilbur followed the line of the beach to the old fort; and there,

on the very threshold of the Western world, at the very outpost of

civilization, sat down in the lee of the crumbling fortification,

and scene by scene reviewed the extraordinary events of the past

six months.



In front of him ran the narrow channel of the Golden Gate; to his

right was the bay and the city; at his left the open Pacific.



He saw himself the day of his advent aboard the "Bertha" in his

top hat and frock coat; saw himself later "braking down" at the

windlass, the "Petrel" within hailing distance.



Then the pictures began to thicken fast: the derelict bark "Lady

Letty" rolling to her scuppers, abandoned and lonely; the "boy" in

the wheel-box; Kitchell wrenching open the desk in the captain's

stateroom; Captain Sternersen buried at sea, his false teeth

upside down; the black fury of the squall, and Moran at the wheel; 

Moran lying at full length on the deck, getting the altitude of a

star; Magdalena Bay; the shark-fishing; the mysterious lifting and

shuddering of the schooner; the beach-combers' junk, with its

staring red eyes; Hoang, naked to the waist, gleaming with sweat

and whale-oil; the ambergris; the race to beach the sinking

schooner; the never-to-be-forgotten night when he and Moran had

camped together on the beach; Hoang taken prisoner, and the

hideous filing of his teeth; the beach-combers, silent and

watchful behind their sand breastworks; the Chinaman he had killed

twitching and hic-coughing at his feet; Moran turned Berserker,

bursting down upon him through a haze of smoke; Charlie dying in

the hammock aboard the schooner, ordering his funeral with its

"four-piecee horse"; Coronado; the incongruous scene in the

ballroom; and, last of all, Josie Herrick in white duck and kid

shoes, giving her hand to Moran in her boots and belt, hatless as

ever, her sleeves rolled up to above the elbows, her white, strong

arm extended, her ruddy face, and pale, milk-blue eyes gravely

observant, her heavy braids, yellow as ripening rye, hanging over

her shoulder and breast.



A sudden explosion of cold wind, striking down blanket-wise and

bewildering from out the west, made Wilbur look up quickly.  The

gray sky seemed scudding along close overhead.  The bay, the

narrow channel of the Golden Gate, the outside ocean, were all

whitening with crests of waves.  At his feet the huge green

ground-swells thundered to the attack of the fort's granite

foundations.  Through the Gate, the bay seemed rushing out to the

Pacific.  A bewildered gull shot by, tacking and slanting against

the gusts that would drive it out to sea.  Evidently the storm was

not far off.  Wilbur rose to his feet, and saw the "Bertha

Millner," close in, unbridled and free as a runaway horse, headed

directly for the open sea, and rushing on with all the impetus of

wind and tide!

