





V



A Girl Captain





When Wilbur came on deck the morning after the sinking of the bark

he was surprised to find the schooner under way again.  Wilbur and

Charlie had berthed forward during that night--Charlie with the

hands, Wilbur in the Captain's hammock.  The reason for this

change of quarters had been found in a peremptory order from Moran

during the dog-watch the preceding evening.



She had looked squarely at Wilbur from under her scowl, and had

said briefly and in a fine contralto voice, that he had for the

first time noted: "I berth aft, in the cabin; you and the Chinaman

forward.  Understand?"



Moran had only forestalled Wilbur's intention; while after her

almost miraculous piece of seamanship in the rescue of the

schooner, Charlie and the Chinese crew accorded her a respect that

was almost superstitious.



Wilbur met her again at breakfast.  She was still wearing men's

clothing--part of Kitchell's outfit--and was booted to the knee;

but now she wore no hat, and her enormous mane of rye-colored hair

was braided into long strands near to the thickness of a man's

arm.  The redness of her face gave a startling effect to her pale

blue eyes and sandy, heavy eyebrows, that easily lowered to a

frown.  She ate with her knife, and after pushing away her plate

Wilbur observed that she drank half a tumbler of whiskey and

water.



The conversation between the two was tame enough.  There was no

common ground upon which they could meet.  To her father's death--

no doubt an old matter even before her rescue--she made no

allusion.  Her attitude toward Wilbur was one of defiance and

suspicion.  Only once did she relax:



"How did you come to be aboard here with these rat-eaters--you're

no sailor?" she said abruptly.



"Huh!" laughed Wilbur, mirthlessly; "huh! I was shanghaied."



Moran smote the table with a red fist, and shouted with sonorous,

bell-toned laughter.



"Shanghaied?--you? Now, that is really good.  And what are you

going to do now?"



"What are you going to do?"



"Signal the first home-bound vessel and be taken into Frisco. 

I've my insurance to collect (Wilbur had given her the 'Letty's'

papers) and the disaster to report."



"Well, I'm not keen on shark-hunting myself," said Wilbur.  But

Moran showed no interest in his plans.



However, they soon found that they were not to be permitted to

signal.  At noon the same day the schooner sighted a steamship's

smoke on the horizon, and began to raise her rapidly.  Moran

immediately bound on the ensign, union down, and broke it out at

the peak.



Charlie, who was at the wheel, spoke a sentence in Chinese, and

one of the hands drew his knife across the halyards and brought

the distress signal to the deck.  Moran turned upon Charlie with

an oath, her brows knitted.



"No! No!" sang Charlie, closing his eyes and wagging his head. 

"No! Too muchee los' time; no can stop.  You come downside cabin;

you an' one-piece boss number two (this was Wilbur) have um chin-

chin."



The odd conclave assembled about Kitchell's table--the club-man,

the half-masculine girl in men's clothes, and the Chinaman.  The

conference was an angry one, Wilbur and Moran insisting that they

be put aboard the steamship, Charlie refusing with calm obstinacy.



"I have um chin-chin with China boys las' nigh'.  China boy heap

flaid, no can stop um steamship.  Heap flaid too much talkee-

talkee.  No stop; go fish now; go fish chop-chop.  Los' heap time;

go fish.  I no savvy sail um boat, China boy no savvy sail um

boat.  I tink um you savvy (and he pointed to Moran).  I tink um

you savvy plenty heap much disa bay.  Boss number two, him no

savvy sail um boat, but him savvy plenty many all same.'



"And we're to stop on board your dough-dish and navigate her for

you?" shouted Moran, her face blazing.



Charlie nodded blandly: "I tink um yass."



"And when we get back to port," exclaimed Wilbur, "you think,

perhaps I--we won't make it interesting for you?"



Charlie smiled.



"I tink um Six Company heap rich."



"Well, get along," ordered Moran, as though the schooner was her

property, "and we'll talk it over."



"China boy like you heap pretty big," said Charlie to Moran, as he

went out.  "You savvy sail um boat all light; wanta you fo'

captain.  But," he added, suddenly dropping his bland passivity as

though he wore a mask, and for an instant allowing the wicked

malevolent Cantonese to come to the surface, "China boy no likee

funnee business, savvy?" Then with a smile of a Talleyrand he

disappeared.



Moran and Wilbur were helpless for the present.  They were but two

against seven Chinamen.  They must stay on board, if the coolies

wished it; and if they were to stay it was a matter of their own

personal safety that the "Bertha Millner" should be properly

navigated.



"I'll captain her," concluded Moran, sullenly, at the end of their

talk.  "You must act as mate, Mr. Wilbur.  And don't get any

mistaken idea into your head that, because I'm a young girl and

alone, you are going to run things your way.  I don't like funny

business any better than Charlie."



"Look here," said Wilbur, complaining, "don't think I'm altogether

a villain.  I think you're a ripping fine girl.  You're different

from any kind of girl I ever met, of course, but you, by jingo,

you're--you're splendid.  There in the squall last evening, when

you stood at the wheel, with your hair--"



"Oh, drop that!" said the girl, contemptuously, and went up on

deck.  Wilbur followed, scratching an ear.



Charlie was called aft and their decision announced.  Moran would

navigate the "Bertha Millner," Wilbur and she taking the watches. 

Charlie promised that he would answer for the obedience of the

men.



Their first concern now was to shape their course for Magdalena

Bay.  Moran and Wilbur looked over Kitchell's charts and log-book,

but the girl flung them aside disdainfully.



"He's been sailing by the dead reckoning, and his navigation is

drivel.  Why, a cabin-boy would know better; and, to end with, the

chronometer is run down.  I'll have to get Green'ich time by

taking the altitude of a star to-night, and figure out our

longitude.  Did you bring off our sextant?"



Wilbur shook his head.  "Only the papers," he said.



"There's only an old ebony quadrant here," said Moran, "but it

will have to do."



That night, lying flat on her back on the deck with a quadrant to

her eye, she "got a star and brought it down to the horizon," and

sat up under the reeking lamp in the cabin nearly the whole night

ciphering and ciphering till she had filled up the four sides of

the log-slate with her calculations.  However, by daylight she had

obtained the correct Greenwich time and worked the schooner's

longitude.



Two days passed, then a third.  Moran set the schooner's course. 

She kept almost entirely to herself, and when not at the wheel or

taking the sun or writing up the log, gloomed over the after-rail

into the schooner's wake.  Wilbur knew not what to think of her. 

Never in his life had he met with any girl like this.  So

accustomed had she been to the rough, give-and-take, direct

associations of a seafaring life that she misinterpreted well-

meant politeness--the only respect he knew how to pay her--to mean

insidious advances.  She was suspicious of him--distrusted him

utterly, and openly ridiculed his abortive seamanship.  Pretty she

was not, but she soon began to have a certain amount of attraction

for Wilbur.  He liked her splendid ropes of hair, her heavy

contralto voice, her fine animal strength of bone and muscle

(admittedly greater than his own); he admired her indomitable

courage and self-reliance, while her positive genius in the

matters of seamanship and navigation filled him with speechless

wonder.  The girls he had been used to were clever only in their

knowledge of the amenities of an afternoon call or the formalities

of a paper german.  A girl of two-and-twenty who could calculate

longitude from the altitude of a star was outside his experience. 

The more he saw of her the more he knew himself to have been right

in his first estimate.  She drank whiskey after her meals, and

when angry, which was often, swore like a buccaneer.  As yet she

was almost, as one might say, without sex--savage, unconquered,

untamed, glorying in her own independence, her sullen isolation. 

Her neck was thick, strong, and very white, her hands roughened

and calloused.  In her men's clothes she looked tall, vigorous,

and unrestrained, and on more than one occasion, as Wilbur passed

close to her, he was made aware that her hair, her neck, her

entire personality exhaled a fine, sweet, natural redolence that

savored of the ocean and great winds.



One day, as he saw her handling a huge water-barrel by the chines

only, with a strength he knew to be greater than his own, her

brows contracted with the effort, her hair curling about her thick

neck, her large, round arms bare to the elbow, a sudden thrill of

enthusiasm smote through him, and between his teeth he exclaimed

to himself:



"By Jove, you're a woman!"



The "Bertha Millner" continued to the southward, gliding quietly

over the oil-smoothness of the ocean under airs so light as hardly

to ruffle the surface.  Sometimes at high noon the shimmer of the

ocean floor blended into the shimmer of the sky at the horizon,

and then it was no longer water and blue heavens; the little craft

seemed to be poised in a vast crystalline sphere, where there was

neither height nor depth--poised motionless in warm, coruscating,

opalescent space, alone with the sun.



At length one morning the schooner, which for the preceding

twenty-four hours had been heading eastward, raised the land, and

by the middle of the afternoon had come up to within a mile of a

low, sandy shore, quivering with heat, and had tied up to the kelp

in Magdalena Bay.



Charlie now took over entire charge of operations.  For two days

previous the Chinese hands had been getting out the deck-tubs,

tackles, gaffs, spades, and the other shark-fishing gear that had

been stowed forward.  The sails were lowered and gasketed, the

decks cleared of all impedimenta, hogsheads and huge vats stood

ready in the waist, and the lazy indolence of the previous week

was replaced by an extraordinary activity.



The day after their arrival in the bay was occupied by all hands

in catching bait.  This bait was a kind of rock-fish, of a

beautiful red gold color, and about the size of an ordinary cod. 

They bit readily enough, but out of every ten hooked three were

taken off the lines by the sharks before they could be brought

aboard.  Another difficulty lay in the fact that, either because

of the excessive heat in the air or the percentage of alkali in

the water, they spoiled almost immediately if left in the air.



Turtle were everywhere--floating gray-green disks just under the

surface.  Sea-birds in clouds clamored all day long about the

shore and sand-pits.  At long intervals flying-fish skittered over

the water like skipping-stones.  Shoals of porpoises came in from

outside, leaping clumsily along the edges of the kelp.  Bewildered

land-birds perched on the schooner's rigging, and in the early

morning the whistling of quail could be heard on shore near where

a little fresh-water stream ran down to meet the ocean.



It was Wilbur who caught the first shark on the second morning of

the "Bertha's" advent in Magdalena Bay.  A store of bait had been

accumulated, split and halved into chunks for the shark-hooks, and

Wilbur, baiting one of the huge lines that had been brought up on

deck the evening before, flung it overboard, and watched the

glimmer of the white fish-meat turning to a silvery green as it

sank down among the kelp.  Almost instantly a long moving shadow,

just darker than the blue-green mass of the water, identified

itself at a little distance.



Enormous flukes proceeded from either side, an erect dorsal fin,

like an enormous cock's crest, rose from the back, while

immediately over the head swam the two pilot-fish, following so

closely the movement of the shark as to give the impression of

actually adhering to his body.  Twice and three times the great

man-eater twelve feet from snout to tail-tip, circled slowly about

the bait, the flukes moving fan-like through the water.  Once he

came up, touched the bait with his nose, and backed easily away. 

He disappeared, returned, and poised himself motionless in the

schooner's shadow, feeling the water with his flukes.



Moran was looking over Wilbur's shoulder.  "He's as good as

caught," she muttered; "once let them get sight of meat, and--

Steady now!" The shark moved forward.  Suddenly, with a long, easy

roll, he turned completely upon his back.  His white belly flashed

like silver in the water--the bait disappeared.



"You've got him!" shouted Moran.



The rope slid through Wilbur's palms, burning the skin as the huge

sea-wolf sounded.  Moran laid hold.  The heavy, sullen wrenching

from below twitched and swayed their bodies and threw them against

each other.  Her bare, cool arm was pressed close over his

knuckles.



"Heave!" she cried, laughing with the excitement of the moment. 

"Heave all!"--she began the chant of sailors hauling at the ropes. 

Together, and bracing their feet against the schooner's rail, they

fought out the fight with the great fish.  In a swirl of lather

the head and shoulders came above the surface, the flukes churning

the water till it boiled like the wake of a screw steamship.  But

as soon as these great fins were clear of the surface the shark

fell quiet and helpless.



Charlie came up with the cutting-in spade, and as the fish hung

still over the side, cut him open from neck to belly with a single

movement.  Another Chinaman stood by with a long-handled gaff,

hooked out the purple-black liver, brought it over the side, and

dropped it into one of the deck-tubs.  The shark thrashed and

writhed, his flukes quivering and his gills distended.  Wilbur

could not restrain an exclamation.



"Brutal business!" he muttered.



"Hoh!" exclaimed Moran, scornfully, "cutting-in is too good for

him.  Sailor-folk are no friends of such carrion as that."



Other lines were baited and dropped overboard, and the hands

settled themselves to the real business of the expedition.  There

was no skill in the matter.  The sharks bit ravenously, and soon

swarmed about the schooner in hundreds.  Hardly a half minute

passed that one of the four Chinamen that were fishing did not

signal a catch, and Charlie and Jim were kept busy with spade and

gaff.  By noon the deck-tubs were full.  The lines were hauled in,

and the hands set the tubs in the sun to try out the oil.  Under

the tropical heat the shark livers almost visibly melted away, and

by four o'clock in the afternoon the tubs were full of a thick,

yellow oil, the reek of which instantly recalled to Wilbur's mind

the rancid smell of the schooner on the day when he had first come

aboard of her.  The deck-tubs were emptied into the hogsheads and

vats that stood in the waist of the "Bertha," the tubs scoured,

and the lines and bent shark-hooks overhauled.  Charlie

disappeared in the galley, supper was cooked, and eaten upon deck

under the conflagration of the sunset; the lights were set, the

Chinamen foregathered in the fo'c'stle head, smoking opium, and by

eight o'clock the routine of the day was at an end.



So the time passed.  In a short time Wilbur could not have said

whether the day was Wednesday or Sunday.  He soon tired of the

unsportsmanlike work of killing the sluggish brutes, and turned

shoreward to relieve the monotony of the succeeding days.  He and

Moran were left a good deal to their own devices.  Charlie was the

master of the men now.  "Mate," said Moran to Wilbur one day,

after a dinner of turtle steaks and fish, eaten in the open air on

the quarterdeck; "mate, this is slow work, and the schooner smells

terribly foul.  We'll have the dory out and go ashore.  We can

tumble a cask into her and get some water.  The butt's three-

quarters empty.  Let's see how it feels to be in Mexico."



"Mexico?" said Wilbur.  "That's so--Lower California is Mexico. 

I'd forgotten that!"



They went ashore and spent the afternoon in filling the water-cask

from the fresh-water stream and in gathering abalones, which Moran

declared were delicious eating, from the rocks left bare by the

tide.  But nothing could have exceeded the loneliness of that

shore and backland, palpitating under the flogging of a tropical

sun.  Low hills of sand, covered with brush, stretched back from

the shore.  On the eastern horizon, leagues distant, blue masses

of mountain striated with mirages swam in the scorching air.



The sand was like fire to the touch.  Far out in the bay the

schooner hung motionless under bare sticks, resting apparently

upon her inverted shadow only.  And that was all--the flat, heat-

ridden land, the sheen of the open Pacific, and the lonely

schooner.



"Quiet enough," said Wilbur, in a low voice, wondering if there

was such a place as San Francisco, with its paved streets and

cable cars, and if people who had been his friends there had ever

had any real existence.



"Do you like it?" asked Moran quickly, facing him, her thumbs in

her belt.



"It's good fun--how about you?"



"It's no different than the only life I've known.  I suppose you

think it s a queer kind of life for a girl.  I've lived by doing

things, not by thinking things, or reading about what other people

have done or thought; and I guess it's what you do that counts,

rather than what you think or read about.  Where's that pinch-bar?

We'll get a couple more abalones for supper, and then put off."



That was the only talk of moment they had during the afternoon. 

All the rest of their conversation had been of those things that

immediately occupied their attention.



They regained the schooner toward five o'clock, to find the

Chinamen perplexed and mystified.  No explanation was forthcoming,

and Charlie gave them supper in preoccupied silence.  As they were

eating the abalones, which Moran had fried in batter, Charlie

said:



"Shark all gone! No more catch um--him all gone."



"Gone--why?"



"No savvy," said Charlie.  "No likee, no likee.  China boy tink um

heap funny, too much heap funny."



It was true.  During all the next day not a shark was in sight,

and though the crew fished assiduously till dark, they were

rewarded by not so much as a bite.  No one could offer any

explanation.



"'Tis strange," said Moran.  "Never heard of shark leaving this

feed before.  And you can see with half an eye that the hands

don't like the looks of it.  Superstitious beggars! they need to

be clumped in the head."



That same night Wilbur woke in his hammock on the fo'c'stle head

about half-past two.  The moon was down, the sky one powder of

stars.  There was not a breath of wind.  It was so still that he

could hear some large fish playing and breaking off toward the

shore.  Then, without the least warning, he felt the schooner

begin to lift under him.  He rolled out of his hammock and stood

on the deck.  There could be no doubt of it--the whole forepart

was rising beneath him.  He could see the bowsprit moving upward

from star to star.  Still the schooner lifted; objects on deck

began to slide aft; the oil in the deck-tubs washed over; then, as

there came a wild scrambling of the Chinese crew up the fo'c'stle

hatch, she settled again gradually at first, then, with an abrupt

lurch that almost threw him from his feet, regained her level. 

Moran met him in the waist.  Charlie came running aft.



"What was that? Are we grounding? Has she struck?"



"No, no; we're still fast to the kelp.  Was it a tidal wave?"



"Nonsense.  It wouldn't have handled us that way."




"Well, what was it? Listen! For God's sake keep quiet there

forward!"



Wilbur looked over the side into the water.  The ripples were

still chasing themselves away from the schooner.  There was

nothing else.  The stillness shut down again.  There was not a

sound.

