




XI



A CHANGE IN LEADERS





"Well," exclaimed Wilbur at length, the excitement of the fight

returning upon him.  "We have plenty to do yet.  Come on, Moran."



It was no longer Moran who took the initiative--who was the

leader.  The brief fight upon the shore had changed all that.  It

was Wilbur who was now the master, it was Wilbur who was

aggressive.  He had known what it meant to kill.  He was no longer

afraid of anything, no longer hesitating.  He had felt a sudden

quadrupling of all his strength, moral and physical.



All that was strong and virile and brutal in him seemed to harden

and stiffen in the moment after he had seen the beach-comber

collapse limply on the sand under the last strong knife-blow; and

a sense of triumph, of boundless self-confidence, leaped within

him, so that he shouted aloud in a very excess of exhilaration;

and snatching up a heavy cutting-in spade, that had been dropped

in the fight near the burning cabin, tossed it high into the air,

catching it again as it descended, like any exultant savage.



"Come on!" he cried to Moran; "where are the beach-combers gone?

I'm going to get one more before the show is over."



The two passed out of the zone of smoke, and reached the other

side of the burning cabin just in time to see the last of the

struggle.  The whole affair had not taken more than a quarter of

an hour.  In the end the beach-combers had been beaten.  Four had

fled into the waste of sand and sage that lay back of the shore,

and had not been pursued.  A fifth had been almost hamstrung by

one of the "Bertha's" coolies, and had given himself up.  A sixth,

squealing and shrieking like a tiger-cat, had been made prisoner;

and Wilbur himself had accounted for the seventh.



As Wilbur and Moran came around the cabin they saw the "Bertha

Millner's" Chinamen in a group, not far from the water's edge,

reassembled after the fight--panting and bloody, some of them bare

to the belt, their weapons still in their hands.  Here and there

was a bandaged arm or head; but their number was complete--or no,

was it complete?



"Ought to be one more," said Wilbur, anxiously hastening for-ward.



As the two came up the coolies parted, and Wilbur saw one of them,

his head propped upon a rolled-up blouse, lying ominously still on

the trampled sand.



"It's Charlie!" exclaimed Moran.



"Where's he hurt?" cried Wilbur to the group of coolies.  "Jim!--

where's Jim? Where's he hurt, Jim?"



Jim, the only member of the crew besides Charlie who could

understand or speak English, answered:



"Kai-gingh him fin' pistol, you' pistol; Charlie him fight plenty;

bime-by, when he no see, one-piecee Kai-gingh he come up behin',

shoot um Charlie in side--savvy?"



"Did he kill him? Is he dead?"



"No, I tinkum die plenty soon; him no savvy nuttin' now, him all-

same sleep.  Plenty soon bime-by him sleep for good, I tink."



There was little blood to be seen when Wilbur gently unwrapped the

torn sleeve of a blouse that had been used as a bandage.  Just

under the armpit was the mark of the bullet--a small puncture

already closed, half hidden under a clot or two of blood.  The

coolie lay quite unconscious, his eyes wide open, drawing a faint,

quick breath at irregular intervals.



"What do you think, mate?" asked Moran in a low voice.



"I think he's got it through the lungs," answered Wilbur, frowning

in distress and perplexity.  "Poor old Charlie!"



Moran went down on a knee, and put a finger on the slim, corded

wrist, yellow as old ivory.



"Charlie," she called--"Charlie, here, don't you know me? Wake up,

old chap! It's Moran.  You're not hurt so very bad, are you?"



Charlie's eyes closed and opened a couple of times.



"No can tell," he answered feebly; "hurt plenty big"; then he

began to cough.



Wilbur drew a sigh of relief.  "He's all right!" he exclaimed.



"Yes, I think he's all right," assented Moran.



"First thing to do now is to get him aboard the schooner," said

Wilbur.  "We'll take him right across in the beach-combers' dory

here.  By Jove!" he exclaimed on a sudden.  "The ambergris--I'd

forgotten all about it." His heart sank.  In the hideous confusion

of that morning's work, all thought of the loot had been

forgotten.  Had the battle been for nothing, after all? The moment

the beach-combers had been made aware of the meditated attack, it

would have been an easy matter for them to have hidden the

ambergris--destroyed it even.



In two strides Wilbur had reached the beach-combers' dory and was

groping in the forward cuddy.  Then he uttered a great shout of

satisfaction.  The "stuff" was there, all of it, though the mass

had been cut into quarters, three parts of it stowed in tea-

flails, the fourth still reeved up in the hammock netting.



"We've got it!" he cried to Moran, who had followed him.  "We've

got it, Moran! Over $100,000.  We're rich--rich as boodlers, you

and I.  Oh, it was worth fighting for, after all, wasn't it? Now

we'll get out of here--now we'll cut for home."



"It's only Charlie I'm thinking about," answered Moran,

hesitating.  "If it wasn't for that we'd be all right.  I don't

know whether we did right, after all, in jumping the camp here.  I

wouldn't like to feel that I'd got Charlie into our quarrel only

to have him killed."



Wilbur stared at this new Moran in no little amazement.  Where was

the reckless, untamed girl of the previous night, who had sworn at

him and denounced his niggling misgivings as to right and wrong?



"Hoh!" he retorted impatiently, "Charlie's right enough.  And,

besides, I didn't force him to anything.  I--we, that is--took the

same chances.  If I hadn't done for my man there behind the cabin,

he would have done for me.  At all events, we carried our point. 

We got the loot.  They took it from us, and we were strong enough

to get it back."



Moran merely nodded, as though satisfied with his decision, and

added:



"Well, what next, mate?"



"We'll get back to the 'Bertha' now and put to sea as soon as we

can catch the tide.  I'll send Jim and two of the other men across

in the dory with Charlie.  The rest of us will go around by the

shore.  We've got to have a chin-chin with Hoang, if he don't get

loose aboard there and fire the boat before we can get back.  I

don't propose taking these beach-combers back to 'Frisco with us."



"What will we do with the two prisoners?" she asked.



"Let them go; we've got their arms."



The positions of the two were reversed.  It was Wilbur who assumed

control and direction of what went forward, Moran taking his

advice and relying upon his judgment.



In accordance with Wilbur's orders, Charlie was carried aboard the

dory; which, with two Chinamen at the oars, and the ambergris

stowed again into the cuddy, at once set off for the schooner. 

Wilbur himself cut the ropes on the two prisoners, and bade them

shift for themselves.  The rest of the party returned to the

"Bertha Millner" around the wide sweep of the beach.



It was only by high noon, under the flogging of a merciless sun,

that the entire crew of the little schooner once more reassembled

under the shadow of her stranded hulk.  They were quite worn out;

and as soon as Charlie was lifted aboard, and the ambergris--or,

as they spoke of it now, the "loot"--was safely stowed in the

cabin, Wilbur allowed the Chinamen three or four hours' rest. 

They had had neither breakfast nor dinner; but their exhaustion

was greater than their hunger, and in a few moments the entire

half-dozen were stretched out asleep on the forward deck in the

shadow of the foresail raised for the purpose of sheltering them. 

However, Wilbur and Moran sought out Hoang, whom they found as

they had left him--bound upon the floor of the cabin.



"Now we have a talk--savvy?" Wilbur told him as he loosed the

ropes about his wrists and ankles.  "We got our loot back from

you, old man, and we got one of your men into the bargain.  You

woke up the wrong crowd, Hoang, when you went up against this

outfit.  You're in a bad way, my friend.  Your junk is wrecked;

all your oil and blubber from the whale is lost; four of your men

have run away, one is killed, another one we caught and let go,

another one has been hamstrung; and you yourself are our prisoner,

with your teeth filed down to your gums.  Now," continued Wilbur,

with the profoundest gravity, "I hope this will be a lesson to

you.  Don't try and get too much the next time.  Just be content

with what is yours by right, or what you are strong enough to

keep, and don't try to fight with white people.  Other coolies, I

don't say.  But when you try to get the better of white people you

are out of your class."



The little beach-comber (he was scarcely above five feet) rubbed

his chafed wrists, and fixed Wilbur with his tiny, twinkling eyes.



"What you do now?"



"We go home.  I'm going to maroon you and your people here on this

beach.  You deserve that I should let you eat your fists by way of

table-board; but I'm no such dirt as you.  When our men left the

schooner they brought off with them a good share of our

provisions.  I'll leave them here for you--and there's plenty of

turtle and abalone to be had for the catching.  Some of the

American men-of-war, I believe, come down to this bay for target-

practice twice a year, and if we speak any on the way up we'll ask

them to call here for castaways.  That's what I'll do for you, and

that's all! If you don't like it, you can set out to march up the

coast till you hit a town; but I wouldn't advise you to try it. 

Now what have you got to say?"



Hoang was silent.  His queue had become unbound for half its

length, and he plaited it anew, winking his eyes thoughtfully.



"Well, what do you say?" said Moran.



"I lose face," answered Hoang at length, calmly.



"You lose face? What do you mean?"



"I lose face," he insisted; then added: "I heap 'shamed.  You

fightee my China boy, you catchee me.  My boy no mo' hab me fo'

boss--savvy? I go back, him no likee me.  Mebbe all same killee

me.  I lose face--no mo' boss."



"What a herd of wild cattle!" muttered Wilbur.



"There's something in what he says, don't you think, mate?"

observed Moran, bringing a braid over each shoulder and stroking

it according to her habit.



"We'll ask Jim about it," decided Wilbur.



But Jim at once confirmed Hoang's statement.  "Oh, Kai-gingh

killum no-good boss, fo' sure," he declared.



"Don't you think, mate," said Moran, "we'd better take him up to

'Frisco with us? We've had enough fighting and killing."



So it was arranged that the defeated beach-comber, the whipped

buccaneer, who had "lost face" and no longer dared look his men in

the eye, should be taken aboard.



By four o'clock next morning Wilbur had the hands at work digging

the sand from around the "Bertha Millner's" bow.  The line by

which she was to be warped off was run out to the ledge of the

rock; fresh water was taken on; provisions for the marooned beach-

combers were cached upon the beach; the dory was taken aboard,

gaskets were cast off, and hatches battened down.



At high tide, all hands straining upon the warp, the schooner was

floated off, and under touch of the lightest airs drew almost

imperceptibly away from the land.  They were quite an hour

crawling out to the heads of the bay.  But here the breeze was

freshening.  Moran took the wheel; the flying-jib and staysail

were set; the wake began to whiten under the schooner's stern, the

forefoot sang; the Pacific opened out more and more; and by 12:30

o'clock Moran put the wheel over, and, as the schooner's bow swung

to the northward, cried to Wilbur:



"Mate, look your last of Magdalena Bay!"



Standing at her side, Wilbur turned and swept the curve of the

coast with a single glance.  The vast, heat-scourged hoop of

yellow sand, the still, smooth shield of indigo water, with its

beds of kelp, had become insensibly dear to him.  It was all

familiar, friendly, and hospitable.  Hardly an acre of that sweep

of beach that did not hold the impress of his foot.  There was the

point near by the creek where he and Moran first landed to fill

the water-casks and to gather abalones; the creek itself, where he

had snared quail; the sand spit with its whitened whale's skull,

where he and Moran had beached the schooner; and there, last of

all, that spot of black over which still hung a haze of brown-gray

smoke, the charred ruins of the old Portuguese whaling-cabin,

where they had outfought the beach-combers.



For a moment Wilbur and Moran looked back without speaking.  They

stood on the quarter-deck; in the shadow of the main-sail, shut

off from the sight of the schooner's crew, and for the instant

quite alone.



"Well, Moran, it's good-by to the old places, isn't it?" said

Wilbur at length.



"Yes," she said, her deep voice pitched even deeper than usual. 

"Mate, great things have happened there."



"It doesn't look like a place for a Tong row with Chinese pirates,

though, does it?" he said; but even as he spoke the words, he

guessed that that was not what he meant.



"Oh, what did that amount to?" she said, with an impatient

movement of her head.  "It was there that I first knew myself; and

knew that, after all, you were a man and I was a woman; and that

there was just us--you and I--in the world; and that you loved me

and I loved you, and that nothing else was worth thinking of."



Wilbur shut his hand down over hers as it gripped a spoke of the

wheel.



"Moran, I knew that long since," he said.  "Such a month as this

has been! Why, I feel as though I had only begun to live since I

began to love you."



"And you do, mate?" she answered--"you do love me, and always

will? Oh, you don't know," she went on, interrupting his answer,

"you haven't a guess, how the last two days have changed me. 

Something has happened here"--and she put both her hands over her

breast.  "I'm all different here, mate.  It's all you inside here--

all you! And it hurts, and I'm proud that it does hurt.  Oh!" she

cried, of a sudden, "I don't know how to love yet, and I do it

very badly, and I can't tell you how I feel, because I can't even

tell it to myself.  But you must be good to me now." The deep

voice trembled a little.  "Good to me, mate, and true to me, mate,

because I've only you, and all of me is yours.  Mate, be good to

me, and always be kind to me.  I'm not Moran any more.  I'm not

proud and strong and independent, and I don't want to be lonely. 

I want you--I want you always with me.  I'm just a woman now,

dear--just a woman that loves you with a heart she's just found."



Wilbur could find no words to answer.  There was something so

pathetic and at the same time so noble in Moran's complete

surrender of herself, and her dependence upon him, her

unquestioned trust in him and his goodness, that he was suddenly

smitten with awe at the sacredness of the obligation thus imposed

on him.  She was his now, to have and to hold, to keep, to

protect, and to defend--she who was once so glorious of her

strength, of her savage isolation, her inviolate, pristine

maidenhood.  All words seemed futile and inadequate to him.



She came close to him, and put her hands upon his shoulders, and,

looking him squarely in the eye, said:



"You do love me, mate, and you always will?"



"Always, Moran," said Wilbur, simply.  He took her in his arms,

and she laid her cheek against his for a moment, then took his

head between her hands and kissed him.



Two days passed.  The "Bertha Millner" held steadily to her

northward course, Moran keeping her well in toward the land. 

Wilbur maintained a lookout from the crow's-nest in the hope of

sighting some white cruiser or battleship on her way south for

target-practice.  In the cache of provisions he had left for the

beach-combers he had inserted a message, written by Hoang, to the

effect that they might expect to be taken off by a United States

man-of-war within the month.



Hoang did not readily recover his "loss of face." The "Bertha's"

Chinamen would have nothing to do with this member of a hostile

Tong; and the humiliated beach-comber kept almost entirely to

himself, sitting on the forecastle-head all day long, smoking his

sui-yen-hu and brooding silently to himself.



Moran had taken the lump of ambergris from out Kitchell's old

hammock, and had slung the hammock itself in the schooner's waist,

and Charlie was made as comfortable as possible therein.  They

could do but little for him, however; and he was taken from time

to time with spells of coughing that racked him with a dreadful

agony.  At length one noon, just after Moran had taken the sun and

had calculated that the "Bertha" was some eight miles to the

southwest of San Diego, she was surprised to hear Wilbur calling

her sharply.  She ran to him, and found him standing in the waist

by Charlie's hammock.



The Chinaman was dying, and knew it.  He was talking in a faint

and feeble voice to Wilbur as she came up, and was trying to

explain to him that he was sorry he had deserted the schooner

during the scare in the bay.



"Planty muchee solly," he said; "China boy, him heap flaid of

Feng-shui.  When Feng-shui no likee, we then must go chop-chop. 

Plenty much solly I leave-um schooner that night; solly plenty--

savvy?"



"Of course we savvy, Charlie," said Moran.  "You weren't afraid

when it came to fighting."



"I die pletty soon," said Charlie calmly.  "You say you gib me

fifteen hundled dollah?"



"Yes, yes; that was our promise.  What do you want done with it,

Charlie?"



"I want plenty fine funeral in Chinatown in San Francisco.  Oh,

heap fine! You buy um first-chop coffin--savvy? Silver heap much--

costum big money.  You gib my money to Hop Sing Association,

topside Ming Yen temple.  You savvy Hop Sing?--one Six Companies."



"Yes, yes."



"Tellum Hop Sing I want funeral--four-piecee horse.  You no

flogettee horse?" he added apprehensively.



"No, I'll not forget the horses Charlie.  You shall have four."



"Want six-piecee band musicians--China music--heap plenty gong. 

You no flogettee? Two piecee priest, all dressum white--savvy? You

mus' buyum coffin yo'self.  Velly fine coffin, heap much silver,

an' four-piecee horse.  You catchum fireclacker--one, five, seven

hundled fireclacker, makeum big noise; an' loast pig, an' plenty

lice an' China blandy.  Heap fine funeral, costum fifteen hundled

dollah.  I be bury all same Mandarin--all same Little Pete.  You

plomise, sure?"



"I promise you, Charlie.  You shall have a funeral finer than

little Pete's."



Charlie nodded his head contentedly, drawing a breath of

satisfaction.



"Bimeby Hop Sing sendum body back China." He closed his eyes and

lay for a long time, worn out with the effort of speaking, as if

asleep.  Suddenly he opened his eyes wide.  "You no flogettee

horse?"



"Four horses, Charlie.  I'll remember."



He drooped once more, only to rouse again at the end of a few

minutes with:



"First-chop coffin, plenty much silver"; and again, a little later

and very feebly: "Six-piecee--band music--China music--four-

piecee--gong--four."



"I promise you, Charlie," said Wilbur.



"Now," answered Charlie--"now I die."



And the low-caste Cantonese coolie, with all the dignity and

calmness of a Cicero, composed himself for death.



An hour later Wilbur and Moran knew that he was dead.  Yet, though

they had never left the hammock, they could not have told at just

what moment he died.



Later, on that same afternoon, Wilbur, from the crow's-nest, saw

the lighthouse on Point Loma and the huge rambling bulk of the

Coronado Hotel spreading out and along the beach.



It was the outpost of civilization.  They were getting back to the

world again.  Within an hour's ride of the hotel were San Diego,

railroads, newspapers, and policemen.  Just off the hotel,

however, Wilbur could discern the gleaming white hull of a United

States man-of-war.  With the glass he could make her out to be one

of the monitors--the "Monterey" in all probability.



After advising with Moran, it was decided to put in to land.  The

report as to the castaways could be made to the "Monterey," and

Charlie's body forwarded to his Tong in San Francisco.



In two hours' time the schooner was well up, and Wilbur stood by

Moran's side at the wheel.  watching and studying the familiar

aspect of Coronado Beach.



"It's a great winter resort," he told her.  "I was down here with

a party two years ago.  Nothing has changed.  You see that big

sort of round wing, Moran, all full of windows? That's the dining-

room.  And there's the bathhouse and the bowling-alley.  See the

people on the beach, and the girls in white duck skirts; and look

up there by the veranda--let me take the glass--yes, there's a

tally-ho coach.  Isn't it queer to get back to this sort of thing

after Magdalena Bay and the beach-combers?"



Moran spun the wheel without reply, and gave an order to Jim to

ease off the foresheet.

