




XIV



THE OCEAN IS CALLING FOR YOU





A little while after Wilbur had set off for the station, while

Moran was making the last entries in the log-book, seated at the

table in the cabin, Jim appeared at the door.



"Well," she said, looking up.



"China boy him want go asho' plenty big, seeum flen up Chinatown

in um city."



"Shore leave, is it?" said Moran.  "You deserted once before

without even saying good-by; and my hand in the fire, you'll come

back this time dotty with opium.  Get away with you.  We'll have

men aboard here in a few days."



"Can go?" inquired Jim suavely.



"I said so.  Report our arrival to your Six Companies."



Hoang rowed Jim and the coolies ashore, and then returned to the

schooner with the dory and streamed her astern.  As he passed the

cabin door on his way forward, Moran hailed him.



"I thought you went ashore?" she cried.



"Heap flaid," he answered.  "Him other boy go up Chinatown; him

tell Sam Yup; I tink Sam Yup alla same killee me.  I no leaveum

ship two, thlee day; bimeby I go Olegon.  I stay topside ship. 

You wantum cook.  I cook plenty fine; standum watch for you."



Indeed, ever since leaving Coronado the ex-beach-comber had made

himself very useful about the schooner; had been, in fact,

obsequiousness itself, and seemed to be particularly desirous of

gaining the good-will of the "Bertha's" officers.  He understood

pigeon English better than Jim, and spoke it even better than

Charlie had done.  He acted the part of interpreter between Wilbur

and the hands; even turned to in the galley upon occasion; and of

his own accord offered to give the vessel a coat of paint above

the water-line.  Moran turned back to her log, and Hoang went

forward.  Standing on the forward deck, he looked after the

"Bertha's" coolies until they disappeared behind a row of pine-

trees on the Presidio Reservation, going cityward.  Wilbur was

nowhere in sight.  For a longtime Hoang studied the Lifeboat

Station narrowly, while he made a great show of coiling a length

of rope.  The station was just out of hailing distance.  Nobody

seemed stirring.  The whole shore and back land thereabout was

deserted; the edge of the city was four miles distant.  Hoang

returned to the forecastle-hatch and went below, groping under his

bunk in his ditty-box.



"Well, what is it?" exclaimed Moran a moment later, as the beach-

comber entered the cabin, and shut the door behind him.



Hoang did not answer; but she did not need to repeat the question. 

In an instant Moran knew very well what he had come for.



"God!" she exclaimed under her breath, springing to her feet. 

"Why didn't we think of this!"



Hoang slipped his knife from the sleeve of his blouse.  For an

instant the old imperiousness, the old savage pride and anger,

leaped again in Moran's breast--then died away forever.  She was

no longer the same Moran of that first fight on board the

schooner, when the beach-combers had plundered her of her "loot."

Only a few weeks ago, and she would have fought with Hoang without

hesitation and without mercy; would have wrenched a leg from the

table and brained him where he stood.  But she had learned since

to know what it meant to be dependent; to rely for protection upon

some one who was stronger than she; to know her weakness; to know

that she was at last a woman, and to be proud of it.



She did not fight; she had no thought of fighting.  Instinctively

she cried aloud, "Mate--mate!--Oh, mate, where are you? Help me!"

and Hoang's knife nailed the words within her throat.



The "loot" was in a brass-bound chest under one of the cabin's

bunks, stowed in two gunny-bags.  Hoang drew them out, knotted the

two together, and, slinging them over his shoulder, regained the

deck.



He looked carefully at the angry sky and swelling seas, noting the

direction of the wind and set of the tide; then went forward and

cast the anchor-chains from the windlass in such a manner that the

schooner must inevitably wrench free with the first heavy strain. 

The dory was still tugging at the line astern.  Hoang dropped the

sacks in the boat, swung himself over the side, and rowed calmly

toward the station's wharf.  If any notion of putting to sea with

the schooner had entered the obscure, perverted cunning of his

mind, he had almost instantly rejected it.  Chinatown was his aim;

once there and under the protection of his Tong, Hoang knew that

he was safe.  He knew the hiding-places that the See Yup

Association provided for its members--hiding places whose very

existence was unknown to the police of the White Devil.



No one interrupted--no one even noticed--his passage to the

station.  At best, it was nothing more than a coolie carrying a

couple of gunny-sacks across his shoulder.  Two hours later, Hoang

was lost in San Francisco's Chinatown.



*    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *



At the sight of the schooner sweeping out to sea, Wilbur was for

an instant smitten rigid.  What had happened? Where was Moran? Why

was there nobody on board? A swift, sharp sense of some unnamed

calamity leaped suddenly at his throat.  Then he was aware of a

crattering of hoofs along the road that led to the fort.  Hodgson

threw himself from one of the horses that were used in handling

the surf-boat, and ran to him hatless and panting.



"My God!" he shouted.  "Look, your schooner, do you see her? She

broke away after I'd started to tell you--to tell you--to tell

you--your girl there on board--It was horrible!"



"Is she all right?" cried Wilbur, at top voice, for the clamor of

the gale was increasing every second.



"All right! No; they've killed her--somebody--the coolies, I

think--knifed her! I went out to ask you people to come into the

station to have supper with me--"



"Killed her--killed her! Who? I don't believe you--"



"Wait--to have supper with me, and I found her there on the cabin

floor.  She was still breathing.  I carried her up on deck--there

was nobody else aboard.  I carried her up and laid her on the

deck--and she died there.  Just now I came after you to tell you,

and--"



"Good God Almighty, man! who killed her? Where is she? Oh--but of

course it isn't true! How did you know? Moran killed! Moran

killed!"



"And the schooner broke away after I started!"



"Moran killed! But--but--she's not dead yet; we'll have to see--"



"She died on the deck; I brought her up and laid her on--"



"How do you know she's dead? Where is she? Come on, we'll go right

back to her--to the station!"



"She's on board--out there!"



"Where--where is she? My God, man, tell me where she is!"



"Out there aboard the schooner.  I brought her up on deck--I left

her on the schooner--on the deck--she was stabbed in the throat--

and then came after you to tell you.  Then the schooner broke away

while I was coming; she's drifting out to sea now!"



"Where is she? Where is she?"



"Who--the girl--the schooner--which one? The girl is on the

schooner--and the schooner--that's her, right there--she's

drifting out to sea!"



Wilbur put both hands to his temples, closing his eyes.



"I'll go back!" exclaimed Hodgson.  "We'll have the surf-boat out

and get after her; we'll bring the body back!"



"No, no!" cried Wilbur, "it's better--this way.  Leave her, let

her go--she's going out to sea again!"



"But the schooner won't live two hours outside in this weather;

she'll go down!"



"It's better--that way--let her go.  I want it so!"



"I can't stay!" cried the other again.  "If the patrol should sig-

storm coming up, and I've got to be at my station."



Wilbur did not answer; he was watching the schooner.



"I can't stay!" cried the other again.  "If the patrol should

signal--I can't stop here, I must be on duty.  Come back, you

can't do anything!"



"No!"



"I have got to go!" Hodgson ran back, swung himself on the horse,

and rode away at a furious gallop, inclining his head against the

gusts.



And the schooner in a world of flying spray, white scud, and

driving spoondrift, her cordage humming, her forefoot churning,

the flag at her peak straining stiff in the gale, came up into the

narrow passage of the Golden Gate, riding high upon the outgoing

tide.  On she came, swinging from crest to crest of the waves that

kept her company and that ran to meet the ocean, shouting and

calling out beyond there under the low, scudding clouds.



Wilbur had climbed to the top of the old fort.  Erect upon its

granite ledge he stood, and watched and waited.



Not once did the "Bertha Millner" falter in her race.  Like an

unbitted horse, all restraint shaken off, she ran free toward the

ocean as to her pasture-land.  She came nearer, nearer, rising and

rolling with the seas, her bowsprit held due west, pointing like a

finger out to sea, to the west--out to the world of romance.  And

then at last, as the little vessel drew opposite the old fort and

passed not one hundred yards away, Wilbur, watching from the

rampart, saw Moran lying upon the deck with outstretched arms and

calm, upturned face; lying upon the deck of that lonely fleeing

schooner as upon a bed of honor, still and calm, her great braids

smooth upon her breast, her arms wide; alone with the sea; alone

in death as she had been in life.  She passed out of his life as

she had come into it--alone, upon a derelict ship, abandoned to

the sea.  She went out with the tide, out with the storms; out,

out, out to the great gray Pacific that knew her and loved her,

and that shouted and called for her, and thundered in the joy of

her as she came to meet him like a bride to meet a bridegroom.



"Good-by, Moran!" shouted Wilbur as she passed.  "Good-by, good-

by, Moran! You were not for me--not for me! The ocean is calling

for you, dear; don't you hear him? Don't you hear him? Good-by,

good-by, good-by!"



The schooner swept by, shot like an arrow through the swirling

currents of the Golden Gate, and dipped and bowed and courtesied

to the Pacific that reached toward her his myriad curling fingers. 

They infolded her, held her close, and drew her swiftly, swiftly

out to the great heaving bosom, tumultuous and beating in its

mighty joy, its savage exultation of possession.



Wilbur stood watching.  The little schooner lessened in the

distance--became a shadow in mist and flying spray--a shadow

moving upon the face of the great waste of water.  Fainter and

fainter she grew, vanished, reappeared, was heaved up again--a

mere speck upon the western sky--a speck that dwindled and

dwindled, then slowly melted away into the gray of the horizon.





End 
