




IV



MORAN





Meanwhile Charlie had brought the "Bertha Millner" up to within

hailing distance of the bark, and had hove her to.  Kitchell

ordered Wilbur to return to the schooner and bring over a couple

of axes.



"We'll have to knock holes all through the house, and break in the

skylights and let the gas escape before we can do anything.  Take

the kid over and give him whiskey; then come along back and bear a

hand."



Wilbur had considerable difficulty in getting into the dory from

the deck of the plunging derelict with his dazed and almost

helpless charge.  Even as he slid down the rope into the little

boat and helped the girl to follow, he was aware of two dull,

brownish-green shadows moving just beneath the water's surface not

ten feet away, and he knew that he was being stealthily watched. 

The Chinamen at the oars of the dory, with that extraordinary

absence of curiosity which is the mark of the race, did not glance

a second time at the survivor of the "Lady Letty's" misadventure. 

To them it was evident she was but a for'mast hand.  However,

Wilbur examined her with extraordinary interest as she sat in the

sternsheets, sullen, half-defiant, half-bewildered, and bereft of

speech.



She was not pretty--she was too tall for that--quite as tall as

Wilbur himself, and her skeleton was too massive.  Her face was

red, and the glint of blue ice was in her eyes.  Her eyelashes and

eyebrows, as well as the almost imperceptible down that edged her

cheek when she turned against the light, were blond almost to

whiteness.  What beauty she had was of the fine, hardy Norse type. 

Her hands were red and hard, and even beneath the coarse sleeve of

the oilskin coat one could infer that the biceps and deltoids were

large and powerful.  She was coarse-fibred, no doubt, mentally as

well as physically, but her coarseness, so Wilbur guessed, would

prove to be the coarseness of a primitive rather than of a

degenerate character.



One thing he saw clearly during the few moments of the dory's trip

between bark and schooner--the fact that his charge was a woman

must be kept from Captain Kitchell.  Wilbur knew his man by now. 

It could be done.  Kitchell and he would take the "Lady Letty"

into the nearest port as soon as possible.  The deception would

have to be maintained only for a day or two.



He left the girl on board the schooner and returned to the

derelict with the axes.  He found Kitchell on the house, just

returned from a hasty survey of the prize.



"She's a daisy," vociferated the Captain, as Wilbur came aboard. 

"I've been havin' a look 'round.  She's brand-new.  See the date

on the capst'n-head? Christiania is her hailin' port--built there;

but it's her papers I'm after.  Then we'll know where we're at. 

How's the kid?"



"She's all right," answered Wilbur, before he could collect his

thoughts.  But the Captain thought he had reference to the

"Bertha."



"I mean the kid we found in the wheel-box.  He doesn't count in

our salvage.  The bark's been abandoned as plain as paint.  If I

thought he stood in our way," and Kitchell's jaw grew salient. 

"I'd shut him in the cabin with the old man a spell, till he'd

copped off.  Now then, son, first thing to do is to chop vents in

this yere house."



"Hold up--we can do better than that," said Wilbur, restraining

Kitchell's fury of impatience.  "Slide the big skylight off--it's

loose already."



A couple of the schooner's hands were ordered aboard the "Lady

Letty," and the skylight removed.  At first the pour of gas was

terrific, but by degrees it abated, and at the end of half an hour

Kitchell could keep back no longer.



"Come on!" he cried, catching up an axe; "rot the difference." All

the plundering instincts of the man were aroused and clamoring. 

He had become a very wolf within scent of its prey--a veritable

hyena nuzzling about its carrion.



"Lord!" he gasped, "t' think that everything we see, everything we

find, is ours!"



Wilbur himself was not far behind him in eagerness.  Somewhere

deep down in the heart of every Anglo-Saxon lies the predatory

instinct of his Viking ancestors--an instinct that a thousand

years of respectability and taxpaying have not quite succeeded in

eliminating.



A flight of six steps, brass-bound and bearing the double L of the

bark's monogram, led them down into a sort of vestibule.  From the

vestibule a door opened directly into the main cabin.  They

entered.



The cabin was some twenty feet long and unusually spacious.  Fresh

from his recollection of the grime and reek of the schooner, it

struck Wilbur as particularly dainty.  It was painted white with

stripes of blue, gold and pea-green.  On either side three doors

opened off into staterooms and private cabins, and with each roll

of the derelict these doors banged like an irregular discharge of

revolvers.  In the centre was the dining-table, covered with a red

cloth, very much awry.  On each side of the table were four arm

chairs, screwed to the deck, one somewhat larger at the head. 

Overhead, in swinging racks, were glasses and decanters of whiskey

and some kind of white wine.  But for one feature the sight of the

"Letty's" cabin was charming.  However, on the floor by the

sliding door in the forward bulkhead lay a body, face upward.



The body was that of a middle-aged, fine-looking man, his head

covered with the fur, ear-lapped cap that Norwegians affect, even

in the tropics.  The eyes were wide open, the face discolored.  In

the last gasp of suffocation the set of false teeth had been

forced half-way out of his mouth, distorting the countenance with

a hideous simian grin.  Instantly Kitchell's eye was caught by the

glint of the gold in which these teeth were set.



"Here's about $100 to begin with," he exclaimed, and picking up

the teeth, dropped them into his pocket with a wink at Wilbur. 

The body of the dead Captain was passed up through the skylight

and slid out on the deck, and Wilbur and Kitchell turned their

attention to what had been his stateroom.



The Captain's room was the largest one of the six staterooms

opening from the main cabin.



"Here we are!" exclaimed Kitchell as he and Wilbur entered.  "The

old man's room, and no mistake."



Besides the bunk, the stateroom was fitted up with a lounge of red

plush screwed to the bulkhead.  A roll of charts leaned in one

corner, an alarm clock, stopped at 1:15, stood on a shelf in the

company of some dozen paper-covered novels and a drinking-glass

full of cigars.  Over the lounge, however, was the rack of

instruments, sextant, barometer, chronometer, glass, and the like,

securely screwed down, while against the wall, in front of a

swivel leather chair that was ironed to the deck, was the locked

secretary.



"Look at 'em, just look at 'em, will you!" said Kitchell, running

his fingers lovingly over the polished brass of the instruments. 

"There's a thousand dollars of stuff right here.  The

chronometer's worth five hundred alone, Bennett & Sons' own make."

He turned to the secretary.



"Now!" he exclaimed with a long breath.



What followed thrilled Wilbur with alternate excitement,

curiosity, and a vivid sense of desecration and sacrilege.  For

the life of him he could not make the thing seem right or legal in

his eyes, and yet he had neither the wish nor the power to stay

his hand or interfere with what Kitchell was doing.



The Captain put the blade of the axe in the chink of the

secretary's door and wrenched it free.  It opened down to form a

sort of desk, and disclosed an array of cubby-holes and two small

doors, both locked.  These latter Kitchell smashed in with the

axe-head.  Then he seated himself in the swivel chair and began to

rifle their contents systematically, Wilbur leaning over his

shoulder.



The heat from the coal below them was almost unbearable.  In the

cabin the six doors kept up a continuous ear-shocking fusillade,

as though half a dozen men were fighting with revolvers; from

without, down the open skylight, came the sing-song talk of the

Chinamen and the wash and ripple of the two vessels, now side by

side.  The air, foul beyond expression, tasted of brass, their

heads swam and ached to bursting, but absorbed in their work they

had no thought of the lapse of time nor the discomfort of their

surroundings.  Twice during the examination of the bark's papers,

Kitchell sent Wilbur out into the cabin for the whiskey decanter

in the swinging racks.



"Here's the charter papers," said Kitchell, unfolding and

spreading them out one by one; "and here's the clearing papers

from Blyth in England.  This yere's the insoorance, and here, this

is--rot that, nothin' but the articles for the crew--no use to

us."



In a separate envelope, carefully sealed and bound, they came upon

the Captain's private papers.  A marriage certificate setting

forth the union between Eilert Sternersen, of Fruholmen, Norway,

and Sarah Moran, of some seaport town (the name was

indecipherable) of the North of England.  Next came a birth 

certificate of a daughter named Moran, dated twenty-two years

back, and a bill of sale of the bark "Lady Letty," whereby a two-

thirds interest was conveyed from the previous owners (a

shipbuilding firm of Christiania) to Capt. Eilert Sternersen.



"The old man was his own boss," commented Kitchell.  "Hello!" he

remarked, "look here"; a yellowed photograph was in his hand the

picture of a stout, fair-haired woman of about forty, wearing

enormous pendant earrings in the style of the early sixties. 

Below was written: "S. Moran Sternersen, ob. 1867."



"Old woman copped off," said Kitchell, "so much the better for us;

no heirs to put in their gab; an'--hold hard--steady all--here's

the will, s'help me."



The only items of importance in the will were the confirmation of

the wife's death and the expressly stated bequest of "the bark

known as and sailing under the name of the 'Lady Letty' to my only

and beloved daughter, Moran."



"Well," said Wilbur.



The Captain sucked his mustache, then furiously, striking the desk

with his fist:



"The bark's ours!" there was a certain ring of defiance in his

voice.  "Damn the will! I ain't so cock-sure about the law, but

I'll make sure."



"As how?" said Wilbur.



Kitchell slung the will out of the open port into the sea.



"That's how," he remarked.  "I'm the heir.  I found the bark; mine

she is, an' mine she stays--yours an' mine, that is."



But Wilbur had not even time to thoroughly enjoy the satisfaction

that the Captain's words conveyed, before an idea suddenly

presented itself to him.  The girl he had found on board of the

bark, the ruddy, fair-haired girl of the fine and hardy Norse

type--that was the daughter, of course; that was "Moran."

Instantly the situation adjusted itself in his imagination.  The

two inseparables father and daughter, sailors both, their lives

passed together on ship board, and the "Lady Letty" their dream,

their ambition, a vessel that at last they could call their own.



Then this disastrous voyage--perhaps the first in their new craft--

the combustion in the coal--the panic terror of the crew and

their desertion of the bark, and the sturdy resolution of the

father and daughter to bring the "Letty" in--to work her into port

alone.  They had failed; the father had died from gas; the girl,

at least for the moment, was crazed from its effects.  But the

bark had not been abandoned.  The owner was on board.  Kitchell

was wrong; she was no derelict; not one penny could they gain by

her salvage.



For an instant a wave of bitterest disappointment passed over

Wilbur as he saw his $30,000 dwindling to nothing.  Then the

instincts of habit reasserted themselves.  The taxpayer in him was

stronger than the freebooter, after all.  He felt that it was his

duty to see to it that the girl had her rights.  Kitchell must be

made aware of the situation--must be told that Moran, the

daughter, the Captain's heir, was on board the schooner; that the

"kid" found in the wheel-box was a girl.  But on second thought

that would never do.  Above all things, the brute Kitchell must

not be shown that a girl was aboard the schooner on which he had

absolute command, nor, setting the question of Moran's sex aside,

must Kitchell know her even as the dead Captain's heir.  There was

a difference in the men here, and Wilbur appreciated it. 

Kitchell, the law-abiding taxpayer, was a weakling in comparison

with Kitchell, the free-booter and beach-comber in sight of his

prize.



"Son," said the Captain, making a bundle of all the papers, "take

these over to my bunk and hide 'em under the donkey's breakfast. 

Stop a bit," he added, as Wilbur started away.  "I'll go with you. 

We'll have to bury the old man."



Throughout all the afternoon the Captain had been drinking the

whiskey from the decanter found in the cabin; now he stood up

unsteadily, and, raising his glass, exclaimed:



"Sonny, here's to Kitchell, Wilbur & Co., beach-combers,

unlimited.  What do you say, hey?"



"I only want to be sure that we've a right to the bark," answered

Wilbur.



"Right to her--ri-hight to 'er," hiccoughed the Captain.  "Strike

me blind, I'd like to see any one try'n take her away from Alvinza

Kitchell now," and he thrust out his chin at Wilbur.



"Well, so much the better, then," said Wilbur, pocketing the

papers.  The pair ascended to the deck.



The burial of Captain Sternersen was a dreadful business. 

Kitchell, far gone in whiskey, stood on the house issuing his

orders, drinking from one of the decanters he had brought up with

him.  He had already rifled the dead man's pockets, and had even

taken away the boots and fur-lined cap.  Cloths were cut from the

spanker and rolled around the body.  Then Kitchell ordered the

peak halyards unrove and used as lashings to tie the canvas around

the corpse.  The red and white flags (the distress signals) were

still bound on the halyards.



"Leave 'em on.  Leave 'em on," commanded Kitchell.  "Use 'm as a

shrou'.  All ready now, stan' by to let her go."



Wilbur looked over at the schooner and noted with immense relief

that Moran was not in sight.  Suddenly an abrupt reaction took

place in the Captain's addled brain.



"Can't bury 'um 'ithout 'is teeth," he gabbled solemnly.  He laid

back the canvas and replaced the set.  "Ole man'd ha'nt me 'f I

kep' 's teeth.  Strike! look a' that, I put 'em in upside down. 

Nev' min', upsi' down, downsi' up, whaz odds, all same with ole

Bill, hey, ole Bill, all same with you, hey?" Suddenly he began to

howl with laughter "T' think a bein' buried with y'r teeth upsi'

down.  Oh, mee, but that's a good grind.  Stan' by to heave ole

Uncle Bill over--ready, heave, an' away she goes." He ran to the

side, waving his hat and looking over.  "Goo'-by, ole Bill, by-by. 

There you go, an' the signal o' distress roun' you, H. B.  'I'm in

need of assistance.' Lord, here comes the sharks--look! look! look

at um fight! look at um takin' ole Bill! I'm in need of

assistance.  I sh'd say you were, ole Bill."



Wilbur looked once over the side in the churning, lashing water,

then drew back, sick to vomiting.  But in less than thirty seconds

the water was quiet.  Not a shark was in sight.



"Get over t' the 'Bertha' with those papers, son," ordered

Kitchell; "I'll bide here and dig up sh' mor' loot.  I'll gut this

ole pill-box from stern to stem-post 'fore I'll leave.  I won't

leave a copper rivet in 'er, notta co'er rivet, dyhear?" he

shouted, his face purple with unnecessary rage.



Wilbur returned to the schooner with the two Chinamen, leaving

Kitchell alone on the bark.  He found the girl sitting by the

rudderhead almost as he had left her, looking about her with

vague, unseeing eyes.



"You name is Moran, isn't it?" he asked.  "Moran Sternersen."



"Yes," she said, after a pause, then looked curiously at a bit of

tarred rope on the deck.  Nothing more could be got out of her. 

Wilbur talked to her at length, and tried to make her understand

the situation, but it was evident she did not follow.  However, at

each mention of her name she would answer:



"Yes, yes, I'm Moran."



Wilbur turned away from her, biting his nether lip in perplexity.



"Now, what am I going to do?" he muttered.  "What a situation! If

I tell the Captain, it's all up with the girl.  If he didn't kill

her, he'd do worse--might do both.  If I don't tell him, there

goes her birthright, $60,000, and she alone in the world.  It's

begun to go already," he added, listening to the sounds that came

from the bark.  Kitchell was raging to and fro in the cabin in a

frenzy of drink, axe in hand, smashing glassware, hacking into the

wood-work, singing the while at the top of his voice:





          "As through the drop I go, drop I go,

           As through the drop I go, drop I go,

           As through the drop I go,

           Down to hell that yawns below,

           Twenty stiffs all in a row

              Damn your eyes"





"That's the kind of man I have to deal with," muttered Wilbur. 

"It's encouraging, and there's no one to talk to.  Not much help

in a Chinaman and a crazy girl in a man's oilskins.  It's about

the biggest situation you ever faced, Ross Wilbur, and you're all

alone.  What the devil are you going to do?"



He acknowledged with considerable humiliation that he could not

get the better of Kitchell, either physically or mentally.

Kitchell was a more powerful man than he, and cleverer.  The

Captain was in his element now, and he was the commander.  On

shore it would have been vastly different.  The city-bred fellow,

with a policeman always in call, would have known how to act.



"I simply can't stand by and see that hog plundering everything

she's got.  What's to be done?"



And suddenly, while the words were yet in his mouth, the sun was

wiped from the sky like writing from a slate, the horizon

blackened, vanished, a long white line of froth whipped across the

sea and came on hissing.  A hollow note boomed out, boomed,

swelled, and grew rapidly to a roar.



An icy chill stabbed the air.  Then the squall swooped and struck,

and the sky shut down over the troubled ocean like a pot-lid over

a boiling pot.  The schooner's fore and main sheets, that had not

been made fast, unrove at the first gust and began to slat wildly

in the wind.  The Chinamen cowered to the decks, grasping at

cleats, stays, and masts.  They were helpless--paralyzed with

fear.  Charlie clung to a stay, one arm over his head, as though

dodging a blow.  Wilbur gripped the rail with his hands where he

stood, his teeth set, his eyes wide, waiting for the foundering of

the schooner, his only thought being that the end could not be

far.  He had heard of the suddenness of tropical squalls, but this

had come with the abruptness of a scene-shift at a play.  The

schooner veered broad-on to the waves.  It was the beginning of

the end--another roll to the leeward like the last and the Pacific

would come aboard.



"And you call yourselves sailor men! Are you going to drown like

rats on a plank?" A voice that Wilbur did not know went ringing

through that horrid shouting of wind and sea like the call of a

bugle.  He turned to see Moran, the girl of the "Lady Letty,"

standing erect upon the quarterdeck, holding down the schooner's

wheel.  The confusion of that dreadful moment, that had paralyzed

the crew's senses, had brought back hers.  She was herself again,

savage, splendid, dominant, superb, in her wrath at their

weakness, their cowardice.



Her heavy brows were knotted over her flaming eyes, her hat was

gone, and her thick bands of yellow hair whipped across her face

and streamed out in the wind like streamers of the northern

lights.  As she shouted, gesturing furiously to the men, the loose

sleeve of the oilskin coat fell back, and showed her forearm,

strong, round, and white as scud, the hand and wrist so tanned as

to look almost like a glove.  And all the while she shouted aloud,

furious with indignation, raging against the supineness of the

"Bertha's" crew.



"Stand by, men! stand by! Look alive, now! Make fast the stays'l

halyards to the dory's warp! Now, then, unreeve y'r halyards! all

clear there! pass the end for'd outside the rigging! outside! you

fools! Make fast to the bits for'ard--let go y'r line--that'll do. 

Soh--soh.  There, she's coming up."



The dory had been towing astern, and the seas combing over her had

swamped her.  Moran had been inspired to use the swamped boat as a

sea-anchor, fastening her to the schooner's bow instead of to the

stern.  The "Bertha's" bow, answering to the drag, veered around. 

The "Bertha" stood head to the seas, riding out the squall.  It

was a masterpiece of seamanship, conceived and executed in the

very thick of peril, and it saved the schooner.



But there was little time to think of themselves.  On board the

bark the sails were still set.  The squall struck the "Lady Letty"

squarely aback.  She heeled over upon the instant; then as the top

hamper carried away with a crash, eased back a moment upon an even

keel.  But her cargo had shifted.  The bark was doomed.  Through

the flying spray and scud and rain Wilbur had a momentary glimpse

of Kitchell, hacking at the lanyards with his axe.  Then the "Lady

Letty" capsized, going over till her masts were flat with the

water, and in another second rolled bottom up.  For a moment her

keel and red iron bottom were visible through the mist of driving

spoon-drift.  Suddenly they sank from sight.  She was gone.



And then, like the rolling up of a scroll, the squall passed, the

sun returned, the sky burned back to blue, the ruggedness was

smoothed from the ocean, and the warmth of the tropics closed

around the "Bertha Millner," once more rolling easily on the swell

of the ocean.



Of the "Lady Letty" and the drunken beach-combing Captain not a

trace remained.  Kitchell had gone down with his prize.  The

"Bertha Millner's" Chinese crew huddled forward, talking wildly,

pointing and looking in a bewildered fashion over the sides.



Wilbur and Moran were left alone on the open Pacific.

