




X

A BATTLE





Wilbur had imagined that the fight would be hardly more than a

wild rush down the slope of the beach, a dash over the beach-

combers' breastworks of sand, and a brief hand-to-hand scrimmage

around the old cabin.  In all accounts he had ever read of such

affairs, and in all ideas he had entertained on the subject, this

had always been the case.  The two bodies had shocked together

like a college rush, there had been five minutes' play of knife

and club and gun, a confused whirl of dust and smoke, and all was

over before one had time either to think or be afraid.  But

nothing of the kind happened that morning.



The "Bertha Millner's" crew, in a long line, Moran at one end,

Wilbur at the other, and Charlie in the centre, came on toward the

beach-combers, step by step.  There was little outcry.  Each

contestant singled out his enemy, and made slowly for him with

eyes fixed and weapon ready, regardless of the movements of his

mates.



"See any rifles among them, Charlie?" shouted Moran, suddenly

breaking the silence.



"No, I tink no hab got," answered Charlie.



Wilbur took another step forward and cocked his revolver.  One of

the beach-combers shouted out something in angry vernacular, and

Charlie instantly responded.  All this time the line had been

slowly advancing upon the enemy, and Wilbur began to wonder how

long that heartbreaking suspense was to continue.  This was not at

all what he had imagined.  Already he was within twenty feet of

his man, could see the evil glint of his slant, small eye, and the

shine of his yellow body, naked to the belt.  Still foot by foot

the forward movement continued.  The Chinese on either side had

begun exchanging insults; the still, hot air of the tropic dawn

was vibrant with the Cantonese monosyllables tossed back and forth

like tennis-balls over the low sand rampart.  The thing was

degenerating into a farce--the "Bertha's" Chinamen would not

fight.



Back there, under the shelter of the schooner, it was all very

well to talk, and they had been very brave when they had all flung

themselves upon Hoang.  Here, face to face with the enemy, the sun

striking off heliograph flashes from their knives and spades, it

was a vastly different matter.  The thing, to Wilbur's mind,

should have been done suddenly if it was to be done at all.  The

best course now was to return to camp and try some other plan. 

Charlie shouted a direction to him in pigeon English that he did

not understand, but he answered all right, and moved forward

another step so as to be in line with the coolie at his left.



The liquor that he had drunk before starting began suddenly to

affect him, yet he knew that his head was yet clear.  He could not

bring himself to run away before them all, but he would have given

much to have discovered a good reason for postponing the fight--if

fight there was to be.



He remembered the cocked revolver in his hand, and, suddenly

raising it, fired point-blank at his man, not fifteen feet away. 

The hammer snapped on the nipple, but the cartridge did not

explode.  Wilbur turned to the Chinaman next him in line,

exclaiming excitedly:



"Here, say, have you got a knife--something I can fight with? This

gun's no good."



There was a shout from Moran:



"Look out, here they come!"



Two of the beach-combers suddenly sprang over the sand breastworks 

and ran toward Charlie, their knives held low in front of them,

ready to rip.



"Shoot! shoot! shoot!" shouted Moran rapidly.



Wilbur's revolver was a self-cocker.  He raised it again, drawing

hard on the trigger as he did so.  It roared and leaped in his

hand, and a whiff of burned powder came to his nostrils.  Then

Wilbur was astonished to hear himself shout at the top of his

voice:



"Come on now, get into them--get into them now, everybody!"



The "Bertha's" Chinamen were all running forward, three of them

well in advance of the others.  In the rear Charlie was at

grapples with a beach-comber who fought with a knife in each hand,

and Wilbur had a sudden glimpse of another sitting on the sand

with his hand to his mouth, the blood spurting between his

fingers.



Wilbur suddenly realized that he held a knife, and that he was

directly abreast the sand rampart.  How he got the knife he could

not tell, though he afterward distinctly remembered throwing away

his revolver, loaded as it was.  He had leaped the breastworks, he

knew that, and between him and the vast bright blur of the ocean

he saw one of the beach-combers backing away and watching him

intently, his hatchet in his hand.  Wilbur had only time to think

that he himself would no doubt be killed within the next few

moments, when this latter halted abruptly, took a step forward,

and.  instead of striking downward, as Wilbur had anticipated,

dropped upon his knee and struck with all his might at the calf of

Wilbur's leg.  It was only the thickness of his boots that saved

Wilbur from being hamstrung where he stood.  As it was, he felt

the blade bite almost to the bone, and heard the blood squelch in

the sole of his boot, as he staggered for the moment, almost

tripping over the man in front of him.



The Chinaman sprang to his feet again, but Wilbur was at him in an

instant, feeling instinctively that his chance was to close with

his man, and so bring his own superior weight and strength to

bear.  Again and again he tried to run in and grip the slim yellow

body, but the other dodged and backed away, as hard to hold as any

fish.  All around and back of him now Wilbur heard the hideous

sound of stamping and struggling, and the noise of hoarse, quick

shouts and the rebound of bodies falling and rolling upon the

hard, smooth beach.  The thing had not been a farce, after all. 

This was fighting at last, and there within arm's length were men

grappling and gripping and hitting one another, each honestly

striving to kill his fellow--Chinamen all, fighting in barbarous

Oriental fashion with nails and teeth when the knife or hatchet

failed.  What did he, clubman and college man, in that hideous

trouble that wrought itself out there on that heat-stricken tropic

beach under that morning's sun?



Suddenly there was a flash of red flame, and a billow of thick,

yellow smoke filled all the air.  The cabin was afire.  The

hatchet-man with whom Wilbur was fighting had been backing in this

direction.  He was close in when the fire began to leap from the

one window; now he could go no further.  He turned to run sidewise

between his enemy and the burning cabin.  Wilbur thrust his foot

sharply forward; the beach-comber tripped, staggered, and before

he had reached the ground Wilbur had driven home the knife.



Then suddenly, at the sight of his smitten enemy rolling on the

ground at his feet, the primitive man, the half-brute of the stone

age, leaped to life in Wilbur's breast--he felt his muscles

thrilling with a strength they had not known before.  His nerves,

stretched tense as harp-strings, were vibrating to a new tune. 

His blood spun through his veins till his ears roared with the

rush of it.  Never had he conceived of such savage exultation as

that which mastered him at that instant.  The knowledge that he

could kill filled him with a sense of power that was veritably

royal.  He felt physically larger.  It was the joy of battle, the

horrid exhilaration of killing, the animal of the race, the human

brute suddenly aroused and dominating every instinct and tradition

of centuries of civilization.  The fight still was going forward.



Wilbur could hear the sounds of it, though from where he stood all

sight was shut off by the smoke of the burning house.  As he

turned about, knife in hand, debating what next he should do, a

figure burst down upon him, shadowy and distorted through the

haze.



It was Moran, but Moran as Wilbur had never seen her before.  Her

eyes were blazing under her thick frown like fire under a bush. 

Her arms were bared to the elbow, her heavy ropes of hair flying

and coiling from her in all directions, while with a voice hoarse

from shouting she sang, or rather chanted, in her long-forgotten

Norse tongue, fragments of old sagas, words, and sentences,

meaningless even to herself.  The fury of battle had exalted her

to a sort of frenzy.  She was beside herself with excitement.

Once more she had lapsed back to the Vikings and sea-rovers of the

tenth century--she was Brunhilde again, a shield-maiden, a

Valkyrie, a Berserker and the daughter of Berserkers, and like

them she fought in a veritable frenzy, seeing nothing, hearing

nothing, every sense exalted, every force doubled, insensible to

pain, deaf to all reason.



Her dirk uplifted, she rushed upon Wilbur, never once pausing in

her chant.  Wilbur shouted a warning to her as she came on,

puzzled beyond words, startled back to a consciousness of himself

again by this insensate attack.



"Moran! Moran!" he called.  "What is it--you're wrong! It-s I. 

It's Wilbur--your mate, can't you see?"



Moran could not see--blind to friend or foe, as she was deaf to

reason, she struck at him with all the strength of her arm.  But

there was no skill in her fighting now.  Wilbur dropped his own

knife and gripped her right wrist.  She closed with him upon the

instant, clutching at his throat with her one free hand; and as he

felt her strength--doubled and tripled in the fury of her madness--

Wilbur knew that, however easily he had overcome his enemy of a

moment before, he was now fighting for his very life.



At first, Wilbur merely struggled to keep her from him--to prevent

her using her dirk.  He tried not to hurt her.  But what with the

spirits he had drunk before the attack, what with the excitement

of the attack itself and the sudden unleashing of the brute in him

an instant before, the whole affair grew dim and hazy in his mind. 

He ceased to see things in their proportion.  His new-found

strength gloried in matching itself with another strength that was

its equal.  He fought with Moran--not as he would fight with

either woman or man, or with anything human, for the matter of

that.  He fought with her as against some impersonal force that it

was incumbent upon him to conquer--that it was imperative he

should conquer if he wished to live.  When she struck, he struck

blow for blow, force for force, his strength against hers,

glorying in that strange contest, though he never once forgot that

this last enemy was the girl he loved.  It was not Moran whom he

fought; it was her force, her determination, her will, her

splendid independence, that he set himself to conquer.



Already she had dropped or flung away the dirk, and their battle

had become an issue of sheer physical strength between them.  It

was a question now as to who should master the other.  Twice she

had fought Wilbur to his knees, the heel of her hand upon his 

face, his head thrust back between his shoulders, and twice he had

wrenched away, rising to his feet again, panting, bleeding even,

but with his teeth set and all his resolution at the sticking-

point.  Once he saw his chance, and planted his knuckles squarely

between her eyes where her frown was knotted hard, hoping to stun

her and end the fight once and for all.  But the blow did not seem

to affect her in the least.  By this time he saw that her

Berserker rage had worked itself clear as fermenting wine clears

itself, and that she knew now with whom she was fighting; and he

seemed now to understand the incomprehensible, and to sympathize

with her joy in measuring her strength against his; and yet he

knew that the combat was deadly serious, and that more than life

was at stake.  Moran despised a weakling.



For an instant, as they fell apart, she stood off, breathing hard

and rolling up her sleeve; then, as she started forward again,

Wilbur met her half-way, caught her round the neck and under the

arm, gripping her left wrist with his right hand behind her; then,

exerting every ounce of strength he yet retained, he thrust her

down and from him, until at length, using his hip as a pivot, he

swung her off her feet, threw her fairly on her back, and held her

so, one knee upon her chest, his hands closed vise-like on her

wrists.



Then suddenly Moran gave up, relaxing in his grasp all in a

second, and, to his great surprise, suddenly smiled.



"Ho! mate," she exclaimed; "that was a tough one; but I'm beaten--

you're stronger than I thought for."



Wilbur released her and rose to his feet.



"Here," she continued, "give me your hand.  I'm as weak as a

kitten." As Wilbur helped her to her feet, she put her hand to her

forehead, where his knuckles had left their mark, and frowned at

him, but not ill-naturedly.



"Next time you do that," she said, "use a rock or a belaying-pin,

or something that won't hurt--not your fist, mate." She looked at

him admiringly.  "What a two-fisted, brawny dray-horse it is! I

told you I was stronger than most men, didn't I? But I'm the

weaker of us two, and that's a fact.  You've beaten, mate--I admit

it; you've conquered me, and," she continued, smiling again and

shaking him by the shoulder--"and, mate, do you know, I love you

for it."

