




VIII



A RUN FOR LAND





"SINKING!" exclaimed Wilbur.



Moran was already on her feet.  "We'll have to beach her," she

cried, "and we're six miles out.  Up y'r jib, mate!" The two set

the jib, flying-jib, and staysails.



The fore and main sails were already drawing, and under all the

spread of her canvas the "Bertha" raced back toward the shore.



But by the time she was within the head of the bay her stern had

settled to such an extent that the forefoot was clear of the

water, the bowsprit pointing high into the heavens.  Moran was at

the wheel, her scowl thicker than ever, her eyes measuring the

stretch of water that lay between the schooner and the shore.



"She'll never make it in God's world," she muttered as she

listened to the wash of the water in the cabin under her feet.  In

the hold, empty barrels were afloat, knocking hollowly against

each other.  "We're in a bad way, mate."



"If it comes to that," returned Wilbur, surprised to see her thus

easily downcast, who was usually so indomitable--"if it comes to

that, we can swim for it--a couple of planks--"



"Swim?" she echoed; "I'm not thinking of that; of course we could

swim."



"What then?"



"The sharks!"



Wilbur's teeth clicked sharply together.  He could think of

nothing to say.



As the water gained between decks the schooner's speed dwindled,

and at the same time as she approached the shore the wind, shut

off by the land, fell away.  By this time the ocean was not four

inches below the stern-rail.  Two miles away was the nearest sand-

spit.  Wilbur broke out a distress signal on the foremast, in the

hope that Charlie and the deserters might send off the dory to

their assistance.  But the deserters were nowhere in sight.



"What became of the junk?" he demanded suddenly of Moran.  She

motioned to the westward with her head.  "Still lying out-side."



Twenty minutes passed.  Once only Moran spoke.



"When she begins to go," she said, "she'll go with a rush.  Jump

pretty wide, or you'll get caught in the suction."



The two had given up all hope.  Moran held grimly to the wheel as

a mere matter of form.  Wilbur stood at her side, his clinched

fists thrust into his pockets.  The eyes of both were fixed on the

yellow line of the distant beach.  By and by Moran turned to him

with an odd smile.



"We're a strange pair to die together," she said.  Wilbur met her

eyes an instant, but finding no reply, put his chin in the air as

though he would have told her she might well say that.



"A strange pair to die together," Moran repeated; "but we can do

that better than we could have"--she looked away from him--"could

have LIVED together," she finished, and smiled again.



"And yet," said Wilbur, "these last few weeks here on board the

schooner, we have been through a good deal--together.  I don't

know," he went on clumsily, "I don't know when I've been--when

I've had--I've been happier than these last weeks.  It is queer,

isn't it? I know, of course, what you'll say.  I've said it to

myself often of late.  I belong to the city and to my life there,

and you--you belong to the ocean.  I never knew a girl like you--

never knew a girl COULD be like you.  You don't know how

extraordinary it all seems to me.  You swear like a man, and you

dress like a man, and I don't suppose you've ever been associated

with other women; and you're strong--I know you are as strong as I

am.  You have no idea how different you are to the kind of girl

I've known.  Imagine my kind of girl standing up before Hoang and

those cutthroat beach-combers with their knives and hatchets. 

Maybe it's because you are so unlike my kind of girl that--that

things are as they are with me.  I don't know.  It's a queer

situation.  A month or so ago I was at a tea in San Francisco, and

now I'm aboard a shark-fishing schooner sinking in Magdalena Bay;

and I'm with a girl that--that--that I--well, I'm with you, and,

well, you know how it is--I might as well say it--I love you more

than I imagined I ever could love a girl."



Moran's frown came back to her forehead.



"I don't like that kind of talk," she said; "I am not used to it,

and I don't know how to take it.  Believe me," she said with a

half laugh, "it's all wasted.  I never could love a man.  I'm not

made for men."



"No," said Wilbur, "nor for other women either."



"Nor for other women either."



Wilbur fell silent.  In that instant he had a distinct vision of

Moran's life and character, shunning men and shunned of women, a

strange, lonely creature, solitary as the ocean whereon she lived,

beautiful after her fashion; as yet without sex, proud, untamed,

splendid in her savage, primal independence--a thing untouched and

unsullied by civilization.  She seemed to him some Bradamante,

some mythical Brunhilde, some Valkyrie of the legends, born out of

season, lost and unfamiliar in this end-of-the-century time.  Her

purity was the purity of primeval glaciers.  He could easily see

how to such a girl the love of a man would appear only in the

light of a humiliation--a degradation.  And yet she COULD love,

else how had HE been able to love her? Wilbur found himself--even

at that moment--wondering how the thing could be done--wondering

to just what note the untouched cords would vibrate.  Just how she

should be awakened one morning to find that she--Moran, sea-rover,

virgin unconquered, without law, without land, without sex--was,

after all, a woman.



"By God, mate!" she exclaimed of a sudden.  "The barrels are

keeping us up--the empty barrels in the hold.  Hoh! we'll make

land yet."



It was true.  The empty hogsheads, destined for the storage of

oil, had been forced up by the influx of the water to the roof of

the hold, and were acting as so many buoys--the schooner could

sink no lower.  An hour later, the quarterdeck all awash, her bow

thrown high into the air, listing horribly to starboard, the

"Bertha Millner" took ground on the shore of Magdalena Bay at

about the turn of the tide.



Moran swung herself over the side, hip deep in the water, and,

wading ashore with a line, made fast to the huge skull of a whale

half buried in the sand at that point.



Wilbur followed.  The schooner had grounded upon the southern horn

of the bay and lay easily on a spit of sand.  They could not

examine the nature of the leak until low water the next morning.



"Well, here we are," said Moran, her thumbs in her belt.  "What

next? We may be here for two days, we MAY be here for two years. 

It all depends upon how bad a hole she has.  Have we 'put in for

repairs,' or have we been cast away? Can't tell till to-morrow

morning.  Meanwhile, I'm hungry."



Half of the stores of the schooner were water-soaked, but upon

examination Wilbur found that enough remained intact to put them

beyond all fear for the present.



"There's plenty of water up the creek," he said, "and we can snare

all the quail we want; and then there's the fish and abalone. 

Even if the stores were gone we could make out very well."



The schooner's cabin was full of water and Wilbur's hammock was

gone, so the pair decided to camp on shore.  In that torrid

weather to sleep in the open air was a luxury.



In great good spirits the two sat down to their first meal on

land.  Moran cooked a supper that, barring the absence of coffee,

was delicious.  The whiskey was had from aboard, and they pledged

each other, standing up, in something over two stiff fingers.



"Moran," said Wilbur, "you ought to have been born a man."



"At all events, mate," she said--"at all events, I'm not a girl."



"NO!" exclaimed Wilbur, as he filled his pipe.  "NO, you're just

Moran, Moran of the 'Lady Letty.'"



"And I'll stay that, too," she said decisively.



Never had an evening been more beautiful in Wilbur's eyes.  There

was not a breath of air.  The stillness was so profound that the

faint murmur of the blood behind the ear-drums became an

oppression.  The ocean tiptoed toward the land with tiny rustling

steps.  The west was one gigantic stained window, the ocean floor

a solid shimmer of opalescence.  Behind them, sullen purples

marked the horizon, hooded with mountain crests, and after a long

while the moon shrugged a gleaming shoulder into view.



Wilbur, dressed in Chinese jeans and blouse, with Chinese wicker

sandals on his bare feet, sat with his back against the whale's

skull, smoking quietly.  For a long time there was no

conversation; then at last:



"No," said Moran in a low voice.  "This is the life I'm made for. 

In six years I've not spent three consecutive weeks on land.  Now

that Eilert" (she always spoke of her father by his first name),

"now that Eilert is dead, I've not a tie, not a relative, not even

a friend, and I don't wish it."



"But the loneliness of the life, the solitude," said Wilbur,

"that's what I don't understand.  Did it ever occur to you that

the best happiness is the happiness that one shares?"



Moran clasped a knee in both hands and looked out to sea.  She

never wore a hat, and the red light of the afterglow was turning

her rye-hued hair to saffron.



"Hoh!" she exclaimed, her heavy voice pitched even lower than

usual.  "Who could understand or share any of my pleasures, or be

happy when I'm happy? And, besides, I'm happiest when I'm alone--I

don't want any one."



"But," hesitated Wilbur, "one is not always alone.  After all,

you're a girl, and men, sailormen especially, are beasts when it's

a question of a woman--an unprotected woman."



"I'm stronger than most men," said Moran simply.  "If you, for

instance, had been like some men, I should have fought you.  It

wouldn't have been the first time," she added, smoothing one huge

braid between her palms.



Wilbur looked at her with intent curiosity--noted again, as if for

the first time, the rough, blue overalls thrust into the shoes;

the coarse flannel shirt open at the throat; the belt with its

sheath-knife; her arms big and white and tattooed in sailor

fashion; her thick, muscular neck; her red face, with its pale

blue eyes and almost massive jaw; and her hair, her heavy, yellow,

fragrant hair, that lay over her shoulder and breast, coiling and

looping in her lap.



"No," he said, with a long breath, "I don't make it out.  I knew

you were out of my experience, but I begin to think now that you

are out of even my imagination.  You are right, you SHOULD keep to

yourself.  You should be alone--your mate isn't made yet.  You are

splendid just as you are," while under his breath he added, his

teeth clinching, "and God! but I love you."



It was growing late, the stars were all out, the moon riding high. 

Moran yawned:



"Mate, I think I'll turn in.  We'll have to be at that schooner

early in the morning, and I make no doubt she'll give us plenty to

do." Wilbur hesitated to reply, waiting to take his cue from what

next she should say.  "It's hot enough to sleep where we are," she

added, "without going aboard the 'Bertha,' though we might have a

couple of blankets off to lie on.  This sand's as hard as a

plank."



Without answering, Wilbur showed her a couple of blanket-rolls he

had brought off while he was unloading part of the stores that

afternoon.  They took one apiece and spread them on the sand by

the bleached whale's skull.  Moran pulled off her boots and

stretched herself upon her blanket with absolute unconcern, her

hands clasped under her head.  Wilbur rolled up his coat for a

pillow and settled himself for the night with an assumed self-

possession.  There was a long silence.  Moran yawned again.



"I pulled the heel off my boot this morning," she said lazily,

"and I've been limping all day."



"I noticed it," answered Wilbur.  "Kitchell had a new pair aboard

somewhere, if they're not spoiled by the water now."



"Yes?" she said indifferently; "we'll look them up in the

morning."



Again there was silence.



"I wonder," she began again, staring up into the dark, "if Charlie

took that frying-pan off with him when he went?"



"I don't know.  He probably did."



"It was the only thing we had to cook abalones in.  Make me think

to look into the galley to-morrow....This ground's as hard as

nails, for all your blankets....Well, good-night, mate; I'm going

to sleep."



"Good-night, Moran."



Three hours later Wilbur, who had not closed his eyes, sat up and

looked at Moran, sleeping quietly, her head in a pale glory of

hair; looked at her, and then around him at the silent, deserted

land.



"I don't know," he said to himself.  "Am I a right-minded man and

a thoroughbred, or a mush-head, or merely a prudent, sensible sort

of chap that values his skin and bones? I'd be glad to put a name

to myself." Then, more earnestly he added: "Do I love her too

much, or not enough, or love her the wrong way, or how?" He leaned

toward her, so close that he could catch the savor of her breath

and the smell of her neck, warm with sleep.  The sleeve of the

coarse blue shirt was drawn up, and it seemed to him as if her

bare arm, flung out at full length, had some sweet aroma of its

own.  Wilbur drew softly back.



"No," he said to himself decisively; "no, I guess I am a

thoroughbred after all." It was only then that he went to sleep.



When he awoke the sea was pink with the sunrise, and one of the

bay heads was all distorted and stratified by a mirage.  It was

hot already.  Moran was sitting a few paces from him, braiding her

hair.



"Hello, Moran!" he said, rousing up; "how long have you been up?"



"Since before sunrise," she said; "I've had a bath in the cove

where the creek runs down.  I saw a jack-rabbit."



"Seen anything of Charlie and the others?"



"They've camped on the other side of the bay.  But look yonder,"

she added.



The junk had come in overnight, and was about a mile and a half

from shore.



"The deuce!" exclaimed Wilbur.  "What are they after?"



"Fresh water, I guess," said Moran, knotting the end of a braid. 

"We'd better have breakfast in a hurry, and turn to on the

'Bertha.' The tide is going out fast."



While they breakfasted they kept an eye on the schooner, watching

her sides and flanks as the water fell slowly away.



"Don't see anything very bad yet," said Wilbur.



"It's somewhere in her stern," remarked Moran.



In an hour's time the "Bertha Millner" was high and dry, and they

could examine her at their leisure.  It was Moran who found the

leak.



"Pshaw!" she exclaimed, with a half-laugh, "we can stick that up

in half an hour."



A single plank had started away from the stern-post; that was all. 

Otherwise the schooner was as sound as the day she left San

Francisco.  Moran and Wilbur had the damage repaired by noon,

nailing the plank into its place and caulking the seams with lamp-

wick.  Nor could their most careful search discover any further

injury.



"We're ready to go," said Moran, "so soon as she'll float.  We can

dig away around the bows here, make fast a line to that rock out

yonder, and warp her off at next high tide.  Hello! who's this?"



It was Charlie.  While the two had been at work, he had come

around the shore unobserved, and now stood at some little

distance, smiling at them calmly.



"Well, what do you want?" cried Moran angrily.  "If you had your

rights, my friend, you'd be keelhauled."



"I tink um velly hot day."



"You didn't come here to say that.  What do you want?"



"I come hab talkee-talk."



"We don't want to have any talkee-talk with such vermin as you. 

Get out!"



Charlie sat down on the beach and wiped his forehead.



"I come buy one-piecee bacon.  China boy no hab got."



"We aren't selling bacon to deserters," cried Moran; "and I'll

tell you this, you filthy little monkey: Mr. Wilbur and I are

going home--back to 'Frisco--this afternoon; and we're going to

leave you and the rest of your vipers to rot on this beach, or to

be murdered by beach-combers," and she pointed out toward the

junk.  Charlie did not even follow the direction of her gesture,

and from this very indifference Wilbur guessed that it was

precisely because of the beach-combers that the Machiavellian

Chinaman had wished to treat with his old officers.



"No hab got bacon?" he queried, lifting his eyebrows in surprise.



"Plenty; but not for you."



Charlie took a buckskin bag from his blouse and counted out a

handful of silver and gold.



"I buy um nisi two-piecee tobacco."



"Look here," said Wilbur deliberately; "don't you try to flim-flam

us, Charlie.  We know you too well.  You don't want bacon and you

don't want tobacco."



"China boy heap plenty much sick.  Two boy velly sick.  I tink um

die pretty soon to-molla.  You catch um slop-chest; you gib me

five, seven liver pill.  Sabe?"



"I'll tell you what you want," cried Moran, aiming a forefinger at

him, pistol fashion; "you've got a blue funk because those Kai-

gingh beach-combers have come into the bay, and you're more

frightened of them than you are of the schooner; and now you want

us to take you home."



"How muchee?"



"A thousand dollars."



Wilbur looked at her in surprise.  He had expected a refusal.



"You no hab got liver pill?" inquired Charlie blandly.



Moran turned her back on him.  She and Wilbur conferred in a low

voice.



"We'd better take them back, if we decently can," said Moran.

"The schooner is known, of course, in 'Frisco.  She went out with

Kitchell and a crew of coolies, and she comes back with you and I

aboard, and if we tell the truth about it, it will sound like a

lie, and we'll have no end of trouble.  Then again, can just you

and I work the 'Bertha' into port? In these kind of airs it's

plain work, but suppose we have dirty weather? I'm not so sure."



"I gib you ten dollah fo' ten liver pill," said Charlie.



"Will you give us a thousand dollars to set you down in San

Francisco?"



Charlie rose.  "I go back.  I tell um China boy what you say 'bout

liver pill.  Bime-by I come back."



"That means he'll take our offer back to his friends," said

Wilbur, in a low voice.  "You best hurry chop-chop," he called

after Charlie; "we go home pretty soon!"



"He knows very well we can't get away before high tide to-morrow,"

said Moran.  "He'll take his time."



Later on in the afternoon Moran and Wilbur saw a small boat put

off from the junk and make a landing by the creek.  The beach-

combers were taking on water.  The boat made three trips before

evening, but the beach-combers made no show of molesting the

undefended schooner, or in any way interfering with Charlie's camp

on the other side of the bay.



"No!" exclaimed Moran between her teeth, as she and Wilbur were

cooking supper; "no, they don't need to; they've got about a

hundred and fifty thousand dollars of loot on board--OUR loot,

too! Good God! it goes against the grain!"



The moon rose considerably earlier that night, and by twelve

o'clock the bay was flooded with its electrical whiteness.  Wilbur

and Moran could plainly make out the junk tied up to the kelp off-

shore.  But toward one o'clock Wilbur was awakened by Moran

shaking his arm.



"There's something wrong out there," she whispered; "something

wrong with the junk.  Hear 'em squealing? Look! look! look!" she

cried of a sudden; "it's their turn now!"



Wilbur could see the crank junk, with its staring red eyes, high

stern and prow, as distinctly as though at noonday.  As he

watched, it seemed as if a great wave caught her suddenly

underfoot.  She heaved up bodily out of the water, dropped again

with a splash, rose again, and again fell back into her own

ripples, that, widening from her sides, broke crisply on the sand

at Wilbur's feet.



Then the commotion ceased abruptly.  The bay was quiet again.  An

hour passed, then two.  The moon began to set.  Moran and Wilbur,

wearied of watching, had turned in again, when they were startled

to wakefulness by the creak of oarlocks and the sound of a boat

grounding in the sand.



The coolies--the deserters from the "Bertha Millner"--were there. 

Charlie came forward.



"Ge' lup! Ge' lup!" he said.  "Junk all smash! Kai-gingh come

ashore.  I tink him want catch um schooner."

