



MORAN OF THE LADY LETTY



by  Frank Norris







DEDICATED TO

Captain Joseph Hodgson

UNITED STATES LIFE SAVING SERVICE







I



SHANGHAIED





This is to be a story of a battle, at least one murder, and

several sudden deaths.  For that reason it begins with a pink tea

and among the mingled odors of many delicate perfumes and the

hale, frank smell of Caroline Testout roses.



There had been a great number of debutantes "coming out" that

season in San Francisco by means of afternoon teas, pink,

lavender, and otherwise.  This particular tea was intended to

celebrate the fact that Josie Herrick had arrived at that time of

her life when she was to wear her hair high and her gowns long,

and to have a "day" of her own quite distinct from that of her

mother.



Ross Wilbur presented himself at the Herrick house on Pacific

Avenue much too early upon the afternoon of Miss Herrick's tea. 

As he made, his way up the canvased stairs he was aware of a

terrifying array of millinery and a disquieting staccato chatter

of feminine voices in the parlors and reception-rooms on either

side of the hallway.  A single high hat in the room that had been

set apart for the men's use confirmed him in his suspicions.



"Might have known it would be a hen party till six, anyhow," he

muttered, swinging out of his overcoat.  "Bet I don't know one

girl in twenty down there now--all mamma's friends at this hour,

and papa's maiden sisters, and Jo's school-teachers and

governesses and music-teachers, and I don't know what all."



When he went down he found it precisely as he expected.  He went

up to Miss Herrick, where she stood receiving with her mother and

two of the other girls, and allowed them to chaff him on his

forlornness.



"Maybe I seem at my ease," said Ross Wilbur to them, "but really I

am very much frightened.  I'm going to run away as soon as it is

decently possible, even before, unless you feed me."



"I believe you had luncheon not two hours ago," said Miss Herrick. 

"Come along, though, and I'll give you some chocolate, and

perhaps, if you're good, a stuffed olive.  I got them just because

I knew you liked them.  I ought to stay here and receive, so I

can't look after you for long."



The two fought their way through the crowded rooms to the

luncheon-table, and Miss Herrick got Wilbur his chocolate and his

stuffed olives.  They sat down and talked in a window recess for a

moment, Wilbur toeing-in in absurd fashion as he tried to make a

lap for his plate.



"I thought," said Miss Herrick, "that you were going on the

Ridgeways' yachting party this afternoon.  Mrs. Ridgeway said she

was counting on you.  They are going out with the 'Petrel.'"



"She didn't count above a hundred, though," answered Wilbur.  "I

got your bid first, so I regretted the yachting party; and I guess

I'd have regretted it anyhow," and he grinned at her over his cup.



"Nice man," she said--adding on the instant, "I must go now,

Ross."



"Wait till I eat the sugar out of my cup," complained Wilbur. 

"Tell me," he added, scraping vigorously at the bottom of the cup

with the inadequate spoon; "tell me, you're going to the hoe-down

to-night?"



"If you mean the Assembly, yes, I am."



"Will you give me the first and last?"



"I'll give you the first, and you can ask for the last then."



"Let's put it down; I know you'll forget it." Wilbur drew a couple

of cards from his case.



"Programmes are not good form any more," said Miss Herrick.



"Forgetting a dance is worse."



He made out the cards, writing on the one he kept for himself,

"First waltz--Jo."



"I must go back now," said Miss Herrick, getting up.



"In that case I shall run--I'm afraid of girls."



"It's a pity about you."



"I am; one girl, I don't say, but girl in the aggregate like

this," and he pointed his chin toward the thronged parlors.  "It

un-mans me."



"Good-by, then."



"Good-by, until to-night, about--?"



"About nine."



"About nine, then."



Ross Wilbur made his adieu to Mrs. Herrick and the girls who were

receiving, and took himself away.  As he came out of the house and

stood for a moment on the steps, settling his hat gingerly upon

his hair so as not to disturb the parting, he was not by any means

an ill-looking chap.  His good height was helped out by his long

coat and his high silk hat, and there was plenty of jaw in the

lower part of his face.  Nor was his tailor altogether answerable

for his shoulders.  Three years before this time Ross Wilbur had

pulled at No. 5 in his varsity boat in an Eastern college that was

not accustomed to athletic discomfiture.



"I wonder what I'm going to do with myself until supper time," he

muttered, as he came down the steps, feeling for the middle of his

stick.  He found no immediate answer to his question.  But the

afternoon was fine, and he set off to walk in the direction of the

town, with a half-formed idea of looking in at his club.



At his club he found a letter in his box from his particular chum,

who had been spending the month shooting elk in Oregon.





"Dear Old Man," it said, "will be back on the afternoon you

receive this.  Will hit the town on the three o'clock boat.  Get

seats for the best show going--my treat--and arrange to assimilate

nutriment at the Poodle Dog--also mine.  I've got miles of talk in

me that I've got to reel off before midnight.  Yours.

                                     "JERRY."







"I've got a stand of horns for you, Ross, that are Glory

Hallelujah."





"Well, I can't go," murmured Wilbur, as he remembered the Assembly

that was to come off that night and his engaged dance with Jo

Herrick.  He decided that it would be best to meet Jerry as he

came off the boat and tell him how matters stood.  Then he

resolved, since no one that he knew was in the club, and the

instalment of the Paris weeklies had not arrived, that it would be

amusing to go down to the water-front and loaf among the shipping

until it was time for Jerry's boat.



Wilbur spent an hour along the wharves, watching the great grain

ships consigned to "Cork for orders" slowly gorging themselves

with whole harvests of wheat from the San Joaquin Valley; lumber

vessels for Durban and South African ports settling lower and

lower to the water's level as forests of pine and redwood

stratified themselves along their decks and in their holds; coal

barges discharging from Nanaimo; busy little tugs coughing and

nuzzling at the flanks of the deep-sea tramps, while hay barges

and Italian whitehalls came and went at every turn.  A Stockton

River boat went by, her stern wheel churning along behind, like a

huge net-reel; a tiny maelstrom of activity centred about an

Alaska Commercial Company's steamboat that would clear for Dawson

in the morning.



No quarter of one of the most picturesque cities in the world had

more interest for Wilbur than the water-front.  In the mile or so

of shipping that stretched from the docks where the China

steamships landed, down past the ferry slips and on to Meiggs's

Wharf, every maritime nation in the world was represented.  More

than once Wilbur had talked to the loungers of the wharves,

stevedores out of work, sailors between voyages, caulkers and ship

chandlers' men looking--not too earnestly--for jobs; so that on

this occasion, when a little, undersized fellow in dirty brown

sweater and clothes of Barbary coast cut asked him for a match to

light his pipe, Wilbur offered a cigar and passed the time of day

with him.  Wilbur had not forgotten that he himself was dressed

for an afternoon function.  But the incongruity of the business

was precisely what most amused him.



After a time the fellow suggested drinks.  Wilbur hesitated for a

moment.  It would be something to tell about, however, so, "All

right, I'll drink with you," he said.



The brown sweater led the way to a sailors' boarding-house hard

by.  The rear of the place was built upon piles over the water.

But in front, on the ground floor, was a barroom.



"Rum an' gum," announced the brown sweater, as the two came in and

took their places at the bar.



"Rum an' gum, Tuck; wattle you have, sir?"



"Oh--I don't know," hesitated Wilbur; "give me a mild Manhattan."



While the drinks were being mixed the brown sweater called

Wilbur's attention to a fighting head-dress from the Marquesas

that was hung on the wall over the free-lunch counter and opposite

the bar.  Wilbur turned about to look at it, and remained so, his

back to the barkeeper, till the latter told them their drinks were

ready.



"Well, mate, here's big blocks an' taut hawse-pipes," said the

brown sweater cordially.



"Your very good health," returned Wilbur.



The brown sweater wiped a thin mustache in the hollow of his palm,

and wiped that palm upon his trouser leg.



"Yessir," he continued, once more facing the Marquesas head-dress.

"Yessir, they're queer game down there."



"In the Marquesas Islands, you mean?" said Wilbur.



"Yessir, they're queer game.  When they ain't tattoin' theirselves

with Scripture tex's they git from the missionaries, they're

pullin' out the hairs all over their bodies with two clam-shells.

Hair by hair, y' understan'?"



"Pull'n out 'er hair?" said Wilbur, wondering what was the matter

with his tongue.



"They think it's clever--think the women folk like it."



Wilbur had fancied that the little man had worn a brown sweater

when they first met.  But now, strangely enough, he was not in the

least surprised to see it iridescent like a pigeon's breast.



"Y' ever been down that way?" inquired the little man next.



Wilbur heard the words distinctly enough, but somehow they refused

to fit into the right places in his brain.  He pulled himself

together, frowning heavily.



"What--did--you--say?" he asked with great deliberation, biting

off his words.  Then he noticed that he and his companion were no

longer in the barroom, but in a little room back of it.  His

personality divided itself.  There was one Ross Wilbur--who could

not make his hands go where he wanted them, who said one word when

he thought another, and whose legs below the knee were made of

solid lead.  Then there was another Ross Wilbur--Ross Wilbur, the

alert, who was perfectly clear-headed, and who stood off to one

side and watched his twin brother making a monkey of himself,

without power and without even the desire of helping him.



This latter Wilbur heard the iridescent sweater say:



"Bust me, if y' a'n't squiffy, old man.  Stand by a bit an' we'll

have a ball."



"Can't have got--return--exceptionally--and the round table--pull

out hairs wi' tu clamsh'ls," gabbled Wilbur's stupefied double;

and Wilbur the alert said to himself: "You're not drunk, Ross

Wilbur, that's certain; what could they have put in your

cocktail?"



The iridescent sweater stamped twice upon the floor and a trap-

door fell away beneath Wilbur's feet like the drop of a gallows. 

With the eyes of his undrugged self Wilbur had a glimpse of water

below.  His elbow struck the floor as he went down, and he fell

feet first into a Whitehall boat.  He had time to observe two men

at the oars and to look between the piles that supported the house

above him and catch a glimpse of the bay and a glint of the Contra

Costa shore.  He was not in the least surprised at what had

happened, and made up his mind that it would be a good idea to lie

down in the boat and go to sleep.



Suddenly--but how long after his advent into the boat he could not

tell--his wits began to return and settle themselves, like wild

birds flocking again after a scare.  Swiftly he took in the scene. 

The blue waters of the bay around him, the deck of a schooner on

which he stood, the Whitehall boat alongside, and an enormous man

with a face like a setting moon wrangling with his friend in the

sweater--no longer iridescent.



"What do you call it?" shouted the red man.  "I want able seamen--

I don't figger on working this boat with dancing masters, do I? We

ain't exactly doing quadrilles on my quarterdeck.  If we don't

look out we'll step on this thing and break it.  It ain't ought to

be let around loose without its ma."



"Rot that," vociferated the brown sweater.  "I tell you he's one

of the best sailor men on the front.  If he ain't we'll forfeit

the money.  Come on, Captain Kitchell, we made show enough gettin'

away as it was, and this daytime business ain't our line.  D'you

sign or not? Here's the advance note.  I got to duck my nut or

I'll have the patrol boat after me."



"I'll sign this once," growled the other, scrawling his name on

the note; "but if this swab ain't up to sample, he'll come back by

freight, an' I'll drop in on mee dear friend Jim when we come back

and give him a reel nice time, an' you can lay to that, Billy

Trim." The brown sweater pocketed the note, went over the side,

and rowed off.



Wilbur stood in the waist of a schooner anchored in the stream

well off Fisherman's wharf.  In the forward part of the schooner a

Chinaman in brown duck was mixing paint.  Wilbur was conscious

that he still wore his high hat and long coat, but his stick was

gone and one gray glove was slit to the button.  In front of him

towered the enormous red-faced man.  A pungent reek of some kind

of rancid fat or oil assailed his nostrils.  Over by Alcatraz a

ferry-boat whistled for its slip as it elbowed its way through the

water.



Wilbur had himself fairly in hand by now.  His wits were all about

him; but the situation was beyond him as yet.



"Git for'd," commanded the big man.



Wilbur drew himself up, angry in an instant.  "Look here," he

began, "what's the meaning of this business? I know I've been

drugged and mishandled.  I demand to be put ashore.  Do you

understand that?"



"Angel child," whimpered the big man.  "Oh, you lilee of the

vallee, you bright an' mornin' star.  I'm reely pained y'know,

that your vally can't come along, but we'll have your piano set up

in the lazarette.  It gives me genuine grief, it do, to see you

bein' obliged to put your lilee white feet on this here vulgar an'

dirtee deck.  We'll have the Wilton carpet down by to-morrer, so

we will, my dear.  Yah-h!" he suddenly broke out, as his rage

boiled over.  "Git for'd, d'ye hear! I'm captain of this here

bathtub, an' that's all you need to know for a good while to come. 

I ain't generally got to tell that to a man but once; but I'll

stretch the point just for love of you, angel child.  Now, then,

move!"



Wilbur stood motionless--puzzled beyond expression.  No experience

he had ever been through helped in this situation.



"Look here," he began, "I--"



The captain knocked him down with a blow of one enormous fist upon

the mouth, and while he was yet stretched upon the deck kicked him

savagely in the stomach.  Then he allowed him to rise, caught him

by the neck and the slack of his overcoat, and ran him forward to

where a hatchway, not two feet across, opened in the deck. 

Without ado, he flung him down into the darkness below; and while

Wilbur, dizzied by the fall, sat on the floor at the foot of the

vertical companion-ladder, gazing about him with distended eyes,

there rained down upon his head, first an oilskin coat, then a

sou'wester, a pair of oilskin breeches, woolen socks, and a plug

of tobacco.  Above him, down the contracted square of the hatch,

came the bellowing of the Captain's voice:



"There's your fit-out, Mister Lilee of the Vallee, which the same

our dear friend Jim makes a present of and no charge, because he

loves you so.  You're allowed two minutes to change, an' it is to

be hoped as how you won't force me to come for to assist."



It would have been interesting to have followed, step by step, the

mental process that now took place in Ross Wilbur's brain.  The

Captain had given him two minutes in which to change.  The time

was short enough, but even at that Wilbur changed more than his

clothes during the two minutes he was left to himself in the

reekind dark of the schooner's fo'castle.  It was more than a

change--it was a revolution.  What he made up his mind to do--

precisely what mental attitude he decided to adopt, just what new

niche he elected wherein to set his feet, it is difficult to say. 

Only by results could the change be guessed at.  He went down the

forward hatch at the toe of Kitchell's boot--silk-hatted, melton-

overcoated, patent-booted, and gloved in suedes.  Two minutes

later there emerged upon the deck a figure in oilskins and a

sou'wester.  There was blood upon the face of him and the grime of

an unclean ship upon his bare hands.  It was Wilbur, and yet not

Wilbur.  In two minutes he had been, in a way, born again.  The

only traces of his former self were the patent-leather boots,

still persistent in their gloss and shine, that showed grim

incongruity below the vast compass of the oilskin breeches.



As Wilbur came on deck he saw the crew of the schooner hurrying

forward, six of them, Chinamen every one, in brown jeans and black

felt hats.  On the quarterdeck stood the Captain, barking his

orders.



"Consider the Lilee of the Vallee," bellowed the latter, as his

eye fell upon Wilbur the Transformed.  "Clap on to that starboard

windlass brake, sonny."



Wilbur saw the Chinamen ranging themselves about what he guessed

was the windlass in the schooner's bow.  He followed and took his

place among them, grasping one of the bars.



"Break down!" came the next order.  Wilbur and the Chinamen

obeyed, bearing up and down upon the bars till the slack of the

anchor-chain came home and stretched taut and dripping from the

hawse-holes.



"'Vast heavin'!"



And then as Wilbur released the brake and turned about for the

next order, he cast his glance out upon the bay, and there, not a

hundred and fifty yards away, her spotless sails tense, her

cordage humming, her immaculate flanks slipping easily through the

waves, the water hissing and churning under her forefoot, clean,

gleaming, dainty, and aristocratic, the Ridgeways' yacht "Petrel"

passed like a thing of life.  Wilbur saw Nat Ridgeway himself at

the wheel.  Girls in smart gowns and young fellows in white ducks

and yachting caps--all friends of his--crowded the decks.  A

little orchestra of musicians were reeling off a quickstep.



The popping of a cork and a gale of talk and laughter came to his

ears.  Wilbur stared at the picture, his face devoid of

expression.  The "Petrel" came on--drew nearer--was not a hundred

feet away from the schooner's stern.  A strong swimmer, such as

Wilbur, could cover the distance in a few strides.  Two minutes

ago Wilbur might have--



"Set your mains'l," came the bellow of Captain Kitchell.  "Clap on

to your throat and peak halyards."



The Chinamen hurried aft.



Wilbur followed.

