





VI



A SEA MYSTERY





In spite of his best efforts at self-control, Wilbur felt a slow,

cold clutch at his heart.  That sickening, uncanny lifting of the

schooner out of the glassy water, at a time when there was not

enough wind to so much as wrinkle the surface, sent a creep of

something very like horror through all his flesh.



Again he peered over the side, down into the kelp-thickened sea. 

Nothing--not a breath of air was stirring.  The gray light that

flooded down from the stars showed not a break upon the surface of

Magdalena Bay.  On shore, nothing moved.



"Quiet there, forward," called Moran to the shrill-voiced coolies.



The succeeding stillness was profound.  All on board listened

intently.  The water dripped like the ticking of a clock from the

"Bertha Millner's" stern, which with the rising of the bow had

sunk almost to the rail.  There was no other sound.



"Strange," muttered Moran, her brows contracting.



Charlie broke the silence with a wail: "No likee, no likee!" he

cried at top voice.



The man had gone suddenly green; Wilbur could see the shine of his

eyes distended like those of a harassed cat.  As he, Moran, and

Wilbur stood in the schooner's waist, staring at each other, the

smell of punk came to their nostrils.  Forward, the coolies were

already burning joss-sticks on the fo'castle head, kowtowing their

foreheads to the deck.



Moran went forward and kicked them to their feet and hurled their

joss-sticks into the sea.



"Feng shui! Feng shui!" they exclaimed with bated breaths.  "The

Feng shui no likee we."



Low in the east the horizon began to blacken against the sky.  It

was early morning.  A watch was set, the Chinamen sent below, and

until daybreak, when Charlie began to make a clattering of tins in 

the galley as he set about preparing breakfast, Wilbur paced the

rounds of the schooner, looking, listening, and waiting again for

that slow, horrifying lift.  But the rest of the night was without

incident.



After breakfast, the strangely assorted trio--Charlie, Moran, and

Wilbur--held another conference in the cabin.  It was decided to

move the schooner to the other side of the bay.



"Feng shui in disa place, no likee we," announced Charlie.



"Feng shui, who are they?"



Charlie promptly became incoherent on this subject, and Moran and

Wilbur could only guess that the Feng shui were the tutelary

deities that presided over that portion of Magdalena Bay.  At any

rate, there were evidently no more shark to be caught in that

fishing-ground; so sail was made, and by noon the "Bertha Millner"

tied up to the kelp on the opposite side of the inlet, about half

a mile from the shore.



The shark were plentiful here and the fishing went forward again

as before.  Certain of these shark were hauled aboard, stunned by

a blow on the nose, and their fins cut off.  The Chinamen packed

these fins away in separate kegs.  Eventually they would be sent

to China.



Two or three days passed.  The hands kept steadily at their work. 

Nothing more occurred to disturb the monotony of the scorching

days and soundless nights; the schooner sat as easily on the

unbroken water as though built to the bottom.  Soon the night

watch was discontinued.  During these days the three officers

lived high.  Turtle were plentiful, and what with their steaks and

soups, the fried abalones, the sea-fish, the really delicious

shark-fins, and the quail that Charlie and Wilbur trapped along

the shore, the trio had nothing to wish for in the way of table

luxuries.



The shore was absolutely deserted, as well as the back country--an

unbroken wilderness of sand and sage.  Half a dozen times, Wilbur,

wearying of his inaction aboard the schooner, made the entire

circuit of the bay from point to point.  Standing on one of the

latter projections and looking out to the west, the Pacific

appeared as empty of life as the land.  Never a keel cut those

waters, never a sail broke the edge of the horizon, never a

feather of smoke spotted the sky where it whitened to meet the

sea.  Everything was empty--vast, unspeakably desolate--

palpitating with heat.



Another week passed.  Charlie began to complain that the shark

were growing scarce again.



"I think bime-by him go away, once a mo'."



That same night, Wilbur, lying in his hammock, was awakened by a

touch on his arm.  He woke to see Moran beside him on the deck.



"Did you hear anything?" she said in a low voice, looking at him

under her scowl.



"No! no!" he exclaimed, getting up, reaching for his wicker

sandals.  "Did you?"



"I thought so--something.  Did you feel anything?"



"I've been asleep, I haven't noticed anything.  Is it beginning

again?"



"The schooner lifted again, just now, very gently.  I happened to

be awake or I wouldn't have noticed it."  They were talking in low

voices, as is the custom of people speaking in the dark.



"There, what's that?" exclaimed Wilbur under his breath.  A gentle

vibration, barely perceptible, thrilled through the schooner. 

Under his hand, that was clasped upon the rail, Wilbur could feel

a faint trembling in her frame.  It stopped, began again, and died

slowly away.



"Well, what the devil IS it?" he muttered impatiently, trying to

master the returning creep of dread.



Moran shook her head, biting her lip.



"It's beyond me," she said, frowning.  "Can you see anything?" The

sky, sea, and land were unbroken reaches of solitude.  There was

no breath of wind.



"Listen," said Moran.  Far off to landward came the faint, sleepy

clucking of a quail, and the stridulating of unnumbered crickets;

a long ripple licked the slope of the beach and slid back into the

ocean.  Wilbur shook his head.



"Don't hear anything," he whispered.  "Sh--there--she's trembling

again."



Once more a prolonged but faint quivering ran through the "Bertha

Millner" from stem to stern, and from keel to masthead.  There was

a barely audible creaking of joints and panels.  The oil in the

deck-tubs trembled.  The vibration was so fine and rapid that it

tickled the soles of Wilbur's feet as he stood on the deck.



"I'd give two fingers to know what it all means," murmured Moran

in a low voice.  "I've been to sea for--" Then suddenly she cried

aloud: "Steady all, she's lifting again!"



The schooner heaved slowly under them, this time by the stern.  Up

she went, up and up, while Wilbur gripped at a stay to keep his

place, and tried to choke down his heart, that seemed to beat

against his palate.



"God!" ejaculated Moran, her eyes blazing.  "This thing is--" The

"Bertha" came suddenly down to an easy keel, rocking in that

glassy sea as if in a tide rip.  The deck was awash with oil.  Far

out in the bay the ripples widening from the schooner blurred the

reflections of the stars.  The Chinamen swarmed up the hatch-way,

voluble and shrill.  Again the "Bertha Millner" lifted and sank,

the tubs sliding on the deck, the masts quivering like reeds, the

timbers groaning aloud with the strain.  In the stern something

cracked and smashed.  Then the trouble died away, the ripples

faded into the ocean, and the schooner settled to her keel, quite

motionless.



"Look," said Moran, her face toward the "Bertha's" stern.  "The

rudder is out of the gudgeons." It was true--the "Bertha

Millner's" helm was unshipped.



There was no more sleep for any one on board that night.  Wilbur

tramped the quarterdeck, sick with a feeling he dared not put a

name to.  Moran sat by the wrecked rudder-head, a useless pistol

in her hand, swearing under her breath from time to time.  Charlie

appeared on the quarterdeck at intervals, looked at Wilbur and

Moran with wide-open eyes, and then took himself away.  On the

forward deck the coolies pasted strips of red paper inscribed with

mottoes upon the mast, and filled the air with the reek of their

joss-sticks.



"If one could only SEE what it was," growled Moran between her

clinched teeth.  "But this--this damned heaving and trembling, it--

it's queer."



"That's it, that's it," said Wilbur quickly, facing her.  "What

are we going to do, Moran?"



"STICK IT OUT!" she exclaimed, striking her knee with her fist. 

"We can't leave the schooner--I WON'T leave her.  I'll stay by

this dough-dish as long as two planks in her hold together.  Were

you thinking of cutting away?" She fixed him with her frown.



Wilbur looked at her, sitting erect by the disabled rudder, her

head bare, her braids of yellow hair hanging over her breast,

sitting there in man's clothes and man's boots, the pistol at her

side.  He shook his head.



"I'm not leaving the 'Bertha' till you do," he answered; adding:

"I'll stand by you, mate, until we--"



"Feel that?" said Moran, holding up a hand.



A fine, quivering tremble was thrilling through every beam of the

schooner, vibrating each rope like a harp-string.  It passed away;

but before either Wilbur or Moran could comment upon it

recommenced, this time much more perceptibly.  Charlie dashed aft,

his queue flying.



"W'at makum heap shake?" he shouted; "w'at for him shake? No

savvy, no likee, pretty much heap flaid; aie-yah, aie-yah!"



Slowly the schooner heaved up as though upon the crest of some

huge wave, slowly it settled, and again gradually lifted till

Wilbur had to catch at the rail to steady his footing.  The

quivering sensation increased so that their very teeth chattered

with it.  Below in the cabin they could hear small objects falling

from the shelves and table.  Then with a sudden drop the "Bertha"

fell back to her keel again, the spilled oil spouting from her

scuppers, the masts rocking, the water churning and splashing from

her sides.



And that was all.  There was no sound--nothing was in sight. 

There was only the frightened trembling of the little schooner and

that long, slow heave and lift.



Morning came, and breakfast was had in silence and grim

perplexity.  It was too late to think of getting away, now that

the rudder was disabled.  The "Bertha Millner" must bide where she

was.



"And a little more of this dancing," exclaimed Moran, "and we'll

have the planks springing off the stern-post."



Charlie nodded solemnly.  He said nothing--his gravity had

returned.  Now in the glare of the tropical day, with the "Bertha

Millner" sitting the sea as placidly as a brooding gull, he was

Talleyrand again.



"I tinkum yas," he said vaguely.



"Well, I think we had better try and fix the rudder and put back

to Frisco," said Moran.  "You're making no money this way.  There

are no shark to be caught.  SOMETHING'S wrong.  They're gone away

somewhere.  The crew are eating their heads off and not earning

enough money to pay for their keep.  What do you think?"



"I tinkum yas."



"Then we'll go home.  Is that it?"



"I tinkum yas--to-molla."



"To-morrow?"



"Yas."



"That's settled then," persisted Moran, surprised at his ready

acquiescence; "we start home to-morrow?" Charlie nodded.



"To-molla," he said.



The rudder was not so badly damaged as they had at first supposed;

the break was easily mended, but it was found necessary for one of

the men to go over the side.



"Get over the side here, Jim," commanded Moran.  "Charlie, tell

him what's wanted; we can't work the pintle in from the deck."



But Charlie shook his head.



"Him no likee go; him plenty much flaid."



Moran ripped out an oath.



"What do I care if he's afraid! I want him to shove the pintle

into the lower gudgeon.  My God," she exclaimed, with immense

contempt, "what carrion! I'd sooner work a boat with she-monkeys. 

Mr. Wilbur, I shall have to ask you to go over.  I thought I was

captain here, but it all depends on whether these rats are afraid

or not."



"Plenty many shark," expostulated Charlie.  "Him flaid shark come

back, catchum chop-chop."



"Stand by here with a couple of cutting-in spades," cried Moran,

"and fend off if you see any shark; now, then, are you ready,

mate?"



Wilbur took his determination in both hands, threw off his coat

and sandals, and went over the stern rail.



"Put your ear to the water," called Moran from above; "sometimes

you can hear their flukes."



It took but a minute to adjust the pintle, and Wilbur regained the

deck again, dripping and a little pale.  He knew not what horrid

form of death might have been lurking for him down below there

underneath the kelp.  As he started forward for dry clothes he was

surprised to observe that Moran was smiling at him, holding out

her hand.



"That was well done," she said, "and thank you.  I've seen older

sailor-men than you who wouldn't have taken the risk." Never

before had she appeared more splendid in his eyes than at this

moment.  After changing his clothes in the fo'castle, he sat for a

long time, his chin in his hands, very thoughtful.  Then at

length, as though voicing the conclusion of his reflections, said

aloud, as he rose to his feet:



"But, of course, THAT is out of the question."



He remembered that they were going home on the next day.  Within a

fortnight he would be in San Francisco again--a taxpayer, a

police-protected citizen once more.  It had been good fun, after

all, this three weeks' life on the "Bertha Millner," a strange

episode cut out from the normal circle of his conventional life. 

He ran over the incidents of the cruise--Kitchell, the turtle

hunt, the finding of the derelict, the dead captain, the squall,

and the awful sight of the sinking bark, Moran at the wheel, the

grewsome business of the shark-fishing, and last of all that

inexplicable lifting and quivering of the schooner.  He told

himself that now he would probably never know the explanation of

that mystery.



The day passed in preparations to put to sea again.  The deck-tubs

and hogsheads were stowed below and the tackle cleared away.  By

evening all was ready; they would be under way by daybreak the

next morning.  There was a possibility of their being forced to

tow the schooner out by means of the dory, so light were the airs

inside.  Once beyond the heads, however, they were sure of a

breeze.



About ten o'clock that night, the same uncanny trembling ran

through the schooner again, and about half an hour later she

lifted gently once or twice.  But after that she was undisturbed.



Later on in the night--or rather early in the morning--Wilbur woke

suddenly in his hammock without knowing why, and got up and stood

listening.  The "Bertha Millner" was absolutely quiet.  The night

was hot and still; the new moon, canted over like a sinking

galleon, was low over the horizon.  Wilbur listened intently, for

now at last he heard something.



Between the schooner and the shore a gentle sound of splashing

came to his ears, and an occasional crack as of oars in their

locks.  Was it possible that a boat was there between the schooner

and the land? What boat, and manned by whom?



The creaking of oarlocks and the dip of paddles was unmistakable.



Suddenly Wilbur raised his voice in a great shout:



"Boat ahoy!"



There was no answer; the noise of oars grew fainter.  Moran came

running out of her cabin, swinging into her coat as she ran.



"What is it--what is it?"



"A boat, I think, right off the schooner here.  Hark--there--did

you hear the oars?"



"You're right; call the hands, get the dory over, we'll follow

that boat right up.  Hello, forward there, Charlie, all hands,

tumble out!"



Then Wilbur and Moran caught themselves looking into each other's

eyes.  At once something--perhaps the latent silence of the

schooner--told them there was to be no answer.  The two ran for-

ward: Moran swung herself into the fo'castle hatch, and without

using the ladder dropped to the deck below.  In an instant her

voice came up the hatch:



"The bunks are empty--they're gone--abandoned us." She came up the

ladder again.



"Look," said Wilbur, as she regained the deck.  "The dory's gone;

they've taken it.  It was our only boat; we can't get ashore."



"Cowardly, superstitious rats, I should have expected this.  They

would be chopped in bits before they would stay longer on board

this boat--they and their-Feng shui."



When morning came the deserters could be made out camped on the

shore, near to the beached dory.  What their intentions were could

not be conjectured.  Ridden with all manner of nameless Oriental

superstitions, it was evident that the Chinamen preferred any

hazard of fortune to remaining longer upon the schooner.



"Well, can we get along without them?" said Wilbur.  "Can we two

work the schooner back to port ourselves?"



"We'll try it on, anyhow, mate," said Moran; "we might get her

into San Diego, anyhow."



The Chinamen had left plenty of provisions on board, and Moran

cooked breakfast.  Fortunately, by eight o'clock a very light

westerly breeze came up.  Moran and Wilbur cast off the gaskets

and set the fore and main sails.



Wilbur was busy at the forward bitts preparing to cast loose from

the kelp, and Moran had taken up her position at the wheel when

suddenly she exclaimed:



"Sail ho!--and in God's name what kind of a sail do you call it?"



In fact a strange-looking craft had just made her appearance at

the entrance of Magdalena Bay.

