




CHAPTER XI

THE GREAT COLLAPSE



1



And now the whole fabric of civilisation was bending and giving,

and dropping to pieces and melting in the furnace of the war.



The stages of the swift and universal collapse of the financial

and scientific civilisation with which the twentieth century

opened followed each other very swiftly, so swiftly that upon the

foreshortened page of history--they seem altogether to overlap. 

To begin with, one sees the world nearly at a maximum wealth and

prosperity.  To its inhabitants indeed it seemed also at a

maximum of security.  When now in retrospect the thoughtful

observer surveys the intellectual history of this time, when one

reads its surviving fragments of literature, its scraps of

political oratory, the few small voices that chance has selected

out of a thousand million utterances to speak to later days, the

most striking thing of all this web of wisdom and error is surely

that hallucination of security.  To men living in our present

world state, orderly, scientific and secured, nothing seems so

precarious, so giddily dangerous, as the fabric of the social

order with which the men of the opening of the twentieth century

were content.  To us it seems that every institution and

relationship was the fruit of haphazard and tradition and the

manifest sport of chance, their laws each made for some separate

occasion and having no relation to any future needs, their

customs illogical, their education aimless and wasteful.  Their

method of economic exploitation indeed impresses a trained and

informed mind as the most frantic and destructive scramble it is

possible to conceive; their credit and monetary system resting on

an unsubstantial tradition of the worthiness of gold, seems a

thing almost fantastically unstable.  And they lived in planless

cities, for the most part dangerously congested; their rails and

roads and population were distributed over the earth in the

wanton confusion ten thousand irrevelant considerations had made.



Yet they thought confidently that this was a secure and permanent

progressive system, and on the strength of some three hundred

years of change and irregular improvement answered the doubter

with, "Things always have gone well.  We'll worry through!"



But when we contrast the state of man in the opening of the

twentieth century with the condition of any previous period in

his history, then perhaps we may begin to understand something of

that blind confidence.  It was not so much a reasoned confidence

as the inevitable consequence of sustained good fortune.  By such

standards as they possessed, things HAD gone amazingly well for

them.  It is scarcely an exaggeration to say that for the first

time in history whole populations found themselves regularly

supplied with more than enough to eat, and the vital statistics

of the time witness to an amelioration of hygienic conditions

rapid beyond all precedent, and to a vast development of

intelligence and ability in all the arts that make life

wholesome.  The level and quality of the average education had

risen tremendously; and at the dawn of the twentieth century

comparatively few people in Western Europe or America were unable

to read or write.  Never before had there been such reading

masses.  There was wide social security.  A common man might

travel safely over three-quarters of the habitable globe, could

go round the earth at a cost of less than the annual earnings of

a skilled artisan.  Compared with the liberality and comfort of

the ordinary life of the time, the order of the Roman Empire

under the Antonines was local and limited.  And every year, every

month, came some new increment to human achievement, a new

country opened up, new mines, new scientific discoveries, a new

machine!



For those three hundred years, indeed, the movement of the world

seemed wholly beneficial to mankind.  Men said, indeed, that

moral organisation was not keeping pace with physical progress,

but few attached any meaning to these phrases, the understanding

of which lies at the basis of our present safety.  Sustaining and

constructive forces did indeed for a time more than balance the

malign drift of chance and the natural ignorance, prejudice,

blind passion, and,wasteful self-seeking of mankind.



The accidental balance on the side of Progress was far slighter

and infinitely more complex and delicate in its adjustments than

the people of that time suspected; but that did not alter the

fact that it was an effective balance.  They did not realise that

this age of relative good fortune was an age of immense but

temporary opportunity for their kind.  They complacently assumed

a necessary progress towards which they had no moral

responsibility.  They did not realise that this security of

progress was a thing still to be won--or lost, and that the time

to win it was a time that passed.  They went about their affairs

energetically enough and yet with a curious idleness towards

those threatening things.  No one troubled over the real dangers

of mankind.  They, saw their armies and navies grow larger and

more portentous; some of their ironclads at the last cost as much

as the whole annual expenditure upon advanced education; they

accumulated explosives and the machinery of destruction; they

allowed their national traditions and jealousies to accumulate;

they contemplated a steady enhancement of race hostility as the

races drew closer without. concern or understanding, and they

permitted the growth in their midst of an evil-spirited press,

mercenary, and unscrupulous, incapable of good, and powerful for

evil.  The State had practically no control over the press at

all.  Quite heedlessly they allowed thistouch-paper to lie at the

door of their war magazine for any spark to fire.  The precedents

of history were all one tale of the collapse of civilisations,

the dangers of the time were manifest.  One is incredulous now to

believe they could not see.



Could mankind have prevented this disaster of the War in the Air?



An idle question that, as idle as to ask could mankind have

prevented the decay that turned Assyria and Babylon to empty

deserts or the slow decline and fall, the gradual social

disorganisation, phase by phase, that closed the chapter of the

Empire of the West!  They could not, because they did not, they

had not the will to arrest it.  What mankind could achieve with a

different will is a speculation as idle as it is magnificent. 

And this was no slow decadence that came to the Europeanised

world;  those other civilisations rotted and crumbled down, the

Europeanised civilisation was, as it were, blown up.  Within the

space of five years it was altogether disintegrated and

destroyed.  Up to the very eve of the War in the Air one sees a

spacious spectacle of incessant advance, a world-wide security,

enormous areas with highly organised industry and settled

populations, gigantic cities spreading gigantically, the seas and

oceans dotted with shipping, the land netted with rails, and open

ways.  Then suddenly the German air-fleets sweep across the

scene, and we are in the beginning of the end.



2



This story has already told of the swift rush upon New York of

the first German air-fleet and of the wild, inevitable orgy of

inconclusive destruction that ensued.  Behind it a second

air-fleet was already swelling at its gasometers when England and

France and Spain and Italy showed their hands.  None of these

countries had prepared for aeronautic warfare on the magnificent

scale of the Germans, but each guarded secrets, each in a measure

was making ready, and a common dread of German vigour and that

aggressive spirit Prince Karl Albert embodied, had long been

drawing these powers together in secret anticipation of some such

attack.  This rendered their prompt co-operation possible, and

they certainly co-operated promptly.  The second aerial power in

Europe at this time was France; the British, nervous for their

Asiatic empire, and sensible of the immense moral effect of the

airship upon half-educated populations, had placed their

aeronautic parks in North India, and were able to play but a

subordinate part in the European conflict.  Still, even in

England they had nine or ten big navigables, twenty or thirty

smaller ones, and a variety of experimental aeroplanes.  Before

the fleet of Prince Karl Albert had crossed England, while Bert

was still surveying Manchester in bird's-eye view, the diplomatic

exchanges were going on that led to an attack upon Germany.  A

heterogeneous collection of navigable balloons of all sizes and

types gathered over the Bernese Oberland, crushed and burnt the

twenty-five Swiss air-ships' that unexpectedly resisted this

concentration in the battle of the Alps, and then, leaving the

Alpine glaciers and valleys strewn with strange wreckage, divided

into two fleets and set itself to terrorise Berlin and destroy

the Franconian Park, seeking to do this before the second

air-fleet could be inflated.



Both over Berlin and Franconia the assailants with their modern

explosives effected great damage before they were driven off.  In

Franconia twelve fully distended and five partially filled and

manned giants were able to make head against and at last, with

the help of a squadron of drachenflieger from Hamburg, defeat and

pursue the attack and to relieve Berlin, and the Germans were

straining every nerve to get an overwhelming fleet in the air,

and were already raiding London and Paris when the advance fleets

from the Asiatic air-parks, the first intimation of a new factor

in the conflict, were reported from Burmah and Armenia.



Already the whole financial fabric of the world was staggering

when that occurred.  With the destruction of the American fleet

in the North Atlantic, and the smashing conflict that ended the

naval existence of Germany in the North Sea, with the burning and

wrecking of billions of pounds' worth of property in the four

cardinal cities of the world, the fact of the hopeless costliness

of war came home for the first time, came, like a blow in the

face, to the consciousness of mankind.  Credit went down in a

wild whirl of selling.  Everywhere appeared a phenomenon that had

already in a mild degree manifested itself in preceding periods

of panic; a desire to SECURE AND HOARD GOLD before prices reached

bottom.  But now it spread like wild-fire, it became universal. 

Above was visible conflict and destruction; below something was

happening far more deadly and incurable to the flimsy fabric of

finance and commercialism in which men had so blindly put their

trust.  As the airships fought above, the visible gold supply of

the world vanished below.  An epidemic of private cornering and

universal distrust swept the world.  In a few weeks, money,

except for depreciated paper, vanished into vaults, into holes,

into the walls of houses, into ten million hiding-places.  Money

vanished, and at its disappearance trade and industry came to an

end.  The economic world staggered and fell dead.  It was like

the stroke of some disease it was like the water vanishing out of

the blood of a living creature; it was a sudden, universal

coagulation of intercourse....



And as the credit system, that had been the living fortress of

the scientific civilisation, reeled and fell upon the millions it

had held together in economic relationship, as these people,

perplexed and helpless, faced this marvel of credit utterly

destroyed, the airships of Asia, countless and relentless, poured

across the heavens, swooped  eastward to America and westward to

Europe.  The page of history becomes a long crescendo of battle. 

The main body of the British-Indian air-fleet perished upon a

pyre of blazing antagonists in Burmah; the Germans were scattered

in the great battle of the Carpathians; the vast peninsula of

India burst into insurrection and civil war from end to end, and


from Gobi to Morocco rose the standards of the "Jehad."  For some

weeks of warfare and destruction it seemed as though the

Confederation of Eastern Asia must needs conquer the world, and

then the jerry-built "modern" civilisation of China too gave way

under the strain.  The teeming and peaceful population of China

had been "westernised" during the opening years of the twentieth

century with the deepest resentment and reluctance; they had

been dragooned and disciplined under Japanese and

European--influence into an acquiescence with sanitary methods,

police controls, military service, and wholesale process of

exploitation against which their whole tradition rebelled.  Under

the stresses of the war their endurance reached the breaking

point, the whole of China rose in incoherent revolt, and the

practical destruction of the central government at Pekin by a

handful of British and German airships that had escaped from the

main battles rendered that revolt invincible.  In Yokohama

appeared barricades, the black flag and the social revolution. 

With that the whole world became a welter of conflict.



So that a universal social collapse followed, as it were a

logical consequence, upon world-wide war.  Wherever there were

great populations, great masses of people found themselves

without work, without money, and unable to get food.  Famine was

in every working-class quarter in the world within three weeks of

the beginning of the war.  Within a month there was not a city

anywhere in which the ordinary law and social procedure had not

been replaced by some form of emergency control, in which

firearms and military executions were not being used to keep

order and prevent violence.  And still in the poorer quarters,

and in the populous districts, and even here and there already

among those who had been wealthy, famine spread.



3



So what historians have come to call the Phase of the Emergency

Committees sprang from the opening phase and from the phase of

social collapse.  Then followed a period of vehement and

passionate conflict against disintegration; everywhere the

struggle to keep order and to keep fighting went on.  And at the

same time the character of the war altered through the

replacement of the huge gas-filled airships by flying-machines as

the instruments of war.  So soon as the big fleet engagements

were over, the Asiatics endeavoured to establish in close

proximity to the more vulnerable points of the countries against

which they were acting, fortified centres from which

flying-machine raids could be made.  For a time they had

everything their own way in this, and then, as this story has

told, the lost secret of the Butteridge machine came to light,

and the conflict became equalized and less conclusive than ever. 

For these small flying-machines, ineffectual for any large

expedition or conclusive attack, were horribly convenient for

guerilla warfare, rapidly and cheaply made, easily used, easily

hidden.  The design of them was hastily copied and printed in

Pinkerville and scattered broadcast over the United States and

copies were sent to Europe, and there reproduced.  Every man,

every town, every parish that could, was exhorted to make and use

them.  In a little while they were being constructed not only by

governments and local authorities, but by robber bands, by

insurgent committees, by every type of private person.  The

peculiar social destructiveness of the Butteridge machine lay in

its complete simplicity.  It was nearly as simple as a

motor-bicycle.  The broad outlines of the earlier stages of the

war disappeared under its influence, the spacious antagonism of

nations and empires and races vanished in a seething mass of

detailed conflict.  The world passed at a stride from a unity and

simplicity broader than that of the Roman Empire at its best, to

as social fragmentation as complete as the robber-baron period of

the Middle Ages.  But this time, for a long descent down gradual

slopes of disintegration, comes a fall like a fall over a cliff. 

Everywhere were men and women perceiving this and struggling

desperately to keep as it were a hold upon the edge of the cliff.



A fourth phase follows.  Through the struggle against Chaos, in

the wake of the Famine, came now another old enemy of humanity--

the Pestilence, the Purple Death.  But the war does not pause. 

The flags still fly.  Fresh air-fleets rise, new forms of

airship, and beneath their swooping struggles the world

darkens--scarcely heeded by history.



It is not within the design of this book to tell what further

story, to tell how the War in the Air kept on through the sheer

inability of any authorities to meet and agree and end it, until

every organised government in the world was as shattered and

broken as a heap of china beaten with a stick.  With every week

of those terrible years history becomes more detailed and

confused, more crowded and uncertain.  Not without great and

heroic resistance was civilisation borne down.  Out of the bitter

social conflict below rose patriotic associations, brotherhoods

of order, city mayors, princes, provisional committees, trying to

establish an order below and to keep the sky above.  The double

effort destroyed them.  And as the exhaustion of the mechanical

resources of civilisation clears the heavens of airships at last

altogether, Anarchy, Famine and Pestilence are discovered

triumphant below.  The great nations and empires have become but

names in the mouths of men.  Everywhere there are ruins and

unburied dead, and shrunken, yellow-faced survivors in a mortal

apathy.  Here there are robbers, here vigilance committees, and

here guerilla bands ruling patches of exhausted territory,

strange federations and brotherhoods form and dissolve, and

religious fanaticisms begotten of despair gleam in famine-bright

eyes.  It is a universal dissolution.  The fine order and welfare

of the earth have crumpled like an exploded bladder.  In five

short years the world and the scope of human life have undergone

a retrogressive change as great as that between the age of the

Antonines and the Europe of the ninth century....



4



Across this sombre spectacle of disaster goes a minute and

insignificant person for whom perhaps the readers of this story

have now some slight solicitude.  Of him there remains to be told

just one single and miraculous thing.  Through a world darkened

and lost, through a civilisation in its death agony, our little

Cockney errant went and found his Edna!  He found his Edna!



He got back across the Atlantic partly by means of an order from

the President and partly through his own good luck.  He contrived

to get himself aboard a British brig in the timber trade that put

out from Boston without cargo, chiefly, it would seem, because

its captain had a vague idea of "getting home" to South Shields. 

Bert was able to ship himself upon her mainly because of the

seamanlike appearance of his rubber boots.  They had a long,

eventful voyage; they were chased, or imagined themselves to be

chased, for some hours by an Asiatic ironclad, which was

presently engaged by a British cruiser.  The two ships fought for

three hours, circling and driving southward as they fought, until

the twilight and the cloud-drift of a rising gale swallowed them

up.  A few days later Bert's ship lost her rudder and mainmast in

a gale.  The crew ran out of food and subsisted on fish.  They

saw strange air-ships going eastward near the Azores and landed

to get provisions and repair the rudder at Teneriffe.  There they

found the town destroyed and two big liners, with dead still

aboard, sunken in the harbour.  From there they got canned food

and material for repairs, but their operations were greatly

impeded by the hostility of a band of men amidst the ruins of the

town, who sniped them and tried to drive them away.



At Mogador, they stayed and sent a boat ashore for water, and

were nearly captured by an Arab ruse.  Here too they got the

Purple Death aboard, and sailed with it incubating in their

blood.  The cook sickened first, and then the mate, and presently

every one was down and three in the forecastle were dead.  It

chanced to be calm weather, and they drifted helplessly and

indeed careless of their fate backwards towards the Equator.  The

captain doctored them all with rum.  Nine died all together, and

of the four survivors none understood navigation; when at last

they took heart again and could handle a sail, they made a course

by the stars roughly northward and were already short of food

once more when they fell in with a petrol-driven ship from Rio to

Cardiff, shorthanded by reason of the Purple Death and glad to

take them aboard.  So at,last, after a year of wandering Bert

reached England.  He landed in bright June weather, and found the

Purple Death was there just beginning its ravages.



The people were in a state of panic in Cardiff and many had fled

to the hills, and directly the steamer came to the harbour she

was boarded and her residue of food impounded by some

unauthenticated Provisional Committee.  Bert tramped through a

country disorganised by  pestilence, foodless, and shaken to the

very base of its immemorial order.  He came near death and

starvation many times, and once he was drawn into scenes of

violence that might have ended his career.  But the Bert

Smallways who tramped from Cardiff to London vaguely "going

home," vaguely seeking something of his own that had no tangible

form but Edna, was a very different person from the Desert

Dervish who was swept out of England in Mr. Butteridge's balloon

a year before.  He was brown and lean and enduring, steady-eyed

and pestilence-salted, and his mouth, which had once hung open,

shut now like a steel trap.  Across his brow ran a white scar

that he had got in a fight on the brig.  In Cardiff he had felt

the need of new clothes and a weapon, and had, by means that

would have shocked him a year ago, secured a flannel shirt, a

corduroy suit, and a revolver and fifty cartridges from an

abandoned pawnbroker's.  He also got some soap and had his first

real wash for thirteen months in a stream outside the town.  The

Vigilance bands that had at first shot plunderers very freely

were now either entirely dispersed by the plague, or busy between

town and cemetery in a vain attempt to keep pace with it.  He

prowled on the outskirts of the town for three or four days,

starving, and then went back to join the Hospital Corps for a

week, and so fortified himself with a few square meals before he

started eastward.



The Welsh and English countryside at that time presented the

strangest mingling of the assurance and wealth of the opening

twentieth century with a sort of Dureresque medievalism.  All the

gear, the houses and mono-rails, the farm hedges and power

cables, the roads and pavements, the sign-posts and

advertisements of the former order were still for the most part

intact.  Bankruptcy, social collapse, famine, and pestilence had

done nothing to damage these, and it was only to the great

capitals and ganglionic centres, as it were, of this State, that

positive destruction had come.  Any one dropped suddenly into the

country would have noticed very little difference.  He would have

remarked first, perhaps, that all the hedges needed clipping,

that the roadside grass grew rank, that the road-tracks were

unusually rainworn, and that the cottages by the wayside seemed

in many cases shut up, that a telephone wire had dropped here,

and that a cart stood abandoned by the wayside.  But he would

still find his hunger whetted by the bright assurance that

Wilder's Canned Peaches were excellent, or that there was nothing

so good for the breakfast table as Gobble's Sausages.  And then

suddenly would come the Dureresque element; the skeleton of a

horse, or some crumpled mass of rags in the ditch, with gaunt

extended feet and a yellow, purple-blotched skin and face, or

what had been a face, gaunt and glaring and devastated.  Then

here would be a field that had been ploughed and not sown, and

here a field of corn carelessly trampled by beasts, and here a

hoarding torn down across the road to make a fire.



Then presently he would meet a man or a woman, yellow-faced and

probably negligently dressed and armed--prowling for food.  These

people would have the complexions and eyes and expressions of

tramps or criminals, and often the clothing of prosperous

middle-class or upper-class people.  Many of these would be eager

for news, and willing to give help and even scraps of queer

meat, or crusts of grey and doughy bread, in return for it.  They

would listen to Bert's story with avidity, and attempt to keep

him with them for a day or so.  The virtual cessation of postal

distribution and the collapse of all newspaper enterprise had

left an immense and aching gap in the mental life of this time. 

Men had suddenly lost sight of the ends of the earth and had

still to recover the rumour-spreading habits of the Middle Ages. 

In their eyes, in their bearing, in their talk, was the quality

of lost and deoriented souls.



As Bert travelled from parish to parish, and from district to

district, avoiding as far as possible those festering centres of

violence and despair, the larger towns, he found the condition

of affairs varying widely.  In one parish he would find the large

house burnt, the vicarage wrecked, evidently in violent conflict

for some suspected and perhaps imaginary store of food unburied

dead everywhere, and the whole mechanism of the community at a

standstill.  In another he would find organising forces stoutly

at work, newly-painted notice boards warning off vagrants, the

roads and still cultivated fields policed by armed men, the

pestilence under control, even nursing going on, a store of food

husbanded, the cattle and sheep well guarded, and a group of two

or three justices, the village doctor or a farmer, dominating the

whole place; a reversion, in fact, to the autonomous community of

the fifteenth century.  But at any time such a village would be

liable to a raid of Asiatics or Africans or such-like

air-pirates, demanding petrol and alcohol or provisions.  The

price of its order was an almost intolerable watchfulness and

tension.



Then the approach to the confused problems of some larger centre

of population and the presence of a more intricate conflict would

be marked by roughly smeared notices of "Quarantine" or

"Strangers Shot," or by a string of decaying plunderers dangling

from the telephone poles at the roadside.  About Oxford big

boards were put on the roofs warning all air wanderers off with

the single word, "Guns."



Taking their risks amidst these things, cyclists still kept

abroad, and once or twice during Bert's long tramp powerful motor

cars containing masked and goggled figures went tearing past him.

There were few police in evidence, but ever and again squads of

gaunt and tattered soldier-cyclists would come drifting along,

and such encounters became more frequent as he got out of Wales

into England.  Amidst all this wreckage they were still

campaigning.  He had had some idea of resorting to the workhouses

for the night if hunger pressed him too closely, but some of

these were closed and others converted into temporary hospitals,

and one he came up to at twilight near a village in

Gloucestershire stood with all its doors and windows open, silent

as the grave, and, as he found to his horror by stumbling along

evil-smelling corridors, full of unburied dead.



From Gloucestershire Bert went northward to the British

aeronautic park outside Birmingham, in the hope that he might be

taken on and given food, for there the Government, or at any rate

the War Office, still existed as an energetic fact, concentrated

amidst collapse and social disaster upon the effort to keep the

British flag still flying in the air, and trying to brisk up

mayor and mayor and magistrate and magistrate in a new effort of

organisation.  They had brought together all the best of the

surviving artisans from that region, they had provisioned the

park for a siege, and they were urgently building a larger type

of Butteridge machine.  Bert could get no footing at this work: 

he was not sufficiently skilled, and he had drifted to Oxford

when the great fight occurred in which these works were finally

wrecked.  He saw something, but not very much, of the battle from

a place called Boar Hill.  He saw the Asiatic squadron coming up

across the hills to the south-west, and he saw one of their

airships circling southward again chased by two aeroplanes, the

one that was ultimately overtaken, wrecked and burnt at Edge

Hill. But he never learnt the issue of the combat as a whole.



He crossed the Thames from Eton to Windsor and made his way round

the south of London to Bun Hill, and there he found his brother

Tom, looking like some dark, defensive animal in the old shop,

just recovering from the Purple Death, and Jessica upstairs

delirious, and, as it seemed to him, dying grimly.  She raved of

sending out orders to customers, and scolded Tom perpetually lest

he should be late with Mrs. Thompson's potatoes and Mrs. Hopkins'

cauliflower, though all business had long since ceased and Tom

had developed a quite uncanny skill in the snaring of rats and

sparrows and the concealment of certain stores of cereals and

biscuits from plundered grocers' shops.  Tom received his brother

with a sort of guarded warmth.



"Lor!" he said, "it's Bert.  I thought you'd be coming back some

day, and I'm glad to see you.  But I carn't arst you to eat

anything, because I 'aven't got anything to eat.... Where you

been, Bert, all this time?"



Bert reassured his brother by a glimpse of a partly eaten swede,

and was still telling his story in fragments and parentheses,

when he discovered behind the counter a yellow and forgotten note

addressed to himself.  "What's this?" he said, and found it was a

year-old note from Edna.  "She came 'ere," said Tom, like one who

recalls a trivial thing, "arstin' for you and arstin' us to take

'er in.  That was after the battle and settin' Clapham Rise

afire.  I was for takin' 'er in, but Jessica wouldn't 'ave

it--and so she borrowed five shillings of me quiet like and went

on. I dessay she's tole you--"



She had, Bert found.  She had gone on, she said in her note, to

an aunt and uncle who had a brickfield near Horsham.  And there

at last, after another fortnight of adventurous journeying, Bert

found her.



5



When Bert and Edna set eyes on one another, they stared and

laughed foolishly, so changed they were, and so ragged and

surprised.  And then they both fell weeping.



"Oh!  Bertie, boy!" she cried. "You've come--you've come!" and

put out her arms and staggered.  "I told 'im.  He said he'd kill

me if I didn't marry him."



But Edna was not married, and when presently Bert could get talk

from her, she explained the task before him.  That little patch

of lonely agricultural country had fallen under the power of a

band of bullies led by a chief called Bill Gore who had begun

life as a butcher boy and developed into a prize-fighter and a

professional sport.  They had been organised by a local nobleman

of former eminence upon the turf, but after  a time he had

disappeared, no one quite knew how and Bill had succeeded to the

leadership of the countryside, and had developed his teacher's

methods with considerable vigour.  There had been a strain of

advanced philosophy about the local nobleman, and his mind ran to

"improving the race" and producing the Over-Man, which in

practice took the form of himself especially and his little band

in moderation marrying with some frequency.  Bill followed up the

idea with an enthusiasm that even trenched upon his popularity

with his followers.  One day he had happened upon Edna tending

her pigs, and had at once fallen a-wooing with great urgency

among the troughs of slush.  Edna had made a gallant resistance,

but he was still vigorously about and extraordinarily impatient. 

He might, she said, come at any time, and she looked Bert in the

eyes.  They were back already in the barbaric stage when a man

must fight for his love.



And here one deplores the conflicts of truth with the chivalrous

tradition.  One would like to tell of Bert sallying forth to

challenge his rival, of a ring formed and a spirited encounter,

and Bert by some miracle of pluck and love and good fortune

winning.  But indeed nothing of the sort occurred.  Instead, he

reloaded his revolver very carefully, and then sat in the best

room of the cottage by the derelict brickfield, looking anxious

and perplexed, and listening to talk about Bill and his ways, and

thinking, thinking.  Then suddenly Edna's aunt, with a thrill in

her voice, announced the appearance of that individual.  He was

coming with two others of his gang through the garden gate.  Bert

got up, put the woman aside, and looked out.  They presented

remarkable figures.  They wore a sort of uniform of red golfing

jackets and white sweaters, football singlet, and stockings and

boots and each had let his fancy play about his head-dress.  Bill

had a woman's hat full of cock's feathers, and all had wild,

slouching cowboy brims.



Bert sighed and stood up, deeply thoughtful, and Edna watched

him, marvelling.  The women stood quite still.  He left the

window, and went out into the passage rather slowly, and with the

careworn expression of a man who gives his mind to a complex and

uncertain business.  "Edna!" he called, and when she came he

opened the front door.



He asked very simply, and pointing to the foremost of the three,

"That 'im? ... Sure?" ... and being told that it was, shot his

rival instantly and very accurately through the chest.  He then

shot Bill's best man much less tidily in the head, and then shot

at and winged the third man as he fled.  The third gentleman

yelped, and continued running with a comical end-on twist.



Then Bert stood still meditating, with the pistol in his hand,

and quite regardless of the women behind him.



So far things had gone well.



It became evident to him that if he did not go into politics at

once, he would be hanged as an assassin and accordingly, and

without a word to the women, he went down to the village

public-house he had passed an hour before on his way to Edna,

entered it from the rear, and confronted the little band of

ambiguous roughs, who were drinking in the tap-room and

discussing matrimony and Bill's affection in a facetious but

envious manner, with a casually held but carefully reloaded

revolver, and an invitation to join what he called, I regret to

say, a "Vigilance Committee" under his direction.  "It's wanted

about 'ere, and some of us are gettin' it up."  He presented

himself as one having friends outside, though indeed, he had no

friends at all in the world but Edna and her aunt and two female

cousins.



There was a quick but entirely respectful discussion of the

situation.  They thought him a lunatic who had tramped into, this

neighbourhood ignorant of Bill.  They desired to temporise until

their leader came.  Bill would settle him.  Some one spoke of

Bill.



"Bill's dead, I jest shot 'im," said Bert. "We don't need reckon

with 'IM.  'E's shot, and a red-'aired chap with a squint, 'E'S

shot.  We've settled up all that. There ain't going to be no more

Bill, ever. 'E'd got wrong ideas about marriage and things.  It's

'is sort of chap we're after."



That carried the meeting.



Bill was perfunctorily buried, and Bert's Vigilance Committee

(for so it continued to be called) reigned in his stead.



That is the end of this story so  far as Bert Smallways is

concerned.  We leave him with his Edna to become squatters among

the clay and oak thickets of the Weald, far away from the stream

of events.  From that time forth life became a succession of

peasant encounters, an affair of pigs and hens and small needs

and little economies and children, until Clapham and Bun Hill and

all the life of the Scientific Age became to Bert no more than

the fading memory of a dream.  He never knew how the War in the

Air went on, nor whether it still went on.  There were rumours of

airships going and coming, and of happenings Londonward.  Once or

twice their shadows fell on him as he worked, but whence they

came or whither they went he could not tell.  Even his desire to

tell died out for want of food.  At times came robbers and

thieves, at times came diseases among the beasts and shortness of

food, once the country was worried by a pack of boar-hounds he

helped to kill; he went through many inconsecutive, irrelevant

adventures.  He survived them all.



Accident and death came near them both ever and again and passed

them by, and they loved and suffered and were happy, and she bore

him many children--eleven children--one after the other, of whom

only four succumbed to the necessary hardships of their simple

life.  They lived and did well, as well was understood in those

days.  They went the way of all flesh, year by year.

