




The Last Days of Pompeii



by Edward George Bulwer-Lytton










BOOK THE FIRST



Chapter I



THE TWO GENTLEMEN OF POMPEII.



'HO, Diomed, well met!  Do you sup with Glaucus to-night?' said a young man

of small stature, who wore his tunic in those loose and effeminate folds

which proved him to be a gentleman and a coxcomb.



'Alas, no! dear Clodius; he has not invited me,' replied Diomed, a man of

portly frame and of middle age.  'By Pollux, a scurvy trick! for they say

his suppers are the best in Pompeii'.



'Pretty well--though there is never enough of wine for me.  It is not the

old Greek blood that flows in his veins, for he pretends that wine makes him

dull the next morning.'



'There may be another reason for that thrift,' said Diomed, raising his

brows.  'With all his conceit and extravagance he is not so rich, I fancy,

as he affects to be, and perhaps loves to save his amphorae better than his

wit.'



'An additional reason for supping with him while the sesterces last.  Next

year, Diomed, we must find another Glaucus.'



'He is fond of the dice, too, I hear.'



'He is fond of every pleasure; and while he likes the pleasure of giving

suppers, we are all fond of him.'



'Ha, ha, Clodius, that is well said!  Have you ever seen my wine-cellars,

by-the-by?'



'I think not, my good Diomed.'



'Well, you must sup with me some evening; I have tolerable muraenae in my

reservoir, and I ask Pansa the aedile to meet you.'



'O, no state with me!--Persicos odi apparatus, I am easily contented.  Well,

the day wanes; I am for the baths--and you...'



'To the quaestor--business of state--afterwards to the temple of Isis. 

Vale!'



'An ostentatious, bustling, ill-bred fellow,' muttered Clodius to himself,

as he sauntered slowly away.  'He thinks with his feasts and his

wine-cellars to make us forget that he is the son of a freedman--and so we

will, when we do him the honour of winning his money; these rich plebeians

are a harvest for us spendthrift nobles.'



Thus soliloquising, Clodius arrived in the Via Domitiana, which was crowded

with passengers and chariots, and exhibited all that gay and animated

exuberance of life and motion which we find at this day in the streets of

Naples.



The bells of the cars as they rapidly glided by each other jingled merrily

on the ear, and Clodius with smiles or nods claimed familiar acquaintance

with whatever equipage was most elegant or fantastic: in fact, no idler was

better known in Pompeii.



'What, Clodius! and how have you slept on your good fortune?' cried, in a

pleasant and musical voice, a young man, in a chariot of the most fastidious

and graceful fashion.  Upon its surface of bronze were elaborately wrought,

in the still exquisite workmanship of Greece, reliefs of the Olympian games;

the two horses that drew the car were of the rarest breed of Parthia; their

slender limbs seemed to disdain the ground and court the air, and yet at the

slightest touch of the charioteer, who stood behind the young owner of the

equipage, they paused motionless, as if suddenly transformed into

stone--lifeless, but lifelike, as one of the breathing wonders of

Praxiteles. The owner himself was of that slender and beautiful symmetry

from which the sculptors of Athens drew their models; his Grecian origin

betrayed itself in his light but clustering locks, and the perfect harmony

of his features.  He wore no toga, which in the time of the emperors had

indeed ceased to be the general distinction of the Romans, and was

especially ridiculed by the pretenders to fashion; but his tunic glowed in

the richest hues of the Tyrian dye, and the fibulae, or buckles, by which it

was fastened, sparkled with emeralds: around his neck was a chain of gold,

which in the middle of his breast twisted itself into the form of a

serpent's head, from the mouth of which hung pendent a large signet ring of

elaborate and most exquisite workmanship; the sleeves of the tunic were

loose, and fringed at the hand with gold: and across the waist a girdle

wrought in arabesque designs, and of the same material as the fringe, served

in lieu of pockets for the receptacle of the handkerchief and the purse, the

stilus and the tablets.



'My dear Glaucus!' said Clodius, 'I rejoice to see that your losses have so

little affected your mien.  Why, you seem as if you had been inspired by

Apollo, and your face shines with happiness like a glory; any one might take

you for the winner, and me for the loser.'



'And what is there in the loss or gain of those dull pieces of metal that

should change our spirit, my Clodius?  By Venus, while yet young, we can

cover our full locks with chaplets--while yet the cithara sounds on unsated

ears--while yet the smile of Lydia or of Chloe flashes over our veins in

which the blood runs so swiftly, so long shall we find delight in the sunny

air, and make bald time itself but the treasurer of our joys.  You sup with

me to-night, you know.'



'Who ever forgets the invitation of Glaucus!'



'But which way go you now?'



'Why, I thought of visiting the baths: but it wants yet an hour to the usual

time.'



'Well, I will dismiss my chariot, and go with you.  So, so, my Phylias,'

stroking the horse nearest to him, which by a low neigh and with backward

ears playfully acknowledged the courtesy: 'a holiday for you to-day.  Is he

not handsome, Clodius?'



'Worthy of Phoebus,' returned the noble parasite--'or of Glaucus.'







Chapter II



THE BLIND FLOWER-GIRL, AND THE BEAUTY OF FASHION.  THE ATHENIAN'S 

CONFESSION.  THE READER'S INTRODUCTION TO ARBACES OF EGYPT.



TALKING lightly on a thousand matters, the two young men sauntered through

the streets; they were now in that quarter which was filled with the gayest

shops, their open interiors all and each radiant with the gaudy yet

harmonious colors of frescoes, inconceivably varied in fancy and design. 

The sparkling fountains, that at every vista threw upwards their grateful

spray in the summer air; the crowd of passengers, or rather loiterers,

mostly clad in robes of the Tyrian dye; the gay groups collected round each

more attractive shop; the slaves passing to and fro with buckets of bronze,

cast in the most graceful shapes, and borne upon their heads; the country

girls stationed at frequent intervals with baskets of blushing fruit, and

flowers more alluring to the ancient Italians than to their descendants

(with whom, indeed, "latet anguis in herba," a disease seems lurking in

every violet and rose); the numerous haunts which fulfilled with that idle

people the office of cafes and clubs at this day; the shops, where on

shelves of marble were ranged the vases of wine and oil, and before whose

thresholds, seats, protected from the sun by a purple awning, invited the

weary to rest and the indolent to lounge--made a scene of such glowing and

vivacious excitement, as might well give the Athenian spirit of Glaucus an

excuse for its susceptibility to joy.



'Talk to me no more of Rome,' said he to Clodius.  'Pleasure is too stately

and ponderous in those mighty walls: even in the precincts of the

court--even in the Golden House of Nero, and the incipient glories of the

palace of Titus, there is a certain dulness of magnificence--the eye

aches--the spirit is wearied; besides, my Clodius, we are discontented when

we compare the enormous luxury and wealth of others with the mediocrity of

our own state.  But here we surrender ourselves easily to pleasure, and we

have the brilliancy of luxury without the lassitude of its pomp.'



'It was from that feeling that you chose your summer retreat at Pompeii?'



'It was.  I prefer it to Baiae: I grant the charms of the latter, but I love

not the pedants who resort there, and who seem to weigh out their pleasures

by the drachm.'



'Yet you are fond of the learned, too; and as for poetry, why, your house is

literally eloquent with AEschylus and Homer, the epic and the drama.'



'Yes, but those Romans who mimic my Athenian ancestors do everything so

heavily.  Even in the chase they make their slaves carry Plato with them;

and whenever the boar is lost, out they take their books and their papyrus,

in order not to lose their time too. When the dancing-girls swim before them

in all the blandishment of Persian manners, some drone of a freedman, with a

face of stone, reads them a section of Cicero "De Officiis".  Unskilful

pharmacists! pleasure and study are not elements to be thus mixed together,

they must be enjoyed separately: the Romans lose both by this pragmatical

affectation of refinement, and prove that they have no souls for either. 

Oh, my Clodius, how little your countrymen know of the true versatility of a

Pericles, of the true witcheries of an Aspasia!  It was but the other day

that I paid a visit to Pliny: he was sitting in his summer-house writing,

while an unfortunate slave played on the tibia.  His nephew (oh! whip me

such philosophical coxcombs!) was reading Thucydides' description of the

plague, and nodding his conceited little head in time to the music, while

his lips were repeating all the loathsome details of that terrible

delineation. The puppy saw nothing incongruous in learning at the same time

a ditty of love and a description of the plague.'



'Why, they are much the same thing,' said Clodius.



'So I told him, in excuse for his coxcombry--but my youth stared me

rebukingly in the face, without taking the jest, and answered, that it was

only the insensate ear that the music pleased, whereas the book (the

description of the plague, mind you!) elevated the heart.  "Ah!" quoth the

fat uncle, wheezing, "my boy is quite an Athenian, always mixing the utile

with the dulce." O Minerva, how I laughed in my sleeve!  While I was there,

they came to tell the boy-sophist that his favorite freedman was just dead

of a fever.  "Inexorable death!" cried he; "get me my Horace.  How

beautifully the sweet poet consoles us for these misfortunes!"  Oh, can

these men love, my Clodius?  Scarcely even with the senses.  How rarely a

Roman has a heart!  He is but the mechanism of genius--he wants its bones

and flesh.'



Though Clodius was secretly a little sore at these remarks on his

countrymen, he affected to sympathize with his friend, partly because he was

by nature a parasite, and partly because it was the fashion among the

dissolute young Romans to affect a little contempt for the very birth which,

in reality, made them so arrogant; it was the mode to imitate the Greeks,

and yet to laugh at their own clumsy imitation.



Thus conversing, their steps were arrested by a crowd gathered round an open

space where three streets met; and, just where the porticoes of a light and

graceful temple threw their shade, there stood a young girl, with a

flower-basket on her right arm, and a small three-stringed instrument of

music in the left hand, to whose low and soft tones she was modulating a

wild and half-barbaric air.  At every pause in the music she gracefully

waved her flower-basket round, inviting the loiterers to buy; and many a

sesterce was showered into the basket, either in compliment to the music or

in compassion to the songstress--for she was blind.



'It is my poor Thessalian,' said Glaucus, stopping; 'I have not seen her

since my return to Pompeii.  Hush! her voice is sweet; let us listen.'



          THE BLIND FLOWER-GIRL'S SONG



                    I.



         Buy my flowers--O buy--I pray!

           The blind girl comes from afar;

         If the earth be as fair as I hear them say,

           These flowers her children are!

         Do they her beauty keep?

           They are fresh from her lap, I know;

         For I caught them fast asleep

           In her arms an hour ago.

           With the air which is her breath--

          Her soft and delicate breath--

          Over them murmuring low!



        On their lips her sweet kiss lingers yet,

        And their cheeks with her tender tears are wet.

        For she weeps--that gentle mother weeps--

       (As morn and night her watch she keeps,

        With a yearning heart and a passionate care)

        To see the young things grow so fair;

           She weeps--for love she weeps;

           And the dews are the tears she weeps

           From the well of a mother's love!



                    II.



         Ye have a world of light,

           Where love in the loved rejoices;

         But the blind girl's home is the House of Night,

           And its beings are empty voices.



           As one in the realm below,

           I stand by the streams of woe!

           I hear the vain shadows glide,

           I feel their soft breath at my side.

             And I thirst the loved forms to see,

           And I stretch my fond arms around,

           And I catch but a shapeless sound,

           For the living are ghosts to me.



            Come buy--come buy?--

          Hark! how the sweet things sigh

           For they have a voice like ours),

           `The breath of the blind girl closes

           The leaves of the saddening roses--

          We are tender, we sons of light,

           We shrink from this child of night;

           From the grasp of the blind girl free us--

          We yearn for the eyes that see us--

         We are for night too gay,

           In your eyes we behold the day--

             O buy--O buy the flowers!'



'I must have yon bunch of violets, sweet Nydia,' said Glaucus, pressing

through the crowd, and dropping a handful of small coins into the basket;

'your voice is more charming than ever.'



The blind girl started forward as she heard the Athenian's voice; then as

suddenly paused, while the blood rushed violently over neck, cheek, and

temples.



'So you are returned!' said she, in a low voice; and then repeated half to

herself, 'Glaucus is returned!'



'Yes, child, I have not been at Pompeii above a few days.  My garden wants

your care, as before; you will visit it, I trust, to-morrow.  And mind, no

garlands at my house shall be woven by any hands but those of the pretty

Nydia.'



Nydia smiled joyously, but did not answer; and Glaucus, placing in his

breast the violets he had selected, turned gaily and carelessly from the

crowd.



'So she is a sort of client of yours, this child?' said Clodius.



'Ay--does she not sing prettily?  She interests me, the poor slave! Besides,

she is from the land of the Gods' hill--Olympus frowned upon her cradle--she

is of Thessaly.'



'The witches' country.'



'True: but for my part I find every woman a witch; and at Pompeii, by Venus!

the very air seems to have taken a love-philtre, so handsome does every face

without a beard seem in my eyes.'



'And lo! one of the handsomest in Pompeii, old Diomed's daughter, the rich

Julia!' said Clodius, as a young lady, her face covered by her veil, and

attended by two female slaves, approached them, in her way to the baths.



'Fair Julia, we salute thee!' said Clodius.



Julia partly raised her veil, so as with some coquetry to display a bold

Roman profile, a full dark bright eye, and a cheek over whose natural olive

art shed a fairer and softer rose.



'And Glaucus, too, is returned!' said she, glancing meaningly at the

Athenian.  'Has he forgotten,' she added, in a half-whisper, 'his friends of

the last year?'



'Beautiful Julia! even Lethe itself, if it disappear in one part of the

earth, rises again in another.  Jupiter does not allow us ever to forget for

more than a moment: but Venus, more harsh still, vouchsafes not even a

moment's oblivion.'



'Glaucus is never at a loss for fair words.'



'Who is, when the object of them is so fair?'



'We shall see you both at my father's villa soon,' said Julia, turning to

Clodius.



'We will mark the day in which we visit you with a white stone,' answered

the gamester.



Julia dropped her veil, but slowly, so that her last glance rested on the

Athenian with affected timidity and real boldness; the glance bespoke

tenderness and reproach.



The friends passed on.



'Julia is certainly handsome,' said Glaucus.



'And last year you would have made that confession in a warmer tone.'



'True; I was dazzled at the first sight, and mistook for a gem that which

was but an artful imitation.'



'Nay,' returned Clodius, 'all women are the same at heart.  Happy he who

weds a handsome face and a large dower.  What more can he desire?'



Glaucus sighed.



They were now in a street less crowded than the rest, at the end of which

they beheld that broad and most lovely sea, which upon those delicious

coasts seems to have renounced its prerogative of terror--so soft are the

crisping winds that hover around its bosom, so glowing and so various are

the hues which it takes from the rosy clouds, so fragrant are the perfumes

which the breezes from the land scatter over its depths.  From such a sea

might you well believe that Aphrodite rose to take the empire of the earth.



'It is still early for the bath,' said the Greek, who was the creature of

every poetical impulse; 'let us wander from the crowded city, and look upon

the sea while the noon yet laughs along its billows.'



'With all my heart,' said Clodius; 'and the bay, too, is always the most

animated part of the city.'



Pompeii was the miniature of the civilization of that age. Within the narrow

compass of its walls was contained, as it were, a specimen of every gift

which luxury offered to power.  In its minute but glittering shops, its tiny

palaces, its baths, its forum, its theatre, its circus--in the energy yet

corruption, in the refinement yet the vice, of its people, you beheld a

model of the whole empire. It was a toy, a plaything, a showbox, in which

the gods seemed pleased to keep the representation of the great monarchy of

earth, and which they afterwards hid from time, to give to the wonder of

posterity--the moral of the maxim, that under the sun there is nothing new.



Crowded in the glassy bay were the vessels of commerce and the gilded

galleys for the pleasures of the rich citizens.  The boats of the fishermen

glided rapidly to and fro; and afar off you saw the tall masts of the fleet

under the command of Pliny.  Upon the shore sat a Sicilian who, with

vehement gestures and flexile features, was narrating to a group of

fishermen and peasants a strange tale of shipwrecked mariners and friendly

dolphins--just as at this day, in the modern neighborhood, you may hear upon

the Mole of Naples.



Drawing his comrade from the crowd, the Greek bent his steps towards a

solitary part of the beach, and the two friends, seated on a small crag

which rose amidst the smooth pebbles, inhaled the voluptuous and cooling

breeze, which dancing over the waters, kept music with its invisible feet. 

There was, perhaps, something in the scene that invited them to silence and

reverie.  Clodius, shading his eyes from the burning sky, was calculating

the gains of the last week; and the Greek, leaning upon his hand, and

shrinking not from that sun--his nation's tutelary deity--with whose fluent

light of poesy, and joy, and love, his own veins were filled, gazed upon the

broad expanse, and envied, perhaps, every wind that bent its pinions towards

the shores of Greece.



'Tell me, Clodius,' said the Greek at last, 'hast thou ever been in love?'



'Yes, very often.'



'He who has loved often,' answered Glaucus, 'has loved never. There is but

one Eros, though there are many counterfeits of him.'



'The counterfeits are not bad little gods, upon the whole,' answered

Clodius.



'I agree with you,' returned the Greek.  'I adore even the shadow of Love;

but I adore himself yet more.'



'Art thou, then, soberly and honestly in love?  Hast thou that feeling which

the poets describe--a feeling that makes us neglect our suppers, forswear

the theatre, and write elegies?  I should never have thought it.  You

dissemble well.'



'I am not far gone enough for that,' returned Glaucus, smiling, 'or rather I

say with Tibullus--



 He whom love rules, where'er his path may be,

 Walks safe and sacred.



In fact, I am not in love; but I could be if there were but occasion to see

the object.  Eros would light his torch, but the priests have given him no

oil.'



'Shall I guess the object?--Is it not Diomed's daughter?  She adores you,

and does not affect to conceal it; and, by Hercules, I say again and again,

she is both handsome and rich.  She will bind the door-posts of her husband

with golden fillets.'



'No, I do not desire to sell myself.  Diomed's daughter is handsome, I

grant: and at one time, had she not been the grandchild of a freedman, I

might have...  Yet no--she carries all her beauty in her face; her manners

are not maiden-like, and her mind knows no culture save that of pleasure.'



'You are ungrateful.  Tell me, then, who is the fortunate virgin?'



'You shall hear, my Clodius.  Several months ago I was sojourning at

Neapolis, a city utterly to my own heart, for it still retains the manners

and stamp of its Grecian origin--and it yet merits the name of Parthenope,

from its delicious air and its beautiful shores. One day I entered the

temple of Minerva, to offer up my prayers, not for myself more than for the

city on which Pallas smiles no longer. The temple was empty and deserted. 

The recollections of Athens crowded fast and meltingly upon me: imagining

myself still alone in the temple, and absorbed in the earnestness of my

devotion, my prayer gushed from my heart to my lips, and I wept as I prayed. 

I was startled in the midst of my devotions, however, by a deep sigh; I

turned suddenly round, and just behind me was a female.  She had raised her

veil also in prayer: and when our eyes met, methought a celestial ray shot

from those dark and smiling orbs at once into my soul.  Never, my Clodius,

have I seen mortal face more exquisitely molded: a certain melancholy

softened and yet elevated its expression: that unutterable something, which

springs from the soul, and which our sculptors have imparted to the aspect

of Psyche, gave her beauty I know not what of divine and noble; tears were

rolling down her eyes.  I guessed at once that she was also of Athenian

lineage; and that in my prayer for Athens her heart had responded to mine. 

I spoke to her, though with a faltering voice--"Art thou not, too,

Athenian?" said I, "O beautiful virgin!" At the sound of my voice she

blushed, and half drew her veil across her face.--"My forefathers' ashes,"

said she, "repose by the waters of Ilissus: my birth is of Neapolis; but my

heart, as my lineage, is Athenian."--"Let us, then," said I, "make our

offerings together": and, as the priest now appeared, we stood side by side,

while we followed the priest in his ceremonial prayer; together we touched

the knees of the goddess--together we laid our olive garlands on the altar. 

I felt a strange emotion of almost sacred tenderness at this companionship. 

We, strangers from a far and fallen land, stood together and alone in that

temple of our country's deity: was it not natural that my heart should yearn

to my countrywoman, for so I might surely call her?  I felt as if I had

known her for years; and that simple rite seemed, as by a miracle, to

operate on the sympathies and ties of time.  Silently we left the temple,

and I was about to ask her where she dwelt, and if I might be permitted to

visit her, when a youth, in whose features there was some kindred

resemblance to her own, and who stood upon the steps of the fane, took her

by the hand.  She turned round and bade me farewell.  The crowd separated

us: I saw her no more.  On reaching my home I found letters, which obliged

me to set out for Athens, for my relations threatened me with litigation

concerning my inheritance. When that suit was happily over, I repaired once

more to Neapolis; I instituted inquiries throughout the whole city, I could

discover no clue of my lost countrywoman, and, hoping to lose in gaiety all

remembrance of that beautiful apparition, I hastened to plunge myself amidst

the luxuries of Pompeii.  This is all my history.  I do not love; but I

remember and regret.'



As Clodius was about to reply, a slow and stately step approached them, and

at the sound it made amongst the pebbles, each turned, and each recognized

the new-comer.



It was a man who had scarcely reached his fortieth year, of tall stature,

and of a thin but nervous and sinewy frame.  His skin, dark and bronzed,

betrayed his Eastern origin; and his features had something Greek in their

outline (especially in the chin, the lip, and the brow), save that the nose

was somewhat raised and aquiline; and the bones, hard and visible, forbade

that fleshy and waving contour which on the Grecian physiognomy preserved

even in manhood the round and beautiful curves of youth.  His eyes, large

and black as the deepest night, shone with no varying and uncertain lustre. 

A deep, thoughtful, and half-melancholy calm seemed unalterably fixed in

their majestic and commanding gaze.  His step and mien were peculiarly

sedate and lofty, and something foreign in the fashion and the sober hues of

his sweeping garments added to the impressive effect of his quiet

countenance and stately form.  Each of the young men, in saluting the

new-comer, made mechanically, and with care to conceal it from him, a slight

gesture or sign with their fingers; for Arbaces, the Egyptian, was supposed

to possess the fatal gift of the evil eye.



'The scene must, indeed, be beautiful,' said Arbaces, with a cold though

courteous smile, 'which draws the gay Clodius, and Glaucus the all admired,

from the crowded thoroughfares of the city.'



'Is Nature ordinarily so unattractive?' asked the Greek.



'To the dissipated--yes.'



'An austere reply, but scarcely a wise one.  Pleasure delights in contrasts;

it is from dissipation that we learn to enjoy solitude, and from solitude

dissipation.'



'So think the young philosophers of the Garden,' replied the Egyptian; 'they

mistake lassitude for meditation, and imagine that, because they are sated

with others, they know the delight of loneliness.  But not in such jaded

bosoms can Nature awaken that enthusiasm which alone draws from her chaste

reserve all her unspeakable beauty: she demands from you, not the exhaustion

of passion, but all that fervor, from which you only seek, in adoring her, a

release.  When, young Athenian, the moon revealed herself in visions of

light to Endymion, it was after a day passed, not amongst the feverish

haunts of men, but on the still mountains and in the solitary valleys of the

hunter.'



'Beautiful simile!' cried Glaucus; 'most unjust application! Exhaustion!

that word is for age, not youth.  By me, at least, one moment of satiety has

never been known!'



Again the Egyptian smiled, but his smile was cold and blighting, and even

the unimaginative Clodius froze beneath its light.  He did not, however,

reply to the passionate exclamation of Glaucus; but, after a pause, he said,

in a soft and melancholy voice:



'After all, you do right to enjoy the hour while it smiles for you; the rose

soon withers, the perfume soon exhales.  And we, O Glaucus! strangers in the

land and far from our fathers' ashes, what is there left for us but pleasure

or regret!--for you the first, perhaps for me the last.'



The bright eyes of the Greek were suddenly suffused with tears. 'Ah, speak

not, Arbaces,' he cried--'speak not of our ancestors.  Let us forget that

there were ever other liberties than those of Rome!  And Glory!--oh, vainly

would we call her ghost from the fields of Marathon and Thermopylae!'



'Thy heart rebukes thee while thou speakest,' said the Egyptian; 'and in thy

gaieties this night, thou wilt be more mindful of Leoena than of Lais. 

Vale!'



Thus saying, he gathered his robe around him, and slowly swept away.



'I breathe more freely,' said Clodius.  'Imitating the Egyptians, we

sometimes introduce a skeleton at our feasts.  In truth, the presence of

such an Egyptian as yon gliding shadow were spectre enough to sour the

richest grape of the Falernian.'



'Strange man! said Glaucus, musingly; 'yet dead though he seem to pleasure,

and cold to the objects of the world, scandal belies him, or his house and

his heart could tell a different tale.'



'Ah! there are whispers of other orgies than those of Osiris in his gloomy

mansion.  He is rich, too, they say.  Can we not get him amongst us, and

teach him the charms of dice?  Pleasure of pleasures! hot fever of hope and

fear! inexpressible unjaded passion! how fiercely beautiful thou art, O

Gaming!'



'Inspired--inspired!' cried Glaucus, laughing; 'the oracle speaks poetry in

Clodius.  What miracle next!'







Chapter III



PARENTAGE OF GLAUCUS.  DESCRIPTION OF THE HOUSES OF POMPEII. CLASSIC REVEL.



HEAVEN had given to Glaucus every blessing but one: it had given him beauty,

health, fortune, genius, illustrious descent, a heart of fire, a mind of

poetry; but it had denied him the heritage of freedom. He was born in

Athens, the subject of Rome.  Succeeding early to an ample inheritance, he

had indulged that inclination for travel so natural to the young, and had

drunk deep of the intoxicating draught of pleasure amidst the gorgeous

luxuries of the imperial court.



He was an Alcibiades without ambition.  He was what a man of imagination,

youth, fortune, and talents, readily becomes when you deprive him of the

inspiration of glory.  His house at Rome was the theme of the debauchees,

but also of the lovers of art; and the sculptors of Greece delighted to task

their skill in adorning the porticoes and exedrae of an Athenian.  His

retreat in Pompeii--alas! the colors are faded now, the walls stripped of

their paintings!--its main beauty, its elaborate finish of grace and

ornament, is gone; yet when first given once more to the day, what eulogies,

what wonder, did its minute and glowing decorations create--its

paintings--its mosaics!  Passionately enamoured of poetry and the drama,

which recalled to Glaucus the wit and the heroism of his race, that fairy

mansion was adorned with representations of AEschylus and Homer.  And

antiquaries, who resolve taste to a trade, have turned the patron to the

professor, and still (though the error is now acknowledged) they style in

custom, as they first named in mistake, the disburied house of the Athenian

Glaucus 'THE HOUSE OF THE DRAMATIC POET'.



Previous to our description of this house, it may be as well to convey to

the reader a general notion of the houses of Pompeii, which he will find to

resemble strongly the plans of Vitruvius; but with all those differences in

detail, of caprice and taste, which being natural to mankind, have always

puzzled antiquaries.  We shall endeavor to make this description as clear

and unpedantic as possible.



You enter then, usually, by a small entrance-passage (called cestibulum),

into a hall, sometimes with (but more frequently without) the ornament of

columns; around three sides of this hall are doors communicating with

several bedchambers (among which is the porter's), the best of these being

usually appropriated to country visitors.  At the extremity of the hall, on

either side to the right and left, if the house is large, there are two

small recesses, rather than chambers, generally devoted to the ladies of the

mansion; and in the centre of the tessellated pavement of the hall is

invariably a square, shallow reservoir for rain water (classically termed

impluvium), which was admitted by an aperture in the roof above; the said

aperture being covered at will by an awning.  Near this impluvium, which had

a peculiar sanctity in the eyes of the ancients, were sometimes (but at

Pompeii more rarely than at Rome) placed images of the household gods--the

hospitable hearth, often mentioned by the Roman poets, and consecrated to

the Lares, was at Pompeii almost invariably formed by a movable brazier;

while in some corner, often the most ostentatious place, was deposited a

huge wooden chest, ornamented and strengthened by bands of bronze or iron,

and secured by strong hooks upon a stone pedestal so firmly as to defy the

attempts of any robber to detach it from its position. It is supposed that

this chest was the money-box, or coffer, of the master of the house; though

as no money has been found in any of the chests discovered at Pompeii, it is

probable that it was sometimes rather designed for ornament than use.



In this hall (or atrium, to speak classically) the clients and visitors of

inferior rank were usually received.  In the houses of the more

'respectable', an atriensis, or slave peculiarly devoted to the service of

the hall, was invariably retained, and his rank among his fellow-slaves was

high and important.  The reservoir in the centre must have been rather a

dangerous ornament, but the centre of the hall was like the grass-plot of a

college, and interdicted to the passers to and fro, who found ample space in

the margin.  Right opposite the entrance, at the other end of the hall, was

an apartment (tablinum), in which the pavement was usually adorned with rich

mosaics, and the walls covered with elaborate paintings.  Here were usually

kept the records of the family, or those of any public office that had been

filled by the owner: on one side of this saloon, if we may so call it, was

often a dining-room, or triclinium; on the other side, perhaps, what we

should now term a cabinet of gems, containing whatever curiosities were

deemed most rare and costly; and invariably a small passage for the slaves

to cross to the further parts of the house, without passing the apartments

thus mentioned.  These rooms all opened on a square or oblong colonnade,

technically termed peristyle.  If the house was small, its boundary ceased

with this colonnade; and in that case its centre, however diminutive, was

ordinarily appropriated to the purpose of a garden, and adorned with vases

of flowers, placed upon pedestals: while, under the colonnade, to the right

and left, were doors admitting to bedrooms, to a second triclinium, or

eating-room (for the ancients generally appropriated two rooms at least to

that purpose, one for summer, and one for winter--or, perhaps, one for

ordinary, the other for festive, occasions); and if the owner affected

letters, a cabinet, dignified by the name of library--for a very small room

was sufficient to contain the few rolls of papyrus which the ancients deemed

a notable collection of books.



At the end of the peristyle was generally the kitchen.  Supposing the house

was large, it did not end with the peristyle, and the centre thereof was not

in that case a garden, but might be, perhaps, adorned with a fountain, or

basin for fish; and at its end, exactly opposite to the tablinum, was

generally another eating-room, on either side of which were bedrooms, and,

perhaps, a picture-saloon, or pinacotheca.  These apartments communicated

again with a square or oblong space, usually adorned on three sides with a

colonnade like the peristyle, and very much resembling the peristyle, only

usually longer.  This was the proper viridarium, or garden, being commonly

adorned with a fountain, or statues, and a profusion of gay flowers: at its

extreme end was the gardener's house; on either side, beneath the colonnade,

were sometimes, if the size of the family required it, additional rooms.



At Pompeii, a second or third story was rarely of importance, being built

only above a small part of the house, and containing rooms for the slaves;

differing in this respect from the more magnificent edifices of Rome, which

generally contained the principal eating-room (or caenaculum) on the second

floor.  The apartments themselves were ordinarily of small size; for in

those delightful climes they received any extraordinary number of visitors

in the peristyle (or portico), the hall, or the garden; and even their

banquet-rooms, however elaborately adorned and carefully selected in point

of aspect, were of diminutive proportions; for the intellectual ancients,

being fond of society, not of crowds, rarely feasted more than nine at a

time, so that large dinner-rooms were not so necessary with them as with us. 

But the suite of rooms seen at once from the entrance, must have had a very

imposing effect: you beheld at once the hall richly paved and painted--the

tablinum--the graceful peristyle, and (if the house extended farther) the

opposite banquet-room and the garden, which closed the view with some

gushing fount or marble statue.



The reader will now have a tolerable notion of the Pompeian houses, which

resembled in some respects the Grecian, but mostly the Roman fashion of

domestic architecture.  In almost every house there is some difference in

detail from the rest, but the principal outline is the same in all.  In all

you find the hall, the tablinum, and the peristyle, communicating with each

other; in all you find the walls richly painted; and all the evidence of a

people fond of the refining elegancies of life.  The purity of the taste of

the Pompeians in decoration is, however, questionable: they were fond of the

gaudiest colors, of fantastic designs; they often painted the lower half of

their columns a bright red, leaving the rest uncolored; and where the garden

was small, its wall was frequently tinted to deceive the eye as to its

extent, imitating trees, birds, temples, etc., in perspective--a

meretricious delusion which the graceful pedantry of Pliny himself adopted,

with a complacent pride in its ingenuity.



But the house of Glaucus was at once one of the smallest, and yet one of the

most adorned and finished of all the private mansions of Pompeii: it would

be a model at this day for the house of 'a single man in Mayfair'--the envy

and despair of the coelibian purchasers of buhl and marquetry.



You enter by a long and narrow vestibule, on the floor of which is the image

of a dog in mosaic, with the well-known 'Cave canem'--or 'Beware the dog'. 

On either side is a chamber of some size; for the interior part of the house

not being large enough to contain the two great divisions of private and

public apartments, these two rooms were set apart for the reception of

visitors who neither by rank nor familiarity were entitled to admission in

the penetralia of the mansion.



Advancing up the vestibule you enter an atrium, that when first discovered

was rich in paintings, which in point of expression would scarcely disgrace

a Rafaele.  You may see them now transplanted to the Neapolitan Museum: they

are still the admiration of connoisseurs--they depict the parting of

Achilles and Briseis.  Who does not acknowledge the force, the vigour, the

beauty, employed in delineating the forms and faces of Achilles and the

immortal slave!



On one side the atrium, a small staircase admitted to the apartments for the

slaves on the second floor; there also were two or three small bedrooms, the

walls of which portrayed the rape of Europa, the battle of the Amazons, etc.



You now enter the tablinum, across which, at either end, hung rich draperies

of Tyrian purple, half withdrawn.  On the walls was depicted a poet reading

his verses to his friends; and in the pavement was inserted a small and most

exquisite mosaic, typical of the instructions given by the director of the

stage to his comedians.



You passed through this saloon and entered the peristyle; and here (as I

have said before was usually the case with the smaller houses of Pompeii)

the mansion ended.  From each of the seven columns that adorned this court

hung festoons of garlands: the centre, supplying the place of a garden,

bloomed with the rarest flowers placed in vases of white marble, that were

supported on pedestals.  At the left hand of this small garden was a

diminutive fane, resembling one of those small chapels placed at the side of

roads in Catholic countries, and dedicated to the Penates; before it stood a

bronzed tripod: to the left of the colonnade were two small cubicula, or

bedrooms; to the right was the triclinium, in which the guests were now

assembled.



This room is usually termed by the antiquaries of Naples 'The Chamber of

Leda'; and in the beautiful work of Sir William Gell, the reader will find

an engraving from that most delicate and graceful painting of Leda

presenting her newborn to her husband, from which the room derives its name. 

This charming apartment opened upon the fragrant garden.  Round the table of

citrean wood, highly polished and delicately wrought with silver arabesques,

were placed the three couches, which were yet more common at Pompeii than

the semicircular seat that had grown lately into fashion at Rome: and on

these couches of bronze, studded with richer metals, were laid thick

quiltings covered with elaborate broidery, and yielding luxuriously to the

pressure.



'Well, I must own,' said the aedile Pansa, 'that your house, though scarcely

larger than a case for one's fibulae, is a gem of its kind.  How beautifully

painted is that parting of Achilles and Briseis!--what a style!--what

heads!--what a-hem!'



'Praise from Pansa is indeed valuable on such subjects,' said Clodius,

gravely.  'Why, the paintings on his walls!--Ah! there is, indeed, the hand

of a Zeuxis!'



'You flatter me, my Clodius; indeed you do,' quoth the aedile, who was

celebrated through Pompeii for having the worst paintings in the world; for

he was patriotic, and patronized none but Pompeians.  'You flatter me; but

there is something pretty--AEdepol, yes--in the colors, to say nothing of

the design--and then for the kitchen, my friends--ah! that was all my

fancy.'



'What is the design?' said Glaucus.  'I have not yet seen your kitchen,

though I have often witnessed the excellence of its cheer.'



'A cook, my Athenian--a cook sacrificing the trophies of his skill on the

altar of Vesta, with a beautiful muraena (taken from the life) on a spit at

a distance--there is some invention there!'



At that instant the slaves appeared, bearing a tray covered with the first

preparative initia of the feast.  Amidst delicious figs, fresh herbs strewed

with snow, anchovies, and eggs, were ranged small cups of diluted wine

sparingly mixed with honey.  As these were placed on the table, young slaves

bore round to each of the five guests (for there were no more) the silver

basin of perfumed water, and napkins edged with a purple fringe.  But the

aedile ostentatiously drew forth his own napkin, which was not, indeed, of

so fine a linen, but in which the fringe was twice as broad, and wiped his

hands with the parade of a man who felt he was calling for admiration.



'A splendid nappa that of yours,' said Clodius; 'why, the fringe is as broad

as a girdle!'



'A trifle, my Clodius: a trifle!  They tell me this stripe is the latest

fashion at Rome; but Glaucus attends to these things more than I.'



'Be propitious, O Bacchus!' said Glaucus, inclining reverentially to a

beautiful image of the god placed in the centre of the table, at the corners

of which stood the Lares and the salt-holders.  The guests followed the

prayer, and then, sprinkling the wine on the table, they performed the

wonted libation.



This over, the convivialists reclined themselves on the couches, and the

business of the hour commenced.



'May this cup be my last!' said the young Sallust, as the table, cleared of

its first stimulants, was now loaded with the substantial part of the

entertainment, and the ministering slave poured forth to him a brimming

cyathus--'May this cup be my last, but it is the best wine I have drunk at

Pompeii!'



'Bring hither the amphora,' said Glaucus, 'and read its date and its

character.'



The slave hastened to inform the party that the scroll fastened to the cork

betokened its birth from Chios, and its age a ripe fifty years.



'How deliciously the snow has cooled it!' said Pansa.  'It is just enough.'



'It is like the experience of a man who has cooled his pleasures

sufficiently to give them a double zest,' exclaimed Sallust.



'It is like a woman's "No",' added Glaucus: 'it cools, but to inflame the

more.'



'When is our next wild-beast fight?' said Clodius to Pansa.



'It stands fixed for the ninth ide of August,' answered Pansa: 'on the day

after the Vulcanalia--we have a most lovely young lion for the occasion.'



'Whom shall we get for him to eat?' asked Clodius.  'Alas! there is a great

scarcity of criminals.  You must positively find some innocent or other to

condemn to the lion, Pansa!'



'Indeed I have thought very seriously about it of late,' replied the aedile,

gravely.  'It was a most infamous law that which forbade us to send our own

slaves to the wild beasts.  Not to let us do what we like with our own,

that's what I call an infringement on property itself.'



'Not so in the good old days of the Republic,' sighed Sallust.



'And then this pretended mercy to the slaves is such a disappointment to the

poor people.  How they do love to see a good tough battle between a man and

a lion; and all this innocent pleasure they may lose (if the gods don't send

us a good criminal soon) from this cursed law!'



'What can be worse policy,' said Clodius, sententiously, 'than to interfere

with the manly amusements of the people?'



'Well thank Jupiter and the Fates! we have no Nero at present,' said

Sallust.



'He was, indeed, a tyrant; he shut up our amphitheatre for ten years.'



'I wonder it did not create a rebellion,' said Sallust.



'It very nearly did,' returned Pansa, with his mouth full of wild boar.



Here the conversation was interrupted for a moment by a flourish of flutes,

and two slaves entered with a single dish.



'Ah, what delicacy hast thou in store for us now, my Glaucus?' cried the

young Sallust, with sparkling eyes.



Sallust was only twenty-four, but he had no pleasure in life like

eating--perhaps he had exhausted all the others: yet had he some talent, and

an excellent heart--as far as it went.



'I know its face, by Pollux!' cried Pansa.  'It is an Ambracian Kid.  Ho

(snapping his fingers, a usual signal to the slaves) we must prepare a new

libation in honour to the new-comer.'



'I had hoped said Glaucus, in a melancholy tone, 'to have procured you some

oysters from Britain; but the winds that were so cruel to Caesar have forbid

us the oysters.'



'Are they in truth so delicious?' asked Lepidus, loosening to a yet more

luxurious ease his ungirdled tunic.



'Why, in truth, I suspect it is the distance that gives the flavor; they

want the richness of the Brundusium oyster.  But, at Rome, no supper is

complete without them.'



'The poor Britons!  There is some good in them after all,' said Sallust. 

'They produce an oyster.'



'I wish they would produce us a gladiator,' said the aedile, whose provident

mind was musing over the wants of the amphitheatre.



'By Pallas!' cried Glaucus, as his favorite slave crowned his streaming

locks with a new chaplet, 'I love these wild spectacles well enough when

beast fights beast; but when a man, one with bones and blood like ours, is

coldly put on the arena, and torn limb from limb, the interest is too

horrid: I sicken--I gasp for breath--I long to rush and defend him.  The

yells of the populace seem to me more dire than the voices of the Furies

chasing Orestes.  I rejoice that there is so little chance of that bloody

exhibition for our next show!'



The aedile shrugged his shoulders.  The young Sallust, who was thought the

best-natured man in Pompeii, stared in surprise.  The graceful Lepidus, who

rarely spoke for fear of disturbing his features, ejaculated 'Hercle!' The

parasite Clodius muttered 'AEdepol!' and the sixth banqueter, who was the

umbra of Clodius, and whose duty it was to echo his richer friend, when he

could not praise him--the parasite of a parasite--muttered also 'AEdepol!'



'Well, you Italians are used to these spectacles; we Greeks are more

merciful.  Ah, shade of Pindar!--the rapture of a true Grecian game--the

emulation of man against man--the generous strife--the half-mournful

triumph--so proud to contend with a noble foe, so sad to see him overcome! 

But ye understand me not.'



'The kid is excellent,' said Sallust.  The slave, whose duty it was to

carve, and who valued himself on his science, had just performed that office

on the kid to the sound of music, his knife keeping time, beginning with a

low tenor and accomplishing the arduous feat amidst a magnificent diapason.



'Your cook is, of course, from Sicily?' said Pansa.



'Yes, of Syracuse.'



'I will play you for him,' said Clodius.  'We will have a game between the

courses.'



'Better that sort of game, certainly, than a beast fight; but I cannot stake

my Sicilian--you have nothing so precious to stake me in return.'



'My Phillida--my beautiful dancing-girl!'



'I never buy women,' said the Greek, carelessly rearranging his chaplet.



The musicians, who were stationed in the portico without, had commenced

their office with the kid; they now directed the melody into a more soft, a

more gay, yet it may be a more intellectual strain; and they chanted that

song of Horace beginning 'Persicos odi', etc., so impossible to translate,

and which they imagined applicable to a feast that, effeminate as it seems

to us, was simple enough for the gorgeous revelry of the time.  We are

witnessing the domestic, and not the princely feast--the entertainment of a

gentleman, not an emperor or a senator.



'Ah, good old Horace!' said Sallust, compassionately; 'he sang well of

feasts and girls, but not like our modern poets.'



'The immortal Fulvius, for instance,' said Clodius.



'Ah, Fulvius, the immortal!' said the umbra.



'And Spuraena; and Caius Mutius, who wrote three epics in a year--could

Horace do that, or Virgil either said Lepidus.  'Those old poets all fell

into the mistake of copying sculpture instead of painting.  Simplicity and

repose--that was their notion; but we moderns have fire, and passion, and

energy--we never sleep, we imitate the colors of painting, its life, and its

action.  Immortal Fulvius!'



'By the way,' said Sallust, 'have you seen the new ode by Spuraena, in

honour of our Egyptian Isis?  It is magnificent--the true religious fervor.'



'Isis seems a favorite divinity at Pompeii,' said Glaucus.



'Yes!' said Pansa, 'she is exceedingly in repute just at this moment; her

statue has been uttering the most remarkable oracles.  I am not

superstitious, but I must confess that she has more than once assisted me

materially in my magistracy with her advice.  Her priests are so pious, too!

none of your gay, none of your proud, ministers of Jupiter and Fortune: they

walk barefoot, eat no meat, and pass the greater part of the night in

solitary devotion!'



'An example to our other priesthoods, indeed!--Jupiter's temple wants

reforming sadly,' said Lepidus, who was a great reformer for all but

himself.



'They say that Arbaces the Egyptian has imparted some most solemn mysteries

to the priests of Isis,' observed Sallust.  'He boasts his descent from the

race of Rameses, and declares that in his family the secrets of remotest

antiquity are treasured.'



'He certainly possesses the gift of the evil eye,' said Clodius. 'If I ever

come upon that Medusa front without the previous charm, I am sure to lose a

favorite horse, or throw the canes nine times running.'



'The last would be indeed a miracle!' said Sallust, gravely.



'How mean you, Sallust?' returned the gamester, with a flushed brow.



'I mean, what you would leave me if I played often with you; and that

is--nothing.'



Clodius answered only by a smile of disdain.



'If Arbaces were not so rich,' said Pansa, with a stately air, 'I should

stretch my authority a little, and inquire into the truth of the report

which calls him an astrologer and a sorcerer.  Agrippa, when aedile of Rome,

banished all such terrible citizens.  But a rich man--it is the duty of an

aedile to protect the rich!'



'What think you of this new sect, which I am told has even a few proselytes

in Pompeii, these followers of the Hebrew God--Christus?'



'Oh, mere speculative visionaries,' said Clodius; 'they have not a single

gentleman amongst them; their proselytes are poor, insignificant, ignorant

people!'



'Who ought, however, to be crucified for their blasphemy,' said Pansa, with

vehemence; 'they deny Venus and Jove!  Nazarene is but another name for

atheist.  Let me catch them--that's all.'



The second course was gone--the feasters fell back on their couches--there

was a pause while they listened to the soft voices of the South, and the

music of the Arcadian reed.  Glaucus was the most rapt and the least

inclined to break the silence, but Clodius began already to think that they

wasted time.



'Bene vobis! (Your health!) my Glaucus,' said he, quaffing a cup to each

letter of the Greek's name, with the ease of the practised drinker.  'Will

you not be avenged on your ill-fortune of yesterday? See, the dice court

us.'



'As you will,' said Glaucus.



'The dice in summer, and I an aedile!' said Pansa, magisterially; 'it is

against all law.'



'Not in your presence, grave Pansa,' returned Clodius, rattling the dice in

a long box; 'your presence restrains all license: it is not the thing, but

the excess of the thing, that hurts.'



'What wisdom!' muttered the umbra.



'Well, I will look another way,' said the aedile.



'Not yet, good Pansa; let us wait till we have supped,' said Glaucus.



Clodius reluctantly yielded, concealing his vexation with a yawn.



'He gapes to devour the gold,' whispered Lepidus to Sallust, in a quotation

from the Aulularia of Plautus.



'Ah! how well I know these polypi, who hold all they touch,' answered

Sallust, in the same tone, and out of the same play.



The third course, consisting of a variety of fruits, pistachio nuts,

sweetmeats, tarts, and confectionery tortured into a thousand fantastic and

airy shapes, was now placed upon the table; and the ministri, or attendants,

also set there the wine (which had hitherto been handed round to the guests)

in large jugs of glass, each bearing upon it the schedule of its age and

quality.



'Taste this Lesbian, my Pansa,' said Sallust; 'it is excellent.'



'It is not very old,' said Glaucus, 'but it has been made precocious, like

ourselves, by being put to the fire:--the wine to the flames of Vulcan--we

to those of his wife--to whose honour I pour this cup.'



'It is delicate,' said Pansa, 'but there is perhaps the least particle too

much of rosin in its flavor.'



'What a beautiful cup!' cried Clodius, taking up one of transparent crystal,

the handles of which were wrought with gems, and twisted in the shape of

serpents, the favorite fashion at Pompeii.



'This ring,' said Glaucus, taking a costly jewel from the first joint of his

finger and hanging it on the handle, 'gives it a richer show, and renders it

less unworthy of thy acceptance, my Clodius, on whom may the gods bestow

health and fortune, long and oft to crown it to the brim!'



'You are too generous, Glaucus,' said the gamester, handing the cup to his

slave; 'but your love gives it a double value.'



'This cup to the Graces!' said Pansa, and he thrice emptied his calix.  The

guests followed his example.



'We have appointed no director to the feast,' cried Sallust.



'Let us throw for him, then,' said Clodius, rattling the dice-box.



'Nay,' cried Glaucus, 'no cold and trite director for us: no dictator of the

banquet; no rex convivii.  Have not the Romans sworn never to obey a king? 

Shall we be less free than your ancestors?  Ho! musicians, let us have the

song I composed the other night: it has a verse on this subject, "The

Bacchic hymn of the Hours".'



The musicians struck their instruments to a wild Ionic air, while the

youngest voice in the band chanted forth, in Greek words, as numbers, the

following strain:-



           THE EVENING HYMN OF THE HOURS



                     I



     "Through the summer day, through the weary day,

          We have glided long;

      Ere we speed to the Night through her portals grey,

          Hail us with song!--

         With song, with song,

        With a bright and joyous song;

       Such as the Cretan maid,

        While the twilight made her bolder,

       Woke, high through the ivy shade,

        When the wine-god first consoled her.

       From the hush'd, low-breathing skies,

       Half-shut look'd their starry eyes,

          And all around,

          With a loving sound,

        The AEgean waves were creeping:

       On her lap lay the lynx's head;

       Wild thyme was her bridal bed;

       And aye through each tiny space,

       In the green vine's green embrace

       The Fauns were slily peeping--

       The Fauns, the prying Fauns--

      The arch, the laughing Fauns--

      The Fauns were slily peeping!



                     II



      Flagging and faint are we

        With our ceaseless flight,

       And dull shall our journey be

        Through the realm of night,

       Bathe us, O bathe our weary wings

       In the purple wave, as it freshly springs

        To your cups from the fount of light--

    From the fount of light--from the fount of light,



     For there, when the sun has gone down in night,

         There in the bowl we find him.

       The grape is the well of that summer sun,

       Or rather the stream that he gazed upon,

       Till he left in truth, like the Thespian youth,

           His soul, as he gazed, behind him.



                    III



      A cup to Jove, and a cup to Love,

        And a cup to the son of Maia;

       And honour with three, the band zone-free,

        The band of the bright Aglaia.

       But since every bud in the wreath of pleasure

        Ye owe to the sister Hours,

       No stinted cups, in a formal measure,

        The Bromian law makes ours.

       He honors us most who gives us most,

       And boasts, with a Bacchanal's honest boast,

        He never will count the treasure.

     Fastly we fleet, then seize our wings,

     And plunge us deep in the sparkling springs;

     And aye, as we rise with a dripping plume,

     We'll scatter the spray round the garland's bloom;

           We glow--we glow,

     Behold, as the girls of the Eastern wave

     Bore once with a shout to the crystal cave

       The prize of the Mysian Hylas,

           Even so--even so,

     We have caught the young god in our warm embrace

     We hurry him on in our laughing race;

     We hurry him on, with a whoop and song,

     The cloudy rivers of night along--

      Ho, ho!--we have caught thee, Psilas! 



The guests applauded loudly.  When the poet is your host, his verses are

sure to charm.



'Thoroughly Greek,' said Lepidus: 'the wildness, force, and energy of that

tongue, it is impossible to imitate in the Roman poetry.'



'It is, indeed, a great contrast,' said Clodius, ironically at heart, though

not in appearance, 'to the old-fashioned and tame simplicity of that ode of

Horace which we heard before.  The air is beautifully Ionic: the word puts

me in mind of a toast--Companions, I give you the beautiful Ione.'



'Ione!--the name is Greek,' said Glaucus, in a soft voice.  'I drink the

health with delight.  But who is Ione?'



'Ah! you have but just come to Pompeii, or you would deserve ostracism for

your ignorance,' said Lepidus, conceitedly; 'not to know Ione, is not to

know the chief charm of our city.'



'She is of the most rare beauty,' said Pansa; 'and what a voice!'



'She can feed only on nightingales' tongues,' said Clodius.



'Nightingales' tongues!--beautiful thought!' sighed the umbra.



'Enlighten me, I beseech you,' said Glaucus.



'Know then...' began Lepidus.



'Let me speak,' cried Clodius; 'you drawl out your words as if you spoke

tortoises.'



'And you speak stones,' muttered the coxcomb to himself, as he fell back

disdainfully on his couch.



'Know then, my Glaucus,' said Clodius, 'that Ione is a stranger who has but

lately come to Pompeii.  She sings like Sappho, and her songs are her own

composing; and as for the tibia, and the cithara, and the lyre, I know not

in which she most outdoes the Muses.  Her beauty is most dazzling.  Her


house is perfect; such taste--such gems--such bronzes!  She is rich, and

generous as she is rich.'



'Her lovers, of course,' said Glaucus, 'take care that she does not starve;

and money lightly won is always lavishly spent.'



'Her lovers--ah, there is the enigma!--Ione has but one vice--she is chaste. 

She has all Pompeii at her feet, and she has no lovers: she will not even

marry.'



'No lovers!' echoed Glaucus.



'No; she has the soul of Vestal with the girdle of Venus.'



'What refined expressions!' said the umbra.



'A miracle!' cried Glaucus.  'Can we not see her?'



'I will take you there this evening, said Clodius; 'meanwhile...' added he,

once more rattling the dice.



'I am yours!' said the complaisant Glaucus.  'Pansa, turn your face!'



Lepidus and Sallust played at odd and even, and the umbra looked on, while

Glaucus and Clodius became gradually absorbed in the chances of the dice.



'By Pollux!' cried Glaucus, 'this is the second time I have thrown the

caniculae' (the lowest throw).



'Now Venus befriend me!' said Clodius, rattling the box for several moments. 

'O Alma Venus--it is Venus herself!' as he threw the highest cast, named

from that goddess--whom he who wins money, indeed, usually propitiates!



'Venus is ungrateful to me,' said Glaucus, gaily; 'I have always sacrificed

on her altar.'



'He who plays with Clodius,' whispered Lepidus, 'will soon, like Plautus's

Curculio, put his pallium for the stakes.'



'Poor Glaucus!--he is as blind as Fortune herself,' replied Sallust, in the

same tone.



'I will play no more,' said Glaucus; 'I have lost thirty sestertia.'



'I am sorry...' began Clodius.



'Amiable man!' groaned the umbra.



'Not at all!' exclaimed Glaucus; 'the pleasure I take in your gain

compensates the pain of my loss.'



The conversation now grew general and animated; the wine circulated more

freely; and Ione once more became the subject of eulogy to the guests of

Glaucus.



'Instead of outwatching the stars, let us visit one at whose beauty the

stars grow pale,' said Lepidus.



Clodius, who saw no chance of renewing the dice, seconded the proposal; and

Glaucus, though he civilly pressed his guests to continue the banquet, could

not but let them see that his curiosity had been excited by the praises of

Ione: they therefore resolved to adjourn (all, at least, but Pansa and the

umbra) to the house of the fair Greek.  They drank, therefore, to the health

of Glaucus and of Titus--they performed their last libation--they resumed

their slippers--they descended the stairs--passed the illumined atrium--and

walking unbitten over the fierce dog painted on the threshold, found

themselves beneath the light of the moon just risen, in the lively and still

crowded streets of Pompeii.



They passed the jewellers' quarter, sparkling with lights, caught and

reflected by the gems displayed in the shops, and arrived at last at the

door of Ione.  The vestibule blazed with rows of lamps; curtains of

embroidered purple hung on either aperture of the tablinum, whose walls and

mosaic pavement glowed with the richest colors of the artist; and under the

portico which surrounded the odorous viridarium they found Ione, already

surrounded by adoring and applauding guests!



'Did you say she was Athenian?' whispered Glaucus, ere he passed into the

peristyle.



'No, she is from Neapolis.'



'Neapolis!' echoed Glaucus; and at that moment the group, dividing on either

side of Ione, gave to his view that bright, that nymph-like beauty, which

for months had shone down upon the waters of his memory.







Chapter IV



THE TEMPLE OF ISIS.  ITS PRIEST.  THE CHARACTER OF ARBACES DEVELOPS ITSELF.



THE story returns to the Egyptian.  We left Arbaces upon the shores of the

noonday sea, after he had parted from Glaucus and his companion.  As he

approached to the more crowded part of the bay, he paused and gazed upon

that animated scene with folded arms, and a bitter smile upon his dark

features.



'Gulls, dupes, fools, that ye are!' muttered he to himself; 'whether

business or pleasure, trade or religion, be your pursuit, you are equally

cheated by the passions that ye should rule!  How I could loathe you, if I

did not hate--yes, hate!  Greek or Roman, it is from us, from the dark lore

of Egypt, that ye have stolen the fire that gives you souls.  Your

knowledge--your poesy--your laws--your arts--your barbarous mastery of war

(all how tame and mutilated, when compared with the vast original!)--ye have

filched, as a slave filches the fragments of the feast, from us!  And now,

ye mimics of a mimic!--Romans, forsooth! the mushroom herd of robbers! ye

are our masters! the pyramids look down no more on the race of Rameses--the

eagle cowers over the serpent of the Nile.  Our masters--no, not mine.  My

soul, by the power of its wisdom, controls and chains you, though the

fetters are unseen.  So long as craft can master force, so long as religion

has a cave from which oracles can dupe mankind, the wise hold an empire over

earth.  Even from your vices Arbaces distills his pleasures--pleasures

unprofaned by vulgar eyes--pleasures vast, wealthy, inexhaustible, of which

your enervate minds, in their unimaginative sensuality, cannot conceive or

dream!  Plod on, plod on, fools of ambition and of avarice! your petty

thirst for fasces and quaestorships, and all the mummery of servile power,

provokes my laughter and my scorn.  My power can extend wherever man

believes.  I ride over the souls that the purple veils.  Thebes may fall,

Egypt be a name; the world itself furnishes the subjects of Arbaces.'



Thus saying, the Egyptian moved slowly on; and, entering the town, his tall

figure towered above the crowded throng of the forum, and swept towards the

small but graceful temple consecrated to Isis.



That edifice was then but of recent erection; the ancient temple had been

thrown down in the earthquake sixteen years before, and the new building had

become as much in vogue with the versatile Pompeians as a new church or a

new preacher may be with us.  The oracles of the goddess at Pompeii were

indeed remarkable, not more for the mysterious language in which they were

clothed, than for the credit which was attached to their mandates and

predictions.  If they were not dictated by a divinity, they were framed at

least by a profound knowledge of mankind; they applied themselves exactly to

the circumstances of individuals, and made a notable contrast to the vague

and loose generalities of their rival temples.  As Arbaces now arrived at

the rails which separated the profane from the sacred place, a crowd,

composed of all classes, but especially of the commercial, collected,

breathless and reverential, before the many altars which rose in the open

court.  In the walls of the cella, elevated on seven steps of Parian marble,

various statues stood in niches, and those walls were ornamented with the

pomegranate consecrated to Isis.  An oblong pedestal occupied the interior

building, on which stood two statues, one of Isis, and its companion

represented the silent and mystic Orus.  But the building contained many

other deities to grace the court of the Egyptian deity: her kindred and

many-titled Bacchus, and the Cyprian Venus, a Grecian disguise for herself,

rising from her bath, and the dog-headed Anubis, and the ox Apis, and

various Egyptian idols of uncouth form and unknown appellations.



But we must not suppose that among the cities of Magna Graecia, Isis was

worshipped with those forms and ceremonies which were of right her own.  The

mongrel and modern nations of the South, with a mingled arrogance and

ignorance, confounded the worships of all climes and ages.  And the profound

mysteries of the Nile were degraded by a hundred meretricious and frivolous

admixtures from the creeds of Cephisus and of Tibur.  The temple of Isis in

Pompeii was served by Roman and Greek priests, ignorant alike of the

language and the customs of her ancient votaries; and the descendant of the

dread Egyptian kings, beneath the appearance of reverential awe, secretly

laughed to scorn the puny mummeries which imitated the solemn and typical

worship of his burning clime.



Ranged now on either side the steps was the sacrificial crowd, arrayed in

white garments, while at the summit stood two of the inferior priests, the

one holding a palm branch, the other a slender sheaf of corn.  In the narrow

passage in front thronged the bystanders.



'And what,' whispered Arbaces to one of the bystanders, who was a merchant

engaged in the Alexandrian trade, which trade had probably first introduced

in Pompeii the worship of the Egyptian goddess--'what occasion now assembles

you before the altars of the venerable Isis?  It seems, by the white robes

of the group before me, that a sacrifice is to be rendered; and by the

assembly of the priests, that ye are prepared for some oracle.  To what

question is it to vouchsafe a reply?'



'We are merchants,' replied the bystander (who was no other than Diomed) in

the same voice, 'who seek to know the fate of our vessels, which sail for

Alexandria to-morrow.  We are about to offer up a sacrifice and implore an

answer from the goddess.  I am not one of those who have petitioned the

priest to sacrifice, as you may see by my dress, but I have some interest in

the success of the fleet--by Jupiter! yes.  I have a pretty trade, else how

could I live in these hard times?



The Egyptian replied gravely--'That though Isis was properly the goddess of

agriculture, she was no less the patron of commerce.' Then turning his head

towards the east, Arbaces seemed absorbed in silent prayer.



And now in the centre of the steps appeared a priest robed in white from

head to foot, the veil parting over the crown; two new priests relieved

those hitherto stationed at either corner, being naked half-way down to the

breast, and covered, for the rest, in white and loose robes.  At the same

time, seated at the bottom of the steps, a priest commenced a solemn air

upon a long wind-instrument of music.  Half-way down the steps stood another

flamen, holding in one hand the votive wreath, in the other a white wand;

while, adding to the picturesque scene of that eastern ceremony, the stately

ibis (bird sacred to the Egyptian worship) looked mutely down from the wall

upon the rite, or stalked beside the altar at the base of the steps.



At that altar now stood the sacrificial flamen.



The countenance of Arbaces seemed to lose all its rigid calm while the

aruspices inspected the entrails, and to be intent in pious anxiety--to

rejoice and brighten as the signs were declared favorable, and the fire

began bright and clearly to consume the sacred portion of the victim amidst

odorous of myrrh and frankincense.  It was then that a dead silence fell

over the whispering crowd, and the priests gathering round the cella,

another priest, naked save by a cincture round the middle, rushed forward,

and dancing with wild gestures, implored an answer from the goddess.  He

ceased at last in exhaustion, and a low murmuring noise was heard within the

body of the statue: thrice the head moved, and the lips parted, and then a

hollow voice uttered these mystic words: 



  There are waves like chargers that meet and glow,

  There are graves ready wrought in the rocks below,

  On the brow of the future the dangers lour,

  But blest are your barks in the fearful hour.



The voice ceased--the crowd breathed more freely--the merchants looked at

each other.  'Nothing can be more plain,' murmured Diomed; 'there is to be a

storm at sea, as there very often is at the beginning of autumn, but our

vessels are to be saved.  O beneficent Isis!'



'Lauded eternally be the goddess!' said the merchants: 'what can be less

equivocal than her prediction?'



Raising one hand in sign of silence to the people, for the rites of Isis

enjoined what to the lively Pompeians was an impossible suspense from the

use of the vocal organs, the chief priest poured his libation on the altar,

and after a short concluding prayer the ceremony was over, and the

congregation dismissed.  Still, however, as the crowd dispersed themselves

here and there, the Egyptian lingered by the railing, and when the space

became tolerably cleared, one of the priests, approaching it, saluted him

with great appearance of friendly familiarity.



The countenance of the priest was remarkably unprepossessing--his shaven

skull was so low and narrow in the front as nearly to approach to the

conformation of that of an African savage, save only towards the temples,

where, in that organ styled acquisitiveness by the pupils of a science

modern in name, but best practically known (as their sculpture teaches us)

amongst the ancients, two huge and almost preternatural protuberances yet

more distorted the unshapely head--around the brows the skin was puckered

into a web of deep and intricate wrinkles--the eyes, dark and small, rolled

in a muddy and yellow orbit--the nose, short yet coarse, was distended at

the nostrils like a satyr's--and the thick but pallid lips, the high

cheek-bones, the livid and motley hues that struggled through the parchment

skin, completed a countenance which none could behold without repugnance,

and few without terror and distrust: whatever the wishes of the mind, the

animal frame was well fitted to execute them; the wiry muscles of the

throat, the broad chest, the nervous hands and lean gaunt arms, which were

bared above the elbow, betokened a form capable alike of great active

exertion and passive endurance.



'Calenus,' said the Egyptian to this fascinating flamen, 'you have improved

the voice of the statue much by attending to my suggestion; and your verses

are excellent.  Always prophesy good fortune, unless there is an absolute

impossibility of its fulfilment.'



'Besides,' added Calenus, 'if the storm does come, and if it does overwhelm

the accursed ships, have we not prophesied it? and are the barks not blest

to be at rest?--for rest prays the mariner in the AEgean sea, or at least so

says Horace--can the mariner be more at rest in the sea than when he is at

the bottom of it?'



'Right, my Calenus; I wish Apaecides would take a lesson from your wisdom. 

But I desire to confer with you relative to him and to other matters: you

can admit me into one of your less sacred apartments?'



'Assuredly,' replied the priest, leading the way to one of the small

chambers which surrounded the open gate.  Here they seated themselves before

a small table spread with dishes containing fruit and eggs, and various cold

meats, with vases of excellent wine, of which while the companions partook,

a curtain, drawn across the entrance opening to the court, concealed them

from view, but admonished them by the thinness of the partition to speak

low, or to speak no secrets: they chose the former alternative.



'Thou knowest,' said Arbaces, in a voice that scarcely stirred the air, so

soft and inward was its sound, 'that it has ever been my maxim to attach

myself to the young.  From their flexile and unformed minds I can carve out

my fittest tools.  I weave--I warp--I mould them at my will.  Of the men I

make merely followers or servants; of the women...'



'Mistresses,' said Calenus, as a livid grin distorted his ungainly features.



'Yes, I do not disguise it: woman is the main object, the great appetite, of

my soul.  As you feed the victim for the slaughter, I love to rear the

votaries of my pleasure.  I love to train, to ripen their minds--to unfold

the sweet blossom of their hidden passions, in order to prepare the fruit to

my taste.  I loathe your ready-made and ripened courtesans; it is in the

soft and unconscious progress of innocence to desire that I find the true

charm of love; it is thus that I defy satiety; and by contemplating the

freshness of others, I sustain the freshness of my own sensations.  From the

young hearts of my victims I draw the ingredients of the caldron in which I

re-youth myself.  But enough of this: to the subject before us.  You know,

then, that in Neapolis some time since I encountered Ione and Apaecides,

brother and sister, the children of Athenians who had settled at Neapolis. 

The death of their parents, who knew and esteemed me, constituted me their

guardian.  I was not unmindful of the trust. The youth, docile and mild,

yielded readily to the impression I sought to stamp upon him.  Next to

woman, I love the old recollections of my ancestral land; I love to keep

alive--to propagate on distant shores (which her colonies perchance yet

people) her dark and mystic creeds.  It may be, that it pleases me to delude

mankind, while I thus serve the deities.  To Apaecides I taught the solemn

faith of Isis.  I unfolded to him something of those sublime allegories

which are couched beneath her worship.  I excited in a soul peculiarly alive

to religious fervor that enthusiasm which imagination begets on faith.  I

have placed him amongst you: he is one of you.'



'He is so,' said Calenus: 'but in thus stimulating his faith, you have

robbed him of wisdom.  He is horror-struck that he is no longer duped: our

sage delusions, our speaking statues and secret staircases dismay and revolt

him; he pines; he wastes away; he mutters to himself; he refuses to share

our ceremonies.  He has been known to frequent the company of men suspected

of adherence to that new and atheistical creed which denies all our gods,

and terms our oracles the inspirations of that malevolent spirit of which

eastern tradition speaks.  Our oracles--alas! we know well whose

inspirations they are!'



'This is what I feared,' said Arbaces, musingly, 'from various reproaches he

made me when I last saw him.  Of late he hath shunned my steps.  I must find

him: I must continue my lessons: I must lead him into the adytum of Wisdom. 

I must teach him that there are two stages of sanctity--the first,

FAITH--the next, DELUSION; the one for the vulgar, the second for the sage.'



'I never passed through the first, I said Calenus; 'nor you either, I think,

my Arbaces.'



'You err,' replied the Egyptian, gravely.  'I believe at this day (not

indeed that which I teach, but that which I teach not).  Nature has a

sanctity against which I cannot (nor would I) steel conviction.  I believe

in mine own knowledge, and that has revealed to me--but no matter.  Now to

earthlier and more inviting themes.  If I thus fulfilled my object with

Apaecides, what was my design for Ione?  Thou knowest already I intend her

for my queen--my bride--my heart's Isis.  Never till I saw her knew I all

the love of which my nature is capable.'



'I hear from a thousand lips that she is a second Helen,' said Calenus; and

he smacked his own lips, but whether at the wine or at the notion it is not

easy to decide.



'Yes, she has a beauty that Greece itself never excelled,' resumed Arbaces. 

'But that is not all: she has a soul worthy to match with mine.  She has a

genius beyond that of woman--keen--dazzling--bold. Poetry flows spontaneous

to her lips: utter but a truth, and, however intricate and profound, her

mind seizes and commands it.  Her imagination and her reason are not at war

with each other; they harmonize and direct her course as the winds and the

waves direct some lofty bark.  With this she unites a daring independence of

thought; she can stand alone in the world; she can be brave as she is

gentle; this is the nature I have sought all my life in woman, and never

found till now.  Ione must be mine!  In her I have a double passion; I wish

to enjoy a beauty of spirit as of form.'



'She is not yours yet, then?' said the priest.



'No; she loves me--but as a friend--she loves me with her mind only.  She

fancies in me the paltry virtues which I have only the profounder virtue to

disdain.  But you must pursue with me her history. The brother and sister

were young and rich: Ione is proud and ambitious--proud of her genius--the

magic of her poetry--the charm of her conversation.  When her brother left

me, and entered your temple, in order to be near him she removed also to

Pompeii.  She has suffered her talents to be known.  She summons crowds to

her feasts; her voice enchants them; her poetry subdues.  She delights in

being thought the successor of Erinna.'



'Or of Sappho?'



'But Sappho without love!  I encouraged her in this boldness of career--in

this indulgence of vanity and of pleasure.  I loved to steep her amidst the

dissipations and luxury of this abandoned city.  Mark me, Calenus!  I

desired to enervate her mind!--it has been too pure to receive yet the

breath which I wish not to pass, but burningly to eat into, the mirror.  I

wished her to be surrounded by lovers, hollow, vain, and frivolous (lovers

that her nature must despise), in order to feel the want of love.  Then, in

those soft intervals of lassitude that succeed to excitement--I can weave my

spells--excite her interest--attract her passions--possess myself of her

heart.  For it is not the young, nor the beautiful, nor the gay, that should

fascinate Ione; her imagination must be won, and the life of Arbaces has

been one scene of triumph over the imaginations of his kind.'



'And hast thou no fear, then, of thy rivals?  The gallants of Italy are

skilled in the art to please.'



'None!  Her Greek soul despises the barbarian Romans, and would scorn itself

if it admitted a thought of love for one of that upstart race.'



'But thou art an Egyptian, not a Greek!'



'Egypt,' replied Arbaces, 'is the mother of Athens.  Her tutelary Minerva is

our deity; and her founder, Cecrops, was the fugitive of Egyptian Sais. 

This have I already taught to her; and in my blood she venerates the eldest

dynasties of earth.  But yet I will own that of late some uneasy suspicions

have crossed my mind.  She is more silent than she used to be; she loves

melancholy and subduing music; she sighs without an outward cause.  This may

be the beginning of love--it may be the want of love.  In either case it is

time for me to begin my operations on her fancies and her heart: in the one

case, to divert the source of love to me; in the other, in me to awaken it. 

It is for this that I have sought you.'



'And how can I assist you?'



'I am about to invite her to a feast in my house: I wish to dazzle--to

bewilder--to inflame her senses.  Our arts--the arts by which Egypt trained

her young novitiates--must be employed; and, under veil of the mysteries of

religion, I will open to her the secrets of love.'



'Ah! now I understand:--one of those voluptuous banquets that, despite our

dull vows of mortified coldness, we, the priests of Isis, have shared at thy

house.'



'No, no!  Thinkest thou her chaste eyes are ripe for such scenes? No; but

first we must ensnare the brother--an easier task.  Listen to me, while I

give you my instructions.'







Chapter V



MORE OF THE FLOWER-GIRL.  THE PROGRESS OF LOVE.



THE sun shone gaily into that beautiful chamber in the house of Glaucus,

which I have before said is now called the 'Room of Leda'.  The morning rays

entered through rows of small casements at the higher part of the room, and

through the door which opened on the garden, that answered to the

inhabitants of the southern cities the same purpose that a greenhouse or

conservatory does to us.  The size of the garden did not adapt it for

exercise, but the various and fragrant plants with which it was filled gave

a luxury to that indolence so dear to the dwellers in a sunny clime.  And

now the odorous, fanned by a gentle wind creeping from the adjacent sea,

scattered themselves over that chamber, whose walls vied with the richest

colors of the most glowing flowers.  Besides the gem of the room--the

painting of Leda and Tyndarus--in the centre of each compartment of the

walls were set other pictures of exquisite beauty.  In one you saw Cupid

leaning on the knees of Venus; in another Ariadne sleeping on the beach,

unconscious of the perfidy of Theseus.  Merrily the sunbeams played to and

fro on the tessellated floor and the brilliant walls--far more happily came

the rays of joy to the heart of the young Glaucus.



'I have seen her, then,' said he, as he paced that narrow chamber--'I have

heard her--nay, I have spoken to her again--I have listened to the music of

her song, and she sung of glory and of Greece.  I have discovered the

long-sought idol of my dreams; and like the Cyprian sculptor, I have

breathed life into my own imaginings.'



Longer, perhaps, had been the enamoured soliloquy of Glaucus, but at that

moment a shadow darkened the threshold of the chamber, and a young female,

still half a child in years, broke upon his solitude.  She was dressed

simply in a white tunic, which reached from the neck to the ankles; under

her arm she bore a basket of flowers, and in the other hand she held a

bronze water-vase; her features were more formed than exactly became her

years, yet they were soft and feminine in their outline, and without being

beautiful in themselves, they were almost made so by their beauty of

expression; there was something ineffably gentle, and you would say patient,

in her aspect.  A look of resigned sorrow, of tranquil endurance, had

banished the smile, but not the sweetness, from her lips; something timid

and cautious in her step--something wandering in her eyes, led you to

suspect the affliction which she had suffered from her birth--she was blind;

but in the orbs themselves there was no visible defect--their melancholy and

subdued light was clear, cloudless, and serene. 'They tell me that Glaucus

is here,' said she; 'may I come in?'



'Ah, my Nydia,' said the Greek, 'is that you I knew you would not neglect my

invitation.'



'Glaucus did but justice to himself,' answered Nydia, with a blush; 'for he

has always been kind to the poor blind girl.'



'Who could be otherwise?' said Glaucus, tenderly, and in the voice of a

compassionate brother.



Nydia sighed and paused before she resumed, without replying to his remark. 

'You have but lately returned?'



'This is the sixth sun that hath shone upon me at Pompeii.'



'And you are well?  Ah, I need not ask--for who that sees the earth, which

they tell me is so beautiful, can be ill?'



'I am well.  And you, Nydia--how you have grown!  Next year you will be

thinking what answer to make your lovers.'



A second blush passed over the cheek of Nydia, but this time she frowned as

she blushed.  'I have brought you some flowers,' said she, without replying

to a remark that she seemed to resent; and feeling about the room till she

found the table that stood by Glaucus, she laid the basket upon it: 'they

are poor, but they are fresh-gathered.'



'They might come from Flora herself,' said he, kindly; 'and I renew again my

vow to the Graces, that I will wear no other garlands while thy hands can

weave me such as these.'



'And how find you the flowers in your viridarium?--are they thriving?'



'Wonderfully so--the Lares themselves must have tended them.'



'Ah, now you give me pleasure; for I came, as often as I could steal the

leisure, to water and tend them in your absence.'



'How shall I thank thee, fair Nydia?' said the Greek.  'Glaucus little

dreamed that he left one memory so watchful over his favorites at Pompeii.'



The hand of the child trembled, and her breast heaved beneath her tunic. 

She turned round in embarrassment.  'The sun is hot for the poor flowers,'

said she, 'to-day and they will miss me; for I have been ill lately, and it

is nine days since I visited them.'



'Ill, Nydia!--yet your cheek has more color than it had last year.'



'I am often ailing,' said the blind girl, touchingly; 'and as I grow up I

grieve more that I am blind.  But now to the flowers!' So saying, she made a

slight reverence with her head, and passing into the viridarium, busied

herself with watering the flowers.



'Poor Nydia,' thought Glaucus, gazing on her; 'thine is a hard doom!  Thou

seest not the earth--nor the sun--nor the ocean--nor the stars--above all,

thou canst not behold Ione.'



At that last thought his mind flew back to the past evening, and was a

second time disturbed in its reveries by the entrance of Clodius.  It was a

proof how much a single evening had sufficed to increase and to refine the

love of the Athenian for Ione, that whereas he had confided to Clodius the

secret of his first interview with her, and the effect it had produced on

him, he now felt an invincible aversion even to mention to him her name.  He

had seen Ione, bright, pure, unsullied, in the midst of the gayest and most

profligate gallants of Pompeii, charming rather than awing the boldest into

respect, and changing the very nature of the most sensual and the least

ideal--as by her intellectual and refining spells she reversed the fable of

Circe, and converted the animals into men.  They who could not understand

her soul were made spiritual, as it were, by the magic of her beauty--they

who had no heart for poetry had ears, at least, for the melody of her voice. 

Seeing her thus surrounded, purifying and brightening all things with her

presence, Glaucus almost for the first time felt the nobleness of his own

nature--he felt how unworthy of the goddess of his dreams had been his

companions and his pursuits.  A veil seemed lifted from his eyes; he saw

that immeasurable distance between himself and his associates which the

deceiving mists of pleasure had hitherto concealed; he was refined by a

sense of his courage in aspiring to Ione.  He felt that henceforth it was

his destiny to look upward and to soar.  He could no longer breathe that

name, which sounded to the sense of his ardent fancy as something sacred and

divine, to lewd and vulgar ears.  She was no longer the beautiful girl once

seen and passionately remembered--she was already the mistress, the divinity

of his soul.  This feeling who has not experienced?--If thou hast not, then

thou hast never loved.



When Clodius therefore spoke to him in affected transport of the beauty of

Ione, Glaucus felt only resentment and disgust that such lips should dare to

praise her; he answered coldly, and the Roman imagined that his passion was

cured instead of heightened.  Clodius scarcely regretted it, for he was

anxious that Glaucus should marry an heiress yet more richly endowed--Julia,

the daughter of the wealthy Diomed, whose gold the gamester imagined he

could readily divert into his own coffers.  Their conversation did not flow

with its usual ease; and no sooner had Clodius left him than Glaucus bent

his way to the house of Ione.  In passing by the threshold he again

encountered Nydia, who had finished her graceful task.  She knew his step on

the instant.



'You are early abroad?' said she.



'Yes; for the skies of Campania rebuke the sluggard who neglects them.'



'Ah, would I could see them!' murmured the blind girl, but so low that

Glaucus did not overhear the complaint.



The Thessalian lingered on the threshold a few moments, and then guiding her

steps by a long staff, which she used with great dexterity, she took her way

homeward.  She soon turned from the more gaudy streets, and entered a

quarter of the town but little loved by the decorous and the sober.  But

from the low and rude evidences of vice around her she was saved by her

misfortune.  And at that hour the streets were quiet and silent, nor was her

youthful ear shocked by the sounds which too often broke along the obscene

and obscure haunts she patiently and sadly traversed.



She knocked at the back-door of a sort of tavern; it opened, and a rude

voice bade her give an account of the sesterces.  Ere she could reply,

another voice, less vulgarly accented, said:



'Never mind those petty profits, my Burbo.  The girl's voice will be wanted

again soon at our rich friend's revels; and he pays, as thou knowest, pretty

high for his nightingales' tongues.



'Oh, I hope not--I trust not,' cried Nydia, trembling.  'I will beg from

sunrise to sunset, but send me not there.'



'And why?' asked the same voice.



'Because--because I am young, and delicately born, and the female companions

I meet there are not fit associates for one who--who...'



'Is a slave in the house of Burbo,' returned the voice ironically, and with

a coarse laugh.



The Thessalian put down the flowers, and, leaning her face on her hands,

wept silently.



Meanwhile, Glaucus sought the house of the beautiful Neapolitan. He found

Ione sitting amidst her attendants, who were at work around her.  Her harp

stood at her side, for Ione herself was unusually idle, perhaps unusually

thoughtful, that day.  He thought her even more beautiful by the morning

light and in her simple robe, than amidst the blazing lamps, and decorated

with the costly jewels of the previous night: not the less so from a certain

paleness that overspread her transparent hues--not the less so from the

blush that mounted over them when he approached.  Accustomed to flatter,

flattery died upon his lips when he addressed Ione.  He felt it beneath her

to utter the homage which every look conveyed.  They spoke of Greece; this

was a theme on which Ione loved rather to listen than to converse: it was a

theme on which the Greek could have been eloquent for ever.  He described to

her the silver olive groves that yet clad the banks of Ilyssus, and the

temples, already despoiled of half their glories--but how beautiful in

decay!  He looked back on the melancholy city of Harmodius the free, and

Pericles the magnificent, from the height of that distant memory, which

mellowed into one hazy light all the ruder and darker shades.  He had seen

the land of poetry chiefly in the poetical age of early youth; and the

associations of patriotism were blended with those of the flush and spring

of life.  And Ione listened to him, absorbed and mute; dearer were those

accents, and those descriptions, than all the prodigal adulation of her

numberless adorers.  Was it a sin to love her countryman? she loved Athens

in him--the gods of her race, the land of her dreams, spoke to her in his

voice!  From that time they daily saw each other.  At the cool of the

evening they made excursions on the placid sea.  By night they met again in

Ione's porticoes and halls.  Their love was sudden, but it was strong; it

filled all the sources of their life. Heart--brain--sense--imagination, all

were its ministers and priests.  As you take some obstacle from two objects

that have a mutual attraction, they met, and united at once; their wonder

was, that they had lived separate so long.  And it was natural that they

should so love.  Young, beautiful, and gifted--of the same birth, and the

same soul--there was poetry in their very union.  They imagined the heavens

smiled upon their affection.  As the persecuted seek refuge at the shrine,

so they recognized in the altar of their love an asylum from the sorrows of

earth; they covered it with flowers--they knew not of the serpents that lay

coiled behind.



One evening, the fifth after their first meeting at Pompeii, Glaucus and

Ione, with a small party of chosen friends, were returning from an excursion

round the bay; their vessel skimmed lightly over the twilight waters, whose

lucid mirror was only broken by the dripping oars.  As the rest of the party

conversed gaily with each other, Glaucus lay at the feet of Ione, and he

would have looked up in her face, but he did not dare.  Ione broke the pause

between them.



'My poor brother,' said she, sighing, 'how once he would have enjoyed this

hour!'



'Your brother!' said Glaucus; 'I have not seen him.  Occupied with you, I

have thought of nothing else, or I should have asked if that was not your

brother for whose companionship you left me at the Temple of Minerva, in

Neapolis?'



'It was.'



'And is he here?'



'He is.



'At Pompeii! and not constantly with you?  Impossible!'



'He has other duties,' answered Ione, sadly; 'he is a priest of Isis.'



'So young, too; and that priesthood, in its laws at least, so severe!' said

the warm and bright-hearted Greek, in surprise and pity. 'What could have

been his inducement?'



'He was always enthusiastic and fervent in religious devotion: and the

eloquence of an Egyptian--our friend and guardian--kindled in him the pious

desire to consecrate his life to the most mystic of our deities.  Perhaps in

the intenseness of his zeal, he found in the severity of that peculiar

priesthood its peculiar attraction.'



'And he does not repent his choice?--I trust he is happy.'



Ione sighed deeply, and lowered her veil over her eyes.



'I wish,' said she, after a pause, 'that he had not been so hasty. Perhaps,

like all who expect too much, he is revolted too easily!'



'Then he is not happy in his new condition.  And this Egyptian, was he a

priest himself? was he interested in recruits to the sacred band?



'No.  His main interest was in our happiness.  He thought he promoted that

of my brother.  We were left orphans.'



'Like myself,' said Glaucus, with a deep meaning in his voice.



Ione cast down her eyes as she resumed:



'And Arbaces sought to supply the place of our parent.  You must know him. 

He loves genius.'



'Arbaces! I know him already; at least, we speak when we meet.  But for your

praise I would not seek to know more of him.  My heart inclines readily to

most of my kind.  But that dark Egyptian, with his gloomy brow and icy

smiles, seems to me to sadden the very sun. One would think that, like

Epimenides, the Cretan, he had spent forty years in a cave, and had found

something unnatural in the daylight ever afterwards.'



'Yet, like Epimenides, he is kind, and wise, and gentle,' answered Ione.



'Oh, happy that he has thy praise!  He needs no other virtues to make him

dear to me.'



'His calm, his coldness,' said Ione, evasively pursuing the subject, 'are

perhaps but the exhaustion of past sufferings; as yonder mountain (and she

pointed to Vesuvius), which we see dark and tranquil in the distance, once

nursed the fires for ever quenched.'



They both gazed on the mountain as Ione said these words; the rest of the

sky was bathed in rosy and tender hues, but over that grey summit, rising

amidst the woods and vineyards that then clomb half-way up the ascent, there

hung a black and ominous cloud, the single frown of the landscape.  A sudden

and unaccountable gloom came over each as they thus gazed; and in that

sympathy which love had already taught them, and which bade them, in the

slightest shadows of emotion, the faintest presentiment of evil, turn for

refuge to each other, their gaze at the same moment left the mountain, and

full of unimaginable tenderness, met.  What need had they of words to say

they loved?







Chapter VI



THE FOWLER SNARES AGAIN THE BIRD THAT HAD JUST ESCAPED, AND SETS HIS NETS 

FOR A NEW VICTIM.



IN the history I relate, the events are crowded and rapid as those of the

drama.  I write of an epoch in which days sufficed to ripen the ordinary

fruits of years.



Meanwhile, Arbaces had not of late much frequented the house of Ione; and

when he had visited her he had not encountered Glaucus, nor knew he, as yet,

of that love which had so suddenly sprung up between himself and his

designs.  In his interest for the brother of Ione, he had been forced, too,

a little while, to suspend his interest in Ione herself.  His pride and his

selfishness were aroused and alarmed at the sudden change which had come

over the spirit of the youth.  He trembled lest he himself should lose a

docile pupil, and Isis an enthusiastic servant.  Apaecides had ceased to

seek or to consult him.  He was rarely to be found; he turned sullenly from

the Egyptian--nay, he fled when he perceived him in the distance. Arbaces

was one of those haughty and powerful spirits accustomed to master others;

he chafed at the notion that one once his own should ever elude his grasp. 

He swore inly that Apaecides should not escape him.



It was with this resolution that he passed through a thick grove in the

city, which lay between his house and that of Ione, in his way to the

latter; and there, leaning against a tree, and gazing on the ground, he came

unawares on the young priest of Isis.



'Apaecides!' said he--and he laid his hand affectionately on the young man's

shoulder.



The priest started; and his first instinct seemed to be that of flight.  'My

son,' said the Egyptian, 'what has chanced that you desire to shun me?'



Apaecides remained silent and sullen, looking down on the earth, as his lips

quivered, and his breast heaved with emotion.



'Speak to me, my friend,' continued the Egyptian.  'Speak. Something burdens

thy spirit.  What hast thou to reveal?'



'To thee--nothing.'



'And why is it to me thou art thus unconfidential?'



'Because thou hast been my enemy.'



'Let us confer,' said Arbaces, in a low voice; and drawing the reluctant arm

of the priest in his own, he led him to one of the seats which were

scattered within the grove.  They sat down--and in those gloomy forms there

was something congenial to the shade and solitude of the place.



Apaecides was in the spring of his years, yet he seemed to have exhausted

even more of life than the Egyptian; his delicate and regular features were

worn and colorless; his eyes were hollow, and shone with a brilliant and

feverish glare: his frame bowed prematurely, and in his hands, which were

small to effeminacy, the blue and swollen veins indicated the lassitude and

weakness of the relaxed fibres.  You saw in his face a strong resemblance to

Ione, but the expression was altogether different from that majestic and

spiritual calm which breathed so divine and classical a repose over his

sister's beauty.  In her, enthusiasm was visible, but it seemed always

suppressed and restrained; this made the charm and sentiment of her

countenance; you longed to awaken a spirit which reposed, but evidently did

not sleep.  In Apaecides the whole aspect betokened the fervor and passion

of his temperament, and the intellectual portion of his nature seemed, by

the wild fire of the eyes, the great breadth of the temples when compared

with the height of the brow, the trembling restlessness of the lips, to be

swayed and tyrannized over by the imaginative and ideal.  Fancy, with the

sister, had stopped short at the golden goal of poetry; with the brother,

less happy and less restrained, it had wandered into visions more intangible

and unembodied; and the faculties which gave genius to the one threatened

madness to the other.



'You say I have been your enemy,' said Arbaces, 'I know the cause of that

unjust accusation: I have placed you amidst the priests of Isis--you are

revolted at their trickeries and imposture--you think that I too have

deceived you--the purity of your mind is offended--you imagine that I am one

of the deceitful...'



'You knew the jugglings of that impious craft,' answered Apaecides; 'why did

you disguise them from me?--When you excited my desire to devote myself to

the office whose garb I bear, you spoke to me of the holy life of men

resigning themselves to knowledge--you have given me for companions an

ignorant and sensual herd, who have no knowledge but that of the grossest

frauds; you spoke to me of men sacrificing the earthlier pleasures to the

sublime cultivation of virtue--you place me amongst men reeking with all the

filthiness of vice; you spoke to me of the friends, the enlighteners of our

common kind--I see but their cheats and deluders!  Oh!  it was basely

done!--you have robbed me of the glory of youth, of the convictions of

virtue, of the sanctifying thirst after wisdom.  Young as I was, rich,

fervent, the sunny pleasures of earth before me, I resigned all without a

sign, nay, with happiness and exultation, in the thought that I resigned

them for the abstruse mysteries of diviner wisdom, for the companionship of

gods--for the revelations of Heaven--and now--now...'



Convulsive sobs checked the priest's voice; he covered his face with his

hands, and large tears forced themselves through the wasted fingers, and ran

profusely down his vest.



'What I promised to thee, that will I give, my friend, my pupil: these have

been but trials to thy virtue--it comes forth the brighter for thy

novitiate--think no more of those dull cheats--assort no more with those

menials of the goddess, the atrienses of her hall--you are worthy to enter

into the penetralia.  I henceforth will be your priest, your guide, and you

who now curse my friendship shall live to bless it.'



The young man lifted up his head, and gazed with a vacant and wondering

stare upon the Egyptian.



'Listen to me,' continued Arbaces, in an earnest and solemn voice, casting

first his searching eyes around to see that they were still alone.  'From

Egypt came all the knowledge of the world; from Egypt came the lore of

Athens, and the profound policy of Crete; from Egypt came those early and

mysterious tribes which (long before the hordes of Romulus swept over the

plains of Italy, and in the eternal cycle of events drove back civilization

into barbarism and darkness) possessed all the arts of wisdom and the graces

of intellectual life.  From Egypt came the rites and the grandeur of that

solemn Caere, whose inhabitants taught their iron vanquishers of Rome all

that they yet know of elevated in religion and sublime in worship.  And how

deemest thou, young man, that that Egypt, the mother of countless nations,

achieved her greatness, and soared to her cloud-capt eminence of wisdom?--It

was the result of a profound and holy policy.  Your modern nations owe their

greatness to Egypt--Egypt her greatness to her priests.  Rapt in themselves,

coveting a sway over the nobler part of man, his soul and his belief, those

ancient ministers of God were inspired with the grandest thought that ever

exalted mortals.  From the revolutions of the stars, from the seasons of the

earth, from the round and unvarying circle of human destinies, they devised

an august allegory; they made it gross and palpable to the vulgar by the

signs of gods and goddesses, and that which in reality was Government they

named Religion.  Isis is a fable--start not!--that for which Isis is a type

is a reality, an immortal being; Isis is nothing.  Nature, which she

represents, is the mother of all things--dark, ancient, inscrutable, save to

the gifted few.  "None among mortals hath ever lifted up my veil," so saith

the Isis that you adore; but to the wise that veil hath been removed, and we

have stood face to face with the solemn loveliness of Nature.  The priests

then were the benefactors, the civilizers of mankind; true, they were also

cheats, impostors if you will.  But think you, young man, that if they had

not deceived their kind they could have served them?  The ignorant and

servile vulgar must be blinded to attain to their proper good; they would

not believe a maxim--they revere an oracle.  The Emperor of Rome sways the

vast and various tribes of earth, and harmonizes the conflicting and

disunited elements; thence come peace, order, law, the blessings of life.

Think you it is the man, the emperor, that thus sways?--no, it is the pomp,

the awe, the majesty that surround him--these are his impostures, his

delusions; our oracles and our divinations, our rites and our ceremonies,

are the means of our sovereignty and the engines of our power.  They are the

same means to the same end, the welfare and harmony of mankind.  You listen

to me rapt and intent--the light begins to dawn upon you.'



Apaecides remained silent, but the changes rapidly passing over his speaking

countenance betrayed the effect produced upon him by the words of the

Egyptian--words made tenfold more eloquent by the voice, the aspect, and the

manner of the man.



'While, then,' resumed Arbaces, 'our fathers of the Nile thus achieved the

first elements by whose life chaos is destroyed, namely, the obedience and

reverence of the multitude for the few, they drew from their majestic and

starred meditations that wisdom which was no delusion: they invented the

codes and regularities of law--the arts and glories of existence.  They

asked belief; they returned the gift by civilization.  Were not their very

cheats a virtue!  Trust me, whosoever in yon far heavens of a diviner and

more beneficent nature look down upon our world, smile approvingly on the

wisdom which has worked such ends.  But you wish me to apply these

generalities to yourself; I hasten to obey the wish.  The altars of the

goddess of our ancient faith must be served, and served too by others than

the stolid and soulless things that are but as pegs and hooks whereon to

hang the fillet and the robe.  Remember two sayings of Sextus the

Pythagorean, sayings borrowed from the lore of Egypt.  The first is, "Speak

not of God to the multitude"; the second is, "The man worthy of God is a god

among men." As Genius gave to the ministers of Egypt worship, that empire in

late ages so fearfully decayed, thus by Genius only can the dominion be

restored.  I saw in you, Apaecides, a pupil worthy of my lessons--a minister

worthy of the great ends which may yet be wrought; your energy, your

talents, your purity of faith, your earnestness of enthusiasm, all fitted

you for that calling which demands so imperiously high and ardent qualities:

I fanned, therefore, your sacred desires; I stimulated you to the step you

have taken. But you blame me that I did not reveal to you the little souls

and the juggling tricks of your companions.  Had I done so, Apaecides, I had

defeated my own object; your noble nature would have at once revolted, and

Isis would have lost her priest.'



Apaecides groaned aloud.  The Egyptian continued, without heeding the

interruption.



'I placed you, therefore, without preparation, in the temple; I left you

suddenly to discover and to be sickened by all those mummeries which dazzle

the herd.  I desired that you should perceive how those engines are moved by

which the fountain that refreshes the world casts its waters in the air.  It

was the trial ordained of old to all our priests.  They who accustom

themselves to the impostures of the vulgar, are left to practise them--for

those like you, whose higher natures demand higher pursuit, religion opens

more god-like secrets.  I am pleased to find in you the character I had

expected.  You have taken the vows; you cannot recede.  Advance--I will be

your guide.'



'And what wilt thou teach me, O singular and fearful man?  New

cheats--new...'



'No--I have thrown thee into the abyss of disbelief; I will lead thee now to

the eminence of faith.  Thou hast seen the false types: thou shalt learn now

the realities they represent.  There is no shadow, Apaecides, without its

substance.  Come to me this night.  Your hand.'



Impressed, excited, bewildered by the language of the Egyptian, Apaecides

gave him his hand, and master and pupil parted.



It was true that for Apaecides there was no retreat.  He had taken the vows

of celibacy: he had devoted himself to a life that at present seemed to

possess all the austerities of fanaticism, without any of the consolations

of belief It was natural that he should yet cling to a yearning desire to

reconcile himself to an irrevocable career.  The powerful and profound mind

of the Egyptian yet claimed an empire over his young imagination; excited

him with vague conjecture, and kept him alternately vibrating between hope

and fear.



Meanwhile Arbaces pursued his slow and stately way to the house of Ione.  As

he entered the tablinum, he heard a voice from the porticoes of the

peristyle beyond, which, musical as it was, sounded displeasingly on his

ear--it was the voice of the young and beautiful Glaucus, and for the first

time an involuntary thrill of jealousy shot through the breast of the

Egyptian.  On entering the peristyle, he found Glaucus seated by the side of

Ione.  The fountain in the odorous garden cast up its silver spray in the

air, and kept a delicious coolness in the midst of the sultry noon.  The

handmaids, almost invariably attendant on Ione, who with her freedom of life

preserved the most delicate modesty, sat at a little distance; by the feet

of Glaucus lay the lyre on which he had been playing to Ione one of the

Lesbian airs.  The scene--the group before Arbaces, was stamped by that

peculiar and refined ideality of poesy which we yet, not erroneously,

imagine to be the distinction of the ancients--the marble columns, the vases

of flowers, the statue, white and tranquil, closing every vista; and, above

all, the two living forms, from which a sculptor might have caught either

inspiration or despair!



Arbaces, pausing for a moment, gazed on the pair with a brow from which all

the usual stern serenity had fled; he recovered himself by an effort, and

slowly approached them, but with a step so soft and echoless, that even the

attendants heard him not; much less Ione and her lover.



'And yet,' said Glaucus, 'it is only before we love that we imagine that our

poets have truly described the passion; the instant the sun rises, all the

stars that had shone in his absence vanish into air.  The poets exist only

in the night of the heart; they are nothing to us when we feel the full

glory of the god.'



'A gentle and most glowing image, noble Glaucus.'



Both started, and recognized behind the seat of Ione the cold and sarcastic

face of the Egyptian.



'You are a sudden guest,' said Glaucus, rising, and with a forced smile.



'So ought all to be who know they are welcome,' returned Arbaces, seating

himself, and motioning to Glaucus to do the same.



'I am glad,' said Ione, 'to see you at length together; for you are suited

to each other, and you are formed to be friends.'



'Give me back some fifteen years of life,' replied the Egyptian, 'before you

can place me on an equality with Glaucus.  Happy should I be to receive his

friendship; but what can I give him in return?  Can I make to him the same

confidences that he would repose in me--of banquets and garlands--of

Parthian steeds, and the chances of the dice? these pleasures suit his age,

his nature, his career: they are not for mine.'



So saying, the artful Egyptian looked down and sighed; but from the corner

of his eye he stole a glance towards Ione, to see how she received these

insinuations of the pursuits of her visitor.  Her countenance did not

satisfy him.  Glaucus, slightly coloring, hastened gaily to reply.  Nor was

he, perhaps, without the wish in his turn to disconcert and abash the

Egyptian.



'You are right, wise Arbaces,' said he; 'we can esteem each other, but we

cannot be friends.  My banquets lack the secret salt which, according to

rumor, gives such zest to your own.  And, by Hercules! when I have reached

your age, if I, like you, may think it wise to pursue the pleasures of

manhood, like you, I shall be doubtless sarcastic on the gallantries of

youth.'



The Egyptian raised his eyes to Glaucus with a sudden and piercing glance.



'I do not understand you,' said he, coldly; 'but it is the custom to

consider that wit lies in obscurity.' He turned from Glaucus as he spoke,

with a scarcely perceptible sneer of contempt, and after a moment's pause

addressed himself to Ione.



'I have not, beautiful Ione,' said he, 'been fortunate enough to find you

within doors the last two or three times that I have visited your

vestibule.'



'The smoothness of the sea has tempted me much from home,' replied Ione,

with a little embarrassment.



The embarrassment did not escape Arbaces; but without seeming to heed it, he

replied with a smile: 'You know the old poet says, that "Women should keep

within doors, and there converse."'



'The poet was a cynic,' said Glaucus, 'and hated women.'



'He spoke according to the customs of his country, and that country is your

boasted Greece.'



'To different periods different customs.  Had our forefathers known Ione,

they had made a different law.'



'Did you learn these pretty gallantries at Rome?' said Arbaces, with

ill-suppressed emotion.



'One certainly would not go for gallantries to Egypt,' retorted Glaucus,

playing carelessly with his chain.



'Come, come,' said Ione, hastening to interrupt a conversation which she

saw, to her great distress, was so little likely to cement the intimacy she

had desired to effect between Glaucus and her friend, 'Arbaces must not be

so hard upon his poor pupil.  An orphan, and without a mother's care, I may

be to blame for the independent and almost masculine liberty of life that I

have chosen: yet it is not greater than the Roman women are accustomed

to--it is not greater than the Grecian ought to be.  Alas! is it only to be

among men that freedom and virtue are to be deemed united?  Why should the

slavery that destroys you be considered the only method to preserve us?  Ah!

believe me, it has been the great error of men--and one that has worked

bitterly on their destinies--to imagine that the nature of women is (I will

not say inferior, that may be so, but) so different from their own, in

making laws unfavorable to the intellectual advancement of women.  Have they

not, in so doing, made laws against their children, whom women are to

rear?--against the husbands, of whom women are to be the friends, nay,

sometimes the advisers?' Ione stopped short suddenly, and her face was

suffused with the most enchanting blushes.  She feared lest her enthusiasm

had led her too far; yet she feared the austere Arbaces less than the

courteous Glaucus, for she loved the last, and it was not the custom of the

Greeks to allow their women (at least such of their women as they most

honored) the same liberty and the same station as those of Italy enjoyed. 

She felt, therefore, a thrill of delight as Glaucus earnestly replied:



'Ever mayst thou think thus, Ione--ever be your pure heart your unerring

guide!  Happy it had been for Greece if she had given to the chaste the same

intellectual charms that are so celebrated amongst the less worthy of her

women.  No state falls from freedom--from knowledge, while your sex smile

only on the free, and by appreciating, encourage the wise.'



Arbaces was silent, for it was neither his part to sanction the sentiment of

Glaucus, nor to condemn that of Ione, and, after a short and embarrassed

conversation, Glaucus took his leave of Ione.



When he was gone, Arbaces, drawing his seat nearer to the fair Neapolitan's,

said in those bland and subdued tones, in which he knew so well how to veil

the mingled art and fierceness of his character:



'Think not, my sweet pupil, if so I may call you, that I wish to shackle

that liberty you adorn while you assume: but which, if not greater, as you

rightly observe, than that possessed by the Roman women, must at least be

accompanied by great circumspection, when arrogated by one unmarried. 

Continue to draw crowds of the gay, the brilliant, the wise themselves, to

your feet--continue to charm them with the conversation of an Aspasia, the

music of an Erinna--but reflect, at least, on those censorious tongues which

can so easily blight the tender reputation of a maiden; and while you

provoke admiration, give, I beseech you, no victory to envy.'



'What mean you, Arbaces?' said Ione, in an alarmed and trembling voice: 'I

know you are my friend, that you desire only my honour and my welfare.  What

is it you would say?'



'Your friend--ah, how sincerely!  May I speak then as a friend, without

reserve and without offence?'



'I beseech you do so.'



'This young profligate, this Glaucus, how didst thou know him? Hast thou

seen him often?' And as Arbaces spoke, he fixed his gaze steadfastly upon

Ione, as if he sought to penetrate into her soul.



Recoiling before that gaze, with a strange fear which she could not explain,

the Neapolitan answered with confusion and hesitation: 'He was brought to my

house as a countryman of my father's, and I may say of mine.  I have known

him only within this last week or so: but why these questions?'



'Forgive me,' said Arbaces; 'I thought you might have known him longer. 

Base insinuator that he is!'



'How! what mean you?  Why that term?'



'It matters not: let me not rouse your indignation against one who does not

deserve so grave an honour.'



'I implore you speak.  What has Glaucus insinuated? or rather, in what do

you suppose he has offended?'



Smothering his resentment at the last part of Ione's question, Arbaces

continued: 'You know his pursuits, his companions his habits; the comissatio

and the alea (the revel and the dice) make his occupation; and amongst the

associates of vice how can he dream of virtue?'



'Still you speak riddles.  By the gods!  I entreat you, say the worst at

once.'



'Well, then, it must be so.  Know, my Ione, that it was but yesterday that

Glaucus boasted openly--yes, in the public baths--of your love to him.  He

said it amused him to take advantage of it. Nay, I will do him justice, he

praised your beauty.  Who could deny it? But he laughed scornfully when his

Clodius, or his Lepidus, asked him if he loved you enough for marriage, and

when he purposed to adorn his door-posts with flowers?'



'Impossible!  How heard you this base slander?'



'Nay, would you have me relate to you all the comments of the insolent

coxcombs with which the story has circled through the town? Be assured that

I myself disbelieved at first, and that I have now painfully been convinced

by several ear-witnesses of the truth of what I have reluctantly told thee.'



Ione sank back, and her face was whiter than the pillar against which she

leaned for support.



'I own it vexed--it irritated me, to hear your name thus lightly pitched

from lip to lip, like some mere dancing-girl's fame.  I hastened this

morning to seek and to warn you.  I found Glaucus here.  I was stung from my

self-possession.  I could not conceal my feelings; nay, I was uncourteous in

thy presence.  Canst thou forgive thy friend, Ione?'



Ione placed her hand in his, but replied not.



'Think no more of this,' said he; 'but let it be a warning voice, to tell

thee how much prudence thy lot requires.  It cannot hurt thee, Ione, for a

moment; for a gay thing like this could never have been honored by even a

serious thought from Ione.  These insults only wound when they come from one

we love; far different indeed is he whom the lofty Ione shall stoop to

love.'



'Love!' muttered Ione, with an hysterical laugh.  'Ay, indeed.'



It is not without interest to observe in those remote times, and under a

social system so widely different from the modern, the same small causes

that ruffle and interrupt the 'course of love', which operate so commonly at

this day--the same inventive jealousy, the same cunning slander, the same

crafty and fabricated retailings of petty gossip, which so often now suffice

to break the ties of the truest love, and counteract the tenor of

circumstances most apparently propitious.  When the bark sails on over the

smoothest wave, the fable tells us of the diminutive fish that can cling to

the keel and arrest its progress: so is it ever with the great passions of

mankind; and we should paint life but ill if, even in times the most

prodigal of romance, and of the romance of which we most largely avail

ourselves, we did not also describe the mechanism of those trivial and

household springs of mischief which we see every day at work in our chambers

and at our hearths.  It is in these, the lesser intrigues of life, that we

mostly find ourselves at home with the past.



Most cunningly had the Egyptian appealed to Ione's ruling foible--most

dexterously had he applied the poisoned dart to her pride.  He fancied he

had arrested what he hoped, from the shortness of the time she had known

Glaucus, was, at most, but an incipient fancy; and hastening to change the

subject, he now led her to talk of her brother.  Their conversation did not

last long.  He left her, resolved not again to trust so much to absence, but

to visit--to watch her--every day.



No sooner had his shadow glided from her presence, than woman's pride--her

sex's dissimulation--deserted his intended victim, and the haughty Ione

burst into passionate tears.







Chapter VII



THE GAY LIFE OF THE POMPEIAN LOUNGER.  A MINIATURE LIKENESS OF THE ROMAN 

BATHS.



WHEN Glaucus left Ione, he felt as if he trod upon air.  In the interview

with which he had just been blessed, he had for the first time gathered from

her distinctly that his love was not unwelcome to, and would not be

unrewarded by, her.  This hope filled him with a rapture for which earth and

heaven seemed too narrow to afford a vent. Unconscious of the sudden enemy

he had left behind, and forgetting not only his taunts but his very

existence, Glaucus passed through the gay streets, repeating to himself, in

the wantonness of joy, the music of the soft air to which Ione had listened

with such intentness; and now he entered the Street of Fortune, with its

raised footpath--its houses painted without, and the open doors admitting

the view of the glowing frescoes within.  Each end of the street was adorned

with a triumphal arch: and as Glaucus now came before the Temple of Fortune,

the jutting portico of that beautiful fane (which is supposed to have been

built by one of the family of Cicero, perhaps by the orator himself)

imparted a dignified and venerable feature to a scene otherwise more

brilliant than lofty in its character.  That temple was one of the most

graceful specimens of Roman architecture. It was raised on a somewhat lofty

podium; and between two flights of steps ascending to a platform stood the

altar of the goddess.  From this platform another flight of broad stairs led

to the portico, from the height of whose fluted columns hung festoons of the

richest flowers.  On either side the extremities of the temple were placed

statues of Grecian workmanship; and at a little distance from the temple

rose the triumphal arch crowned with an equestrian statue of Caligula, which

was flanked by trophies of bronze.  In the space before the temple a lively

throng were assembled--some seated on benches and discussing the politics of

the empire, some conversing on the approaching spectacle of the

amphitheatre.  One knot of young men were lauding a new beauty, another

discussing the merits of the last play; a third group, more stricken in age,

were speculating on the chance of the trade with Alexandria, and amidst

these were many merchants in the Eastern costume, whose loose and peculiar

robes, painted and gemmed slippers, and composed and serious countenances,

formed a striking contrast to the tunicked forms and animated gestures of

the Italians.  For that impatient and lively people had, as now, a language

distinct from speech--a language of signs and motions, inexpressibly

significant and vivacious: their descendants retain it, and the learned

Jorio hath written a most entertaining work upon that species of

hieroglyphical gesticulation.



Sauntering through the crowd, Glaucus soon found himself amidst a group of

his merry and dissipated friends.



'Ah!' said Sallust, 'it is a lustrum since I saw you.'



'And how have you spent the lustrum?  What new dishes have you discovered?'



'I have been scientific,' returned Sallust, 'and have made some experiments

in the feeding of lampreys: I confess I despair of bringing them to the

perfection which our Roman ancestors attained.'



'Miserable man! and why?'



'Because,' returned Sallust, with a sigh, 'it is no longer lawful to give

them a slave to eat.  I am very often tempted to make away with a very fat

carptor (butler) whom I possess, and pop him slily into the reservoir.  He

would give the fish a most oleaginous flavor!  But slaves are not slaves

nowadays, and have no sympathy with their masters' interest--or Davus would

destroy himself to oblige me!'



'What news from Rome?' said Lepidus, as he languidly joined the group.



'The emperor has been giving a splendid supper to the senators,' answered

Sallust.



'He is a good creature,' quoth Lepidus; 'they say he never sends a man away

without granting his request.'



'Perhaps he would let me kill a slave for my reservoir?' returned Sallust,

eagerly.



'Not unlikely,' said Glaucus; 'for he who grants a favor to one Roman, must

always do it at the expense of another.  Be sure, that for every smile Titus

has caused, a hundred eyes have wept.'



'Long live Titus!' cried Pansa, overhearing the emperor's name, as he swept

patronizingly through the crowd; 'he has promised my brother a quaestorship,

because he had run through his fortune.'



'And wishes now to enrich himself among the people, my Pansa,' said Glaucus.



'Exactly so,' said Pansa.



'That is putting the people to some use,' said Glaucus.



'To be sure, returned Pansa.  'Well, I must go and look after the

aerarium--it is a little out of repair'; and followed by a long train of

clients, distinguished from the rest of the throng by the togas they wore

(for togas, once the sign of freedom in a citizen, were now the badge of

servility to a patron), the aedile fidgeted fussily away.



'Poor Pansa!' said Lepidus: 'he never has time for pleasure.  Thank Heaven I

am not an aedile!'



'Ah, Glaucus! how are you? gay as ever?' said Clodius, joining the group.



'Are you come to sacrifice to Fortune?' said Sallust.



'I sacrifice to her every night,' returned the gamester.



'I do not doubt it.  No man has made more victims!'



'By Hercules, a biting speech!' cried Glaucus, laughing.



'The dog's letter is never out of your mouth, Sallust,' said Clodius,

angrily: 'you are always snarling.'



'I may well have the dog's letter in my mouth, since, whenever I play with

you, I have the dog's throw in my hand,' returned Sallust.



'Hist!' said Glaucus, taking a rose from a flower-girl, who stood beside.



'The rose is the token of silence,' replied Sallust, 'but I love only to see

it at the supper-table.'



'Talking of that, Diomed gives a grand feast next week,' said Sallust: 'are

you invited, Glaucus?'



'Yes, I received an invitation this morning.'



'And I, too,' said Sallust, drawing a square piece of papyrus from his

girdle: 'I see that he asks us an hour earlier than usual: an earnest of

something sumptuous.'



'Oh! he is rich as Croesus,' said Clodius; 'and his bill of fare is as long

as an epic.'



'Well, let us to the baths,' said Glaucus: 'this is the time when all the

world is there; and Fulvius, whom you admire so much, is going to read us

his last ode.'



The young men assented readily to the proposal, and they strolled to the

baths.



Although the public thermae, or baths, were instituted rather for the poorer

citizens than the wealthy (for the last had baths in their own houses), yet,

to the crowds of all ranks who resorted to them, it was a favorite place for

conversation, and for that indolent lounging so dear to a gay and

thoughtless people.  The baths at Pompeii differed, of course, in plan and

construction from the vast and complicated thermae of Rome; and, indeed, it

seems that in each city of the empire there was always some slight

modification of arrangement in the general architecture of the public baths. 

This mightily puzzles the learned--as if architects and fashion were not

capricious before the nineteenth century!  Our party entered by the

principal porch in the Street of Fortune.  At the wing of the portico sat

the keeper of the baths, with his two boxes before him, one for the money he

received, one for the tickets he dispensed.  Round the walls of the portico

were seats crowded with persons of all ranks; while others, as the regimen

of the physicians prescribed, were walking briskly to and fro the portico,

stopping every now and then to gaze on the innumerable notices of shows,

games, sales, exhibitions, which were painted or inscribed upon the walls. 

The general subject of conversation was, however, the spectacle announced in

the amphitheatre; and each new-comer was fastened upon by a group eager to

know if Pompeii had been so fortunate as to produce some monstrous criminal,

some happy case of sacrilege or of murder, which would allow the aediles to

provide a man for the jaws of the lion: all other more common exhibitions

seemed dull and tame, when compared with the possibility of this fortunate

occurrence.



'For my part,' said one jolly-looking man, who was a goldsmith, 'I think the

emperor, if he is as good as they say, might have sent us a Jew.'



'Why not take one of the new sect of Nazarenes?' said a philosopher.  'I am

not cruel: but an atheist, one who denies Jupiter himself, deserves no

mercy.'



'I care not how many gods a man likes to believe in,' said the goldsmith;

'but to deny all gods is something monstrous.'



'Yet I fancy,' said Glaucus, 'that these people are not absolutely atheists. 

I am told that they believe in a God--nay, in a future state.'



'Quite a mistake, my dear Glaucus,' said the philosopher.  'I have conferred

with them--they laughed in my face when I talked of Pluto and Hades.'



'O ye gods!' exclaimed the goldsmith, in horror; 'are there any of these

wretches in Pompeii?'



'I know there are a few: but they meet so privately that it is impossible to

discover who they are.'



As Glaucus turned away, a sculptor, who was a great enthusiast in his art,

looked after him admiringly.



'Ah!' said he, 'if we could get him on the arena--there would be a model for

you! What limbs! what a head! he ought to have been a gladiator!  A

subject--a subject--worthy of our art!  Why don't they give him to the

lion?'



Meanwhile Fulvius, the Roman poet, whom his contemporaries declared

immortal, and who, but for this history, would never have been heard of in

our neglectful age, came eagerly up to Glaucus. 'Oh, my Athenian, my

Glaucus, you have come to hear my ode!  That is indeed an honour; you, a

Greek--to whom the very language of common life is poetry.  How I thank you. 

It is but a trifle; but if I secure your approbation, perhaps I may get an

introduction to Titus.  Oh, Glaucus! a poet without a patron is an amphora

without a label; the wine may be good, but nobody will laud it!  And what

says Pythagoras?--"Frankincense to the gods, but praise to man." A patron,

then, is the poet's priest: he procures him the incense, and obtains him his

believers.'



'But all Pompeii is your patron, and every portico an altar in your praise.'



'Ah! the poor Pompeians are very civil--they love to honour merit. But they

are only the inhabitants of a petty town--spero meliora! Shall we within?'



'Certainly; we lose time till we hear your poem.'



At this instant there was a rush of some twenty persons from the baths into

the portico; and a slave stationed at the door of a small corridor now

admitted the poet, Glaucus, Clodius, and a troop of the bard's other

friends, into the passage.



'A poor place this, compared with the Roman thermae!' said Lepidus,

disdainfully.



'Yet is there some taste in the ceiling,' said Glaucus, who was in a mood to

be pleased with everything; pointing to the stars which studded the roof.



Lepidus shrugged his shoulders, but was too languid to reply.



They now entered a somewhat spacious chamber, which served for the purposes

of the apodyterium (that is, a place where the bathers prepared themselves

for their luxurious ablutions).  The vaulted ceiling was raised from a

cornice, glowingly colored with motley and grotesque paintings; the ceiling

itself was paneled in white compartments bordered with rich crimson; the

unsullied and shining floor was paved with white mosaics, and along the

walls were ranged benches for the accommodation of the loiterers.  This

chamber did not possess the numerous and spacious windows which Vitruvius

attributes to his more magnificent frigidarium.  The Pompeians, as all the

southern Italians, were fond of banishing the light of their sultry skies,

and combined in their voluptuous associations the idea of luxury with

darkness.  Two windows of glass alone admitted the soft and shaded ray; and

the compartment in which one of these casements was placed was adorned with

a large relief of the destruction of the Titans.



In this apartment Fulvius seated himself with a magisterial air, and his

audience gathering round him, encouraged him to commence his recital.



The poet did not require much pressing.  He drew forth from his vest a roll

of papyrus, and after hemming three times, as much to command silence as to

clear his voice, he began that wonderful ode, of which, to the great

mortification of the author of this history, no single verse can be

discovered.



By the plaudits he received, it was doubtless worthy of his fame; and

Glaucus was the only listener who did not find it excel the best odes of

Horace.



The poem concluded, those who took only the cold bath began to undress; they

suspended their garments on hooks fastened in the wall, and receiving,

according to their condition, either from their own slaves or those of the

thermae, loose robes in exchange, withdrew into that graceful circular

building which yet exists, to shame the unlaving posterity of the south.



The more luxurious departed by another door to the tepidarium, a place which

was heated to a voluptuous warmth, partly by a movable fireplace,

principally by a suspended pavement, beneath which was conducted the caloric

of the laconicum.



Here this portion of the intended bathers, after unrobing themselves,

remained for some time enjoying the artificial warmth of the luxurious air. 

And this room, as befitted its important rank in the long process of

ablution, was more richly and elaborately decorated than the rest; the

arched roof was beautifully carved and painted; the windows above, of ground

glass, admitted but wandering and uncertain rays; below the massive cornices

were rows of figures in massive and bold relief; the walls glowed with

crimson, the pavement was skillfully tessellated in white mosaics.  Here the

habituated bathers, men who bathed seven times a day, would remain in a

state of enervate and speechless lassitude, either before or (mostly) after

the water-bath; and many of these victims of the pursuit of health turned

their listless eyes on the newcomers, recognizing their friends with a nod,

but dreading the fatigue of conversation.



>From this place the party again diverged, according to their several

fancies, some to the sudatorium, which answered the purpose of our

vapor-baths, and thence to the warm-bath itself; those more accustomed to

exercise, and capable of dispensing with so cheap a purchase of fatigue,

resorted at once to the calidarium, or water-bath.



In order to complete this sketch, and give to the reader an adequate notion

of this, the main luxury of the ancients, we will accompany Lepidus, who

regularly underwent the whole process, save only the cold bath, which had

gone lately out of fashion.  Being then gradually warmed in the tepidarium,

which has just been described, the delicate steps of the Pompeian elegant

were conducted to the sudatorium.  Here let the reader depict to himself the

gradual process of the vapor-bath, accompanied by an exhalation of spicy

perfumes.  After our bather had undergone this operation, he was seized by

his slaves, who always awaited him at the baths, and the dews of heat were

removed by a kind of scraper, which (by the way) a modern traveler has

gravely declared to be used only to remove the dirt, not one particle of

which could ever settle on the polished skin of the practised bather. 

Thence, somewhat cooled, he passed into the water-bath, over which fresh

perfumes were profusely scattered, and on emerging from the opposite part of

the room, a cooling shower played over his head and form.  Then wrapping

himself in a light robe, he returned once more to the tepidarium, where he

found Glaucus, who had not encountered the sudatorium; and now, the main

delight and extravagance of the bath commenced.  Their slaves anointed the

bathers from vials of gold, of alabaster, or of crystal, studded with

profusest gems, and containing the rarest unguents gathered from all

quarters of the world.  The number of these smegmata used by the wealthy

would fill a modern volume--especially if the volume were printed by a

fashionable publisher; Amaracinum, Megalium, Nardum--omne quod exit in

um--while soft music played in an adjacent chamber, and such as used the

bath in moderation, refreshed and restored by the grateful ceremony,

conversed with all the zest and freshness of rejuvenated life.



'Blessed be he who invented baths!' said Glaucus, stretching himself along

one of those bronze seats (then covered with soft cushions) which the

visitor to Pompeii sees at this day in that same tepidarium.  'Whether he

were Hercules or Bacchus, he deserved deification.'



'But tell me,' said a corpulent citizen, who was groaning and wheezing under

the operation of being rubbed down, 'tell me, O Glaucus!--evil chance to thy

hands, O slave! why so rough?--tell me--ugh--ugh!--are the baths at Rome

really so magnificent?' Glaucus turned, and recognized Diomed, though not

without some difficulty, so red and so inflamed were the good man's cheeks

by the sudatory and the scraping he had so lately undergone.  'I fancy they

must be a great deal finer than these.  Eh?' Suppressing a smile, Glaucus

replied:



'Imagine all Pompeii converted into baths, and you will then form a notion

of the size of the imperial thermae of Rome.  But a notion of the size only. 

Imagine every entertainment for mind and body--enumerate all the gymnastic

games our fathers invented--repeat all the books Italy and Greece have

produced--suppose places for all these games, admirers for all these

works--add to this, baths of the vastest size, the most complicated

construction--intersperse the whole with gardens, with theatres, with

porticoes, with schools--suppose, in one word, a city of the gods, composed

but of palaces and public edifices, and you may form some faint idea of the

glories of the great baths of Rome.'



'By Hercules!' said Diomed, opening his eyes, 'why, it would take a man's

whole life to bathe!'



'At Rome, it often does so,' replied Glaucus, gravely.  'There are many who

live only at the baths.  They repair there the first hour in which the doors

are opened, and remain till that in which the doors are closed.  They seem

as if they knew nothing of the rest of Rome, as if they despised all other

existence.'



'By Pollux! you amaze me.'



'Even those who bathe only thrice a day contrive to consume their lives in

this occupation.  They take their exercise in the tennis-court or the

porticoes, to prepare them for the first bath; they lounge into the theatre,

to refresh themselves after it.  They take their prandium under the trees,

and think over their second bath. By the time it is prepared, the prandium

is digested.  From the second bath they stroll into one of the peristyles,

to hear some new poet recite: or into the library, to sleep over an old one. 

Then comes the supper, which they still consider but a part of the bath: and

then a third time they bathe again, as the best place to converse with their

friends.'



'Per Hercle! but we have their imitators at Pompeii.'



'Yes, and without their excuse.  The magnificent voluptuaries of the Roman

baths are happy: they see nothing but gorgeousness and splendor; they visit

not the squalid parts of the city; they know not that there is poverty in

the world.  All Nature smiles for them, and her only frown is the last one

which sends them to bathe in Cocytus. Believe me, they are your only true

philosophers.'



While Glaucus was thus conversing, Lepidus, with closed eyes and scarce

perceptible breath, was undergoing all the mystic operations, not one of

which he ever suffered his attendants to omit.  After the perfumes and the

unguents, they scattered over him the luxurious powder which prevented any

further accession of heat: and this being rubbed away by the smooth surface

of the pumice, he began to indue, not the garments he had put off, but those

more festive ones termed 'the synthesis', with which the Romans marked their

respect for the coming ceremony of supper, if rather, from its hour (three

o'clock in our measurement of time), it might not be more fitly denominated

dinner.  This done, he at length opened his eyes and gave signs of returning

life.



At the same time, too, Sallust betokened by a long yawn the evidence of

existence.



'It is supper time,' said the epicure; 'you, Glaucus and Lepidus, come and

sup with me.'



'Recollect you are all three engaged to my house next week,' cried Diomed,

who was mightily proud of the acquaintance of men of fashion.



'Ah, ah! we recollect,' said Sallust; 'the seat of memory, my Diomed, is

certainly in the stomach.'



Passing now once again into the cooler air, and so into the street, our

gallants of that day concluded the ceremony of a Pompeian bath.







Chapter VIII



ARBACES COGS HIS DICE WITH PLEASURE AND WINS THE GAME.



THE evening darkened over the restless city as Apaecides took his way to the

house of the Egyptian.  He avoided the more lighted and populous streets;

and as he strode onward with his head buried in his bosom, and his arms

folded within his robe, there was something startling in the contrast, which

his solemn mien and wasted form presented to the thoughtless brows and

animated air of those who occasionally crossed his path.



At length, however, a man of a more sober and staid demeanor, and who had

twice passed him with a curious but doubting look, touched him on the

shoulder.



'Apaecides!' said he, and he made a rapid sign with his hands: it was the

sign of the cross.



'Well, Nazarene,' replied the priest, and his face grew paler; 'what wouldst

thou?'



'Nay,' returned the stranger, 'I would not interrupt thy meditations; but

the last time we met, I seemed not to be so unwelcome.'



'You are not unwelcome, Olinthus; but I am sad and weary: nor am I able this

evening to discuss with you those themes which are most acceptable to you.'



'O backward of heart!' said Olinthus, with bitter fervor; and art thou sad

and weary, and wilt thou turn from the very springs that refresh and heal?'



'O earth!' cried the young priest, striking his breast passionately, 'from

what regions shall my eyes open to the true Olympus, where thy gods really

dwell?  Am I to believe with this man, that none whom for so many centuries

my fathers worshipped have a being or a name?  Am I to break down, as

something blasphemous and profane, the very altars which I have deemed most

sacred? or am I to think with Arbaces--what?' He paused, and strode rapidly

away in the impatience of a man who strives to get rid of himself.  But the

Nazarene was one of those hardy, vigorous, and enthusiastic men, by whom God

in all times has worked the revolutions of earth, and those, above all, in

the establishment and in the reformation of His own religion--men who were

formed to convert, because formed to endure.  It is men of this mould whom

nothing discourages, nothing dismays; in the fervor of belief they are

inspired and they inspire.  Their reason first kindles their passion, but

the passion is the instrument they use; they force themselves into men's

hearts, while they appear only to appeal to their judgment.  Nothing is so

contagious as enthusiasm; it is the real allegory of the tale of Orpheus--it

moves stones, it charms brutes.  Enthusiasm is the genius of sincerity, and

truth accomplishes no victories without it.



Olinthus did not then suffer Apaecides thus easily to escape him.  He

overtook and addressed him thus:



'I do not wonder, Apaecides, that I distress you; that I shake all the

elements of your mind: that you are lost in doubt; that you drift here and

there in the vast ocean of uncertain and benighted thought.  I wonder not at

this, but bear with me a little; watch and pray--the darkness shall vanish,

the storm sleep, and God Himself, as He came of yore on the seas of Samaria,

shall walk over the lulled billows, to the delivery of your soul.  Ours is a

religion jealous in its demands, but how infinitely prodigal in its gifts! 

It troubles you for an hour, it repays you by immortality.'



'Such promises,' said Apaecides, sullenly, 'are the tricks by which man is

ever gulled.  Oh, glorious were the promises which led me to the shrine of

Isis!'



'But,' answered the Nazarene, 'ask thy reason, can that religion be sound

which outrages all morality?  You are told to worship your gods.  What are

those gods, even according to yourselves?  What their actions, what their

attributes?  Are they not all represented to you as the blackest of

criminals? yet you are asked to serve them as the holiest of divinities. 

Jupiter himself is a parricide and an adulterer.  What are the meaner

deities but imitators of his vices?  You are told not to murder, but you

worship murderers; you are told not to commit adultery, and you make your

prayers to an adulterer!  Oh!  what is this but a mockery of the holiest

part of man's nature, which is faith?  Turn now to the God, the one, the

true God, to whose shrine I would lead you.  If He seem to you too sublime,

two shadowy, for those human associations, those touching connections

between Creator and creature, to which the weak heart clings--contemplate

Him in His Son, who put on mortality like ourselves.  His mortality is not

indeed declared, like that of your fabled gods, by the vices of our nature,

but by the practice of all its virtues.  In Him are united the austerest

morals with the tenderest affections.  If He were but a mere man, He had

been worthy to become a god.  You honour Socrates--he has his sect, his

disciples, his schools.  But what are the doubtful virtues of the Athenian,

to the bright, the undisputed, the active, the unceasing, the devoted

holiness of Christ?  I speak to you now only of His human character.  He

came in that as the pattern of future ages, to show us the form of virtue

which Plato thirsted to see embodied. This was the true sacrifice that He

made for man; but the halo that encircled His dying hour not only brightened

earth, but opened to us the sight of heaven!  You are touched--you are

moved.  God works in your heart.  His Spirit is with you.  Come, resist not

the holy impulse; come at once--unhesitatingly.  A few of us are now

assembled to expound the word of God.  Come, let me guide you to them.  You

are sad, you are weary.  Listen, then, to the words of God: "Come to me",

saith He, "all ye that are heavy laden, and I will give you rest!"'



'I cannot now,' said Apaecides; 'another time.'



'Now--now!' exclaimed Olinthus, earnestly, and clasping him by the arm.



But Apaecides, yet unprepared for the renunciation of that faith--that life,

for which he had sacrificed so much, and still haunted by the promises of

the Egyptian, extricated himself forcibly from the grasp; and feeling an

effort necessary to conquer the irresolution which the eloquence of the

Christian had begun to effect in his heated and feverish mind, he gathered

up his robes and fled away with a speed that defied pursuit.



Breathless and exhausted, he arrived at last in a remote and sequestered

part of the city, and the lone house of the Egyptian stood before him.  As

he paused to recover himself, the moon emerged from a silver cloud, and

shone full upon the walls of that mysterious habitation.



No other house was near--the darksome vines clustered far and wide in front

of the building and behind it rose a copse of lofty forest trees, sleeping

in the melancholy moonlight; beyond stretched the dim outline of the distant

hills, and amongst them the quiet crest of Vesuvius, not then so lofty as

the traveler beholds it now.



Apaecides passed through the arching vines, and arrived at the broad and

spacious portico.  Before it, on either side of the steps, reposed the image

of the Egyptian sphinx, and the moonlight gave an additional and yet more

solemn calm to those large, and harmonious, and passionless features, in

which the sculptors of that type of wisdom united so much of loveliness with

awe; half way up the extremities of the steps darkened the green and massive

foliage of the aloe, and the shadow of the eastern palm cast its long and

unwaving boughs partially over the marble surface of the stairs.



Something there was in the stillness of the place, and the strange aspect of

the sculptured sphinxes, which thrilled the blood of the priest with a

nameless and ghostly fear, and he longed even for an echo to his noiseless

steps as he ascended to the threshold.



He knocked at the door, over which was wrought an inscription in characters

unfamiliar to his eyes; it opened without a sound, and a tall Ethiopian

slave, without question or salutation, motioned to him to proceed.



The wide hall was lighted by lofty candelabra of elaborate bronze, and round

the walls were wrought vast hieroglyphics, in dark and solemn colors, which

contrasted strangely with the bright hues and graceful shapes with which the

inhabitants of Italy decorated their abodes.  At the extremity of the hall,

a slave, whose countenance, though not African, was darker by many shades

than the usual color of the south, advanced to meet him.



'I seek Arbaces,' said the priest; but his voice trembled even in his own

ear.  The slave bowed his head in silence, and leading Apaecides to a wing

without the hall, conducted him up a narrow staircase, and then traversing

several rooms, in which the stern and thoughtful beauty of the sphinx still

made the chief and most impressive object of the priest's notice, Apaecides

found himself in a dim and half-lighted chamber, in the presence of the

Egyptian.



Arbaces was seated before a small table, on which lay unfolded several

scrolls of papyrus, impressed with the same character as that on the

threshold of the mansion.  A small tripod stood at a little distance, from

the incense in which the smoke slowly rose.  Near this was a vast globe,

depicting the signs of heaven; and upon another table lay several

instruments, of curious and quaint shape, whose uses were unknown to

Apaecides.  The farther extremity of the room was concealed by a curtain,

and the oblong window in the roof admitted the rays of the moon, mingling

sadly with the single lamp which burned in the apartment.



'Seat yourself, Apaecides,' said the Egyptian, without rising.



The young man obeyed.



'You ask me,' resumed Arbaces, after a short pause, in which he seemed

absorbed in thought--'You ask me, or would do so, the mightiest secrets

which the soul of man is fitted to receive; it is the enigma of life itself

that you desire me to solve.  Placed like children in the dark, and but for

a little while, in this dim and confined existence, we shape our spectres in

the obscurity; our thoughts now sink back into ourselves in terror, now

wildly plunge themselves into the guideless gloom, guessing what it may

contain; stretching our helpless hands here and there, lest, blindly, we

stumble upon some hidden danger; not knowing the limits of our boundary, now

feeling them suffocate us with compression, now seeing them extend far away

till they vanish into eternity.  In this state all wisdom consists

necessarily in the solution of two questions: "What are we to believe? and

What are we to reject?" These questions you desire me to decide.'



Apaecides bowed his head in assent.



'Man must have some belief,' continued the Egyptian, in a tone of sadness. 

'He must fasten his hope to something: is our common nature that you inherit

when, aghast and terrified to see that in which you have been taught to

place your faith swept away, you float over a dreary and shoreless sea of

incertitude, you cry for help, you ask for some plank to cling to, some

land, however dim and distant, to attain.  Well, then, have not forgotten

our conversation of to-day?'



'Forgotten!'



'I confessed to you that those deities for whom smoke so many altars were

but inventions.  I confessed to you that our rites and ceremonies were but

mummeries, to delude and lure the herd to their proper good.  I explained to

you that from those delusions came the bonds of society, the harmony of the

world, the power of the wise; that power is in the obedience of the vulgar. 

Continue we then these salutary delusions--if man must have some belief,

continue to him that which his fathers have made dear to him, and which

custom sanctifies and strengthens.  In seeking a subtler faith for us, whose

senses are too spiritual for the gross one, let us leave others that support

which crumbles from ourselves.  This is wise--it is benevolent.'



'Proceed.'



'This being settled,' resumed the Egyptian, 'the old landmarks being left

uninjured for those whom we are about to desert, we gird up our loins and

depart to new climes of faith.  Dismiss at once from your recollection, from

your thought, all that you have believed before. Suppose the mind a blank,

an unwritten scroll, fit to receive impressions for the first time.  Look

round the world--observe its order--its regularity--its design.  Something

must have created it--the design speaks a designer: in that certainty we

first touch land.  But what is that something?--A god, you cry.  Stay--no

confused and confusing names.  Of that which created the world, we know, we

can know, nothing, save these attributes--power and unvarying

regularity--stern, crushing, relentless regularity--heeding no individual

cases--rolling--sweeping--burning on; no matter what scattered hearts,

severed from the general mass, fall ground and scorched beneath its wheels. 

The mixture of evil with good--the existence of suffering and of crime--in

all times have perplexed the wise.  They created a god--they supposed him

benevolent.  How then came this evil? why did he permit it--nay, why invent,

why perpetuate it?  To account for this, the Persian creates a second

spirit, whose nature is evil, and supposes a continual war between that and

the god of good.  In our own shadowy and tremendous Typhon, the Egyptians

image a similar demon.  Perplexing blunder that yet more bewilders

us!--folly that arose from the vain delusion that makes a palpable, a

corporeal, a human being, of this unknown power--that clothes the Invisible

with attributes and a nature similar to the Seen.  No: to this designer let

us give a name that does not command our bewildering associations, and the

mystery becomes more clear--that name is NECESSITY.  Necessity, say the

Greeks, compels the gods.  Then why the gods?--their agency becomes

unnecessary--dismiss them at once. Necessity is the ruler of all we

see--power, regularity--these two qualities make its nature.  Would you ask

more?--you can learn nothing: whether it be eternal--whether it compel us,

its creatures, to new careers after that darkness which we call death--we

cannot tell.  There leave we this ancient, unseen, unfathomable power, and

come to that which, to our eyes, is the great minister of its functions. 

This we can task more, from this we can learn more: its evidence is around

us--its name is NATURE.  The error of the sages has been to direct their

researches to the attributes of necessity, where all is gloom and blindness. 

Had they confined their researches to Nature--what of knowledge might we not

already have achieved?  Here patience, examination, are never directed in

vain.  We see what we explore; our minds ascend a palpable ladder of causes

and effects.  Nature is the great agent of the external universe, and

Necessity imposes upon it the laws by which it acts, and imparts to us the

powers by which we examine; those powers are curiosity and memory--their

union is reason, their perfection is wisdom.  Well, then, I examine by the

help of these powers this inexhaustible Nature.  I examine the earth, the

air, the ocean, the heaven: I find that all have a mystic sympathy with each

other--that the moon sways the tides--that the air maintains the earth, and

is the medium of the life and sense of things--that by the knowledge of the

stars we measure the limits of the earth--that we portion out the epochs of

time--that by their pale light we are guided into the abyss of the

past--that in their solemn lore we discern the destinies of the future.  And

thus, while we know not that which Necessity is, we learn, at least, her

decrees.  And now, what morality do we glean from this religion?--for

religion it is.  I believe in two deities--Nature and Necessity; I worship

the last by reverence, the first by investigation.  What is the morality my

religion teaches?  This--all things are subject but to general rules; the

sun shines for the joy of the many--it may bring sorrow to the few; the

night sheds sleep on the multitude--but it harbors murder as well as rest;

the forests adorn the earth--but shelter the serpent and the lion; the ocean

supports a thousand barks--but it engulfs the one. It is only thus for the

general, and not for the universal benefit, that Nature acts, and Necessity

speeds on her awful course.  This is the morality of the dread agents of the

world--it is mine, who am their creature.  I would preserve the delusions of

priestcraft, for they are serviceable to the multitude; I would impart to

man the arts I discover, the sciences I perfect; I would speed the vast

career of civilizing lore: in this I serve the mass, I fulfill the general

law, I execute the great moral that Nature preaches.  For myself I claim the

individual exception; I claim it for the wise--satisfied that my individual

actions are nothing in the great balance of good and evil; satisfied that

the product of my knowledge can give greater blessings to the mass than my

desires can operate evil on the few (for the first can extend to remotest

regions and humanize nations yet unborn), I give to the world wisdom, to

myself freedom. I enlighten the lives of others, and I enjoy my own.  Yes;

our wisdom is eternal, but our life is short: make the most of it while it

lasts. Surrender thy youth to pleasure, and thy senses to delight.  Soon

comes the hour when the wine-cup is shattered, and the garlands shall cease

to bloom.  Enjoy while you may.  Be still, O Apaecides, my pupil and my

follower!  I will teach thee the mechanism of Nature, her darkest and her

wildest secrets--the lore which fools call magic--and the mighty mysteries

of the stars.  By this shalt thou discharge thy duty to the mass; by this

shalt thou enlighten thy race.  But I will lead thee also to pleasures of

which the vulgar do not dream; and the day which thou givest to men shall be

followed by the sweet night which thou surrenderest to thyself.'



As the Egyptian ceased there rose about, around, beneath, the softest music

that Lydia ever taught, or Iona ever perfected.  It came like a stream of

sound, bathing the senses unawares; enervating, subduing with delight.  It

seemed the melodies of invisible spirits, such as the shepherd might have

heard in the golden age, floating through the vales of Thessaly, or in the

noontide glades of Paphos.  The words which had rushed to the lip of

Apaecides, in answer to the sophistries of the Egyptian, died tremblingly

away.  He felt it as a profanation to break upon that enchanted strain--the

susceptibility of his excited nature, the Greek softness and ardour of his

secret soul, were swayed and captured by surprise.  He sank on the seat with

parted lips and thirsting ear; while in a chorus of voices, bland and

melting as those which waked Psyche in the halls of love, rose the following

song:



                THE HYMN OF EROS



       By the cool banks where soft Cephisus flows,

         A voice sail'd trembling down the waves of air;

        The leaves blushed brighter in the Teian's rose,

         The doves couch'd breathless in their summer lair;



       While from their hands the purple flowerets fell,

         The laughing Hours stood listening in the sky;--

       From Pan's green cave to AEgle's haunted cell,

         Heaved the charm'd earth in one delicious sigh.



       Love, sons of earth!  I am the Power of Love!

         Eldest of all the gods, with Chaos born;

        My smile sheds light along the courts above,

         My kisses wake the eyelids of the Morn.



       Mine are the stars--there, ever as ye gaze,

         Ye meet the deep spell of my haunting eyes;

        Mine is the moon--and, mournful if her rays,

         'Tis that she lingers where her Carian lies.



       The flowers are mine--the blushes of the rose,

         The violet--charming Zephyr to the shade;

        Mine the quick light that in the Maybeam glows,

         And mine the day-dream in the lonely glade.



       Love, sons of earth--for love is earth's soft lore,

         Look where ye will--earth overflows with ME;

        Learn from the waves that ever kiss the shore,

         And the winds nestling on the heaving sea.



       'All teaches love!'--The sweet voice, like a dream,

         Melted in light; yet still the airs above,

        The waving sedges, and the whispering stream,

         And the green forest rustling, murmur'd 'LOVE!'



As the voices died away, the Egyptian seized the hand of Apaecides, and led

him, wandering, intoxicated, yet half-reluctant, across the chamber towards

the curtain at the far end; and now, from behind that curtain, there seemed

to burst a thousand sparkling stars; the veil itself, hitherto dark, was now

lighted by these fires behind into the tenderest blue of heaven.  It

represented heaven itself--such a heaven, as in the nights of June might

have shone down over the streams of Castaly.  Here and there were painted

rosy and aerial clouds, from which smiled, by the limner's art, faces of

divinest beauty, and on which reposed the shapes of which Phidias and

Apelles dreamed.  And the stars which studded the transparent azure rolled

rapidly as they shone, while the music, that again woke with a livelier and

lighter sound, seemed to imitate the melody of the joyous spheres.



'Oh! what miracle is this, Arbaces,' said Apaecides in faltering accents. 

'After having denied the gods, art thou about to reveal to me...'



'Their pleasures!' interrupted Arbaces, in a tone so different from its

usual cold and tranquil harmony that Apaecides started, and thought the

Egyptian himself transformed; and now, as they neared the curtain, a wild--a

loud--an exulting melody burst from behind its concealment.  With that sound

the veil was rent in twain--it parted--it seemed to vanish into air: and a

scene, which no Sybarite ever more than rivalled, broke upon the dazzled

gaze of the youthful priest.  A vast banquet-room stretched beyond, blazing

with countless lights, which filled the warm air with the scents of

frankincense, of jasmine, of violets, of myrrh; all that the most odorous

flowers, all that the most costly spices could distil, seemed gathered into

one ineffable and ambrosial essence: from the light columns that sprang

upwards to the airy roof, hung draperies of white, studded with golden

stars.  At the extremities of the room two fountains cast up a spray, which,

catching the rays of the roseate light, glittered like countless diamonds. 

In the centre of the room as they entered there rose slowly from the floor,

to the sound of unseen minstrelsy, a table spread with all the viands which

sense ever devoted to fancy, and vases of that lost Myrrhine fabric, so

glowing in its colors, so transparent in its material, were crowned with the

exotics of the East.  The couches, to which this table was the centre, were

covered with tapestries of azure and gold; and from invisible tubes the

vaulted roof descended showers of fragrant waters, that cooled the delicious

air, and contended with the lamps, as if the spirits of wave and fire

disputed which element could furnish forth the most delicious odorous.  And

now, from behind the snowy draperies, trooped such forms as Adonis beheld

when he lay on the lap of Venus.  They came, some with garlands, others with

lyres; they surrounded the youth, they led his steps to the banquet.  They

flung the chaplets round him in rosy chains.  The earth--the thought of

earth, vanished from his soul.  He imagined himself in a dream, and

suppressed his breath lest he should wake too soon; the senses, to which he

had never yielded as yet, beat in his burning pulse, and confused his dizzy

and reeling sight.  And while thus amazed and lost, once again, but in brisk

and Bacchic measures, rose the magic strain:



                ANACREONTIC



       In the veins of the calix foams and glows

          The blood of the mantling vine,

        But oh! in the bowl of Youth there glows

          A Lesbian, more divine!

              Bright, bright,

             As the liquid light,

         Its waves through thine eyelids shine!



       Fill up, fill up, to the sparkling brim,

          The juice of the young Lyaeus;

        The grape is the key that we owe to him

          From the gaol of the world to free us.

              Drink, drink!

             What need to shrink,

         When the lambs alone can see us?



       Drink, drink, as I quaff from thine eyes

          The wine of a softer tree;

        Give the smiles to the god of the grape--thy sighs,

          Beloved one, give to me.

              Turn, turn,

             My glances burn,

         And thirst for a look from thee!



As the song ended, a group of three maidens, entwined with a chain of

starred flowers, and who, while they imitated, might have shamed the Graces,

advanced towards him in the gliding measures of the Ionian dance: such as

the Nereids wreathed in moonlight on the yellow sands of the AEgean

wave--such as Cytherea taught her handmaids in the marriage-feast of Psyche

and her son.



Now approaching, they wreathed their chaplet round his head; now kneeling,

the youngest of the three proffered him the bowl, from which the wine of

Lesbos foamed and sparkled.  The youth resisted no more, he grasped the

intoxicating cup, the blood mantled fiercely through his veins.  He sank

upon the breast of the nymph who sat beside him, and turning with swimming

eyes to seek for Arbaces, whom he had lost in the whirl of his emotions, he

beheld him seated beneath a canopy at the upper end of the table, and gazing

upon him with a smile that encouraged him to pleasure.  He beheld him, but

not as he had hitherto seen, with dark and sable garments, with a brooding

and solemn brow: a robe that dazzled the sight, so studded was its whitest

surface with gold and gems, blazed upon his majestic form; white roses,

alternated with the emerald and the ruby, and shaped tiara-like, crowned his

raven locks.  He appeared, like Ulysses, to have gained the glory of a

second youth--his features seemed to have exchanged thought for beauty, and

he towered amidst the loveliness that surrounded him, in all the beaming and

relaxing benignity of the Olympian god.



'Drink, feast, love, my pupil!' said he, 'blush not that thou art passionate

and young.  That which thou art, thou feelest in thy veins: that which thou

shalt be, survey!'



With this he pointed to a recess, and the eyes of Apaecides, following the

gesture, beheld on a pedestal, placed between the statues of Bacchus and

Idalia, the form of a skeleton.



'Start not,' resumed the Egyptian; 'that friendly guest admonishes us but of

the shortness of life.  From its jaws I hear a voice that summons us to

ENJOY.'



As he spoke, a group of nymphs surrounded the statue; they laid chaplets on

its pedestal, and, while the cups were emptied and refilled at that glowing

board, they sang the following strain:



         BACCHIC HYMNS TO THE IMAGE OF DEATH



                    I



        Thou art in the land of the shadowy Host,

           Thou that didst drink and love:

         By the Solemn River, a gliding ghost,

           But thy thought is ours above!

                If memory yet can fly,

                Back to the golden sky,

           And mourn the pleasures lost!

         By the ruin'd hall these flowers we lay,

           Where thy soul once held its palace;

         When the rose to thy scent and sight was gay,

           And the smile was in the chalice,

                And the cithara's voice

                Could bid thy heart rejoice

           When night eclipsed the day.



Here a new group advancing, turned the tide of the music into a quicker and

more joyous strain.



                    II



        Death, death is the gloomy shore

           Where we all sail--

        Soft, soft, thou gliding oar;

           Blow soft, sweet gale!

         Chain with bright wreaths the Hours;

           Victims if all

         Ever, 'mid song and flowers,

           Victims should fall!



Pausing for a moment, yet quicker and quicker danced the silver-footed

music:



        Since Life's so short, we'll live to laugh,

           Ah! wherefore waste a minute!

         If youth's the cup we yet can quaff,

           Be love the pearl within it!



A third band now approached with brimming cups, which they poured in

libation upon that strange altar; and once more, slow and solemn, rose the

changeful melody:



                  III



        Thou art welcome, Guest of gloom,

           From the far and fearful sea!

         When the last rose sheds its bloom,

           Our board shall be spread with thee!

              All hail, dark Guest!

           Who hath so fair a plea

           Our welcome Guest to be,

           As thou, whose solemn hall

           At last shall feast us all

           In the dim and dismal coast?

           Long yet be we the Host!

           And thou, Dead Shadow, thou,

           All joyless though thy brow,

               Thou--but our passing GUEST!



At this moment, she who sat beside Apaecides suddenly took up the song:



                    IV



        Happy is yet our doom,

           The earth and the sun are ours!

         And far from the dreary tomb

           Speed the wings of the rosy Hours--

          Sweet is for thee the bowl,

              Sweet are thy looks, my love;

           I fly to thy tender soul,

              As bird to its mated dove!

                Take me, ah, take!

           Clasp'd to thy guardian breast,

           Soft let me sink to rest:

                But wake me--ah, wake!

           And tell me with words and sighs,

           But more with thy melting eyes,

                That my sun is not set-- 

         That the Torch is not quench'd at the Urn

           That we love, and we breathe, and burn,

                Tell me--thou lov'st me yet!


