




BOOK THE FIFTH



Chapter I



THE DREAM OF ARBACES.  A VISITOR AND A WARNING TO THE EGYPTIAN.



THE awful night preceding the fierce joy of the amphitheatre rolled drearily

away, and greyly broke forth the dawn of THE LAST DAY OF POMPEII!  The air

was uncommonly calm and sultry--a thin and dull mist gathered over the

valleys and hollows of the broad Campanian fields.  But yet it was remarked

in surprise by the early fishermen, that, despite the exceeding stillness of

the atmosphere, the waves of the sea were agitated, and seemed, as it were,

to run disturbedly back from the shore; while along the blue and stately

Sarnus, whose ancient breadth of channel the traveler now vainly seeks to

discover, there crept a hoarse and sullen murmur, as it glided by the

laughing plains and the gaudy villas of the wealthy citizens.  Clear above

the low mist rose the time-worn towers of the immemorial town, the red-tiled

roofs of the bright streets, the solemn columns of many temples, and the

statue-crowned portals of the Forum and the Arch of Triumph.  Far in the

distance, the outline of the circling hills soared above the vapors, and

mingled with the changeful hues of the morning sky.  The cloud that had so

long rested over the crest of Vesuvius had suddenly vanished, and its rugged

and haughty brow looked without a frown over the beautiful scenes below.



Despite the earliness of the hour, the gates of the city were already

opened.  Horsemen upon horsemen, vehicle after vehicle, poured rapidly in;

and the voices of numerous pedestrian groups, clad in holiday attire, rose

high in joyous and excited merriment; the streets were crowded with citizens

and strangers from the populous neighborhood of Pompeii; and

noisily--fast--confusedly swept the many streams of life towards the fatal

show.



Despite the vast size of the amphitheatre, seemingly so disproportioned to

the extent of the city, and formed to include nearly the whole population of

Pompeii itself, so great, on extraordinary occasions, was the concourse of

strangers from all parts of Campania, that the space before it was usually

crowded for several hours previous to the commencement of the sports, by

such persons as were not entitled by their rank to appointed and special

seats.  And the intense curiosity which the trial and sentence of two

criminals so remarkable had occasioned, increased the crowd on this day to

an extent wholly unprecedented.



While the common people, with the lively vehemence of their Campanian blood,

were thus pushing, scrambling, hurrying on--yet, amidst all their eagerness,

preserving, as is now the wont with Italians in such meetings, a wonderful

order and unquarrelsome good humor, a strange visitor to Arbaces was

threading her way to his sequestered mansion.  At the sight of her quaint

and primaeval garb--of her wild gait and gestures--the passengers she

encountered touched each other and smiled; but as they caught a glimpse of

her countenance, the mirth was hushed at once, for the face was as the face

of the dead; and, what with the ghastly features and obsolete robes of the

stranger, it seemed as if one long entombed had risen once more amongst the

living.  In silence and awe each group gave way as she passed along, and she

soon gained the broad porch of the Egyptian's palace.



The black porter, like the rest of the world, astir at an unusual hour,

started as he opened the door to her summons.



The sleep of the Egyptian had been usually profound during the night; but,

as the dawn approached, it was disturbed by strange and unquiet dreams,

which impressed him the more as they were colored by the peculiar philosophy

he embraced.



He thought that he was transported to the bowels of the earth, and that he

stood alone in a mighty cavern supported by enormous columns of rough and

primaeval rock, lost, as they ascended, in the vastness of a shadow athwart

whose eternal darkness no beam of day had ever glanced.  And in the space

between these columns were huge wheels, that whirled round and round

unceasingly, and with a rushing and roaring noise.  Only to the right and

left extremities of the cavern, the space between the pillars was left bare,

and the apertures stretched away into galleries--not wholly dark, but dimly

lighted by wandering and erratic fires, that, meteor-like, now crept (as the

snake creeps) along the rugged and dank soil; and now leaped fiercely to and

fro, darting across the vast gloom in wild gambols--suddenly disappearing,

and as suddenly bursting into tenfold brilliancy and power.  And while he

gazed wonderingly upon the gallery to the left, thin, mist-like, aerial

shapes passed slowly up; and when they had gained the hall they seemed to

rise aloft, and to vanish, as the smoke vanishes, in the measureless ascent.



He turned in fear towards the opposite extremity--and behold! there came

swiftly, from the gloom above, similar shadows, which swept hurriedly along

the gallery to the right, as if borne involuntarily adown the sides of some

invisible stream; and the faces of these spectres were more distinct than

those that emerged from the opposite passage; and on some was joy, and on

others sorrow--some were vivid with expectation and hope, some unutterably

dejected by awe and horror.  And so they passed, swift and constantly on,

till the eyes of the gazer grew dizzy and blinded with the whirl of an

ever-varying succession of things impelled by a power apparently not their

own.



Arbaces turned away, and, in the recess of the hall, he saw the mighty form

of a giantess seated upon a pile of skulls, and her hands were busy upon a

pale and shadowy woof; and he saw that the woof communicated with the

numberless wheels, as if it guided the machinery of their movements.  He

thought his feet, by some secret agency, were impelled towards the female,

and that he was borne onwards till he stood before her, face to face.  The

countenance of the giantess was solemn and hushed, and beautifully serene. 

It was as the face of some colossal sculpture of his own ancestral sphinx. 

No passion--no human emotion, disturbed its brooding and unwrinkled brow:

there was neither sadness, nor joy, nor memory, nor hope: it was free from

all with which the wild human heart can sympathize.  The mystery of

mysteries rested on its beauty--it awed, but terrified not: it was the

Incarnation of the sublime.  And Arbaces felt the voice leave his lips,

without an impulse of his own; and the voice asked:



'Who art thou, and what is thy task?'



'I am That which thou hast acknowledged,' answered, without desisting from

its work, the mighty phantom.  'My name is NATURE!  These are the wheels of

the world, and my hand guides them for the life of all things.'



'And what,' said the voice of Arbaces, 'are these galleries, that strangely

and fitfully illumined, stretch on either hand into the abyss of gloom?'



'That,' answered the giant-mother, 'which thou beholdest to the left, is the

gallery of the Unborn.  The shadows that flit onward and upward into the

world, are the souls that pass from the long eternity of being to their

destined pilgrimage on earth.  That which thou beholdest to thy right,

wherein the shadows descending from above sweep on, equally unknown and dim,

is the gallery of the Dead!'



'And wherefore, said the voice of Arbaces, 'yon wandering lights, that so

wildly break the darkness; but only break, not reveal?'



'Dark fool of the human sciences! dreamer of the stars, and would-be

decipherer of the heart and origin of things! those lights are but the

glimmerings of such knowledge as is vouchsafed to Nature to work her way, to

trace enough of the past and future to give providence to her designs. 

judge, then, puppet as thou art, what lights are reserved for thee!'



Arbaces felt himself tremble as he asked again, 'Wherefore am I here?'



'It is the forecast of thy soul--the prescience of thy rushing doom--the

shadow of thy fate lengthening into eternity as declines from earth.'



Ere he could answer, Arbaces felt a rushing WIND sweep down the cavern, as

the winds of a giant god.  Borne aloft from the ground, and whirled on high

as a leaf in the storms of autumn, he beheld himself in the midst of the

Spectres of the Dead, and hurrying with them along the length of gloom.  As

in vain and impotent despair he struggled against the impelling power, he

thought the WIND grew into something like a shape--a spectral outline of the

wings and talons of an eagle, with limbs floating far and indistinctly along

the air, and eyes that, alone clearly and vividly seen, glared stonily and

remorselessly on his own.



'What art thou?' again said the voice of the Egyptian.



'I am That which thou hast acknowledged'; and the spectre laughed

aloud--'and my name is NECESSITY.'



'To what dost thou bear me?'



'To the Unknown.'



'To happiness or to woe?'



'As thou hast sown, so shalt thou reap.'



'Dread thing, not so!  If thou art the Ruler of Life, thine are my misdeeds,

not mine.'



'I am but the breath of God!' answered the mighty WIND.



'Then is my wisdom vain!' groaned the dreamer.



'The husbandman accuses not fate, when, having sown thistles, he reaps not

corn.  Thou hast sown crime, accuse not fate if thou reapest not the harvest

of virtue.'



The scene suddenly changed.  Arbaces was in a place of human bones; and lo!

in the midst of them was a skull, and the skull, still retaining its

fleshless hollows, assumed slowly, and in the mysterious confusion of a

dream, the face of Apaecides; and forth from the grinning jaws there crept a

small worm, and it crawled to the feet of Arbaces.  He attempted to stamp on

it and crush it; but it became longer and larger with that attempt.  It

swelled and bloated till it grew into a vast serpent: it coiled itself round

the limbs of Arbaces; it crunched his bones; it raised its glaring eyes and

poisonous jaws to his face.  He writhed in vain; he withered--he

gasped--beneath the influence of the blighting breath--he felt himself

blasted into death. And then a voice came from the reptile, which still bore

the face of Apaecides and rang in his reeling ear:



'THY VICTIM IS THY JUDGE!  THE WORM THOU WOULDST CRUSH BECOMES THE SERPENT

THAT DEVOURS THEE!'



With a shriek of wrath, and woe, and despairing resistance, Arbaces

awoke--his hair on end--his brow bathed in dew--his eyes glazed and

staring--his mighty frame quivering as an infant's, beneath the agony of

that dream.  He awoke--he collected himself--he blessed the gods whom he

disbelieved, that he was in a dream--he turned his eyes from side to

side--he saw the dawning light break through his small but lofty window--he

was in the Precincts of Day--he rejoiced--he smiled; his eyes fell, and

opposite to him he beheld the ghastly features, the lifeless eye, the livid

lip--of the hag of Vesuvius!



'Ha!' he cried, placing his hands before his eyes, as to shut out the grisly

vision, 'do I dream still?--Am I with the dead?'



'Mighty Hermes--no!  Thou art with one death-like, but not dead. Recognize

thy friend and slave.'



There was a long silence.  Slowly the shudders that passed over the limbs of

the Egyptian chased each other away, faintlier and faintlier dying till he

was himself again.



'It was a dream, then,' said he.  'Well--let me dream no more, or the day

cannot compensate for the pangs of night.  Woman, how camest thou here, and

wherefore?'



'I came to warn thee,' answered the sepulchral voice of the saga.



'Warn me!  The dream lied not, then?  Of what peril?'



'Listen to me.  Some evil hangs over this fated city.  Fly while it be time. 

Thou knowest that I hold my home on that mountain beneath which old

tradition saith there yet burn the fires of the river of Phlegethon; and in

my cavern is a vast abyss, and in that abyss I have of late marked a red and

dull stream creep slowly, slowly on; and heard many and mighty sounds

hissing and roaring through the gloom.  But last night, as I looked thereon,

behold the stream was no longer dull, but intensely and fiercely luminous;

and while I gazed, the beast that liveth with me, and was cowering by my

side, uttered a shrill howl, and fell down and died, and the slaver and

froth were round his lips.  I crept back to my lair; but I distinctly heard,

all the night, the rock shake and tremble; and, though the air was heavy and

still, there were the hissing of pent winds, and the grinding as of wheels,

beneath the ground.  So, when I rose this morning at the very birth of dawn,

I looked again down the abyss, and I saw vast fragments of stone borne black

and floatingly over the lurid stream; and the stream itself was broader,

fiercer, redder than the night before.  Then I went forth, and ascended to

the summit of the rock: and in that summit there appeared a sudden and vast

hollow, which I had never perceived before, from which curled a dim, faint

smoke; and the vapor was deathly, and I gasped, and sickened, and nearly

died.  I returned home.  I took my gold and my drugs, and left the

habitation of many years; for I remembered the dark Etruscan prophecy which

saith, "When the mountain opens, the city shall fall--when the smoke crowns

the Hill of the Parched Fields, there shall be woe and weeping in the

hearths of the Children of the Sea." Dread master, ere I leave these walls

for some more distant dwelling, I come to thee.  As thou livest, know I in

my heart that the earthquake that sixteen years ago shook this city to its

solid base, was but the forerunner of more deadly doom.  The walls of

Pompeii are built above the fields of the Dead, and the rivers of the

sleepless Hell.  Be warned and fly!'



'Witch, I thank thee for thy care of one not ungrateful.  On yon table

stands a cup of gold; take it, it is thine.  I dreamt not that there lived

one, out of the priesthood of Isis, who would have saved Arbaces from

destruction.  The signs thou hast seen in the bed of the extinct volcano,'

continued the Egyptian, musingly, 'surely tell of some coming danger to the

city; perhaps another earthquake--fiercer than the last.  Be that as it may,

there is a new reason for my hastening from these walls.  After this day I

will prepare my departure.  Daughter of Etruria, whither wendest thou?'



'I shall cross over to Herculaneum this day, and, wandering thence along the

coast, shall seek out a new home.  I am friendless: my two companions, the

fox and the snake, are dead.  Great Hermes, thou hast promised me twenty

additional years of life!'



'Aye,' said the Egyptian, 'I have promised thee.  But, woman,' he added,

lifting himself upon his arm, and gazing curiously on her face, 'tell me, I

pray thee, wherefore thou wishest to live?  What sweets dost thou discover

in existence?'



'It is not life that is sweet, but death that is awful,' replied the hag, in

a sharp, impressive tone, that struck forcibly upon the heart of the vain

star-seer.  He winced at the truth of the reply; and no longer anxious to

retain so uninviting a companion, he said, 'Time wanes; I must prepare for

the solemn spectacle of this day. Sister, farewell! enjoy thyself as thou

canst over the ashes of life.'



The hag, who had placed the costly gift of Arbaces in the loose folds of her

vest, now rose to depart.  When she had gained the door she paused, turned

back, and said, 'This may be the last time we meet on earth; but whither

flieth the flame when it leaves the ashes?--Wandering to and fro, up and

down, as an exhalation on the morass, the flame may be seen in the marshes

of the lake below; and the witch and the Magian, the pupil and the master,

the great one and the accursed one, may meet again.  Farewell!'



'Out, croaker!' muttered Arbaces, as the door closed on the hag's tattered

robes; and, impatient of his own thoughts, not yet recovered from the past

dream, he hastily summoned his slaves.



It was the custom to attend the ceremonials of the amphitheatre in festive

robes, and Arbaces arrayed himself that day with more than usual care.  His

tunic was of the most dazzling white: his many fibulae were formed from the

most precious stones: over his tunic flowed a loose eastern robe, half-gown,

half-mantle, glowing in the richest hues of the Tyrian dye; and the sandals,

that reached half way up the knee, were studded with gems, and inlaid with

gold.  In the quackeries that belonged to his priestly genius, Arbaces never

neglected, on great occasions, the arts which dazzle and impose upon the

vulgar; and on this day, that was for ever to release him, by the sacrifice

of Glaucus, from the fear of a rival and the chance of detection, he felt

that he was arraying himself as for a triumph or a nuptial feast.



It was customary for men of rank to be accompanied to the shows of the

amphitheatre by a procession of their slaves and freedmen; and the long

'family' of Arbaces were already arranged in order, to attend the litter of

their lord.



Only, to their great chagrin, the slaves in attendance on Ione, and the

worthy Sosia, as gaoler to Nydia, were condemned to remain at home.



'Callias,' said Arbaces, apart to his freedman, who was buckling on his

girdle, 'I am weary of Pompeii; I propose to quit it in three days, should

the wind favor.  Thou knowest the vessel that lies in the harbor which

belonged to Narses, of Alexandria; I have purchased it of him.  The day

after tomorrow we shall begin to remove my stores.'



'So soon!  'Tis well.  Arbaces shall be obeyed--and his ward, Ione?'



'Accompanies me.  Enough!--Is the morning fair?'



'Dim and oppressive; it will probably be intensely hot in the forenoon.'



'The poor gladiators, and more wretched criminals!  Descend, and see that

the slaves are marshalled.'



Left alone, Arbaces stepped into his chamber of study, and thence upon the

portico without.  He saw the dense masses of men pouring fast into the

amphitheatre, and heard the cry of the assistants, and the cracking of the

cordage, as they were straining aloft the huge awning under which the

citizens, molested by no discomforting ray, were to behold, at luxurious

ease, the agonies of their fellow creatures.  Suddenly a wild strange sound

went forth, and as suddenly died away--it was the roar of the lion.  There

was a silence in the distant crowd; but the silence was followed by joyous

laughter--they were making merry at the hungry impatience of the royal

beast.



'Brutes!' muttered the disdainful Arbaces are ye less homicides than I am? 

I slay but in self-defence--ye make murder pastime.'



He turned with a restless and curious eye, towards Vesuvius. Beautifully

glowed the green vineyards round its breast, and tranquil as eternity lay in

the breathless skies the form of the mighty hill.



'We have time yet, if the earthquake be nursing,' thought Arbaces; and he

turned from the spot.  He passed by the table which bore his mystic scrolls

and Chaldean calculations.



'August art!' he thought, 'I have not consulted thy decrees since I passed

the danger and the crisis they foretold.  What matter?--I know that

henceforth all in my path is bright and smooth. Have not events already

proved it?  Away, doubt--away, pity!  Reflect O my heart--reflect, for the

future, but two images--Empire and Ione!'







Chapter II



THE AMPHITHEATRE.



NYDIA, assured by the account of Sosia, on his return home, and satisfied

that her letter was in the hands of Sallust, gave herself up once more to

hope.  Sallust would surely lose no time in seeking the praetor--in coming

to the house of the Egyptian--in releasing her--in breaking the prison of

Calenus.  That very night Glaucus would be free.  Alas! the night

passed--the dawn broke; she heard nothing but the hurried footsteps of the

slaves along the hall and peristyle, and their voices in preparation for the

show.  By-and-by, the commanding voice of Arbaces broke on her ear--a

flourish of music rung out cheerily: the long procession were sweeping to

the amphitheatre to glut their eyes on the death-pangs of the Athenian!



The procession of Arbaces moved along slowly, and with much solemnity till

now, arriving at the place where it was necessary for such as came in

litters or chariots to alight, Arbaces descended from his vehicle, and

proceeded to the entrance by which the more distinguished spectators were

admitted.  His slaves, mingling with the humbler crowd, were stationed by

officers who received their tickets (not much unlike our modern Opera ones),

in places in the popularia (the seats apportioned to the vulgar).  And now,

from the spot where Arbaces sat, his eyes scanned the mighty and impatient

crowd that filled the stupendous theatre.



On the upper tier (but apart from the male spectators) sat women, their gay

dresses resembling some gaudy flower-bed; it is needless to add that they

were the most talkative part of the assembly; and many were the looks

directed up to them, especially from the benches appropriated to the young

and the unmarried men.  On the lower seats round the arena sat the more

high-born and wealthy visitors--the magistrates and those of senatorial or

equestrian dignity; the passages which, by corridors at the right and left,

gave access to these seats, at either end of the oval arena, were also the

entrances for the combatants.  Strong palings at these passages prevented

any unwelcome eccentricity in the movements of the beasts, and confined them

to their appointed prey.  Around the parapet which was raised above the

arena, and from which the seats gradually rose, were gladiatorial

inscriptions, and paintings wrought in fresco, typical of the entertainments

for which the place was designed. Throughout the whole building wound

invisible pipes, from which, as the day advanced, cooling and fragrant

showers were to be sprinkled over the spectators.  The officers of the

amphitheatre were still employed in the task of fixing the vast awning (or

velaria) which covered the whole, and which luxurious invention the

Campanians arrogated to themselves: it was woven of the whitest Apulian

wool, and variegated with broad stripes of crimson.  Owing either to some

inexperience on the part of the workmen, or to some defect in the machinery,

the awning, however, was not arranged that day so happily as usual; indeed,

from the immense space of the circumference, the task was always one of

great difficulty and art--so much so, that it could seldom be adventured in

rough or windy weather.  But the present day was so remarkably still that

there seemed to the spectators no excuse for the awkwardness of the

artificers; and when a large gap in the back of the awning was still

visible, from the obstinate refusal of one part of the velaria to ally

itself with the rest, the murmurs of discontent were loud and general.



The aedile Pansa, at whose expense the exhibition was given, looked

particularly annoyed at the defect, and, vowed bitter vengeance on the head

of the chief officer of the show, who, fretting, puffing, perspiring, busied

himself in idle orders and unavailing threats.



The hubbub ceased suddenly--the operators desisted--the crowd were

stilled--the gap was forgotten--for now, with a loud and warlike flourish of

trumpets, the gladiators, marshalled in ceremonious procession, entered the

arena.  They swept round the oval space very slowly and deliberately, in

order to give the spectators full leisure to admire their stern serenity of

feature--their brawny limbs and various arms, as well as to form such wagers

as the excitement of the moment might suggest.



'Oh!' cried the widow Fulvia to the wife of Pansa, as they leaned down from

their lofty bench, 'do you see that gigantic gladiator? how drolly he is

dressed!'



'Yes,' said the aedile's wife, with complacent importance, for she knew all

the names and qualities of each combatant; 'he is a retiarius or netter; he

is armed only, you see, with a three-pronged spear like a trident, and a

net; he wears no armor, only the fillet and the tunic.  He is a mighty man,

and is to fight with Sporus, yon thick-set gladiator, with the round shield

and drawn sword, but without body armor; he has not his helmet on now, in

order that you may see his face--how fearless it is!--by-and-by he will

fight with his vizor down.'



'But surely a net and a spear are poor arms against a shield and sword?'



'That shows how innocent you are, my dear Fulvia; the retiarius has

generally the best of it.'



'But who is yon handsome gladiator, nearly naked--is it not quite improper? 

By Venus! but his limbs are beautifully shaped!'



'It is Lydon, a young untried man! he has the rashness to fight yon other

gladiator similarly dressed, or rather undressed--Tetraides. They fight

first in the Greek fashion, with the cestus; afterwards they put on armor,

and try sword and shield.'



'He is a proper man, this Lydon; and the women, I am sure, are on his side.'



'So are not the experienced betters; Clodius offers three to one against

him!'



'Oh, Jove! how beautiful!' exclaimed the widow, as two gladiators, armed

cap-a-pie, rode round the arena on light and prancing steeds. Resembling

much the combatants in the tilts of the middle age, they bore lances and

round shields beautifully inlaid: their armor was woven intricately with

bands of iron, but it covered only the thighs and the right arms; short

cloaks, extending to the seat, gave a picturesque and graceful air to their

costume; their legs were naked, with the exception of sandals, which were

fastened a little above the ankle.  'Oh, beautiful!  Who are these?' asked

the widow.



'The one is named Berbix--he has conquered twelve times; the other assumes

the arrogant name of Nobilior.  They are both Gauls.'



While thus conversing, the first formalities of the show were over.  To

these succeeded a feigned combat with wooden swords between the various

gladiators matched against each other.  Amongst these, the skill of two

Roman gladiators, hired for the occasion, was the most admired; and next to

them the most graceful combatant was Lydon.  This sham contest did not last

above an hour, nor did it attract any very lively interest, except among

those connoisseurs of the arena to whom art was preferable to more coarse

excitement; the body of the spectators were rejoiced when it was over, and

when the sympathy rose to terror.  The combatants were now arranged in

pairs, as agreed beforehand; their weapons examined; and the grave sports of

the day commenced amidst the deepest silence--broken only by an exciting and

preliminary blast of warlike music.



It was often customary to begin the sports by the most cruel of all, and

some bestiarius, or gladiator appointed to the beasts, was slain first, as

an initiatory sacrifice.  But in the present instance, the experienced Pansa

thought it better that the sanguinary drama should advance, not decrease, in

interest and, accordingly, the execution of Olinthus and Glaucus was

reserved for the last.  It was arranged that the two horsemen should first

occupy the arena; that the foot gladiators, paired Off, should then be

loosed indiscriminately on the stage; that Glaucus and the lion should next

perform their part in the bloody spectacle; and the tiger and the Nazarene

be the grand finale.  And, in the spectacles of Pompeii, the reader of Roman

history must limit his imagination, nor expect to find those vast and

wholesale exhibitions of magnificent slaughter with which a Nero or a

Caligula regaled the inhabitants of the Imperial City.  The Roman shows,

which absorbed the more celebrated gladiators, and the chief proportion of

foreign beasts, were indeed the very reason why, in the lesser towns of the

empire, the sports of the amphitheatre were comparatively humane and rare;

and in this, as in other respects, Pompeii was but the miniature, the

microcosm of Rome.  Still, it was an awful and imposing spectacle, with

which modern times have, happily, nothing to compare--a vast theatre, rising

row upon row, and swarming with human beings, from fifteen to eighteen

thousand in number, intent upon no fictitious representation--no tragedy of

the stage--but the actual victory or defeat, the exultant life or the bloody

death, of each and all who entered the arena!



The two horsemen were now at either extremity of the lists (if so they might

be called); and, at a given signal from Pansa, the combatants started

simultaneously as in full collision, each advancing his round buckler, each

poising on high his light yet sturdy javelin; but just when within three

paces of his opponent, the steed of Berbix suddenly halted, wheeled round,

and, as Nobilior was borne rapidly by, his antagonist spurred upon him.  The

buckler of Nobilior, quickly and skillfully extended, received a blow which

otherwise would have been fatal.



'Well done, Nobilior!' cried the praetor, giving the first vent to the

popular excitement.



'Bravely struck, my Berbix!' answered Clodius from his seat.



And the wild murmur, swelled by many a shout, echoed from side to side.



The vizors of both the horsemen were completely closed (like those of the

knights in after times), but the head was, nevertheless, the great point of

assault; and Nobilior, now wheeling his charger with no less adroitness than

his opponent, directed his spear full on the helmet of his foe.  Berbix

raised his buckler to shield himself, and his quick-eyed antagonist,

suddenly lowering his weapon, pierced him through the breast.  Berbix reeled

and fell.



'Nobilior! Nobilior!' shouted the populace.



'I have lost ten sestertia,' said Clodius, between his teeth.



'Habet!--he has it,' said Pansa, deliberately.



The populace, not yet hardened into cruelty, made the signal of mercy; but

as the attendants of the arena approached, they found the kindness came too

late--the heart of the Gaul had been pierced, and his eyes were set in

death.  It was his life's blood that flowed so darkly over the sand and

sawdust of the arena.



'It is a pity it was so soon over--there was little enough for one's

trouble,' said the widow Fulvia.



'Yes--I have no compassion for Berbix.  Any one might have seen that

Nobilior did but feint.  Mark, they fix the fatal hook to the body--they

drag him away to the spoliarium--they scatter new sand over the stage! 

Pansa regrets nothing more than that he is not rich enough to strew the

arena with borax and cinnabar, as Nero used to do.'



'Well, if it has been a brief battle, it is quickly succeeded.  See my

handsome Lydon on the arena--ay--and the net-bearer too, and the swordsmen!

oh, charming!'



There were now on the arena six combatants: Niger and his net, matched

against Sporus with his shield and his short broadsword; Lydon and

Tetraides, naked save by a cincture round the waist, each armed only with a

heavy Greek cestus--and two gladiators from Rome, clad in complete steel,

and evenly matched with immense bucklers and pointed swords.



The initiatory contest between Lydon and Tetraides being less deadly than

that between the other combatants, no sooner had they advanced to the middle

of the arena than, as by common consent, the rest held back, to see how that

contest should be decided, and wait till fiercer weapons might replace the

cestus, ere they themselves commenced hostilities.  They stood leaning on

their arms and apart from each other, gazing on the show, which, if not

bloody enough, thoroughly to please the populace, they were still inclined

to admire, because its origin was of their ancestral Greece.



No person could, at first glance, have seemed less evenly matched than the

two antagonists.  Tetraides, though not taller than Lydon, weighed

considerably more; the natural size of his muscles was increased, to the

eyes of the vulgar, by masses of solid flesh; for, as it was a notion that

the contest of the cestus fared easiest with him who was plumpest, Tetraides

had encouraged to the utmost his hereditary predisposition to the portly. 

His shoulders were vast, and his lower limbs thick-set, double-jointed, and

slightly curved outward, in that formation which takes so much from beauty

to give so largely to strength.  But Lydon, except that he was slender even

almost to meagreness, was beautifully and delicately proportioned; and the

skilful might have perceived that, with much less compass of muscle than his

foe, that which he had was more seasoned--iron and compact.  In proportion,

too, as he wanted flesh, he was likely to possess activity; and a haughty

smile on his resolute face which strongly contrasted the solid heaviness of

his enemy's, gave assurance to those who beheld it, and united their hope to

their pity: so that, despite the disparity of their seeming strength, the

cry of the multitude was nearly as loud for Lydon as for Tetraides.



Whoever is acquainted with the modern prize-ring--whoever has witnessed the

heavy and disabling strokes which the human fist, skillfully directed, hath

the power to bestow--may easily understand how much that happy facility

would be increased by a band carried by thongs of leather round the arm as

high as the elbow, and terribly strengthened about the knuckles by a plate

of iron, and sometimes a plummet of lead.  Yet this, which was meant to

increase, perhaps rather diminished, the interest of the fray: for it

necessarily shortened its duration.  A very few blows, successfully and

scientifically planted, might suffice to bring the contest to a close; and

the battle did not, therefore, often allow full scope for the energy,

fortitude and dogged perseverance, that we technically style pluck, which

not unusually wins the day against superior science, and which heightens to

so painful a delight the interest in the battle and the sympathy for the

brave.



'Guard thyself!' growled Tetraides, moving nearer and nearer to his foe, who

rather shifted round him than receded.



Lydon did not answer, save by a scornful glance of his quick, vigilant eye. 

Tetraides struck--it was as the blow of a smith on a vice; Lydon sank

suddenly on one knee--the blow passed over his head.  Not so harmless was

Lydon's retaliation: he quickly sprung to his feet, and aimed his cestus

full on the broad breast of his antagonist.  Tetraides reeled--the populace

shouted.



'You are unlucky to-day,' said Lepidus to Clodius: 'you have lost one

bet----you will lose another.'



'By the gods! my bronzes go to the auctioneer if that is the case. I have no

less than a hundred sestertia upon Tetraides.  Ha, ha! see how he rallies! 

That was a home stroke: he has cut open Lydon's shoulder.  A Tetraides!--a

Tetraides!'



'But Lydon is not disheartened.  By Pollux! how well he keeps his temper. 

See how dexterously he avoids those hammer-like hands!--dodging now here,

now there--circling round and round.  Ah, poor Lydon! he has it again.'



'Three to one still on Tetraides!  What say you, Lepidus?'



'Well, nine sestertia to three--be it so!  What! again, Lydon?  He stops--he

gasps for breath.  By the gods, he is down.  No--he is again on his legs. 

Brave Lydon! Tetraides is encouraged--he laughs loud--he rushes on him.'



'Fool--success blinds him--he should be cautious.  Lydon's eye is like the

lynx's,' said Clodius, between his teeth.



'Ha, Clodius! saw you that?  Your man totters!  Another blow--he falls--he

falls!'



'Earth revives him, then.  He is once more up; but the blood rolls down his

face.'



'By the thunderer! Lydon wins it.  See how he presses on him! That blow on

the temple would have crushed an ox! it has crushed Tetraides.  He falls

again--he cannot move--habet!--habet!'



'Habet!' repeated Pansa.  'Take them out and give them the armor and

swords.'



'Noble editor,' said the officers, 'we fear that Tetraides will not recover

in time; howbeit, we will try.'



'Do so.'



In a few minutes the officers, who had dragged off the stunned and

insensible gladiator, returned with rueful countenances.  They feared for

his life; he was utterly incapacitated from re-entering the arena.



'In that case,' said Pansa, 'hold Lydon a subdititius; and the first

gladiator that is vanquished, let Lydon supply his place with the victor.'

The people shouted their applause at this sentence: then they again sunk

into deep silence.  The trumpet sounded loudly. The four combatants stood

each against each in prepared and stern array.



'Dost thou recognize the Romans, my Clodius; are they among the celebrated,

or are they merely ordinary?'



'Eumolpus is a good second-rate swordsman, my Lepidus.  Nepimus, the lesser

man, I have never seen before: but he is the son of one of the imperial

fiscales, and brought up in a proper school; doubtless they will show sport,

but I have no heart for the game; I cannot win back my money--I am undone. 

Curses on that Lydon! who could have supposed he was so dexterous or so

lucky?'



'Well, Clodius, shall I take compassion on you, and accept your own terms

with these Romans?'



'An even ten sestertia on Eumolpus, then?'



'What! when Nepimus is untried?  Nay, nay; that is to bad.'



'Well--ten to eight?'



'Agreed.'



While the contest in the amphitheatre had thus commenced, there was one in

the loftier benches for whom it had assumed, indeed, a poignant--a stifling

interest.  The aged father of Lydon, despite his Christian horror of the

spectacle, in his agonized anxiety for his son, had not been able to resist

being the spectator of his fate. One amidst a fierce crowd of strangers--the

lowest rabble of the populace--the old man saw, felt nothing, but the

form--the presence of his brave son!  Not a sound had escaped his lips when

twice he had seen him fall to the earth--only he had turned paler, and his

limbs trembled.  But he had uttered one low cry when he saw him victorious;

unconscious, alas! of the more fearful battle to which that victory was but

a prelude.



'My gallant boy!' said he, and wiped his eyes.



'Is he thy son said a brawny fellow to the right of the Nazarene; 'he has

fought well: let us see how he does by-and-by.  Hark! he is to fight the

first victor.  Now, old boy, pray the gods that that victor be neither of

the Romans! nor, next to them, the giant Niger.'



The old man sat down again and covered his face.  The fray for the moment

was indifferent to him--Lydon was not one of the combatants.  Yet--yet--the

thought flashed across him--the fray was indeed of deadly interest--the

first who fell was to make way for Lydon!  He started, and bent down, with

straining eyes and clasped hands, to view the encounter.



The first interest was attracted towards the combat of Niger with Sporus;

for this species of contest, from the fatal result which usually attended

it, and from the great science it required in either antagonist, was always

peculiarly inviting to the spectators.



They stood at a considerable distance from each other.  The singular helmet

which Sporus wore (the vizor of which was down) concealed his face; but the

features of Niger attracted a fearful and universal interest from their

compressed and vigilant ferocity. Thus they stood for some moments, each

eyeing each, until Sporus began slowly, and with great caution, to advance,

holding his sword pointed, like a modern fencer's, at the breast of his foe. 

Niger retreated as his antagonist advanced, gathering up his net with his

right hand, and never taking his small glittering eye from the movements of

the swordsman.  Suddenly when Sporus had approached nearly at arm's length,

the retiarius threw himself forward, and cast his net.  A quick inflection

of body saved the gladiator from the deadly snare! he uttered a sharp cry of

joy and rage, and rushed upon Niger: but Niger had already drawn in his net,

thrown it across his shoulders, and now fled round the lists with a

swiftness which the secutor in vain endeavored to equal.  The people laughed

and shouted aloud, to see the ineffectual efforts of the broad-shouldered

gladiator to overtake the flying giant: when, at that moment, their

attention was turned from these to the two Roman combatants.



They had placed themselves at the onset face to face, at the distance of

modern fencers from each other: but the extreme caution which both evinced

at first had prevented any warmth of engagement, and allowed the spectators

full leisure to interest themselves in the battle between Sporus and his

foe.  But the Romans were now heated into full and fierce encounter: they

pushed--returned--advanced on--retreated from each other with all that

careful yet scarcely perceptible caution which characterizes men well

experienced and equally matched.  But at this moment, Eumolpus, the elder

gladiator, by that dexterous back-stroke which was considered in the arena

so difficult to avoid, had wounded Nepimus in the side.  The people shouted;

Lepidus turned pale.



'Ho!' said Clodius, 'the game is nearly over.  If Eumolpus fights now the

quiet fight, the other will gradually bleed himself away.'



'But, thank the gods! he does not fight the backward fight. See!--he presses

hard upon Nepimus.  By Mars! but Nepimus had him there! the helmet rang

again!--Clodius, I shall win!'



'Why do I ever bet but at the dice?' groaned Clodius to himself;--or why

cannot one cog a gladiator?'



'A Sporus!--a Sporus!' shouted the populace, as Niger having now suddenly

paused, had again cast his net, and again unsuccessfully. He had not

retreated this time with sufficient agility--the sword of Sporus had

inflicted a severe wound upon his right leg; and, incapacitated to fly, he

was pressed hard by the fierce swordsman.  His great height and length of

arm still continued, however, to give him no despicable advantages; and

steadily keeping his trident at the front of his foe, he repelled him

successfully for several minutes. Sporus now tried, by great rapidity of

evolution, to get round his antagonist, who necessarily moved with pain and

slowness.  In so doing, he lost his caution--he advanced too near to the

giant--raised his arm to strike, and received the three points of the fatal

spear full in his breast!  He sank on his knee.  In a moment more, the

deadly net was cast over him, he struggled against its meshes in vain;

again--again--again he writhed mutely beneath the fresh strokes of the

trident--his blood flowed fast through the net and redly over the sand.  He

lowered his arms in acknowledgment of defeat.



The conquering retiarius withdrew his net, and leaning on his spear, looked

to the audience for their judgement.  Slowly, too, at the same moment, the

vanquished gladiator rolled his dim and despairing eyes around the theatre. 

From row to row, from bench to bench, there glared upon him but merciless

and unpitying eyes.



Hushed was the roar--the murmur!  The silence was dread, for it was no

sympathy; not a hand--no, not even a woman's hand--gave the signal of

charity and life!  Sporus had never been popular in the arena; and, lately,

the interest of the combat had been excited on behalf of the wounded Niger. 

The people were warmed into blood--the mimic fight had ceased to charm; the

interest had mounted up to the desire of sacrifice and the thirst of death!



The gladiator felt that his doom was sealed: he uttered no prayer--no groan. 

The people gave the signal of death!  In dogged but agonized submission, he

bent his neck to receive the fatal stroke.  And now, as the spear of the

retiarius was not a weapon to inflict instant and certain death, there

stalked into the arena a grim and fatal form, brandishing a short, sharp

sword, and with features utterly concealed beneath its vizor.  With slow and

measured steps, this dismal headsman approached the gladiator, still

kneeling--laid the left hand on his humbled crest--drew the edge of the

blade across his neck--turned round to the assembly, lest, in the last

moment, remorse should come upon them; the dread signal continued the same:

the blade glittered brightly in the air--fell--and the gladiator rolled upon

the sand; his limbs quivered--were still--he was a corpse.'



His body was dragged at once from the arena through the gate of death, and

thrown into the gloomy den termed technically the spoliarium.  And ere it

had well reached that destination, the strife between the remaining

combatants was decided.  The sword of Eumolpus had inflicted the death-wound

upon the less experienced combatant.  A new victim was added to the

receptacle of the slain.



Throughout that mighty assembly there now ran a universal movement; the

people breathed more freely, and resettled themselves in their seats.  A

grateful shower was cast over every row from the concealed conduits.  In

cool and luxurious pleasure they talked over the late spectacle of blood. 

Eumolpus removed his helmet, and wiped his brows; his close-curled hair and

short beard, his noble Roman features and bright dark eye attracted the

general admiration.  He was fresh, unwounded, unfatigued.



The editor paused, and proclaimed aloud that, as Niger's wound disabled him

from again entering the arena, Lydon was to be the successor to the

slaughtered Nepimus, and the new combatant of Eumolpus.



'Yet, Lydon,' added he, 'if thou wouldst decline the combat with one so

brave and tried, thou mayst have full liberty to do so. Eumolpus is not the

antagonist that was originally decreed for thee. Thou knowest best how far

thou canst cope with him.  If thou failest, thy doom is honorable death; if

thou conquerest, out of my own purse I will double the stipulated prize.'



The people shouted applause.  Lydon stood in the lists, he gazed around;

high above he beheld the pale face, the straining eyes, of his father.  He

turned away irresolute for a moment.  No! the conquest of the cestus was not

sufficient--he had not yet won the prize of victory--his father was still a

slave!



'Noble aedile!' he replied, in a firm and deep tone, 'I shrink not from this

combat.  For the honour of Pompeii, I demand that one trained by its

long-celebrated lanista shall do battle with this Roman.'



The people shouted louder than before.



'Four to one against Lydon!' said Clodius to Lepidus.



'I would not take twenty to one!  Why, Eumolpus is a very Achilles, and this

poor fellow is but a tyro!'



Eumolpus gazed hard on the face of Lydon; he smiled; yet the smile was

followed by a slight and scarce audible sigh--a touch of compassionate

emotion, which custom conquered the moment the heart acknowledged it.



And now both, clad in complete armor, the sword drawn, the vizor closed, the

two last combatants of the arena (ere man, at least, was matched with

beast), stood opposed to each other.



It was just at this time that a letter was delivered to the proctor by one

of the attendants of the arena; he removed the cincture--glanced over it for

a moment--his countenance betrayed surprise and embarrassment.  He re-read

the letter, and then muttering--'Tush! it is impossible!--the man must be

drunk, even in the morning, to dream of such follies!'--threw it carelessly

aside, and gravely settled himself once more in the attitude of attention to

the sports.



The interest of the public was wound up very high.  Eumolpus had at first

won their favor; but the gallantry of Lydon, and his well-timed allusion to

the honour of the Pompeian lanista, had afterwards given the latter the

preference in their eyes.



'Holla, old fellow!' said Medon's neighbor to him.  'Your son is hardly

matched; but never fear, the editor will not permit him to be slain--no, nor

the people neither; he has behaved too bravely for that.  Ha! that was a

home thrust!--well averted, by Pollux!  At him again, Lydon!--they stop to

breathe.  What art thou muttering, old boy



'Prayers!' answered Medon, with a more calm and hopeful mien than he had yet

maintained.



'Prayers!--trifles!  The time for gods to carry a man away in a cloud is

gone now.  Ha! Jupiter! what a blow!  Thy side--thy side!--take care of thy

side, Lydon!'



There was a convulsive tremor throughout the assembly.  A fierce blow from

Eumolpus, full on the crest, had brought Lydon to his knee.



'Habet!--he has it!' cried a shrill female voice; 'he has it!' It was the

voice of the girl who had so anxiously anticipated the sacrifice of some

criminal to the beasts.



'Be silent, child!' said the wife of Pansa, haughtily.  'Non habet!--he is

not wounded!'



'I wish he were, if only to spite old surly Medon,' muttered the girl.



Meanwhile Lydon, who had hitherto defended himself with great skill and

valor, began to give way before the vigorous assaults of the practised

Roman; his arm grew tired, his eye dizzy, he breathed hard and painfully. 

The combatants paused again for breath.



'Young man,' said Eumolpus, in a low voice, 'desist; I will wound thee

slightly--then lower thy arms; thou hast propitiated the editor and the

mob--thou wilt be honorably saved!'



'And my father still enslaved!' groaned Lydon to himself.  'No! death or his

freedom.'



At that thought, and seeing that, his strength not being equal to the

endurance of the Roman, everything depended on a sudden and desperate

effort, he threw himself fiercely on Eumolpus; the Roman warily

retreated--Lydon thrust again--Eumolpus drew himself aside--the sword grazed

his cuirass--Lydon's breast was exposed--the Roman plunged his sword through

the joints of the armor, not meaning, however, to inflict a deep wound;

Lydon, weak and exhausted, fell forward, fell right on the point: it passed

through and through, even to the back.  Eumolpus drew forth his blade; Lydon

still made an effort to regain his balance--his sword left his grasp--he

struck mechanically at the gladiator with his naked hand, and fell prostrate

on the arena.  With one accord, editor and assembly made the signal of

mercy--the officers of the arena approached--they took off the helmet of the

vanquished.  He still breathed; his eyes rolled fiercely on his foe; the

savageness he had acquired in his calling glared from his gaze, and lowered

upon the brow darkened already with the shades of death; then, with a

convulsive groan, with a half start, he lifted his eyes above.  They rested

not on the face of the editor nor on the pitying brows of his relenting

judges.  He saw them not; they were as if the vast space was desolate and

bare; one pale agonizing face alone was all he recognized--one cry of a

broken heart was all that, amidst the murmurs and the shouts of the

populace, reached his ear.  The ferocity vanished from his brow; a soft, a

tender expression of sanctifying but despairing love played over his

features--played--waned--darkened!  His face suddenly became locked and

rigid, resuming its former fierceness.  He fell upon the earth.



'Look to him,' said the aedile; 'he has done his duty!'



The officers dragged him off to the spoliarium.



'A true type of glory, and of its fate!' murmured Arbaces to himself, and

his eye, glancing round the amphitheatre, betrayed so much of disdain and

scorn, that whoever encountered it felt his breath suddenly arrested, and

his emotions frozen into one sensation of abasement and of awe.



Again rich perfumes were wafted around the theatre; the attendants sprinkled

fresh sand over the arena.



'Bring forth the lion and Glaucus the Athenian,' said the editor.



And a deep and breathless hush of overwrought interest, and intense (yet,

strange to say, not unpleasing) terror lay, like a mighty and awful dream,

over the assembly.







Chapter III



SALLUST AND NYDIA'S LETTER.



THRICE had Sallust awakened from his morning sleep, and thrice, recollecting

that his friend was that day to perish, had he turned himself with a deep

sigh once more to court oblivion.  His sole object in life was to avoid

pain; and where he could not avoid, at least to forget it.



At length, unable any longer to steep his consciousness in slumber, he

raised himself from his incumbent posture, and discovered his favorite

freedman sitting by his bedside as usual; for Sallust, who, as I have said,

had a gentlemanlike taste for the polite letters, was accustomed to be read

to for an hour or so previous to his rising in the morning.



'No books to-day! no more Tibullus! no more Pindar for me!  Pindar! alas,

alas! the very name recalls those games to which our arena is the savage

successor.  Has it begun--the amphitheatre? are its rites commenced?'



'Long since, O Sallust!  Did you not hear the trumpets and the trampling

feet?'



'Ay, ay; but the gods be thanked, I was drowsy, and had only to turn round

to fall asleep again.'



'The gladiators must have been long in the ring.'



'The wretches!  None of my people have gone to the spectacle?'



'Assuredly not; your orders were too strict.'



'That is well--would the day were over!  What is that letter yonder on the

table?'



'That!  Oh, the letter brought to you last night, when you

were--too--too...'



'Drunk to read it, I suppose.  No matter, it cannot be of much importance.'



'Shall I open it for you, Sallust,'



'Do: anything to divert my thoughts.  Poor Glaucus!'



The freedman opened the letter.  'What! Greek?' said he: some learned lady,

I suppose.' He glanced over the letter, and for some moments the irregular

lines traced by the blind girl's hand puzzled him.  Suddenly, however, his

countenance exhibited emotion and surprise.  'Good gods! noble Sallust! what

have we done not to attend to this before?  Hear me read!



'"Nydia, the slave, to Sallust, the friend of Glaucus!  I am a prisoner in

the house of Arbaces.  Hasten to the praetor! procure my release, and we

shall yet save Glaucus from the lion.  There is another prisoner within

these walls, whose witness can exonerate the Athenian from the charge

against him--one who saw the crime--who can prove the criminal in a villain

hitherto unsuspected.  Fly! hasten! quick! quick!  Bring with you armed men,

lest resistance be made, and a cunning and dexterous smith; for the dungeon

of my fellow-prisoner is thick and strong.  Oh! by thy right hand and thy

father's ashes, lose not a moment!"'



'Great Jove!' exclaimed Sallust, starting, 'and this day--nay, within this

hour, perhaps, he dies.  What is to be done?  I will instantly to the

praetor.'



'Nay; not so.  The praetor (as well as Pansa, the editor himself) is the

creature of the mob; and the mob will not hear of delay; they will not be

balked in the very moment of expectation.  Besides, the publicity of the

appeal would forewarn the cunning Egyptian.  It is evident that he has some

interest in these concealments.  No; fortunately thy slaves are in thy

house.'



'I seize thy meaning,' interrupted Sallust: 'arm the slaves instantly.  The

streets are empty.  We will ourselves hasten to the house of Arbaces, and

release the prisoners.  Quick! quick!  What ho! Davus there!  My gown and

sandals, the papyrus and a reed.' I will write to the praetor, to beseech

him to delay the sentence of Glaucus, for that, within an hour, we may yet

prove him innocent.  So, so, that is well.  Hasten with this, Davus, to the

praetor, at the amphitheatre.  See it given to his own hand.  Now then, O ye

gods! whose providence Epicurus denied, befriend me, and I will call

Epicurus a liar!'







Chapter IV



THE AMPHITHEATRE ONCE MORE.



GLAUCUS and Olinthus had been placed together in that gloomy and narrow cell

in which the criminals of the arena awaited their last and fearful struggle. 

Their eyes, of late accustomed to the darkness, scanned the faces of each

other in this awful hour, and by that dim light, the paleness, which chased

away the natural hues from either cheek, assumed a yet more ashy and ghastly

whiteness.  Yet their brows were erect and dauntless--their limbs did not

tremble--their lips were compressed and rigid.  The religion of the one, the

pride of the other, the conscious innocence of both, and, it may be, the

support derived from their mutual companionship, elevated the victim into

the hero.



'Hark! hearest thou that shout They are growling over their human blood,'

said Olinthus.



'I hear; my heart grows sick; but the gods support me.'



'The gods!  O rash young man!  in this hour recognize only the One God. 

Have I not taught thee in the dungeon, wept for thee, prayed for thee?--in

my zeal and in my agony, have I not thought more of thy salvation than my

own?'



'Brave friend!' answered Glaucus, solemnly, 'I have listened to thee with

awe, with wonder, and with a secret tendency towards conviction.  Had our

lives been spared, I might gradually have weaned myself from the tenets of

my own faith, and inclined to thine; but, in this last hour it were a craven

thing, and a base, to yield to hasty terror what should only be the result

of lengthened meditation.  Were I to embrace thy creed, and cast down my

father's gods, should I not be bribed by thy promise of heaven, or awed by

thy threats of hell? Olinthus, no!  Think we of each other with equal

charity--I honoring thy sincerity--thou pitying my blindness or my obdurate

courage.  As have been my deeds, such will be my reward; and the Power or

Powers above will not judge harshly of human error, when it is linked with

honesty of purpose and truth of heart.  Speak we no more of this.  Hush!

Dost thou hear them drag yon heavy body through the passage?  Such as that

clay will be ours soon.'



'O Heaven!  O Christ! already I behold ye!' cried the fervent Olinthus,

lifting up his hands; 'I tremble not--I rejoice that the prison-house shall

be soon broken.'



Glaucus bowed his head in silence.  He felt the distinction between his

fortitude and that of his fellow-sufferer.  The heathen did not tremble; but

the Christian exulted.



The door swung gratingly back--the gleam of spears shot along the walls.



'Glaucus the Athenian, thy time has come,' said a loud and clear voice; 'the

lion awaits thee.'



'I am ready,' said the Athenian.  'Brother and co-mate, one last embrace! 

Bless me--and farewell!'



The Christian opened his arms--he clasped the young heathen to his

breast--he kissed his forehead and cheek--he sobbed aloud--his tears flowed

fast and hot over the features of his new friend.



'Oh! could I have converted thee, I had not wept.  Oh! that I might say to

thee, "We two shall sup this night in Paradise!"'



'It may be so yet,' answered the Greek, with a tremulous voice. 'They whom

death part not, may meet yet beyond the grave: on the earth--on the

beautiful, the beloved earth, farewell for ever!--Worthy officer, I attend

you.'



Glaucus tore himself away; and when he came forth into the air, its breath,

which, though sunless, was hot and arid, smote witheringly upon him.  His

frame, not yet restored from the effects of the deadly draught, shrank and

trembled.  The officers supported him.



'Courage!' said one; 'thou art young, active, well knit.  They give thee a

weapon! despair not, and thou mayst yet conquer.'



Glaucus did not reply; but, ashamed of his infirmity, he made a desperate

and convulsive effort, and regained the firmness of his nerves.  They

anointed his body, completely naked, save by a cincture round the loins,

placed the stilus (vain weapon!) in his hand, and led him into the arena.



And now when the Greek saw the eyes of thousands and tens of thousands upon

him, he no longer felt that he was mortal.  All evidence of fear--all fear

itself--was gone.  A red and haughty flush spread over the paleness of his

features--he towered aloft to the full of his glorious stature.  In the

elastic beauty of his limbs and form, in his intent but unfrowning brow, in

the high disdain, and in the indomitable soul, which breathed visibly, which

spoke audibly, from his attitude, his lip, his eye--he seemed the very

incarnation, vivid and corporeal, of the valor of his land--of the divinity

of its worship--at once a hero and a god!



The murmur of hatred and horror at his crime, which had greeted his

entrance, died into the silence of involuntary admiration and

half-compassionate respect; and with a quick and convulsive sigh, that

seemed to move the whole mass of life as if it were one body, the gaze of

the spectators turned from the Athenian to a dark uncouth object in the

centre of the arena.  It was the grated den of the lion!



'By Venus, how warm it is!' said Fulvia; 'yet there is no sun. Would that

those stupid sailors could have fastened up that gap in the awning!'



'Oh! it is warm, indeed.  I turn sick--I faint!' said the wife of Pansa;

even her experienced stoicism giving way at the struggle about to take

place.



The lion had been kept without food for twenty-four hours, and the animal

had, during the whole morning, testified a singular and restless uneasiness,

which the keeper had attributed to the pangs of hunger.  Yet its bearing

seemed rather that of fear than of rage; its roar was painful and

distressed; it hung its head--snuffed the air through the bars--then lay

down--started again--and again uttered its wild and far-resounding cries. 

And now, in its den, it lay utterly dumb and mute, with distended nostrils

forced hard against the grating, and disturbing with a heaving breath, the

sand below on the arena.



The editor's lip quivered, and his cheek grew pale; he looked anxiously

around--hesitated--delayed; the crowd became impatient. Slowly he gave the

sign; the keeper, who was behind the den, cautiously removed the grating,

and the lion leaped forth with a mighty and glad roar of release.  The

keeper hastily retreated through the grated passage leading from the arena,

and left the lord of the forest--and his prey.



Glaucus had bent his limbs so as to give himself the firmest posture at the

expected rush of the lion, with his small and shining weapon raised on high,

in the faint hope that one well-directed thrust (for he knew that he should

have time but for one) might penetrate through the eye to the brain of his

grim foe.



But, to the unutterable astonishment of all, the beast seemed not even aware

of the presence of the criminal.



At the first moment of its release it halted abruptly in the arena, raised

itself half on end, snuffing the upward air with impatient sighs; then

suddenly it sprang forward, but not on the Athenian.  At half-speed it

circled round and round the space, turning its vast head from side to side

with an anxious and perturbed gaze, as if seeking only some avenue of

escape; once or twice it endeavored to leap up the parapet that divided it

from the audience, and, on failing, uttered rather a baffled howl than its

deep-toned and kingly roar.  It evinced no sign, either of wrath or hunger;

its tail drooped along the sand, instead of lashing its gaunt sides; and its

eye, though it wandered at times to Glaucus, rolled again listlessly from

him.  At length, as if tired of attempting to escape, it crept with a moan

into its cage, and once more laid itself down to rest.



The first surprise of the assembly at the apathy of the lion soon grew

converted into resentment at its cowardice; and the populace already merged

their pity for the fate of Glaucus into angry compassion for their own

disappointment.



The editor called to the keeper.



'How is this?  Take the goad, prick him forth, and then close the door of

the den.'



As the keeper, with some fear, but more astonishment, was preparing to obey,

a loud cry was heard at one of the entrances of the arena; there was a

confusion, a bustle--voices of remonstrance suddenly breaking forth, and

suddenly silenced at the reply.  All eyes turned in wonder at the

interruption, towards the quarter of the disturbance; the crowd gave way,

and suddenly Sallust appeared on the senatorial benches, his hair

disheveled--breathless--heated--half-exhausted.  He cast his eyes hastily

round the ring.  'Remove the Athenian,' he cried; 'haste--he is innocent! 

Arrest Arbaces the Egyptian--HE is the murderer of Apaecides!'



'Art thou mad, O Sallust!' said the praetor, rising from his seat. 'What

means this raving?'



'Remove the Athenian!--Quick! or his blood be on your head. Praetor, delay,

and you answer with your own life to the emperor!  I bring with me the

eye-witness to the death of the priest Apaecides. Room there!--stand

back!--give way!  People of Pompeii, fix every eye upon Arbaces--there he

sits!  Room there for the priest Calenus!'



Pale, haggard, fresh from the jaws of famine and of death, his face fallen,

his eyes dull as a vulture's, his broad frame gaunt as a skeleton--Calenus

was supported into the very row in which Arbaces sat.  His releasers had

given him sparingly of food; but the chief sustenance that nerved his feeble

limbs was revenge!



'The priest Calenus!--Calenus!' cried the mob.  'Is it he?  No--it is a dead

man?'



'It is the priest Calenus,' said the praetor, gravely.  'What hast thou to

say?'



'Arbaces of Egypt is the murderer of Apaecides, the priest of Isis; these

eyes saw him deal the blow.  It is from the dungeon into which he plunged

me--it is from the darkness and horror of a death by famine--that the gods

have raised me to proclaim his crime!  Release the Athenian--he is

innocent!'



'It is for this, then, that the lion spared him.  A miracle! a miracle!'

cried Pansa.



'A miracle; a miracle!' shouted the people; 'remove the Athenian--Arbaces to

the lion!'



And that shout echoed from hill to vale--from coast to sea--'Arbaces to the

lion!'



Officers, remove the accused Glaucus--remove, but guard him yet,' said the

praetor.  'The gods lavish their wonders upon this day.'



As the praetor gave the word of release, there was a cry of joy--a female

voice--a child's voice--and it was of joy!  It rang through the heart of the

assembly with electric force--it, was touching, it was holy, that child's

voice!  And the populace echoed it back with sympathizing congratulation!



'Silence!' said the grave praetor--'who is there?'



'The blind girl--Nydia,' answered Sallust; 'it is her hand that has raised

Calenus from the grave, and delivered Glaucus from the lion.'



'Of this hereafter,' said the praetor.  'Calenus, priest of Isis, thou

accusest Arbaces of the murder of Apaecides?'



'I do.'



'Thou didst behold the deed?'



'Praetor--with these eyes...'



'Enough at present--the details must be reserved for more suiting time and

place.  Arbaces of Egypt, thou hearest the charge against thee--thou hast

not yet spoken--what hast thou to say.



The gaze of the crowd had been long riveted on Arbaces: but not until the

confusion which he had betrayed at the first charge of Sallust and the

entrance of Calenus had subsided.  At the shout, 'Arbaces to the lion!' he

had indeed trembled, and the dark bronze of his cheek had taken a paler hue. 

But he had soon recovered his haughtiness and self-control.  Proudly he

returned the angry glare of the countless eyes around him; and replying now

to the question of the praetor, he said, in that accent so peculiarly

tranquil and commanding, which characterized his tones:



'Praetor, this charge is so mad that it scarcely deserves reply. My first

accuser is the noble Sallust--the most intimate friend of Glaucus! my second

is a priest; I revere his garb and calling--but, people of Pompeii! ye know

somewhat of the character of Calenus--he is griping and gold-thirsty to a

proverb; the witness of such men is to be bought!  Praetor, I am innocent!'



'Sallust,' said the magistrate, 'where found you Calenus?'



'In the dungeons of Arbaces.'



'Egyptian,' said the praetor, frowning, 'thou didst, then, dare to imprison

a priest of the gods--and wherefore?'



'Hear me,' answered Arbaces, rising calmly, but with agitation visible in

his face.  'This man came to threaten that he would make against me the

charge he has now made, unless I would purchase his silence with half my

fortune: I remonstrated--in vain.  Peace there--let not the priest interrupt

me!  Noble praetor--and ye, O people!  I was a stranger in the land--I knew

myself innocent of crime--but the witness of a priest against me might yet

destroy me.  In my perplexity I decoyed him to the cell whence he has been

released, on pretence that it was the coffer-house of my gold.  I resolved

to detain him there until the fate of the true criminal was sealed, and his

threats could avail no longer; but I meant no worse.  I may have erred--but

who amongst ye will not acknowledge the equity of self-preservation?  Were I

guilty, why was the witness of this priest silent at the trial?--then I had

not detained or concealed him.  Why did he not proclaim my guilt when I

proclaimed that of Glaucus? Praetor, this needs an answer.  For the rest, I

throw myself on your laws.  I demand their protection.  Remove hence the

accused and the accuser.  I will willingly meet, and cheerfully abide by,

the decision of the legitimate tribunal.  This is no place for further

parley.'



'He says right,' said the praetor.  'Ho! guards--remove Arbaces--guard

Calenus!  Sallust, we hold you responsible for your accusation. Let the

sports be resumed.'



'What!' cried Calenus, turning round to the people, 'shall Isis be thus

contemned?  Shall the blood of Apaecides yet cry for vengeance? Shall

justice be delayed now, that it may be frustrated hereafter? Shall the lion

be cheated of his lawful prey?  A god! a god!--I feel the god rush to my

lips!  To the lion--to the lion with Arbaces!'



His exhausted frame could support no longer the ferocious malice of the

priest; he sank on the ground in strong convulsions--the foam gathered to

his mouth--he was as a man, indeed, whom a supernatural power had entered! 

The people saw and shuddered.



'It is a god that inspires the holy man!  To the lion with the Egyptian!'



With that cry up sprang--on moved--thousands upon thousands! They rushed

from the heights--they poured down in the direction of the Egyptian.  In

vain did the aedile command--in vain did the praetor lift his voice and

proclaim the law.  The people had been already rendered savage by the

exhibition of blood--they thirsted for more--their superstition was aided by

their ferocity.  Aroused--inflamed by the spectacle of their victims, they

forgot the authority of their rulers.  It was one of those dread popular

convulsions common to crowds wholly ignorant, half free and half servile;

and which the peculiar constitution of the Roman provinces so frequently

exhibited.  The power of the praetor was as a reed beneath the whirlwind;

still, at his word the guards had drawn themselves along the lower benches,

on which the upper classes sat separate from the vulgar.  They made but a

feeble barrier--the waves of the human sea halted for a moment, to enable

Arbaces to count the exact moment of his doom!  In despair, and in a terror

which beat down even pride, he glanced his eyes over the rolling and rushing

crowd--when, right above them, through the wide chasm which had been left in

the velaria, he beheld a strange and awful apparition--he beheld--and his

craft restored his courage!



He stretched his hand on high; over his lofty brow and royal features there

came an expression of unutterable solemnity and command.



'Behold!' he shouted with a voice of thunder, which stilled the roar of the

crowd; 'behold how the gods protect the guiltless!  The fires of the

avenging Orcus burst forth against the false witness of my accusers!'



The eyes of the crowd followed the gesture of the Egyptian, and beheld, with

ineffable dismay, a vast vapor shooting from the summit of Vesuvius, in the

form of a gigantic pine-tree; the trunk, blackness--the branches, fire!--a

fire that shifted and wavered in its hues with every moment, now fiercely

luminous, now of a dull and dying red, that again blazed terrifically forth

with intolerable glare!



There was a dead, heart-sunken silence--through which there suddenly broke

the roar of the lion, which was echoed back from within the building by the

sharper and fiercer yells of its fellow-beast. Dread seers were they of the

Burden of the Atmosphere, and wild prophets of the wrath to come!



Then there arose on high the universal shrieks of women; the men stared at

each other, but were dumb.  At that moment they felt the earth shake beneath

their feet; the walls of the theatre trembled: and, beyond in the distance,

they heard the crash of falling roofs; an instant more and the

mountain-cloud seemed to roll towards them, dark and rapid, like a torrent;

at the same time, it cast forth from its bosom a shower of ashes mixed with

vast fragments of burning stone!  Over the crushing vines--over the desolate

streets--over the amphitheatre itself--far and wide--with many a mighty

splash in the agitated sea--fell that awful shower!



No longer thought the crowd of justice or of Arbaces; safety for themselves

was their sole thought.  Each turned to fly--each dashing, pressing,

crushing, against the other.  Trampling recklessly over the fallen--amidst

groans, and oaths, and prayers, and sudden shrieks, the enormous crowd

vomited itself forth through the numerous passages. Whither should they fly? 

Some, anticipating a second earthquake, hastened to their homes to load

themselves with their more costly goods, and escape while it was yet time;

others, dreading the showers of ashes that now fell fast, torrent upon

torrent, over the streets, rushed under the roofs of the nearest houses, or

temples, or sheds--shelter of any kind--for protection from the terrors of

the open air.  But darker, and larger, and mightier, spread the cloud above

them.  It was a sudden and more ghastly Night rushing upon the realm of

Noon!







Chapter V



THE CELL OF THE PRISONER AND THE DEN OF THE DEAD.  GRIEF UNCONSCIOUS OF 

HORROR.



STUNNED by his reprieve, doubting that he was awake, Glaucus had been led by

the officers of the arena into a small cell within the walls of the theatre. 

They threw a loose robe over his form, and crowded round in congratulation

and wonder.  There was an impatient and fretful cry without the cell; the

throng gave way, and the blind girl, led by some gentler hand, flung herself

at the feet of Glaucus.



'It is I who have saved thee,' she sobbed; now let me die!'



'Nydia, my child!--my preserver!'



'Oh, let me feel thy touch--thy breath!  Yes, yes, thou livest! We are not

too late!  That dread door, methought it would never yield! and Calenus--oh!

his voice was as the dying wind among tombs--we had to wait--gods! it seemed

hours ere food and wine restored to him something of strength.  But thou

livest! thou livest yet! And I--I have saved thee!'



This affecting scene was soon interrupted by the event just described.



'The mountain! the earthquake!' resounded from side to side.  The officers

fled with the rest; they left Glaucus and Nydia to save themselves as they

might.



As the sense of the dangers around them flashed on the Athenian, his

generous heart recurred to Olinthus.  He, too, was reprieved from the tiger

by the hand of the gods; should he be left to a no less fatal death in the

neighboring cell?  Taking Nydia by the hand, Glaucus hurried across the

passages; he gained the den of the Christian!  He found Olinthus kneeling

and in prayer.



'Arise! arise! my friend,' he cried.  'Save thyself, and fly! See!  Nature

is thy dread deliverer!' He led forth the bewildered Christian, and pointed

to a cloud which advanced darker and darker, disgorging forth showers of

ashes and pumice stones--and bade him hearken to the cries and trampling

rush of the scattered crowd.



'This is the hand of God--God be praised!' said Olinthus, devoutly.



'Fly! seek thy brethren!--Concert with them thy escape.  Farewell!'



Olinthus did not answer, neither did he mark the retreating form of his

friend.  High thoughts and solemn absorbed his soul: and in the enthusiasm

of his kindling heart, he exulted in the mercy of God rather than trembled

at the evidence of His power.



At length he roused himself, and hurried on, he scarce knew whither.



The open doors of a dark, desolate cell suddenly appeared on his path;

through the gloom within there flared and flickered a single lamp; and by

its light he saw three grim and naked forms stretched on the earth in death. 

His feet were suddenly arrested; for, amidst the terror of that drear

recess--the spoliarium of the arena--he heard a low voice calling on the

name of Christ!



He could not resist lingering at that appeal: he entered the den, and his

feet were dabbled in the slow streams of blood that gushed from the corpses

over the sand.



'Who,' said the Nazarene, 'calls upon the son of God?'



No answer came forth; and turning round, Olinthus beheld, by the light of

the lamp, an old grey-headed man sitting on the floor, and supporting in his

lap the head of one of the dead.  The features of the dead man were firmly

and rigidly locked in the last sleep; but over the lip there played a fierce

smile--not the Christian's smile of hope, but the dark sneer of hatred and

defiance.  Yet on the face still lingered the beautiful roundness of early

youth.  The hair curled thick and glossy over the unwrinkled brow; and the

down of manhood but slightly shaded the marble of the hueless cheek.  And

over this face bent one of such unutterable sadness--of such yearning

tenderness--of such fond and such deep despair!  The tears of the old man


fell fast and hot, but he did not feel them; and when his lips moved, and he

mechanically uttered the prayer of his benign and hopeful faith, neither his

heart nor his sense responded to the words: it was but the involuntary

emotion that broke from the lethargy of his mind.  His boy was dead, and had

died for him!--and the old man's heart was broken!



'Medon!' said Olinthus, pityingly, 'arise, and fly!  God is forth upon the

wings of the elements!  The New Gomorrah is doomed!--Fly, ere the fires

consume thee!'



'He was ever so full of life!--he cannot be dead!  Come hither!--place your

hand on his heart!--sure it beats yet?'



'Brother, the soul has fled!  We will remember it in our prayers! Thou canst

not reanimate the dumb clay!  Come, come--hark! while I speak, yon crashing

walls!--hark! yon agonizing cries!  Not a moment is to be lost!--Come!'



'I hear nothing!' said Medon, shaking his grey hair.  'The poor boy, his

love murdered him!'



'Come! come! forgive this friendly force.'



'What!  Who could sever the father from the son?' And Medon clasped the body

tightly in his embrace, and covered it with passionate kisses.  'Go!' said

he, lifting up his face for one moment.  'Go!--we must be alone!'



'Alas!' said the compassionate Nazarene, 'Death hath severed ye already!'



The old man smiled very calmly.  'No, no, no!' muttered, his voice growing

lower with each word--'Death has been more kind!'



With that his head drooped on His son's breast--his arms relaxed their

grasp.  Olinthus caught him by the hand--the pulse had ceased to beat!  The

last words of the father were the words of truth--Death had been more kind!



Meanwhile Glaucus and Nydia were pacing swiftly up the perilous and fearful

streets.  The Athenian had learned from his preserver that Ione was yet in

the house of Arbaces.  Thither he fled, to release--to save her!  The few

slaves whom the Egyptian had left at his mansion when he had repaired in

long procession to the amphitheatre, had been able to offer no resistance to

the armed band of Sallust; and when afterwards the volcano broke forth, they

had huddled together, stunned and frightened, in the inmost recesses of the

house.  Even the tall Ethiopian had forsaken his post at the door; and

Glaucus (who left Nydia without--the poor Nydia, jealous once more, even in

such an hour!) passed on through the vast hall without meeting one from whom

to learn the chamber of Ione.  Even as he passed, however, the darkness that

covered the heavens increased so rapidly that it was with difficulty he

could guide his steps.  The flower-wreathed columns seemed to reel and

tremble; and with every instant he heard the ashes fall cranchingly into the

roofless peristyle.  He ascended to the upper rooms--breathless he paced

along, shouting out aloud the name of Ione; and at length he heard, at the

end of a gallery, a voice--her voice, in wondering reply!  To rush

forward--to shatter the door--to seize Ione in his arms--to hurry from the

mansion--seemed to him the work of an instant!  Scarce had he gained the

spot where Nydia was, than he heard steps advancing towards the house, and

recognized the voice of Arbaces, who had returned to seek his wealth and

Ione ere he fled from the doomed Pompeii.  But so dense was already the

reeking atmosphere, that the foes saw not each other, though so near--save

that, dimly in the gloom, Glaucus caught the moving outline of the snowy

robes of the Egyptian.



They hastened onward--those three.  Alas! whither?  They now saw not a step

before them--the blackness became utter.  They were encompassed with doubt

and horror!--and the death he had escaped seemed to Glaucus only to have

changed its form and augmented its victims.







Chapter VI



CALENUS AND BURBO.  DIOMED AND CLODIUS.  THE GIRL OF THE AMPHITHEATRE AND 

JULIA.



THE sudden catastrophe which had, as it were, riven the very bonds of

society, and left prisoner and jailer alike free, had soon rid Calenus of

the guards to whose care the praetor had consigned him.  And when the

darkness and the crowd separated the priest from his attendants, he hastened

with trembling steps towards the temple of his goddess.  As he crept along,

and ere the darkness was complete, he felt himself suddenly caught by the

robe, and a voice muttered in his ear:



'Hist!--Calenus!--an awful hour!'



'Ay! by my father's head!  Who art thou?--thy face is dim, and thy voice is

strange.



'Not know thy Burbo?--fie!'



'Gods!--how the darkness gathers!  Ho, ho!--by yon terrific mountain, what

sudden blazes of lightning!'--How they dart and quiver! Hades is loosed on

earth!'



'Tush!--thou believest not these things, Calenus!  Now is the time to make

our fortune!'



'Ha!'



'Listen! Thy temple is full of gold and precious mummeries!--let us load

ourselves with them, and then hasten to the sea and embark! None will ever

ask an account of the doings of this day.'



'Burbo, thou art right!  Hush, and follow me into the temple.  Who cares

now--who sees now--whether thou art a priest or not?  Follow, and we will

share.'



In the precincts of the temple were many priests gathered around the altars,

praying, weeping, grovelling in the dust.  Impostors in safety, they were

not the less superstitious in danger!  Calenus passed them, and entered the

chamber yet to be seen in the south side of the court.  Burbo followed

him--the priest struck a light.  Wine and viands strewed the table; the

remains of a sacrificial feast.



'A man who has hungered forty-eight hours,' muttered Calenus, 'has an

appetite even in such a time.' He seized on the food, and devoured it

greedily.  Nothing could perhaps, be more unnaturally horrid than the

selfish baseness of these villains; for there is nothing more loathsome than

the valor of avarice.  Plunder and sacrilege while the pillars of the world

tottered to and fro!  What an increase to the terrors of nature can be made

by the vices of man!



'Wilt thou never have done?' said Burbo, impatiently; 'thy face purples and

thine eyes start already.'



'It is not every day one has such a right to be hungry.  Oh, Jupiter! what

sound is that?--the hissing of fiery water!  What! does the cloud give rain

as well as flame!  Ha!--what! shrieks?  And, Burbo, how silent all is now! 

Look forth!'



Amidst the other horrors, the mighty mountain now cast up columns of boiling

water.  Blent and kneaded with the half-burning ashes, the streams fell like

seething mud over the streets in frequent intervals.  And full, where the

priests of Isis had now cowered around the altars, on which they had vainly

sought to kindle fires and pour incense, one of the fiercest of those deadly

torrents, mingled with immense fragments of scoria, had poured its rage. 

Over the bended forms of the priests it dashed: that cry had been of

death--that silence had been of eternity!  The ashes--the pitchy

streams--sprinkled the altars, covered the pavement, and half concealed the

quivering corpses of the priests!



'They are dead,' said Burbo, terrified for the first time, and hurrying back

into the cell.  'I thought not the danger was so near and fatal.'



The two wretches stood staring at each other--you might have heard their

hearts beat!  Calenus, the less bold by nature, but the more griping,

recovered first.



'We must to our task, and away!' he said, in a low whisper, frightened at

his own voice.  He stepped to the threshold, paused, crossed over the heated

floor and his dead brethren to the sacred chapel, and called to Burbo to

follow.  But the gladiator quaked, and drew back.



'So much the better,' thought Calenus; 'the more will be my booty.' Hastily

he loaded himself with the more portable treasures of the temple; and

thinking no more of his comrade, hurried from the sacred place.  A sudden

flash of lightning from the mount showed to Burbo, who stood motionless at

the threshold, the flying and laden form of the priest.  He took heart; he

stepped forth to join him, when a tremendous shower of ashes fell right

before his feet.  The gladiator shrank back once more.  Darkness closed him

in.  But the shower continued fast--fast; its heaps rose high and

suffocatingly--deathly vapors steamed from them.  The wretch gasped for

breath--he sought in despair again to fly--the ashes had blocked up the

threshold--he shrieked as his feet shrank from the boiling fluid. How could

he escape? he could not climb to the open space; nay, were he able, he could

not brave its horrors.  It were best to remain in the cells, protected, at

least, from the fatal air.  He sat down and clenched his teeth.  By degrees,

the atmosphere from without--stifling and venomous--crept into the chamber. 

He could endure it no longer.  His eyes, glaring round, rested on a

sacrificial axe, which some priest had left in the chamber: he seized it. 

With the desperate strength of his gigantic arm, he attempted to hew his way

through the walls.



Meanwhile, the streets were already thinned; the crowd had hastened to

disperse itself under shelter; the ashes began to fill up the lower parts of

the town; but, here and there, you heard the steps of fugitives cranching

them warily, or saw their pale and haggard faces by the blue glare of the

lightning, or the more unsteady glare of torches, by which they endeavored

to steer their steps. But ever and anon, the boiling water, or the

straggling ashes, mysterious and gusty winds, rising and dying in a breath,

extinguished these wandering lights, and with them the last living hope of

those who bore them.



In the street that leads to the gate of Herculaneum, Clodius now bent his

perplexed and doubtful way.  'If I can gain the open country,' thought he,

'doubtless there will be various vehicles beyond the gate, and Herculaneum

is not far distant.  Thank Mercury!  I have little to lose, and that little

is about me!'



'Holla!--help there--help!' cried a querulous and frightened voice.  'I have

fallen down--my torch has gone out--my slaves have deserted me.  I am

Diomed--the rich Diomed--ten thousand sesterces to him who helps me!'



At the same moment, Clodius felt himself caught by the feet. 'Ill fortune to

thee--let me go, fool,' said the gambler.



'Oh, help me up!--give me thy hand!'



'There--rise!'



'Is this Clodius?  I know the voice!  Whither fliest thou?'



'Towards Herculaneum.'



'Blessed be the gods! our way is the same, then, as far as the gate.  Why

not take refuge in my villa?  Thou knowest the long range of subterranean

cellars beneath the basement--that shelter, what shower can penetrate?'



'You speak well,' said Clodius musingly.  'And by storing the cellar with

food, we can remain there even some days, should these wondrous storms

endure so long.'



'Oh, blessed be he who invented gates to a city!' cried Diomed. 'See!--they

have placed a light within yon arch: by that let us guide our steps.'



The air was now still for a few minutes: the lamp from the gate streamed out

far and clear: the fugitives hurried on--they gained the gate--they passed

by the Roman sentry; the lightning flashed over his livid face and polished

helmet, but his stern features were composed even in their awe!  He remained

erect and motionless at his post.  That hour itself had not animated the

machine of the ruthless majesty of Rome into the reasoning and self-acting

man.  There he stood, amidst the crashing elements: he had not received the

permission to desert his station and escape.



Diomed and his companion hurried on, when suddenly a female form rushed

athwart their way.  It was the girl whose ominous voice had been raised so

often and so gladly in anticipation of 'the merry show'.



'Oh, Diomed!' she cried, 'shelter! shelter!  See'--pointing to an infant

clasped to her breast--'see this little one!--it is mine!--the child of

shame!  I have never owned it till this hour.  But now I remember I am a

mother!  I have plucked it from the cradle of its nurse: she had fled!  Who

could think of the babe in such an hour, but she who bore it?  Save it! save

it!'



'Curses on thy shrill voice!  Away, harlot!' muttered Clodius between his

ground teeth.



'Nay, girl,' said the more humane Diomed; 'follow if thou wilt. This

way--this way--to the vaults!'



They hurried on--they arrived at the house of Diomed--they laughed aloud as

they crossed the threshold, for they deemed the danger over.



Diomed ordered his slaves to carry down into the subterranean gallery,

before described, a profusion of food and oil for lights; and there Julia,

Clodius, the mother and her babe, the greater part of the slaves, and some

frightened visitors and clients of the neighborhood, sought their shelter.







Chapter VII



THE PROGRESS OF THE DESTRUCTION.



THE cloud, which had scattered so deep a murkiness over the day, had now

settled into a solid and impenetrable mass.  It resembled less even the

thickest gloom of a night in the open air than the close and blind darkness

of some narrow room.  But in proportion as the blackness gathered, did the

lightnings around Vesuvius increase in their vivid and scorching glare.  Nor

was their horrible beauty confined to the usual hues of fire; no rainbow

ever rivalled their varying and prodigal dyes.  Now brightly blue as the

most azure depth of a southern sky--now of a livid and snakelike green,

darting restlessly to and fro as the folds of an enormous serpent--now of a

lurid and intolerable crimson, gushing forth through the columns of smoke,

far and wide, and lighting up the whole city from arch to arch--then

suddenly dying into a sickly paleness, like the ghost of their own life!



In the pauses of the showers, you heard the rumbling of the earth beneath,

and the groaning waves of the tortured sea; or, lower still, and audible but

to the watch of intensest fear, the grinding and hissing murmur of the

escaping gases through the chasms of the distant mountain.  Sometimes the

cloud appeared to break from its solid mass, and, by the lightning, to

assume quaint and vast mimicries of human or of monster shapes, striding

across the gloom, hurtling one upon the other, and vanishing swiftly into

the turbulent abyss of shade; so that, to the eyes and fancies of the

affrighted wanderers, the unsubstantial vapors were as the bodily forms of

gigantic foes--the agents of terror and of death.



The ashes in many places were already knee-deep; and the boiling showers

which came from the steaming breath of the volcano forced their way into the

houses, bearing with them a strong and suffocating vapor.  In some places,

immense fragments of rock, hurled upon the house roofs, bore down along the

streets masses of confused ruin, which yet more and more, with every hour,

obstructed the way; and, as the day advanced, the motion of the earth was

more sensibly felt--the footing seemed to slide and creep--nor could chariot

or litter be kept steady, even on the most level ground.



Sometimes the huger stones striking against each other as they fell, broke

into countless fragments, emitting sparks of fire, which caught whatever was

combustible within their reach; and along the plains beyond the city the

darkness was now terribly relieved; for several houses, and even vineyards,

had been set on flames; and at various intervals the fires rose suddenly and

fiercely against the solid gloom.  To add to this partial relief of the

darkness, the citizens had, here and there, in the more public places, such

as the porticoes of temples and the entrances to the forum, endeavored to

place rows of torches; but these rarely continued long; the showers and the

winds extinguished them, and the sudden darkness into which their sudden

birth was converted had something in it doubly terrible and doubly

impressing on the impotence of human hopes, the lesson of despair.



Frequently, by the momentary light of these torches, parties of fugitives

encountered each other, some hurrying towards the sea, others flying from

the sea back to the land; for the ocean had retreated rapidly from the

shore--an utter darkness lay over it, and upon its groaning and tossing

waves the storm of cinders and rock fell without the protection which the

streets and roofs afforded to the land.  Wild--haggard--ghastly with

supernatural fears, these groups encountered each other, but without the

leisure to speak, to consult, to advise; for the showers fell now

frequently, though not continuously, extinguishing the lights, which showed

to each band the deathlike faces of the other, and hurrying all to seek

refuge beneath the nearest shelter.  The whole elements of civilization were

broken up.  Ever and anon, by the flickering lights, you saw the thief

hastening by the most solemn authorities of the law, laden with, and

fearfully chuckling over, the produce of his sudden gains.  if, in the

darkness, wife was separated from husband, or parent from child, vain was

the hope of reunion.  Each hurried blindly and confusedly on.  Nothing in

all the various and complicated machinery of social life was left save the

primal law of self-preservation!



Through this awful scene did the Athenian wade his way, accompanied by Ione

and the blind girl.  Suddenly, a rush of hundreds, in their path to the sea,

swept by them.  Nydia was torn from the side of Glaucus, who, with Ione, was

borne rapidly onward; and when the crowd (whose forms they saw not, so thick

was the gloom) were gone, Nydia was still separated from their side. 

Glaucus shouted her name.  No answer came.  They retraced their steps--in

vain: they could not discover her--it was evident she had been swept along

some opposite direction by the human current.  Their friend, their

preserver, was lost!  And hitherto Nydia had been their guide.  Her

blindness rendered the scene familiar to her alone.  Accustomed, through a

perpetual night, to thread the windings of the city, she had led them

unerringly towards the sea-shore, by which they had resolved to hazard an

escape.  Now, which way could they wend?  all was rayless to them--a maze

without a clue.  Wearied, despondent, bewildered, they, however, passed

along, the ashes falling upon their heads, the fragmentary stones dashing up

in sparkles before their feet.



'Alas! alas!' murmured Ione, 'I can go no farther; my steps sink among the

scorching cinders.  Fly, dearest!--beloved, fly! and leave me to my fate!'



'Hush, my betrothed! my bride!  Death with thee is sweeter than life without

thee!  Yet, whither--oh! whither, can we direct ourselves through the gloom? 

Already it seems that we have made but a circle, and are in the very spot

which we quitted an hour ago.'



'O gods! yon rock--see, it hath riven the roof before us!  It is death to

move through the streets!'



'Blessed lightning!  See, Ione--see! the portico of the Temple of Fortune is

before us.  Let us creep beneath it; it will protect us from the showers.'



He caught his beloved in his arms, and with difficulty and labor gained the

temple.  He bore her to the remoter and more sheltered part of the portico,

and leaned over her, that he might shield her, with his own form, from the

lightning and the showers!  The beauty and the unselfishness of love could

hallow even that dismal time!



'Who is there?' said the trembling and hollow voice of one who had preceded

them in their place of refuge.  'Yet, what matters?--the crush of the ruined

world forbids to us friends or foes.'



Ione turned at the sound of the voice, and, with a faint shriek, cowered

again beneath the arms of Glaucus: and he, looking in the direction of the

voice, beheld the cause of her alarm.  Through the darkness glared forth two

burning eyes--the lightning flashed and lingered athwart the temple--and

Glaucus, with a shudder, perceived the lion to which he had been doomed

couched beneath the pillars--and, close beside it, unwitting of the

vicinity, lay the giant form of him who had accosted them--the wounded

gladiator, Niger.



That lightning had revealed to each other the form of beast and man; yet the

instinct of both was quelled.  Nay, the lion crept nearer and nearer to the

gladiator, as for companionship; and the gladiator did not recede or

tremble.  The revolution of Nature had dissolved her lighter terrors as well

as her wonted ties.



While they were thus terribly protected, a group of men and women, bearing

torches, passed by the temple.  They were of the congregation of the

Nazarenes; and a sublime and unearthly emotion had not, indeed, quelled

their awe, but it had robbed awe of fear.  They had long believed, according

to the error of the early Christians, that the Last Day was at hand; they

imagined now that the Day had come.



'Woe! woe!' cried, in a shrill and piercing voice, the elder at their head. 

'Behold! the Lord descendeth to judgment!  He maketh fire come down from

heaven in the sight of men!  Woe! woe! ye strong and mighty!  Woe to ye of

the fasces and the purple!  Woe to the idolater and the worshipper of the

beast!  Woe to ye who pour forth the blood of saints, and gloat over the

death-pangs of the sons of God!  Woe to the harlot of the sea!--woe! woe!'



And with a loud and deep chorus, the troop chanted forth along the wild

horrors of the air, 'Woe to the harlot of the sea!--woe! woe!'



The Nazarenes paced slowly on, their torches still flickering in the storm,

their voices still raised in menace and solemn warning, till, lost amid the

windings in the streets, the darkness of the atmosphere and the silence of

death again fell over the scene.



There was one of the frequent pauses in the showers, and Glaucus encouraged

Ione once more to proceed.  just as they stood, hesitating, on the last step

of the portico, an old man, with a bag in his right hand and leaning upon a

youth, tottered by.  The youth bore a torch.  Glaucus recognized the two as

father and son--miser and prodigal.



'Father,' said the youth, 'if you cannot move more swiftly, I must leave

you, or we both perish!'



'Fly, boy, then, and leave thy sire!'



'But I cannot fly to starve; give me thy bag of gold!' And the youth

snatched at it.



'Wretch! wouldst thou rob thy father?'



'Ay! who can tell the tale in this hour?  Miser, perish!'



The boy struck the old man to the ground, plucked the bag from his relaxing

hand, and fled onward with a shrill yell.



'Ye gods!' cried Glaucus: 'are ye blind, then, even in the dark? Such crimes

may well confound the guiltless with the guilty in one common ruin.  Ione,

on!--on!'







Chapter VIII



ARBACES ENCOUNTERS GLAUCUS AND IONE.



ADVANCING, as men grope for escape in a dungeon, Ione and her lover

continued their uncertain way.  At the moments when the volcanic lightnings

lingered over the streets, they were enabled, by that awful light, to steer

and guide their progress: yet, little did the view it presented to them

cheer or encourage their path.  In parts, where the ashes lay dry and

uncommixed with the boiling torrents, cast upward from the mountain at

capricious intervals, the surface of the earth presented a leprous and

ghastly white.  In other places, cinder and rock lay matted in heaps, from

beneath which emerged the half-hid limbs of some crushed and mangled

fugitive.  The groans of the dying were broken by wild shrieks of women's

terror--now near, now distant--which, when heard in the utter darkness, were

rendered doubly appalling by the crushing sense of helplessness and the

uncertainty of the perils around; and clear and distinct through all were

the mighty and various noises from the Fatal Mountain; its rushing winds;

its whirling torrents; and, from time to time, the burst and roar of some

more fiery and fierce explosion.  And ever as the winds swept howling along

the street, they bore sharp streams of burning dust, and such sickening and

poisonous vapors, as took away, for the instant, breath and consciousness,

followed by a rapid revulsion of the arrested blood, and a tingling

sensation of agony trembling through every nerve and fibre of the frame.



'Oh, Glaucus! my beloved! my own!--take me to thy arms!  One embrace! let me

feel thy arms around me--and in that embrace let me die--I can no more!'



'For my sake, for my life--courage, yet, sweet Ione--my life is linked with

thine: and see--torches--this way!  Lo! how they brave the Wind!  Ha! they

live through the storm--doubtless, fugitives to the sea! we will join them.'



As if to aid and reanimate the lovers, the winds and showers came to a

sudden pause; the atmosphere was profoundly still--the mountain seemed at

rest, gathering, perhaps, fresh fury for its next burst; the torch-bearers

moved quickly on.  'We are nearing the sea,' said, in a calm voice, the

person at their head.  'Liberty and wealth to each slave who survives this

day!  Courage!  I tell you that the gods themselves have assured me of

deliverance.  On!'



Redly and steadily the torches flashed full on the eyes of Glaucus and Ione,

who lay trembling and exhausted on his bosom.  Several slaves were bearing,

by the light, panniers and coffers, heavily laden; in front of them--a drawn

sword in his hand--towered the lofty form of Arbaces.



'By my fathers!' cried the Egyptian, 'Fate smiles upon me even through these

horrors, and, amidst the dreadest aspects of woe and death, bodes me

happiness and love.  Away, Greek!  I claim my ward, Ione!'



'Traitor and murderer!' cried Glaucus, glaring upon his foe, 'Nemesis hath

guided thee to my revenge!--a just sacrifice to the shades of Hades, that

now seem loosed on earth.  Approach--touch but the hand of Ione, and thy

weapon shall be as a reed--I will tear thee limb from limb!'



Suddenly, as he spoke, the place became lighted with an intense and lurid

glow.  Bright and gigantic through the darkness, which closed around it like

the walls of hell, the mountain shone--a pile of fire!  Its summit seemed

riven in two; or rather, above its surface there seemed to rise two monster

shapes, each confronting each, as Demons contending for a world.  These were

of one deep blood-red hue of fire, which lighted up the whole atmosphere far

and wide; but, below, the nether part of the mountain was still dark and

shrouded, save in three places, adown which flowed, serpentine and

irregular, rivers of the molten lava.  Darkly red through the profound gloom

of their banks, they flowed slowly on, as towards the devoted city. Over the

broadest there seemed to spring a cragged and stupendous arch, from which,

as from the jaws of hell, gushed the sources of the sudden Phlegethon.  And

through the stilled air was heard the rattling of the fragments of rock,

hurtling one upon another as they were borne down the fiery

cataracts--darkening, for one instant, the spot where they fell, and

suffused the next, in the burnished hues of the flood along which they

floated!



The slaves shrieked aloud, and, cowering, hid their faces.  The Egyptian

himself stood transfixed to the spot, the glow lighting up his commanding

features and jewelled robes.  High behind him rose a tall column that

supported the bronze statue of Augustus; and the imperial image seemed

changed to a shape of fire!



With his left hand circled round the form of Ione--with his right arm raised

in menace, and grasping the stilus which was to have been his weapon in the

arena, and which he still fortunately bore about him, with his brow knit,

his lips apart, the wrath and menace of human passions arrested as by a

charm, upon his features, Glaucus fronted the Egyptian!



Arbaces turned his eyes from the mountain--they rested on the form of

Glaucus!  He paused a moment: 'Why,' he muttered, 'should I hesitate?  Did

not the stars foretell the only crisis of imminent peril to which I was

subjected?--Is not that peril past?'



'The soul,' cried he aloud, 'can brave the wreck of worlds and the wrath of

imaginary gods!  By that soul will I conquer to the last! Advance,

slaves!--Athenian, resist me, and thy blood be on thine own head!  Thus,

then, I regain Ione!'



He advanced one step--it was his last on earth!  The ground shook beneath

him with a convulsion that cast all around upon its surface.  A simultaneous

crash resounded through the city, as down toppled many a roof and

pillar!--the lightning, as if caught by the metal, lingered an instant on

the Imperial Statue--then shivered bronze and column! Down fell the ruin,

echoing along the street, and riving the solid pavement where it

crashed!--The prophecy of the stars was fulfilled!



The sound--the shock, stunned the Athenian for several moments. When he

recovered, the light still illuminated the scene--the earth still slid and

trembled beneath!  Ione lay senseless on the ground; but he saw her not

yet--his eyes were fixed upon a ghastly face that seemed to emerge, without

limbs or trunk, from the huge fragments of the shattered column--a face of

unutterable pain, agony, and despair!  The eyes shut and opened rapidly, as

if sense were not yet fled; the lips quivered and grinned--then sudden

stillness and darkness fell over the features, yet retaining that aspect of

horror never to be forgotten!



So perished the wise Magician--the great Arbaces--the Hermes of the Burning

Belt--the last of the royalty of Egypt!







Chapter IX



THE DESPAIR OF THE LOVERS.  THE CONDITION OF THE MULTITUDE.



GLAUCUS turned in gratitude but in awe, caught Ione once more in his arms,

and fled along the street, that was yet intensely luminous.  But suddenly a

duller shade fell over the air.  Instinctively he turned to the mountain,

and beheld! one of the two gigantic crests, into which the summit had been

divided, rocked and wavered to and fro; and then, with a sound, the

mightiness of which no language can describe, it fell from its burning base,

and rushed, an avalanche of fire, down the sides of the mountain!  At the

same instant gushed forth a volume of blackest smoke--rolling on, over air,

sea, and earth.



Another--and another--and another shower of ashes, far more profuse than

before, scattered fresh desolation along the streets. Darkness once more

wrapped them as a veil; and Glaucus, his bold heart at last quelled and

despairing, sank beneath the cover of an arch, and, clasping Ione to his

heart--a bride on that couch of ruin--resigned himself to die.



Meanwhile Nydia, when separated by the throng from Glaucus and Ione, had in

vain endeavored to regain them.  In vain she raised that plaintive cry so

peculiar to the blind; it was lost amidst a thousand shrieks of more selfish

terror.  Again and again she returned to the spot where they had been

divided--to find her companions gone, to seize every fugitive--to inquire of

Glaucus--to be dashed aside in the impatience of distraction.  Who in that

hour spared one thought to his neighbor?  Perhaps in scenes of universal

horror, nothing is more horrid than the unnatural selfishness they engender.

At length it occurred to Nydia, that as it had been resolved to seek the

sea-shore for escape, her most probable chance of rejoining her companions

would be to persevere in that direction.  Guiding her steps, then, by the

staff which she always carried, she continued, with incredible dexterity, to

avoid the masses of ruin that encumbered the path--to thread the

streets--and unerringly (so blessed now was that accustomed darkness, so

afflicting in ordinary life!) to take the nearest direction to the sea-side.



Poor girl!--her courage was beautiful to behold!--and Fate seemed to favor

one so helpless!  The boiling torrents touched her not, save by the general

rain which accompanied them; the huge fragments of scoria shivered the

pavement before and beside her, but spared that frail form: and when the

lesser ashes fell over her, she shook them away with a slight tremor,' and

dauntlessly resumed her course.



Weak, exposed, yet fearless, supported but by one wish, she was a very

emblem of Psyche in her wanderings; of Hope, walking through the Valley of

the Shadow; of the Soul itself--lone but undaunted, amidst the dangers and

the snares of life!



Her path was, however, constantly impeded by the crowds that now groped

amidst the gloom, now fled in the temporary glare of the lightnings across

the scene; and, at length, a group of torch-bearers rushing full against

her, she was thrown down with some violence.



'What!' said the voice of one of the party, 'is this the brave blind girl! 

By Bacchus, she must not be left here to die!  Up, my Thessalian!  So--so. 

Are you hurt?  That's well!  Come along with us! we are for the shore!'



'O Sallust! it is thy voice!  The gods be thanked!  Glaucus! Glaucus!

Glaucus! have ye seen him?'



'Not I.  He is doubtless out of the city by this time.  The gods who saved

him from the lion will save him from the burning mountain.'



As the kindly epicure thus encouraged Nydia, he drew her along with him

towards the sea, heeding not her passionate entreaties that he would linger

yet awhile to search for Glaucus; and still, in the accent of despair, she

continued to shriek out that beloved name, which, amidst all the roar of the

convulsed elements, kept alive a music at her heart.



The sudden illumination, the bursts of the floods of lava, and the

earthquake, which we have already described, chanced when Sallust and his

party had just gained the direct path leading from the city to the port; and

here they were arrested by an immense crowd, more than half the population

of the city.  They spread along the field without the walls, thousands upon

thousands, uncertain whither to fly.  The sea had retired far from the

shore; and they who had fled to it had been so terrified by the agitation

and preternatural shrinking of the element, the gasping forms of the uncouth

sea things which the waves had left upon the sand, and by the sound of the

huge stones cast from the mountain into the deep, that they had returned

again to the land, as presenting the less frightful aspect of the two.  Thus

the two streams of human beings, the one seaward, the other from the sea,

had met together, feeling a sad comfort in numbers; arrested in despair and

doubt.



'The world is to be destroyed by fire,' said an old man in long loose robes,

a philosopher of the Stoic school: 'Stoic and Epicurean wisdom have alike

agreed in this prediction: and the hour is come!'



'Yea; the hour is come!' cried a loud voice, solemn, but not fearful.



Those around turned in dismay.  The voice came from above them. It was the

voice of Olinthus, who, surrounded by his Christian friends, stood upon an

abrupt eminence on which the old Greek colonists had raised a temple to

Apollo, now timeworn and half in ruin.



As he spoke there came that sudden illumination which had heralded the death

of Arbaces, and glowing over that mighty multitude, awed, crouching,

breathless--never on earth had the faces of men seemed so haggard!--never

had meeting of mortal beings been so stamped with the horror and sublimity

of dread!--never till the last trumpet sounds, shall such meeting be seen

again!  And above those the form of Olinthus, with outstretched arm and

prophet brow, girt with the living fires.  And the crowd knew the face of

him they had doomed to the fangs of the beast--then their victim--now their

warner! and through the stillness again came his ominous voice:



'The hour is come!'



The Christians repeated the cry.  It was caught up--it was echoed from side

to side--woman and man, childhood and old age, repeated, not aloud, but in a

smothered and dreary murmur:



'THE HOUR IS COME!'



At that moment, a wild yell burst through the air--and, thinking only of

escape, whither it knew not, the terrible tiger of the desert leaped amongst

the throng, and hurried through its parted streams.  And so came the

earthquake--and so darkness once more fell over the earth!



And now new fugitives arrived.  Grasping the treasures no longer destined

for their lord, the slaves of Arbaces joined the throng. One only of all

their torches yet flickered on.  It was borne by Sosia; and its light

falling on the face of Nydia, he recognized the Thessalian.



'What avails thy liberty now, blind girl?' said the slave.



'Who art thou? canst thou tell me of Glaucus?'



'Ay; I saw him but a few minutes since.'



'Blessed be thy head! where?'



'Crouched beneath the arch of the forum--dead or dying!--gone to rejoin

Arbaces, who is no more!'



Nydia uttered not a word, she slid from the side of Sallust; silently she

glided through those behind her, and retraced her steps to the city.  She

gained the forum--the arch; she stooped down--she felt around--she called on

the name of Glaucus.



A weak voice answered--'Who calls on me?  Is it the voice of the Shades? 

Lo! I am prepared!'



'Arise! follow me!  Take my hand! Glaucus, thou shalt be saved!'



In wonder and sudden hope, Glaucus arose--'Nydia still?  Ah! thou, then, art

safe!'



The tender joy of his voice pierced the heart of the poor Thessalian, and

she blessed him for his thought of her.



Half leading, half carrying Ione, Glaucus followed his guide.  With

admirable discretion, she avoided the path which led to the crowd she had

just quitted, and, by another route, sought the shore.



After many pauses and incredible perseverance, they gained the sea, and

joined a group, who, bolder than the rest, resolved to hazard any peril

rather than continue in such a scene.  In darkness they put forth to sea;

but, as they cleared the land and caught new aspects of the mountain, its

channels of molten fire threw a partial redness over the waves.



Utterly exhausted and worn out, Ione slept on the breast of Glaucus, and

Nydia lay at his feet.  Meanwhile the showers of dust and ashes, still borne

aloft, fell into the wave, and scattered their snows over the deck.  Far and

wide, borne by the winds, those showers descended upon the remotest climes,

startling even the swarthy African; and whirled along the antique soil of

Syria and of Egypt (Dion Cassius).







Chapter X



THE NEXT MORNING.  THE FATE OF NYDIA.



AND meekly, softly, beautifully, dawned at last the light over the trembling

deep!--the winds were sinking into rest--the foam died from the glowing

azure of that delicious sea.  Around the east, thin mists caught gradually

the rosy hues that heralded the morning; Light was about to resume her

reign.  Yet, still, dark and massive in the distance, lay the broken

fragments of the destroying cloud, from which red streaks, burning dimlier

and more dim, betrayed the yet rolling fires of the mountain of the

'Scorched Fields'.  The white walls and gleaming columns that had adorned

the lovely coasts were no more.  Sullen and dull were the shores so lately

crested by the cities of Herculaneum and Pompeii.  The darlings of the deep

were snatched from her embrace!  Century after century shall the mighty

Mother stretch forth her azure arms, and know them not--moaning round the

sepulchres of the Lost!



There was no shout from the mariners at the dawning light--it had come too

gradually, and they were too wearied for such sudden bursts of joy--but

there was a low, deep murmur of thankfulness amidst those watchers of the

long night.  They looked at each other and smiled--they took heart--they

felt once more that there was a world around, and a God above them!  And in

the feeling that the worst was passed, the overwearied ones turned round,

and fell placidly to sleep. In the growing light of the skies there came the

silence which night had wanted: and the bark drifted calmly onward to its

port.  A few other vessels, bearing similar fugitives, might be seen in the

expanse, apparently motionless, yet gliding also on.  There was a sense of

security, of companionship, and of hope, in the sight of their slender masts

and white sails.  What beloved friends, lost and missed in the gloom, might

they not bear to safety and to shelter!



In the silence of the general sleep, Nydia rose gently.  She bent over the

face of Glaucus--she inhaled the deep breath of his heavy slumber--timidly

and sadly she kissed his brow--his lips; she felt for his hand--it was

locked in that of Ione; she sighed deeply, and her face darkened.  Again she

kissed his brow, and with her hair wiped from it the damps of night.  'May

the gods bless you, Athenian!' she murmured: 'may you be happy with your

beloved one!--may you sometimes remember Nydia!  Alas! she is of no further

use on earth!'



With these words she turned away.  Slowly she crept along by the fori, or

platforms, to the farther side of the vessel, and, pausing, bent low over

the deep; the cool spray dashed upward on her feverish brow.  'It is the

kiss of death,' she said 'it is welcome.' The balmy air played through her

waving tresses--she put them from her face, and raised those eyes--so

tender, though so lightless--to the sky, whose soft face she had never seen!



'No, no!' she said, half aloud, and in a musing and thoughtful tone, 'I

cannot endure it; this jealous, exacting love--it shatters my whole soul in

madness!  I might harm him again--wretch that I was!  I have saved

him--twice saved him--happy, happy thought: why not die happy?--it is the

last glad thought I can ever know.  Oh! sacred Sea!  I hear thy voice

invitingly--it hath a freshening and joyous call. They say that in thy

embrace is dishonour--that thy victims cross not the fatal Styx--be it

so!--I would not meet him in the Shades, for I should meet him still with

her!  Rest--rest--rest! there is no other Elysium for a heart like mine!'



A sailor, half dozing on the deck, heard a slight splash on the waters. 

Drowsily he looked up, and behind, as the vessel merrily bounded on, he

fancied he saw something white above the waves; but it vanished in an

instant.  He turned round again, and dreamed of his home and children.



When the lovers awoke, their first thought was of each other--their next of

Nydia!  She was not to be found--none had seen her since the night.  Every

crevice of the vessel was searched--there was no trace of her.  Mysterious

from first to last, the blind Thessalian had vanished for ever from the

living world!  They guessed her fate in silence: and Glaucus and Ione, while

they drew nearer to each other (feeling each other the world itself), forgot

their deliverance, and wept as for a departed sister.







Chapter the Last



WHEREIN ALL THINGS CEASE LETTER FROM GLAUCUS TO SALLUST, TEN YEARS AFTER THE

DESTRUCTION OF POMPEII.  



'Athens.



GLAUCUS to his beloved Sallust--greeting and health!--You request me to

visit you at Rome--no, Sallust, come rather to me at Athens!  I have

forsworn the Imperial City, its mighty tumult and hollow joys.  In my own

land henceforth I dwell for ever.  The ghost of our departed greatness is

dearer to me than the gaudy life of your loud prosperity.  There is a charm

to me which no other spot can supply, in the porticoes hallowed still by

holy and venerable shades.  In the olive-groves of Ilyssus I still hear the

voice of poetry--on the heights of Phyle, the clouds of twilight seem yet

the shrouds of departed freedom--the heralds--the heralds--of the morrow

that shall come!  You smile at my enthusiasm, Sallust!--better be hopeful in

chains than resigned to their glitter.  You tell me you are sure that I

cannot enjoy life in these melancholy haunts of a fallen majesty.  You dwell

with rapture on the Roman splendors, and the luxuries of the imperial court. 

My Sallust--"non sum qualis eram"--I am not what I was!  The events of my

life have sobered the bounding blood of my youth.  My health has never quite

recovered its wonted elasticity ere it felt the pangs of disease, and

languished in the damps of a criminal's dungeon.  My mind has never shaken

off the dark shadow of the Last Day of Pompeii--the horror and the

desolation of that awful ruin!--Our beloved, our remembered Nydia!  I have

reared a tomb to her shade, and I see it every day from the window of my

study. It keeps alive in me a tender recollection--a not unpleasing

sadness--which are but a fitting homage to her fidelity, and the

mysteriousness of her early death.  Ione gathers the flowers, but my own

hand wreathes them daily around the tomb.  She was worthy of a tomb in

Athens!



'You speak of the growing sect of the Christians in Rome.  Sallust, to you I

may confide my secret; I have pondered much over that faith--I have adopted

it.  After the destruction of Pompeii, I met once more with Olinthus--saved,

alas! only for a day, and falling afterwards a martyr to the indomitable

energy of his zeal.  In my preservation from the lion and the earthquake he

taught me to behold the hand of the unknown God!  I

listened--believed--adored!  My own, my more than ever beloved Ione, has

also embraced the creed!--a creed, Sallust, which, shedding light over this

world, gathers its concentrated glory, like a sunset, over the next!  We

know that we are united in the soul, as in the flesh, for ever and for ever! 

Ages may roll on, our very dust be dissolved, the earth shrivelled like a

scroll; but round and round the circle of eternity rolls the wheel of

life--imperishable--unceasing!  And as the earth from the sun, so

immortality drinks happiness from virtue, which is the smile upon the face

of God!  Visit me, then, Sallust; bring with you the learned scrolls of

Epicurus, Pythagoras, Diogenes; arm yourself for defeat; and let us, amidst

the groves of Academus, dispute, under a surer guide than any granted to our

fathers, on the mighty problem of the true ends of life and the nature of

the soul.



'Ione--at that name my heart yet beats!--Ione is by my side as I write: I

lift my eyes, and meet her smile.  The sunlight quivers over Hymettus: and

along my garden I hear the hum of the summer bees.  Am I happy, ask you? 

Oh, what can Rome give me equal to what I possess at Athens?  Here,

everything awakens the soul and inspires the affections--the trees, the

waters, the hills, the skies, are those of Athens!--fair, though

mourning-mother of the Poetry and the Wisdom of the World.  In my hall I see

the marble faces of my ancestors.  In the Ceramicus, I survey their tombs! 

In the streets, I behold the hand of Phidias and the soul of Pericles. 

Harmodius, Aristogiton--they are everywhere--but in our hearts!--in mine, at

least, they shall not perish!  If anything can make me forget that I am an

Athenian and not free, it is partly the soothing--the love--watchful, vivid,

sleepless--of Ione--a love that has taken a new sentiment in our new

creed--a love which none of our poets, beautiful though they be, had

shadowed forth in description; for mingled with religion, it partakes of

religion; it is blended with pure and unworldly thoughts; it is that which

we may hope to carry through eternity, and keep, therefore, white and

unsullied, that we may not blush to confess it to our God!  This is the true

type of the dark fable of our Grecian Eros and Psyche--it is, in truth, the

soul asleep in the arms of love.  And if this, our love, support me partly

against the fever of the desire for freedom, my religion supports me more;

for whenever I would grasp the sword and sound the shell, and rush to a new

Marathon (but Marathon without victory), I feel my despair at the chilling

thought of my country's impotence--the crushing weight of the Roman yoke,

comforted, at least, by the thought that earth is but the beginning of

life--that the glory of a few years matters little in the vast space of

eternity--that there is no perfect freedom till the chains of clay fall from

the soul, and all space, all time, become its heritage and domain.  Yet,

Sallust, some mixture of the soft Greek blood still mingles with my faith. 

I can share not the zeal of those who see crime and eternal wrath in men who

cannot believe as they.  I shudder not at the creed of others.  I dare not

curse them--I pray the Great Father to convert.  This lukewarmness exposes

me to some suspicion amongst the Christians: but I forgive it; and, not

offending openly the prejudices of the crowd, I am thus enabled to protect

my brethren from the danger of the law, and the consequences of their own

zeal.  If moderation seem to me the natural creature of benevolence, it

gives, also, the greatest scope to beneficence.



'Such, then, O Sallust! is my life--such my opinions.  In this manner I

greet existence and await death.  And thou, glad-hearted and kindly pupil of

Epicurus, thou...  But come hither, and see what enjoyments, what hopes are

ours--and not the splendor of imperial banquets, nor the shouts of the

crowded circus, nor the noisy forum, nor the glittering theatre, nor the

luxuriant gardens, nor the voluptuous baths of Rome--shall seem to thee to

constitute a life of more vivid and uninterrupted happiness than that which

thou so unreasonably pitiest as the career of Glaucus the

Athenian!--Farewell!'



Nearly Seventeen Centuries had rolled away when the City of Pompeii was

disinterred from its silent tomb, all vivid with undimmed hues; its walls

fresh as if painted yesterday--not a hue faded on the rich mosaic of its

floors--in its forum the half-finished columns as left by the workman's

hand--in its gardens the sacrificial tripod--in its halls the chest of

treasure--in its baths the strigil--in its theatres the counter of

admission--in its saloons the furniture and the lamp--in its triclinia the

fragments of the last feast--in its cubicula the perfumes and the rouge of

faded beauty--and everywhere the bones and skeletons of those who once moved

the springs of that minute yet gorgeous machine of luxury and of life! In

the house of Diomed, in the subterranean vaults, twenty skeletons (one of a

babe) were discovered in one spot by the door, covered by a fine ashen dust,

that had evidently been wafted slowly through the apertures, until it had

filled the whole space.  There were jewels and coins, candelabra for

unavailing light, and wine hardened in the amphorae for a prolongation of

agonized life.  The sand, consolidated by damps, had taken the forms of the

skeletons as in a cast; and the traveler may yet see the impression of a

female neck and bosom of young and round proportions--the trace of the fated

Julia!  It seems to the inquirer as if the air had been gradually changed

into a sulphurous vapor; the inmates of the vaults had rushed to the door,

to find it closed and blocked up by the scoria without, and in their

attempts to force it, had been suffocated with the atmosphere.



In the garden was found a skeleton with a key by its bony hand, and near it

a bag of coins.  This is believed to have been the master of the house--the

unfortunate Diomed, who had probably sought to escape by the garden, and

been destroyed either by the vapors or some fragment of stone.  Beside some

silver vases lay another skeleton, probably of a slave.



The houses of Sallust and of Pansa, the Temple of Isis, with the juggling

concealments behind the statues--the lurking-place of its holy oracles--are

now bared to the gaze of the curious.  In one of the chambers of that temple

was found a huge skeleton with an axe beside it: two walls had been pierced

by the axe--the victim could penetrate no farther.  In the midst of the city

was found another skeleton, by the side of which was a heap of coins, and

many of the mystic ornaments of the fane of Isis.  Death had fallen upon him

in his avarice, and Calenus perished simultaneously with Burbo!  As the

excavators cleared on through the mass of ruin, they found the skeleton of a

man literally severed in two by a prostrate column; the skull was of so

striking a conformation, so boldly marked in its intellectual as well as its

worse physical developments, that it has excited the constant speculation of

every itinerant believer in the theories of Spurzheim who has gazed upon

that ruined palace of the mind.  Still, after the lapse of ages, the

traveler may survey that airy hall within whose cunning galleries and

elaborate chambers once thought, reasoned, dreamed, and sinned, the soul

of Arbaces the Egyptian.



Viewing the various witnesses of a social system which has passed

from the world for ever---a stranger, from that remote and barbarian

Isle which the Imperial Roman shivered when he named, paused amidst

the delights of the soft Campania and composed this history!









End 


 