




XXVIII





When he had gone out of the room Anna stood where he had

left her.  "I must believe him!  I must believe him!" she

said.



A moment before, at the moment when she had lifted her arms

to his neck, she had been wrapped in a sense of complete

security.  All the spirits of doubt had been exorcised, and

her love was once more the clear habitation in which every

thought and feeling could move in blissful freedom.  And

then, as she raised her face to Darrow's and met his eyes,

she had seemed to look into the very ruins of his soul.

That was the only way she could express it.  It was as

though he and she had been looking at two sides of the same

thing, and the side she had seen had been all light and

life, and his a place of graves...



She didn't now recall who had spoken first, or even, very

clearly, what had been said.  It seemed to her only a moment

later that she had found herself standing at the other end

of the room--the room which had suddenly grown so small

that, even with its length between them, she felt as if he

touched her--crying out to him "It IS because of you

she's going!" and reading the avowal in his face.



That was his secret, then, THEIR secret: he had met the

girl in Paris and helped her in her straits--lent her money,

Anna vaguely conjectured--and she had fallen in love with

him, and on meeting him again had been suddenly overmastered

by her passion.  Anna, dropping back into her sofa-corner,

sat staring these facts in the face.



The girl had been in a desperate plight--frightened,

penniless, outraged by what had happened, and not knowing

(with a woman like Mrs. Murrett) what fresh injury might

impend; and Darrow, meeting her in this distracted hour, had

pitied, counselled, been kind to her, with the fatal, the

inevitable result.  There were the facts as Anna made them

out: that, at least, was their external aspect, was as much

of them as she had been suffered to see; and into the secret

intricacies they might cover she dared not yet project her

thoughts.



"I must believe him...I must believe him..."  She kept on

repeating the words like a talisman.  It was natural, after

all, that he should have behaved as he had: defended the

girl's piteous secret to the last. She too began to feel the

contagion of his pity--the stir, in her breast, of feelings

deeper and more native to her than the pains of jealousy.

From the security of her blessedness she longed to lean over

with compassionate hands...But Owen?  What was Owen's part to

be?  She owed herself first to him--she was bound to protect

him not only from all knowledge of the secret she had

surprised, but also--and chiefly!--from its consequences.

Yes: the girl must go--there could be no doubt of it--Darrow

himself had seen it from the first; and at the thought she

had a wild revulsion of relief, as though she had been

trying to create in her heart the delusion of a generosity

she could not feel...



The one fact on which she could stay her mind was that Sophy

was leaving immediately; would be out of the house within an

hour.  Once she was gone, it would be easier to bring Owen

to the point of understanding that the break was final; if

necessary, to work upon the girl to make him see it.  But

that, Anna was sure, would not be necessary.  It was clear

that Sophy Viner was leaving Givre with no thought of ever

seeing it again...



Suddenly, as she tried to put some order in her thoughts,

she heard Owen's call at the door: "Mother!----" a name he

seldom gave her.  There was a new note in his voice: the

note of a joyous impatience.  It made her turn hastily to

the glass to see what face she was about to show him; but

before she had had time to compose it he was in the room and

she was caught in a school-boy hug.



"It's all right!  It's all right!  And it's all your doing!  I

want to do the worst kind of penance--bell and candle and

the rest.  I've been through it with HER, and now she

hands me on to you, and you're to call me any names you

please."  He freed her with his happy laugh.  "I'm to be

stood in the corner till next week, and then I'm to go up to

see her.  And she says I owe it all to you!"



"To me?"  It was the first phrase she found to clutch at as

she tried to steady herself in the eddies of his joy.



"Yes: you were so patient, and so dear to her; and you saw

at once what a damned ass I'd been!" She tried a smile, and

it seemed to pass muster with him, for he sent it back in a

broad beam.  "That's not so difficult to see?  No, I admit it

doesn't take a microscope.  But you were so wise and

wonderful--you always are.  I've been mad these last days,

simply mad--you and she might well have washed your hands of

me!  And instead, it's all right--all right!"



She drew back a little, trying to keep the smile on her lips

and not let him get the least glimpse of what it hid.  Now

if ever, indeed, it behoved her to be wise and wonderful!



"I'm so glad, dear; so glad.  If only you'll always feel

like that about me..."  She stopped, hardly knowing what she

said, and aghast at the idea that her own hands should have

retied the knot she imagined to be broken.  But she saw he

had something more to say; something hard to get out, but

absolutely necessary to express.  He caught her hands,

pulled her close, and, with his forehead drawn into its

whimsical smiling wrinkles, "Look here," he cried, "if

Darrow wants to call me a damned ass too you're not to stop

him!"



It brought her back to a sharper sense of her central peril:

of the secret to be kept from him at whatever cost to her

racked nerves.



"Oh, you know, he doesn't always wait for orders!"  On the

whole it sounded better than she'd feared.



"You mean he's called me one already?"  He accepted the fact

with his gayest laugh.  "Well, that saves a lot of trouble;

now we can pass to the order of the day----" he broke off

and glanced at the clock--"which is, you know, dear, that

she's starting in about an hour; she and Adelaide must

already be snatching a hasty sandwich.  You'll come down to

bid them good-bye?"



"Yes--of course."



There had, in fact, grown upon her while he spoke the

urgency of seeing Sophy Viner again before she left. The

thought was deeply distasteful: Anna shrank from

encountering the girl till she had cleared a way through her

own perplexities.  But it was obvious that since they had

separated, barely an hour earlier, the situation had taken a

new shape.  Sophy Viner had apparently reconsidered her

decision to break amicably but definitely with Owen, and

stood again in their path, a menace and a mystery; and

confused impulses of resistance stirred in Anna's mind.

She felt Owen's touch on her arm.  "Are you coming?"



"Yes...yes...presently."



"What's the matter?  You look so strange."



"What do you mean by strange?"



"I don't know: startled--surprised " She read what her look

must be by its sudden reflection in his face.



"Do I?  No wonder!  You've given us all an exciting morning."



He held to his point.  "You're more excited now that there's

no cause for it.  What on earth has happened since I saw

you?"



He looked about the room, as if seeking the clue to her

agitation, and in her dread of what he might guess she

answered: "What has happened is simply that I'm rather

tired.  Will you ask Sophy to come up and see me here?"





While she waited she tried to think what she should say when

the girl appeared; but she had never been more conscious of

her inability to deal with the oblique and the tortuous.

She had lacked the hard teachings of experience, and an

instinctive disdain for whatever was less clear and open

than her own conscience had kept her from learning anything

of the intricacies and contradictions of other hearts.  She

said to herself: "I must find out----" yet everything in her

recoiled from the means by which she felt it must be done...



Sophy Viner appeared almost immediately, dressed for

departure, her little bag on her arm.  She was still pale to

the point of haggardness, but with a light upon her that

struck Anna with surprise.  Or was it, perhaps, that she was

looking at the girl with new eyes: seeing her, for the first

time, not as Effie's governess, not as Owen's bride, but as

the embodiment of that unknown peril lurking in the

background of every woman's thoughts about her lover?  Anna,

at any rate, with a sudden sense of estrangement, noted in

her graces and snares never before perceived.  It was only

the flash of a primitive instinct, but it lasted long enough

to make her ashamed of the darknesses it lit up in her

heart...



She signed to Sophy to sit down on the sofa beside her. "I

asked you to come up to me because I wanted to say good-bye

quietly," she explained, feeling her lips tremble, but

trying to speak in a tone of friendly naturalness.



The girl's only answer was a faint smile of acquiescence,

and Anna, disconcerted by her silence, went on: "You've

decided, then, not to break your engagement?"



Sophy Viner raised her head with a look of surprise.

Evidently the question, thus abruptly put, must have sounded

strangely on the lips of so ardent a partisan as Mrs. Leath!

"I thought that was what you wished," she said.



"What I wished?" Anna's heart shook against her side.  "I

wish, of course, whatever seems best for Owen...It's

natural, you must understand, that that consideration should

come first with me..."



Sophy was looking at her steadily.  "I supposed it was the

only one that counted with you."



The curtness of retort roused Anna's latent antagonism.  "It

is," she said, in a hard voice that startled her as she

heard it.  Had she ever spoken so to any one before?  She

felt frightened, as though her very nature had changed

without her knowing it...Feeling the girl's astonished gaze

still on her, she continued: "The suddenness of the change

has naturally surprised me.  When I left you it was

understood that you were to reserve your decision----"



"Yes."



"And now----?" Anna waited for a reply that did not come.

She did not understand the girl's attitude, the edge of

irony in her short syllables, the plainly premeditated

determination to lay the burden of proof on her

interlocutor.  Anna felt the sudden need to lift their

intercourse above this mean level of defiance and distrust.

She looked appealingly at Sophy.



"Isn't it best that we should speak quite frankly?  It's this

change on your part that perplexes me.  You can hardly be

surprised at that.  It's true, I asked you not to break with

Owen too abruptly--and I asked it, believe me, as much for

your sake as for his: I wanted you to take time to think

over the difficulty that seems to have arisen between you.

The fact that you felt it required thinking over seemed to

show you wouldn't take the final step lightly--wouldn't, I

mean, accept of Owen more than you could give him.  But your

change of mind obliges me to ask the question I thought you

would have asked yourself.  Is there any reason why you

shouldn't marry Owen?"



She stopped a little breathlessly, her eyes on Sophy Viner's

burning face.  "Any reason----?  What do you mean by a

reason?"



Anna continued to look at her gravely.  "Do you love some

one else?" she asked.



Sophy's first look was one of wonder and a faint relief;

then she gave back the other's scrutiny in a glance of

indescribable reproach.  "Ah, you might have waited!" she

exclaimed.



"Waited?"



"Till I'd gone: till I was out of the house.  You might have

known...you might have guessed..."  She turned her eyes

again on Anna.  "I only meant to let him hope a little

longer, so that he shouldn't suspect anything; of course I

can't marry him," she said.



Anna stood motionless, silenced by the shock of the avowal.

She too was trembling, less with anger than with a confused

compassion.  But the feeling was so blent with others, less

generous and more obscure, that she found no words to

express it, and the two women faced each other without

speaking.



"I'd better go," Sophy murmured at length with lowered head.



The words roused in Anna a latent impulse of compunction.

The girl looked so young, so exposed and desolate!  And what

thoughts must she be hiding in her heart!  It was impossible

that they should part in such a spirit.



"I want you to know that no one said anything...It was I

who..."



Sophy looked at her.  "You mean that Mr. Darrow didn't tell

you?  Of course not: do you suppose I thought he did?  You

found it out, that's all--I knew you would. In your place I

should have guessed it sooner."



The words were spoken simply, without irony or emphasis; but

they went through Anna like a sword.  Yes, the girl would

have had divinations, promptings that she had not had!  She

felt half envious of such a sad precocity of wisdom.



"I'm so sorry...so sorry..."  she murmured.



"Things happen that way.  Now I'd better go.  I'd like to

say good-bye to Effie."



"Oh----" it broke in a cry from Effie's mother.  "Not like

this--you mustn't!  I feel--you make me feel too horribly: as

if I were driving you away..."  The words had rushed up from

the depths of her bewildered pity.



"No one is driving me away: I had to go," she heard the girl

reply.



There was another silence, during which passionate impulses

of magnanimity warred in Anna with her doubts and dreads.

At length, her eyes on Sophy's face: "Yes, you must go now,"

she began; "but later on...after a while, when all this is

over...if there's no reason why you shouldn't marry Owen----

" she paused a moment on the words--" I shouldn't want you

to think I stood between you..."



"You?" Sophy flushed again, and then grew pale.  She seemed

to try to speak, but no words came.

"Yes!  It was not true when I said just now that I was

thinking only of Owen.  I'm sorry--oh, so sorry!--for you

too.  Your life--I know how hard it's been; and

mine...mine's so full...Happy women understand best!" Anna

drew near and touched the girl's hand; then she began again,

pouring all her soul into the broken phrases: "It's terrible

now...you see no future; but if, by and bye...you know

best...but you're so young...and at your age things DO

pass.  If there's no reason, no real reason, why you

shouldn't marry Owen, I WANT him to hope, I'll help him

to hope...if you say so..."



With the urgency of her pleading her clasp tightened on

Sophy's hand, but it warmed to no responsive tremor: the

girl seemed numb, and Anna was frightened by the stony

silence of her look.  "I suppose I'm not more than half a

woman," she mused, "for I don't want my happiness to hurt

her;" and aloud she repeated: "If only you'll tell me

there's no reason----"



The girl did not speak; but suddenly, like a snapped branch,

she bent, stooped down to the hand that clasped her, and

laid her lips upon it in a stream of weeping. She cried

silently, continuously, abundantly, as though Anna's touch

had released the waters of some deep spring of pain; then,

as Anna, moved and half afraid, leaned over her with a sound

of pity, she stood up and turned away.



"You're going, then--for good--like this?"  Anna moved

toward her and stopped.  Sophy stopped too, with eyes that

shrank from her.



"Oh----" Anna cried, and hid her face.



The girl walked across the room and paused again in the

doorway.  From there she flung back: "I wanted it--I chose

it.  He was good to me--no one ever was so good!"



The door-handle turned, and Anna heard her go.
