




XXVI





Darrow waited alone in the sitting-room.



No place could have been more distasteful as the scene of

the talk that lay before him; but he had acceded to Anna's

suggestion that it would seem more natural for her to summon

Sophy Viner than for him to go in search of her.  As his

troubled pacings carried him back and forth a relentless

hand seemed to be tearing away all the tender fibres of

association that bound him to the peaceful room.  Here, in

this very place, he had drunk his deepest draughts of

happiness, had had his lips at the fountain-head of its

overflowing rivers; but now that source was poisoned and he

would taste no more of an untainted cup.



For a moment he felt an actual physical anguish; then his

nerves hardened for the coming struggle.  He had no notion

of what awaited him; but after the first instinctive recoil

he had seen in a flash the urgent need of another word with

Sophy Viner.  He had been insincere in letting Anna think

that he had consented to speak because she asked it.  In

reality he had been feverishly casting about for the pretext

she had given him; and for some reason this trivial

hypocrisy weighed on him more than all his heavy burden of

deceit.



At length he heard a step behind him and Sophy Viner

entered.  When she saw him she paused on the threshold and

half drew back.



"I was told that Mrs. Leath had sent for me."



"Mrs. Leath DID send for you.  She'll be here presently;

but I asked her to let me see you first."



He spoke very gently, and there was no insincerity in his

gentleness.  He was profoundly moved by the change in the

girl's appearance.  At sight of him she had forced a smile;

but it lit up her wretchedness like a candle-flame held to a

dead face.



She made no reply, and Darrow went on: "You must understand

my wanting to speak to you, after what I was told just now."



She interposed, with a gesture of protest: "I'm not

responsible for Owen's ravings!"



"Of course----".  He broke off and they stood facing each

other.  She lifted a hand and pushed back her loose lock

with the gesture that was burnt into his memory; then she

looked about her and dropped into the nearest chair.



"Well, you've got what you wanted," she said.



"What do you mean by what I wanted?"



"My engagement's broken--you heard me say so."



"Why do you say that's what I wanted?  All I wished, from the

beginning, was to advise you, to help you as best I could--

--"



"That's what you've done," she rejoined.  "You've convinced

me that it's best I shouldn't marry him."



Darrow broke into a despairing laugh.  "At the very moment

when you'd convinced me to the contrary!"



"Had I?" Her smile flickered up.  "Well, I really believed

it till you showed me...warned me..."



"Warned you?"



"That I'd be miserable if I married a man I didn't love."



"Don't you love him?"



She made no answer, and Darrow started up and walked away to

the other end of the room.  He stopped before the writing-

table, where his photograph, well-dressed, handsome, self-

sufficient--the portrait of a man of the world, confident of

his ability to deal adequately with the most delicate

situations--offered its huge fatuity to his gaze.  He turned

back to her.  "It's rather hard on Owen, isn't it, that you

should have waited until now to tell him?"



She reflected a moment before answering.  "I told him as

soon as I knew."



"Knew that you couldn't marry him?"



"Knew that I could never live here with him."  She looked

about the room, as though the very walls must speak for her.



For a moment Darrow continued to search her face

perplexedly; then their eyes met in a long disastrous gaze.



"Yes----" she said, and stood up.



Below the window they heard Effie whistling for her dogs,

and then, from the terrace, her mother calling her.



"There--THAT for instance," Sophy Viner said.



Darrow broke out: "It's I who ought to go!"



She kept her small pale smile.  "What good would that do any

of us--now?"



He covered his face with his hands.  "Good God!" he groaned.

"How could I tell?"



"You couldn't tell.  We neither of us could."  She seemed to

turn the problem over critically.  "After all, it might have

been YOU instead of me!"



He took another distracted turn about the room and coming

back to her sat down in a chair at her side.  A mocking hand

seemed to dash the words from his lips. There was nothing on

earth that he could say to her that wasn't foolish or cruel

or contemptible...



"My dear," he began at last, "oughtn't you, at any rate, to

try?"



Her gaze grew grave.  "Try to forget you?"



He flushed to the forehead.  "I meant, try to give Owen more

time; to give him a chance.  He's madly in love with you;

all the good that's in him is in your hands. His step-mother

felt that from the first.  And she thought--she believed----

"



"She thought I could make him happy.  Would she think so

now?"



"Now...?  I don't say now.  But later?  Time modifies...rubs

out...more quickly than you think...Go away, but let him

hope...I'm going too--WE'RE going--" he stumbled on the

plural--"in a very few weeks: going for a long time,

probably.  What you're thinking of now may never happen.  We

may not all be here together again for years."



She heard him out in silence, her hands clasped on her knee,

her eyes bent on them.  "For me," she said, "you'll always

be here."



"Don't say that--oh, don't!  Things change...people

change...You'll see!"



"You don't understand.  I don't want anything to change.  I

don't want to forget--to rub out.  At first I imagined I

did; but that was a foolish mistake.  As soon as I saw you

again I knew it...It's not being here with you that I'm

afraid of--in the sense you think.  It's being here, or

anywhere, with Owen."  She stood up and bent her tragic smile

on him.  "I want to keep you all to myself."



The only words that came to him were futile denunciations of

his folly; but the sense of their futility checked them on

his lips.  "Poor child--you poor child!" he heard himself

vainly repeating.



Suddenly he felt the strong reaction of reality and its

impetus brought him to his feet.  "Whatever happens, I

intend to go--to go for good," he exclaimed.  "I want you to

understand that.  Oh, don't be afraid--I'll find a reason.

But it's perfectly clear that I must go."



She uttered a protesting cry.  "Go away?  You?  Don't you see

that that would tell everything--drag everybody into the

horror?"



He found no answer, and her voice dropped back to its calmer

note.  "What good would your going do?  Do you suppose it

would change anything for me?"  She looked at him with a

musing wistfulness.  "I wonder what your feeling for me was?

It seems queer that I've never really known--I suppose we

DON'T know much about that kind of feeling.  Is it like

taking a drink when you're thirsty?...I used to feel as if

all of me was in the palm of your hand..."



He bowed his humbled head, but she went on almost

exultantly: "Don't for a minute think I'm sorry!  It was

worth every penny it cost.  My mistake was in being ashamed,

just at first, of its having cost such a lot. I tried to

carry it off as a joke--to talk of it to myself as an

'adventure'.  I'd always wanted adventures, and you'd given

me one, and I tried to take your attitude about it, to 'play

the game' and convince myself that I hadn't risked any more

on it than you. Then, when I met you again, I suddenly saw

that I HAD risked more, but that I'd won more, too--such

worlds!  I'd been trying all the while to put everything I

could between us; now I want to sweep everything away. I'd

been trying to forget how you looked; now I want to remember

you always.  I'd been trying not to hear your voice; now I

never want to hear any other.  I've made my choice--that's

all: I've had you and I mean to keep you."  Her face was

shining like her eyes.  "To keep you hidden away here," she

ended, and put her hand upon her breast.



After she had left him, Darrow continued to sit motionless,

staring back into their past.  Hitherto it had lingered on

the edge of his mind in a vague pink blur, like one of the

little rose-leaf clouds that a setting sun drops from its

disk.  Now it was a huge looming darkness, through which his

eyes vainly strained.  The whole episode was still obscure

to him, save where here and there, as they talked, some

phrase or gesture or intonation of the girl's had lit up a

little spot in the night.



She had said: "I wonder what your feeling for me was?" and

he found himself wondering too...He remembered distinctly

enough that he had not meant the perilous passion--even in

its most transient form--to play a part in their relation.

In that respect his attitude had been above reproach.  She

was an unusually original and attractive creature, to whom

he had wanted to give a few days of harmless pleasuring, and

who was alert and expert enough to understand his intention

and spare him the boredom of hesitations and

misinterpretations.  That had been his first impression, and

her subsequent demeanour had justified it.  She had been,

from the outset, just the frank and easy comrade he had

expected to find her.  Was it he, then, who, in the sequel,

had grown impatient of the bounds he had set himself?  Was it

his wounded vanity that, seeking balm for its hurt, yearned

to dip deeper into the healing pool of her compassion?  In

his confused memory of the situation he seemed not to have

been guiltless of such yearnings...Yet for the first few

days the experiment had been perfectly successful. Her

enjoyment had been unclouded and his pleasure in it

undisturbed.  It was very gradually--he seemed to see--that

a shade of lassitude had crept over their intercourse.

Perhaps it was because, when her light chatter about people

failed, he found she had no other fund to draw on, or

perhaps simply because of the sweetness of her laugh, or of

the charm of the gesture with which, one day in the woods of

Marly, she had tossed off her hat and tilted back her head

at the call of a cuckoo; or because, whenever he looked at

her unexpectedly, he found that she was looking at him and

did not want him to know it; or perhaps, in varying degrees,

because of all these things, that there had come a moment

when no word seemed to fly high enough or dive deep enough

to utter the sense of well-being each gave to the other, and

the natural substitute for speech had been a kiss.



The kiss, at all events, had come at the precise moment to

save their venture from disaster.  They had reached the

point when her amazing reminiscences had begun to flag, when

her future had been exhaustively discussed, her theatrical

prospects minutely studied, her quarrel with Mrs. Murrett

retold with the last amplification of detail, and when,

perhaps conscious of her exhausted resources and his

dwindling interest, she had committed the fatal error of

saying that she could see he was unhappy, and entreating him

to tell her why...



From the brink of estranging confidences, and from the risk

of unfavourable comparisons, his gesture had snatched her

back to safety; and as soon as he had kissed her he felt

that she would never bore him again. She was one of the

elemental creatures whose emotion is all in their pulses,

and who become inexpressive or sentimental when they try to

turn sensation into speech.  His caress had restored her to

her natural place in the scheme of things, and Darrow felt

as if he had clasped a tree and a nymph had bloomed from

it...



The mere fact of not having to listen to her any longer

added immensely to her charm.  She continued, of course, to

talk to him, but it didn't matter, because he no longer made

any effort to follow her words, but let her voice run on as

a musical undercurrent to his thoughts.



She hadn't a drop of poetry in her, but she had some of the

qualities that create it in others; and in moments of heat

the imagination does not always feel the difference...



Lying beside her in the shade, Darrow felt her presence as a

part of the charmed stillness of the summer woods, as the

element of vague well-being that suffused his senses and

lulled to sleep the ache of wounded pride.  All he asked of

her, as yet, was a touch on the hand or on the lips--and

that she should let him go on lying there through the long

warm hours, while a black-bird's song throbbed like a

fountain, and the summer wind stirred in the trees, and

close by, between the nearest branches and the brim of his

tilted hat, a slight white figure gathered up all the

floating threads of joy...



He recalled, too, having noticed, as he lay staring at a

break in the tree-tops, a stream of mares'-tails coming up

the sky.  He had said to himself: "It will rain to-morrow,"

and the thought had made the air seem warmer and the sun

more vivid on her hair...Perhaps if the mares'-tails had not

come up the sky their adventure might have had no sequel.

But the cloud brought rain, and next morning he looked out

of his window into a cold grey blur.  They had planned an

all-day excursion down the Seine, to the two Andelys and

Rouen, and now, with the long hours on their hands, they

were both a little at a loss...There was the Louvre, of

course, and the Luxembourg; but he had tried looking at

pictures with her, she had first so persistently admired the

worst things, and then so frankly lapsed into indifference,

that he had no wish to repeat the experiment.  So they went

out, aimlessly, and took a cold wet walk, turning at length

into the deserted arcades of the Palais Royal, and finally

drifting into one of its equally deserted restaurants, where

they lunched alone and somewhat dolefully, served by a wan

old waiter with the look of a castaway who has given up

watching for a sail...It was odd how the waiter's face came

back to him...



Perhaps but for the rain it might never have happened; but

what was the use of thinking of that now?  He tried to turn

his thoughts to more urgent issues; but, by a strange

perversity of association, every detail of the day was

forcing itself on his mind with an insistence from which

there was no escape.  Reluctantly he relived the long wet

walk back to the hotel, after a tedious hour at a

cinematograph show on the Boulevard. It was still raining

when they withdrew from this stale spectacle, but she had

obstinately refused to take a cab, had even, on the way,

insisted on loitering under the dripping awnings of shop-

windows and poking into draughty passages, and finally, when

they had nearly reached their destination, had gone so far

as to suggest that they should turn back to hunt up some

show she had heard of in a theatre at the Batignolles.  But

at that he had somewhat irritably protested: he remembered

that, for the first time, they were both rather irritable,

and vaguely disposed to resist one another's suggestions.

His feet were wet, and he was tired of walking, and sick of

the smell of stuffy unaired theatres, and he had said he

must really get back to write some letters--and so they had

kept on to the hotel...
