




XXVII





Darrow had no idea how long he had sat there when he heard

Anna's hand on the door.  The effort of rising, and of

composing his face to meet her, gave him a factitious sense

of self-control.  He said to himself: "I must decide on

something----" and that lifted him a hair's breadth above

the whirling waters.



She came in with a lighter step, and he instantly perceived

that something unforeseen and reassuring had happened.



"She's been with me.  She came and found me on the terrace.

We've had a long talk and she's explained everything.  I

feel as if I'd never known her before!"



Her voice was so moved and tender that it checked his start

of apprehension.



"She's explained----?"



"It's natural, isn't it, that she should have felt a little

sore at the kind of inspection she's been subjected to?  Oh,

not from you--I don't mean that!  But Madame de Chantelle's

opposition--and her sending for Adelaide Painter!  She told

me frankly she didn't care to owe her husband to Adelaide

Painter...She thinks now that her annoyance at feeling

herself so talked over and scrutinized may have shown itself

in her manner to Owen, and set him imagining the insane

things he did...I understand all she must have felt, and I

agree with her that it's best she should go away for a

while.  She's made me," Anna summed up, "feel as if I'd been

dreadfully thick-skinned and obtuse!"



"YOU?"



"Yes.  As if I'd treated her like the bric-a-brac that used

to be sent down here 'on approval,' to see if it would look

well with the other pieces."  She added, with a sudden flush

of enthusiasm: "I'm glad she's got it in her to make one

feel like that!"



She seemed to wait for Darrow to agree with her, or to put

some other question, and he finally found voice to ask:

"Then you think it's not a final break?"



"I hope not--I've never hoped it more!  I had a word with

Owen, too, after I left her, and I think he understands that

he must let her go without insisting on any positive

promise.  She's excited...he must let her calm down..."



Again she waited, and Darrow said: "Surely you can make him

see that."



"She'll help me to--she's to see him, of course, before she

goes.  She starts immediately, by the way, with Adelaide

Painter, who is motoring over to Francheuil to catch the one

o'clock express--and who, of course, knows nothing of all

this, and is simply to be told that Sophy has been sent for

by the Farlows."



Darrow mutely signed his comprehension, and she went on:

"Owen is particularly anxious that neither Adelaide nor his

grandmother should have the least inkling of what's

happened.  The need of shielding Sophy will help him to

control himself.  He's coming to his senses, poor boy; he's

ashamed of his wild talk already.  He asked me to tell you

so; no doubt he'll tell you so himself."



Darrow made a movement of protest.  "Oh, as to that--the

thing's not worth another word."



"Or another thought, either?" She brightened.  "Promise me

you won't even think of it--promise me you won't be hard on

him!"



He was finding it easier to smile back at her.  "Why should

you think it necessary to ask my indulgence for Owen?"



She hesitated a moment, her eyes wandering from him. Then

they came back with a smile.  "Perhaps because I need it for

myself."



"For yourself?"



"I mean, because I understand better how one can torture

one's self over unrealities."



As Darrow listened, the tension of his nerves began to

relax.  Her gaze, so grave and yet so sweet, was like a deep

pool into which he could plunge and hide himself from the

hard glare of his misery.  As this ecstatic sense enveloped

him he found it more and more difficult to follow her words

and to frame an answer; but what did anything matter, except

that her voice should go on, and the syllables fall like

soft touches on his tortured brain?



"Don't you know," she continued, "the bliss of waking from a

bad dream in one's own quiet room, and going slowly over all

the horror without being afraid of it any more?  That's what

I'm doing now.  And that's why I understand Owen..."  She

broke off, and he felt her touch on his arm.  "BECAUSE

I'D DREAMED THE HORROR TOO!"



He understood her then, and stammered: "You?"



"Forgive me!  And let me tell you!...It will help you to

understand Owen...There WERE little things...little

signs...once I had begun to watch for them: your reluctance

to speak about her...her reserve with you...a sort of

constraint we'd never seen in her before..."



She laughed up at him, and with her hands in his he

contrived to say: "NOW you understand why?"



"Oh, I understand; of course I understand; and I want you to

laugh at me--with me!  Because there were other things

too...crazier things still...There was even--last night on

the terrace--her pink cloak..."



"Her pink cloak?" Now he honestly wondered, and as she saw

it she blushed.



"You've forgotten about the cloak?  The pink cloak that Owen

saw you with at the play in Paris?  Yes...yes...I was mad

enough for that!...It does me good to laugh about it now!

But you ought to know that I'm going to be a jealous

woman...a ridiculously jealous woman...you ought to be

warned of it in time..."



He had dropped her hands, and she leaned close and lifted

her arms to his neck with one of her rare gestures of

surrender.



"I don't know why it is; but it makes me happier now to have

been so foolish!"



Her lips were parted in a noiseless laugh and the tremor of

her lashes made their shadow move on her cheek.  He looked

at her through a mist of pain and saw all her offered beauty

held up like a cup to his lips; but as he stooped to it a

darkness seemed to fall between them, her arms slipped from

his shoulders and she drew away from him abruptly.



"But she WAS with you, then?" she exclaimed; and then,

as he stared at her: "Oh, don't say no!  Only go and look at

your eyes!"



He stood speechless, and she pressed on: "Don't deny it--oh,

don't deny it!  What will be left for me to imagine if you

do?  Don't you see how every single thing cries it out?  Owen

sees it--he saw it again just now!  When I told him she'd

relented, and would see him, he said: 'Is that Darrow's

doing too?'"



Darrow took the onslaught in silence.  He might have spoken,

have summoned up the usual phrases of banter and denial; he

was not even certain that they might not, for the moment,

have served their purpose if he could have uttered them

without being seen.  But he was as conscious of what had

happened to his face as if he had obeyed Anna's bidding and

looked at himself in the glass.  He knew he could no more

hide from her what was written there than he could efface

from his soul the fiery record of what he had just lived

through.  There before him, staring him in the eyes, and

reflecting itself in all his lineaments, was the

overwhelming fact of Sophy Viner's passion and of the act by

which she had attested it.



Anna was talking again, hurriedly, feverishly, and his soul

was wrung by the anguish in her voice.  "Do speak at last--

you must speak!  I don't want to ask you to harm the girl;

but you must see that your silence is doing her more harm

than your answering my questions could.  You're leaving me

only the worst things to think of her...she'd see that

herself if she were here. What worse injury can you do her

than to make me hate her--to make me feel she's plotted with

you to deceive us?"



"Oh, not that!" Darrow heard his own voice before he was

aware that he meant to speak.  "Yes; I did see her in

Paris," he went on after a pause; "but I was bound to

respect her reason for not wanting it known."



Anna paled.  "It was she at the theatre that night?"



"I was with her at the theatre one night."



"Why should she have asked you not to say so?"



"She didn't wish it known that I'd met her."



"Why shouldn't she have wished it known?"




"She had quarrelled with Mrs. Murrett and come over suddenly

to Paris, and she didn't want the Farlows to hear of it.  I

came across her by accident, and she asked me not to speak

of having seen her."



"Because of her quarrel?  Because she was ashamed of her part

in it?"



"Oh, no.  There was nothing for her to be ashamed of. But

the Farlows had found the place for her, and she didn't want

them to know how suddenly she'd had to leave, and how badly

Mrs. Murrett had behaved.  She was in a terrible plight--the

woman had even kept back her month's salary.  She knew the

Farlows would be awfully upset, and she wanted more time to

prepare them."



Darrow heard himself speak as though the words had proceeded

from other lips.  His explanation sounded plausible enough,

and he half-fancied Anna's look grew lighter.  She waited a

moment, as though to be sure he had no more to add; then she

said: "But the Farlows DID know; they told me all about

it when they sent her to me."



He flushed as if she had laid a deliberate trap for him.

"They may know NOW; they didn't then----"



"That's no reason for her continuing now to make a mystery

of having met you."



"It's the only reason I can give you."



"Then I'll go and ask her for one myself."  She turned and

took a few steps toward the door.



"Anna!" He started to follow her, and then checked himself.

"Don't do that!"



"Why not?"



"It's not like you...not generous..."



She stood before him straight and pale, but under her rigid

face he saw the tumult of her doubt and misery.



"I don't want to be ungenerous; I don't want to pry into her

secrets.  But things can't be left like this. Wouldn't it be

better for me to go to her?  Surely she'll understand--she'll

explain...It may be some mere trifle she's concealing:

something that would horrify the Farlows, but that I

shouldn't see any harm in..."  She paused, her eyes

searching his face. "A love affair, I suppose...that's it?

You met her with some man at the theatre--and she was

frightened and begged you to fib about it?  Those poor young

things that have to go about among us like machines--oh, if

you knew how I pity them!"



"If you pity her, why not let her go?"



She stared.  "Let her go--go for good, you mean?  Is that the

best you can say for her?"



"Let things take their course.  After all, it's between

herself and Owen."



"And you and me--and Effie, if Owen marries her, and I leave

my child with them!  Don't you see the impossibility of what

you're asking?  We're all bound together in this coil."



Darrow turned away with a groan.  "Oh, let her go--let her

go."



"Then there IS something--something really bad?  She

WAS with some one when you met her?  Some one with whom she

was----" She broke off, and he saw her struggling with new

thoughts.  "If it's THAT, of course...Oh, don't you

see," she desperately appealed to him, "that I must find

out, and that it's too late now for you not to speak?  Don't

be afraid that I'll betray you...I'll never, never let a

soul suspect.  But I must know the truth, and surely it's

best for her that I should find it out from you."



Darrow waited a moment; then he said slowly: "What you

imagine's mere madness.  She was at the theatre with me."



"With you?"  He saw a tremor pass through her, but she

controlled it instantly and faced him straight and

motionless as a wounded creature in the moment before it

feels its wound.  "Why should you both have made a mystery

of that?"



"I've told you the idea was not mine."  He cast about. "She

may have been afraid that Owen----"



"But that was not a reason for her asking you to tell me

that you hardly knew her--that you hadn't even seen her for

years."  She broke off and the blood rose to her face and

forehead.  "Even if SHE had other reasons, there could

be only one reason for your obeying her----"

Silence fell between them, a silence in which the room

seemed to become suddenly resonant with voices.  Darrow's

gaze wandered to the window and he noticed that the gale of

two days before had nearly stripped the tops of the lime-

trees in the court.  Anna had moved away and was resting her

elbows against the mantel-piece, her head in her hands.  As

she stood there he took in with a new intensity of vision

little details of her appearance that his eyes had often

cherished: the branching blue veins in the backs of her

hands, the warm shadow that her hair cast on her ear, and

the colour of the hair itself, dull black with a tawny

under-surface, like the wings of certain birds.  He felt it

to be useless to speak.



After a while she lifted her head and said: "I shall not see

her again before she goes."



He made no answer, and turning to him she added: "That is

why she's going, I suppose?  Because she loves you and won't

give you up?"



Darrow waited.  The paltriness of conventional denial was so

apparent to him that even if it could have delayed discovery

he could no longer have resorted to it. Under all his other

fears was the dread of dishonouring the hour.



"She HAS given me up," he said at last.
