






The afternoon was perfect. A deeper stillness possessed the air,

and the glitter of the American autumn was tempered by a haze

which diffused the brightness without dulling it. 



In the woody hollows of the park there was already a faint chill;

but as the ground rose the air grew lighter, and ascending the

long slopes beyond the high-road, Lily and her companion reached

a zone of lingering summer. The path wound across a meadow with

scattered trees; then it dipped into a lane plumed with asters

and purpling sprays of bramble, whence, through the light quiver

of ash-leaves, the country unrolled itself in pastoral distances.



Higher up, the lane showed thickening tufts of fern and of the

creeping glossy verdure of shaded slopes; trees began to overhang

it, and the shade deepened to the checkered dusk of a

beech-grove. The boles of the trees stood well apart, with only a

light feathering of undergrowth; the path wound along the edge of

the wood, now and then looking out on a sunlit pasture or on an

orchard spangled with fruit.



Lily had no real intimacy with nature, but she had a passion for

the appropriate and could be keenly sensitive to a scene which

was the fitting background of her own sensations. The landscape

outspread below her seemed an enlargement of her present mood,

and she found something of herself in its calmness, its breadth,

its long free reaches. On the nearer slopes the sugar-maples

wavered like pyres of light; lower down was a massing of grey

orchards, and here and there the lingering green of an oak-grove.

Two or three red farm-houses dozed under the apple-trees, and the

white wooden spire of a village church showed beyond the shoulder

of the hill; while far below, in a haze of dust, the high-road

ran between the fields. 



"Let us sit here," Selden suggested, as they reached an open

ledge of rock above which the beeches rose steeply between mossy

boulders.



Lily dropped down on the rock, glowing with her long climb. She

sat quiet, her lips parted by the stress of the ascent,

her eyes wandering peacefully over the broken ranges of the

landscape. Selden stretched himself on the grass at her feet,

tilting his hat against the level sun-rays, and clasping his

hands behind his head, which rested against the side of the rock.

He had no wish to make her talk; her quick-breathing silence

seemed a part of the general hush and harmony of things. In his

own mind there was only a lazy sense of pleasure, veiling the

sharp edges of sensation as the September haze veiled the scene

at their feet. But Lily, though her attitude was as calm as his,

was throbbing inwardly with a rush of thoughts. There were in her

at the moment two beings, one drawing deep breaths of freedom and

exhilaration, the other gasping for air in a little black

prison-house of fears. But gradually the captive's gasps grew

fainter, or the other paid less heed to them: the horizon

expanded, the air grew stronger, and the free spirit quivered for

flight.



She could not herself have explained the sense of buoyancy which

seemed to lift and swing her above the sun-suffused world at her

feet. Was it love, she wondered, or a mere fortuitous combination

of happy thoughts and sensations? How much of it was owing to the

spell of the perfect afternoon, the scent of the fading woods,

the thought of the dulness she had fled from? Lily had no

definite experience by which to test the quality of her feelings.

She had several times been in love with fortunes or careers, but

only once with a man. That was years ago, when she first came

out, and had been smitten with a romantic passion for a young

gentleman named Herbert Melson, who had blue eyes and a little

wave in his hair. Mr. Melson, who was possessed of no other

negotiable securities, had hastened to employ these in capturing

the eldest Miss Van Osburgh: since then he had grown stout and

wheezy, and was given to telling anecdotes about his children. If

Lily recalled this early emotion it was not to compare it with

that which now possessed her; the only point of comparison was

the sense of lightness, of emancipation, which she remembered

feeling, in the whirl of a waltz or the seclusion of a

conservatory, during the brief course of her youthful romance.

She had not known again till today that lightness, that glow of

freedom; but now it was something more than a blind groping of

the blood. The peculiar charm of her feeling for Selden

was that she understood it; she could put her finger on every

link of the chain that was drawing them together. Though his

popularity was of the quiet kind, felt rather than actively

expressed among his friends, she had never mistaken his

inconspicuousness for obscurity. His reputed cultivation was

generally regarded as a slight obstacle to easy intercourse, but

Lily, who prided herself on her broad-minded recognition of

literature, and always carried an Omar Khayam in her

travelling-bag, was attracted by this attribute, which she felt

would have had its distinction in an older society. It was,

moreover, one of his gifts to look his part; to have a height

which lifted his head above the crowd, and the keenly-modelled

dark features which, in a land of amorphous types, gave him the

air of belonging to a more specialized race, of carrying the

impress of a concentrated past. Expansive persons found him a

little dry, and very young girls thought him sarcastic; but this

air of friendly aloofness, as far removed as possible from any

assertion of personal advantage, was the quality which piqued

Lily's interest. Everything about him accorded with the

fastidious element in her taste, even to the light irony with

which he surveyed what seemed to her most sacred. She admired him

most of all, perhaps, for being able to convey as distinct a

sense of superiority as the richest man she had ever met.



It was the unconscious prolongation of this thought which led her

to say presently, with a laugh: "I have broken two engagements

for you today. How many have you broken for me?"



"None," said Selden calmly. "My only engagement at Bellomont was

with you."



She glanced down at him, faintly smiling.



"Did you really come to Bellomont to see me?"



"Of course I did."



Her look deepened meditatively. "Why?" she murmured, with an

accent which took all tinge of coquetry from the question.



"Because you're such a wonderful spectacle: I always like to see

what you are doing."



"How do you know what I should be doing if you were not here?"



Selden smiled. "I don't flatter myself that my coming has

deflected your course of action by a hair's breadth."



"That's absurd--since, if you were not here, I could obviously

not be taking a walk with you."



"No; but your taking a walk with me is only another way of making

use of your material. You are an artist and I happen to be the

bit of colour you are using today. It's a part of your cleverness

to be able to produce premeditated effects extemporaneously."



Lily smiled also: his words were too acute not to strike her

sense of humour. It was true that she meant to use the accident

of his presence as part of a very definite effect; or that, at

least, was the secret pretext she had found for breaking her

promise to walk with Mr. Gryce. She had sometimes been accused of

being too eager--even Judy Trenor had warned her to go slowly.

Well, she would not be too eager in this case; she would give her

suitor a longer taste of suspense. Where duty and inclination

jumped together, it was not in Lily's nature to hold them

asunder. She had excused herself from the walk on the plea of a

headache: the horrid headache which, in the morning, had

prevented her venturing to church. Her appearance at luncheon

justified the excuse. She looked languid, full of a suffering

sweetness; she carried a scent-bottle in her hand. Mr. Gryce was

new to such manifestations; he wondered rather nervously if she

were delicate, having far-reaching fears about the future of his

progeny. But sympathy won the day, and he besought her not to

expose herself: he always connected the outer air with ideas of

exposure.



Lily had received his sympathy with languid gratitude, urging

him, since she should be such poor company, to join the rest of

the party who, after luncheon, were starting in automobiles on a

visit to the Van Osburghs at Peekskill. Mr. Gryce was touched by

her disinterestedness, and, to escape from the threatened vacuity

of the afternoon, had taken her advice and departed mournfully,

in a dust-hood and goggles: as the motor-car plunged down the

avenue she smiled at his resemblance to a baffled beetle. Selden

had watched her manoeuvres with lazy amusement. She had made no

reply to his suggestion that they should spend the

afternoon together, but as her plan unfolded itself he felt

fairly confident of being included in it. The house was empty

when at length he heard her step on the stair and strolled out of

the billiard-room to join her.



She had on a hat and walking-dress, and the dogs were bounding at

her feet.



"I thought, after all, the air might do me good," she explained;

and he agreed that so simple a remedy was worth trying.



The excursionists would be gone at least four hours; Lily and

Selden had the whole afternoon before them, and the sense of

leisure and safety gave the last touch of lightness to her

spirit. With so much time to talk, and no definite object to be

led up to, she could taste the rare joys of mental vagrancy.



She felt so free from ulterior motives that she took up his

charge with a touch of resentment.



"I don't know," she said, "why you are always accusing me of

premeditation."



"I thought you confessed to it: you told me the other day that

you had to follow a certain line--and if one does a thing at all

it is a merit to do it thoroughly."



"If you mean that a girl who has no one to think for her is

obliged to think for herself, I am quite willing to accept the

imputation. But you must find me a dismal kind of person if you

suppose that I never yield to an impulse."



"Ah, but I don't suppose that: haven't I told you that your

genius lies in converting impulses into intentions?"



"My genius?" she echoed with a sudden note of weariness. "Is

there any final test of genius but success? And I certainly

haven't succeeded."



Selden pushed his hat back and took a side-glance at her.

"Success--what is success? I shall be interested to have your

definition."



"Success?" She hesitated. "Why, to get as much as one can out of

life, I suppose. It's a relative quality, after all. Isn't that

your idea of it?"



"My idea of it? God forbid!" He sat up with sudden energy,

resting his elbows on his knees and staring out upon the mellow

fields. "My idea of success," he said, "is personal freedom."



"Freedom? Freedom from worries?"



"From everything--from money, from poverty, from ease and

anxiety, from all the material accidents. To keep a kind of

republic of the spirit--that's what I call success."



She leaned forward with a responsive flash. "I know--I know--it's

strange; but that's just what I've been feeling today."



He met her eyes with the latent sweetness of his. "Is the feeling

so rare with you?" he said.



She blushed a little under his gaze. "You think me horribly

sordid, don't you? But perhaps it's rather that I never had any

choice. There was no one, I mean, to tell me about the republic

of the spirit."



"There never is--it's a country one has to find the way to one's

self."



"But I should never have found my way there if you hadn't told

me."



"Ah, there are sign-posts--but one has to know how to read them."




"Well, I have known, I have known!" she cried with a glow of

eagerness. "Whenever I see you, I find myself spelling out a

letter of the sign--and yesterday--last evening at dinner--I

suddenly saw a little way into your republic."



Selden was still looking at her, but with a changed eye. Hitherto

he had found, in her presence and her talk, the aesthetic

amusement which a reflective man is apt to seek in desultory

intercourse with pretty women. His attitude had been one of

admiring spectatorship, and he would have been almost sorry to

detect in her any emotional weakness which should interfere with

the fulfilment of her aims. But now the hint of this weakness had

become the most interesting thing about her. He had come on her

that morning in a moment of disarray; her face had been pale and

altered, and the diminution of her beauty had lent her a poignant

charm. THAT IS HOW SHE LOOKS WHEN SHE IS ALONE! had been his

first thought; and the second was to note in her the change which

his coming produced. It was the danger-point of their intercourse

that he could not doubt the spontaneity of her liking. From

whatever angle he viewed their dawning intimacy, he could not see

it as part of her scheme of life; and to be the unforeseen

element in a career so accurately planned was stimulating

even to a man who had renounced sentimental experiments.



"Well," he said, "did it make you want to see more? Are you going

to become one of us?"



He had drawn out his cigarettes as he spoke, and she reached her

hand toward the case.



"Oh, do give me one--I haven't smoked for days!"



"Why such unnatural abstinence? Everybody smokes at Bellomont." 



"Yes--but it is not considered becoming in a JEUNE FILLE A

MARIER; and at the present moment I am a JEUNE FILLE A MARIER. 



"Ah, then I'm afraid we can't let you into the republic."



"Why not? Is it a celibate order?"



"Not in the least, though I'm bound to say there are not many

married people in it. But you will marry some one very rich, and

it's as hard for rich people to get into as the kingdom of

heaven."



"That's unjust, I think, because, as I understand it, one of the

conditions of citizenship is not to think too much about money,

and the only way not to think about money is to have a great deal

of it."



"You might as well say that the only way not to think about air

is to have enough to breathe. That is true enough in a sense; but

your lungs are thinking about the air, if you are not. And so it

is with your rich people--they may not be thinking of money, but

they're breathing it all the while; take them into another

element and see how they squirm and gasp!"



Lily sat gazing absently through the blue rings of her

cigarette-smoke.



"It seems to me," she said at length, "that you spend a good deal

of your time in the element you disapprove of."



Selden received this thrust without discomposure. "Yes; but I

have tried to remain amphibious: it's all right as long as one's

lungs can work in another air. The real alchemy consists in being

able to turn gold back again into something else; and that's the

secret that most of your friends have lost."



Lily mused. "Don't you think," she rejoined after a moment, "that

the people who find fault with society are too apt to regard it

as an end and not a means, just as the people who despise

money speak as if its only use were to be kept in bags and

gloated over? Isn't it fairer to look at them both as

opportunities, which may be used either stupidly or

intelligently, according to the capacity of the user?"



"That is certainly the sane view; but the queer thing about

society is that the people who regard it as an end are those who

are in it, and not the critics on the fence. It's just the other

way with most shows--the audience may be under the illusion, but

the actors know that real life is on the other side of the

footlights. The people who take society as an escape from work

are putting it to its proper use; but when it becomes the thing

worked for it distorts all the relations of life." Selden raised

himself on his elbow. "Good heavens!" he went on, "I don't

underrate the decorative side of life. It seems to me the sense

of splendour has justified itself by what it has produced. The

worst of it is that so much human nature is used up in the

process. If we're all the raw stuff of the cosmic effects, one

would rather be the fire that tempers a sword than the fish that

dyes a purple cloak. And a society like ours wastes such good

material in producing its little patch of purple! Look at a boy

like Ned Silverton--he's really too good to be used to refurbish

anybody's social shabbiness. There's a lad just setting out to

discover the universe: isn't it a pity he should end by finding

it in Mrs. Fisher's drawing-room?"



"Ned is a dear boy, and I hope he will keep his illusions long

enough to write some nice poetry about them; but do you think it

is only in society that he is likely to lose them?"



Selden answered her with a shrug. "Why do we call all our

generous ideas illusions, and the mean ones truths? Isn't it a

sufficient condemnation of society to find one's self accepting

such phraseology? I very nearly acquired the jargon at

Silverton's age, and I know how names can alter the colour of

beliefs."



She had never heard him speak with such energy of affirmation.

His habitual touch was that of the eclectic, who lightly turns

over and compares; and she was moved by this sudden glimpse into

the laboratory where his faiths were formed.



"Ah, you are as bad as the other sectarians," she exclaimed;

"why do you call your republic a republic? It is a closed corporation,

and you create arbitrary objections in order to keep people out."



"It is not MY republic; if it were, I should have a COUP D'ETAT

and seat you on the throne."



"Whereas, in reality, you think I can never even get my foot

across the threshold? Oh, I understand what you mean. You despise

my ambitions--you think them unworthy of me!"



Selden smiled, but not ironically. "Well, isn't that a tribute? I

think them quite worthy of most of the people who live by them."



She had turned to gaze on him gravely. "But isn't it possible

that, if I had the opportunities of these people, I might make a

better use of them? Money stands for all kinds of things--its

purchasing quality isn't limited to diamonds and motor-cars." 





"Not in the least: you might expiate your enjoyment of them by

founding a hospital."



"But if you think they are what I should really enjoy, you must

think my ambitions are good enough for me."



Selden met this appeal with a laugh. "Ah, my dear Miss Bart, I am

not divine Providence, to guarantee your enjoying the things you

are trying to get!"



"Then the best you can say for me is, that after struggling to

get them I probably shan't like them?" She drew a deep breath.

"What a miserable future you foresee for me!"



"Well--have you never foreseen it for yourself?" The slow colour

rose to her cheek, not a blush of excitement but drawn from the

deep wells of feeling; it was as if the effort of her spirit had

produced it.



"Often and often," she said. "But it looks so much darker when

you show it to me!"



He made no answer to this exclamation, and for a while they sat

silent, while something throbbed between them in the wide quiet

of the air.



But suddenly she turned on him with a kind of vehemence. "Why do

you do this to me?" she cried. "Why do you make the things I have

chosen seem hateful to me, if you have nothing to give me

instead?" 



The words roused Selden from the musing fit into which he had

fallen. He himself did not know why he had led their talk along

such lines; it was the last use he would have imagined himself

making of an afternoon's solitude with Miss Bart. But it was one

of those moments when neither seemed to speak deliberately, when

an indwelling voice in each called to the other across unsounded

depths of feeling.



"No, I have nothing to give you instead," he said, sitting up and

turning so that he faced her. "If I had, it should be yours, you

know." 



She received this abrupt declaration in a way even stranger than

the manner of its making: she dropped her face on her hands and

he saw that for a moment she wept. 



It was for a moment only, however; for when he leaned nearer and

drew down her hands with a gesture less passionate than grave,

she turned on him a face softened but not disfigured by emotion,

and he said to himself, somewhat cruelly, that even her weeping

was an art. 



The reflection steadied his voice as he asked, between pity and

irony: "Isn't it natural that I should try to belittle all the

things I can't offer you?" 



Her face brightened at this, but she drew her hand away, not with

a gesture of coquetry, but as though renouncing something to

which she had no claim. 



"But you belittle ME, don't you," she returned gently, "in being

so sure they are the only things I care for?" 



Selden felt an inner start; but it was only the last quiver of

his egoism. Almost at once he answered quite simply: "But you do

care for them, don't you? And no wishing of mine can alter that."



He had so completely ceased to consider how far this might carry

him, that he had a distinct sense of disappointment when she

turned on him a face sparkling with derision. 



"Ah," she cried, "for all your fine phrases you're really as

great a coward as I am, for you wouldn't have made one of them if

you hadn't been so sure of my answer." 



The shock of this retort had the effect of crystallizing Selden's

wavering intentions. 



"I am not so sure of your answer," he said quietly. "And I do you

the justice to believe that you are not either." 



It was her turn to look at him with surprise; and after a

moment--"Do you want to marry me?" she asked. 



He broke into a laugh. "No, I don't want to--but perhaps I should

if you did!" 



"That's what I told you--you're so sure of me that you can amuse

yourself with experiments." She drew back the hand he had

regained, and sat looking down on him sadly. 



"I am not making experiments," he returned. "Or if I am, it is

not on you but on myself. I don't know what effect they are going

to have on me--but if marrying you is one of them, I will take

the risk." 



She smiled faintly. "It would be a great risk, certainly--I have

never concealed from you how great." 



"Ah, it's you who are the coward!" he exclaimed. 



She had risen, and he stood facing her with his eyes on hers. The

soft isolation of the falling day enveloped them: they seemed

lifted into a finer air. All the exquisite influences of the hour

trembled in their veins, and drew them to each other as the

loosened leaves were drawn to the earth. 



"It's you who are the coward," he repeated, catching her hands in

his. 



She leaned on him for a moment, as if with a drop of tired wings:

he felt as though her heart were beating rather with the stress

of a long flight than the thrill of new distances. Then, drawing

back with a little smile of warning--"I shall look hideous in

dowdy clothes; but I can trim my own hats," she declared. 



They stood silent for a while after this, smiling at each other

like adventurous children who have climbed to a forbidden height

from which they discover a new world. The actual world at their

feet was veiling itself in dimness, and across the valley a clear

moon rose in the denser blue. 



Suddenly they heard a remote sound, like the hum of a giant

insect, and following the high-road, which wound whiter through

the surrounding twilight, a black object rushed across their

vision. 



Lily started from her attitude of absorption; her smile faded and

she began to move toward the lane.



"I had no idea it was so late! We shall not be back till after

dark," she said, almost impatiently. 



Selden was looking at her with surprise: it took him a moment to

regain his usual view of her; then he said, with an

uncontrollable note of dryness: "That was not one of our party;

the motor was going the other way." 



"I know--I know---" She paused, and he saw her redden through the

twilight. "But I told them I was not well--that I should not go

out. Let us go down!" she murmured. 



Selden continued to look at her; then he drew his cigarette-case

from his pocket and slowly lit a cigarette. It seemed to him

necessary, at that moment, to proclaim, by some habitual gesture

of this sort, his recovered hold on the actual: he had an almost

puerile wish to let his companion see that, their flight over, he

had landed on his feet. 



She waited while the spark flickered under his curved palm; then

he held out the cigarettes to her. 



She took one with an unsteady hand, and putting it to her lips,

leaned forward to draw her light from his. In the indistinctness

the little red gleam lit up the lower part of her face, and he

saw her mouth tremble into a smile. 



"Were you serious?" she asked, with an odd thrill of gaiety which

she might have caught up, in haste, from a heap of stock

inflections, without having time to select the just note. 

Selden's voice was under better control. "Why not?" he returned.

"You see I took no risks in being so." And as she continued to

stand before him, a little pale under the retort, he added

quickly: "Let us go down."





It spoke much for the depth of Mrs. Trenor's friendship that her

voice, in admonishing Miss Bart, took the same note of personal

despair as if she had been lamenting the collapse of a

house-party. 



"All I can say is, Lily, that I can't make you out!" She leaned

back, sighing, in the morning abandon of lace and muslin, turning

an indifferent shoulder to the heaped-up importunities of her

desk, while she considered, with the eye of a physician who has

given up the case, the erect exterior of the patient confronting

her. 



"If you hadn't told me you were going in for him seriously--but

I'm sure you made that plain enough from the beginning! Why else

did you ask me to let you off bridge, and to keep away Carry and

Kate Corby? I don't suppose you did it because he amused you; we

could none of us imagine your putting up with him for a moment

unless you meant to marry him. And I'm sure everybody played

fair! They all wanted to help it along. Even Bertha kept her

hands off--I will say that--till Lawrence came down and you

dragged him away from her. After that she had a right to

retaliate--why on earth did you interfere with her? You've known

Lawrence Selden for years--why did you behave as if you had just

discovered him? If you had a grudge against Bertha it was a

stupid time to show it--you could have paid her back just as well

after you were married! I told you Bertha was dangerous. She was

in an odious mood when she came here, but Lawrence's turning up

put her in a good humour, and if you'd only let her think he came

for HER it would have never occurred to her to play you this

trick. Oh, Lily, you'll never do anything if you're not serious!"



Miss Bart accepted this exhortation in a spirit of the purest

impartiality. Why should she have been angry? It was the voice of

her own conscience which spoke to her through Mrs. Trenor's

reproachful accents. But even to her own conscience she must

trump up a semblance of defence. "I only took a day off--I

thought he meant to stay on all this week, and I knew Mr. Selden

was leaving this morning." 



Mrs. Trenor brushed aside the plea with a gesture which laid bare

its weakness. 



"He did mean to stay--that's the worst of it. It shows that he's

run away from you; that Bertha's done her work and poisoned him

thoroughly." 



Lily gave a slight laugh. "Oh, if he's running I'll overtake

him!" 



Her friend threw out an arresting hand. "Whatever you do, Lily,

do nothing!" 



Miss Bart received the warning with a smile. "I don't mean,

literally, to take the next train. There are ways---" But she did

not go on to specify them. 



Mrs. Trenor sharply corrected the tense. "There WERE ways--plenty

of them! I didn't suppose you needed to have them pointed out.

But don't deceive yourself--he's thoroughly frightened. He has

run straight home to his mother, and she'll protect him!" 



"Oh, to the death," Lily agreed, dimpling at the vision. 



"How you can LAUGH---" her friend rebuked her; and she dropped

back to a soberer perception of things with the question: "What

was it Bertha really told him?" 



"Don't ask me--horrors! She seemed to have raked up everything.

Oh, you know what I mean--of course there isn't anything, REALLY;

but I suppose she brought in Prince Varigliano--and Lord

Hubert--and there was some story of your having borrowed money of

old Ned Van Alstyne: did you ever?" 



"He is my father's cousin," Miss Bart interposed. 



"Well, of course she left THAT out. It seems Ned told Carry

Fisher; and she told Bertha, naturally. They're all alike, you

know: they hold their tongues for years, and you think you're

safe, but when their opportunity comes they remember everything."



Lily had grown pale: her voice had a harsh note in it. "It was

some money I lost at bridge at the Van Osburghs'. I repaid it, of

course." 



"Ah, well, they wouldn't remember that; besides, it was the idea

of the gambling debt that frightened Percy. Oh, Bertha knew her

man--she knew just what to tell him!" 



In this strain Mrs. Trenor continued for nearly an hour to

admonish her friend. Miss Bart listened with admirable

equanimity. Her naturally good temper had been disciplined by

years of enforced compliance, since she had almost always had to

attain her ends by the circuitous path of other people's; and,

being naturally inclined to face unpleasant facts as soon as they

presented themselves, she was not sorry to hear an impartial

statement of what her folly was likely to cost, the more so as

her own thoughts were still insisting on the other side of the

case. Presented in the light of Mrs. Trenor's vigorous comments,

the reckoning was certainly a formidable one, and Lily, as she

listened, found herself gradually reverting to her friend's view

of the situation. Mrs. Trenor's words were moreover emphasized

for her hearer by anxieties which she herself could scarcely

guess. Affluence, unless stimulated by a keen imagination, forms

but the vaguest notion of the practical strain of poverty. Judy

knew it must be "horrid" for poor Lily to have to stop to

consider whether she could afford real lace on her petticoats,

and not to have a motor-car and a steam-yacht at her orders; but

the daily friction of unpaid bills, the daily nibble of small

temptations to expenditure, were trials as far out of her

experience as the domestic problems of the char-woman. Mrs.

Trenor's unconsciousness of the real stress of the situation had

the effect of making it more galling to Lily. While her friend

reproached her for missing the opportunity to eclipse her rivals,

she was once more battling in imagination with the mounting tide

of indebtedness from which she had so nearly escaped. What wind

of folly had driven her out again on those dark seas? 



If anything was needed to put the last touch to her

self-abasement it was the sense of the way her old life was

opening its ruts again to receive her. Yesterday her fancy had

fluttered free pinions above a choice of occupations; now she had

to drop to the level of the familiar routine, in which moments of

seeming brilliancy and freedom alternated with long hours of

subjection. 



She laid a deprecating hand on her friend's. "Dear Judy! I'm

sorry to have been such a bore, and you are very good to me. But

you must have some letters for me to answer--let me at least be

useful." 



She settled herself at the desk, and Mrs. Trenor accepted her

resumption of the morning's task with a sigh which implied that,

after all, she had proved herself unfit for higher uses. 



The luncheon table showed a depleted circle. ALI the men but Jack

Stepney and Dorset had returned to town (it seemed to Lily a last

touch of irony that Selden and Percy Gryce should have gone in

the same train), and Lady Cressida and the attendant Wetheralls

had been despatched by motor to lunch at a distant country-house.

At such moments of diminished interest it was usual for Mrs.

Dorset to keep her room till the afternoon; but on this occasion

she drifted in when luncheon was half over, hollowed-eyed and

drooping, but with an edge of malice under her indifference. 



She raised her eyebrows as she looked about the table. "How few

of us are left! I do so enjoy the quiet--don't you, Lily? I wish

the men would always stop away--it's really much nicer without

them. Oh, you don't count, George: one doesn't have to talk to

one's husband. But I thought Mr. Gryce was to stay for the rest

of the week?" she added enquiringly. "Didn't he intend to, Judy?

He's such a nice boy--I wonder what drove him away? He is rather

shy, and I'm afraid we may have shocked him: he has been brought

up in such an old-fashioned way. Do you know, Lily, he told me he

had never seen a girl play cards for money till he saw you doing

it the other night? And he lives on the interest of his income,

and always has a lot left over to invest!" 



Mrs. Fisher leaned forward eagerly. "I do believe it is some

one's duty to educate that young man. It is shocking that he has

never been made to realize his duties as a citizen. Every wealthy

man should be compelled to study the laws of his country." 



Mrs. Dorset glanced at her quietly. "I think he HAS studied the

divorce laws. He told me he had promised the Bishop to sign some

kind of a petition against divorce." 



Mrs. Fisher reddened under her powder, and Stepney said with a

laughing glance at Miss Bart: "I suppose he is thinking of

marriage, and wants to tinker up the old ship before he goes

aboard." 



His betrothed looked shocked at the metaphor, and George Dorset

exclaimed with a sardonic growl: "Poor devil! It isn't the ship

that will do for him, it's the crew."



"Or the stowaways," said Miss Corby brightly. "If I contemplated

a voyage with him I should try to start with a friend in the

hold." 



Miss Van Osburgh's vague feeling of pique was struggling for

appropriate expression. "I'm sure I don't see why you laugh at

him; I think he's very nice," she exclaimed; "and, at any rate, a

girl who married him would always have enough to be comfortable."



She looked puzzled at the redoubled laughter which hailed her

words, but it might have consoled her to know how deeply they had

sunk into the breast of one of her hearers. 



Comfortable! At that moment the word was more eloquent to Lily

Bart than any other in the language. She could not even pause to

smile over the heiress's view of a colossal fortune as a mere

shelter against want: her mind was filled with the vision of what

that shelter might have been to her. Mrs. Dorset's pin-pricks did

not smart, for her own irony cut deeper: no one could hurt her as

much as she was hurting herself, for no one else--not even Judy

Trenor--knew the full magnitude of her folly. 



She was roused from these unprofitable considerations by a

whispered request from her hostess, who drew her apart as they

left the luncheon-table. 



"Lily, dear, if you've nothing special to do, may I tell Carry

Fisher that you intend to drive to the station and fetch Gus? He

will be back at four, and I know she has it in her mind to meet

him. Of course I'm very glad to have him amused, but I happen to

know that she has bled him rather severely since she's been here,

and she is so keen about going to fetch him that I fancy she must

have got a lot more bills this morning. It seems to me," Mrs.

Trenor feelingly concluded, "that most of her alimony is paid by

other women's husbands!" 



Miss Bart, on her way to the station, had leisure to muse over

her friend's words, and their peculiar application to herself.

Why should she have to suffer for having once, for a few hours,

borrowed money of an elderly cousin, when a woman like Carry

Fisher could make a living unrebuked from the good-nature of her

men friends and the tolerance of their wives? It all turned on

the tiresome distinction between what a married woman

might, and a girl might not, do. Of course it was shocking for a

married woman to borrow money--and Lily was expertly aware of the

implication involved--but still, it was the mere MALUM PROHIBITUM

which the world decries but condones, and which, though it may be

punished by private vengeance, does not provoke the collective

disapprobation of society. To Miss Bart, in short, no such

opportunities were possible. She could of course borrow from her

women friends--a hundred here or there, at the utmost--but they

were more ready to give a gown or a trinket, and looked a little

askance when she hinted her preference for a cheque. Women are

not generous lenders, and those among whom her lot was cast were

either in the same case as herself, or else too far removed from

it to understand its necessities. The result of her meditations

was the decision to join her aunt at Richfield. She could not

remain at Bellomont without playing bridge, and being involved in

other expenses; and to continue her usual series of autumn visits

would merely prolong the same difficulties. She had reached a

point where abrupt retrenchment was necessary, and the only cheap

life was a dull life. She would start the next morning for

Richfield.



At the station she thought Gus Trenor seemed surprised, and not

wholly unrelieved, to see her. She yielded up the reins of the

light runabout in which she had driven over, and as he climbed

heavily to her side, crushing her into a scant third of the seat,

he said: "Halloo! It isn't often you honour me. You must have

been uncommonly hard up for something to do." 



The afternoon was warm, and propinquity made her more than

usually conscious that he was red and massive, and that beads of

moisture had caused the dust of the train to adhere unpleasantly

to the broad expanse of cheek and neck which he turned to her;

but she was aware also, from the look in his small dull eyes,

that the contact with her freshness and slenderness was as

agreeable to him as the sight of a cooling beverage. 



The perception of this fact helped her to answer gaily: "It's not

often I have the chance. There are too many ladies to dispute the

privilege with me." 



"The privilege of driving me home? Well, I'm glad you won

the race, anyhow. But I know what really happened--my wife sent

you. Now didn't she?" 



He had the dull man's unexpected flashes of astuteness, and Lily

could not help joining in the laugh with which he had pounced on

the truth. 



"You see, Judy thinks I'm the safest person for you to be with;

and she's quite right," she rejoined. 



"Oh, is she, though? If she is, it's because you wouldn't waste

your time on an old hulk like me. We married men have to put up

with what we can get: all the prizes are for the clever chaps

who've kept a free foot. Let me light a cigar, will you? I've had

a beastly day of it." 



He drew up in the shade of the village street, and passed the

reins to her while he held a match to his cigar. The little flame

under his hand cast a deeper crimson on his puffing face, and

Lily averted her eyes with a momentary feeling of repugnance. And

yet some women thought him handsome! 



As she handed back the reins, she said sympathetically: "Did you

have such a lot of tiresome things to do?" 



"I should say so--rather!" Trenor, who was seldom listened to,

either by his wife or her friends, settled down into the rare

enjoyment of a confidential talk. "You don't know how a fellow

has to hustle to keep this kind of thing going." He waved his

whip in the direction of the Bellomont acres, which lay outspread

before them in opulent undulations. "Judy has no idea of what she

spends--not that there isn't plenty to keep the thing going," he

interrupted himself, "but a man has got to keep his eyes open and

pick up all the tips he can. My father and mother used to live

like fighting-cocks on their income, and put by a good bit of it

too--luckily for me--but at the pace we go now, I don't know

where I should be if it weren't for taking a flyer now and then.

The women all think--I mean Judy thinks--I've nothing to do but

to go down town once a month and cut off coupons, but the truth

is it takes a devilish lot of hard work to keep the machinery

running. Not that I ought to complain to-day, though," he went on

after a moment, "for I did a very neat stroke of business, thanks

to Stepney's friend Rosedale: by the way, Miss Lily, I wish you'd

try to persuade Judy to be decently civil to that chap. He's

going to be rich enough to buy us all out one of these

days, and if she'd only ask him to dine now and then I could get

almost anything out of him. The man is mad to know the people who

don't want to know him, and when a fellow's in that state there

is nothing he won't do for the first woman who takes him up." 



Lily hesitated a moment. The first part of her companion's

discourse had started an interesting train of thought, which was

rudely interrupted by the mention of Mr. Rosedale's name. She

uttered a faint protest. 



"But you know Jack did try to take him about, and he was

impossible." 



"Oh, hang it--because he's fat and shiny, and has a sloppy

manner! Well, all I can say is that the people who are clever

enough to be civil to him now will make a mighty good thing of

it. A few years from now he'll be in it whether we want him or

not, and then he won't be giving away a half-a-million tip for a

dinner." 
