







Mrs. Trenor was a tall fair woman, whose height just saved her

from redundancy. Her rosy blondness had survived some forty years

of futile activity without showing much trace of ill-usage except

in a diminished play of feature. It was difficult to define her

beyond saying that she seemed to exist only as a hostess, not so

much from any exaggerated instinct of hospitality as because she

could not sustain life except in a crowd. The collective nature

of her interests exempted her from the ordinary rivalries of her

sex, and she knew no more personal emotion than that of hatred

for the woman who presumed to give bigger dinners or have more

amusing house-parties than herself. As her social talents, backed

by Mr. Trenor's bank-account, almost always assured her ultimate

triumph in such competitions, success had developed in her an

unscrupulous good nature toward the rest of her sex, and in Miss

Bart's utilitarian classification of her friends, Mrs. Trenor

ranked as the woman who was least likely to "go back" on her.



"It was simply inhuman of Pragg to go off now," Mrs. Trenor

declared, as her friend seated herself at the desk. "She says her

sister is going to have a baby--as if that were anything to

having a house-party! I'm sure I shall get most horribly mixed up

and there will be some awful rows. When I was down at Tuxedo I

asked a lot of people for next week, and I've mislaid the list

and can't remember who is coming. And this week is going to be a

horrid failure too--and Gwen Van Osburgh will go back and

tell her mother how bored people were. I did mean to ask the

Wetheralls--that was a blunder of Gus's. They disapprove of Carry

Fisher, you know. As if one could help having Carry Fisher! It

WAS foolish of her to get that second divorce--Carry always

overdoes things--but she said the only way to get a penny out of

Fisher was to divorce him and make him pay alimony. And poor

Carry has to consider every dollar. It's really absurd of Alice

Wetherall to make such a fuss about meeting her, when one thinks

of what society is coming to. Some one said the other day that

there was a divorce and a case of appendicitis in every family

one knows. Besides, Carry is the only person who can keep Gus in

a good humour when we have bores in the house. Have you noticed

that ALL the husbands like her? All, I mean, except her own. It's

rather clever of her to have made a specialty of devoting herself

to dull people--the field is such a large one, and she has it

practically to herself. She finds compensations, no doubt--I know

she borrows money of Gus--but then I'd PAY her to keep him in a

good humour, so I can't complain, after all.



"Mrs. Trenor paused to enjoy the spectacle of Miss Bart's efforts

to unravel her tangled correspondence.



"But it is only the Wetheralls and Carry," she resumed, with a

fresh note of lament. "The truth is, I'm awfully disappointed in

Lady Cressida Raith."



"Disappointed? Had you known her before?"



"Mercy, no--never saw her till yesterday. Lady Skiddaw sent her

over with letters to the Van Osburghs, and I heard that Maria Van

Osburgh was asking a big party to meet her this week, so I

thought it would be fun to get her away, and Jack Stepney, who

knew her in India, managed it for me. Maria was furious, and

actually had the impudence to make Gwen invite herself here, so

that they shouldn't be QUITE out of it--if I'd known what Lady

Cressida was like, they could have had her and welcome! But I

thought any friend of the Skiddaws' was sure to be amusing. You

remember what fun Lady Skiddaw was? There were times when I

simply had to send the girls out of the room. Besides, Lady

Cressida is the Duchess of Beltshire's sister, and I naturally

supposed she was the same sort; but you never can tell in those

English families. They are so big that there's room for

all kinds, and it turns out that Lady Cressida is the moral


one--married a clergy-man and does missionary work in the East

End. Think of my taking such a lot of trouble about a clergyman's

wife, who wears Indian jewelry and botanizes! She made Gus take

her all through the glass-houses yesterday, and bothered him to

death by asking him the names of the plants. Fancy treating Gus

as if he were the gardener!



"Mrs. Trenor brought this out in a CRESCENDO of indignation.



"Oh, well, perhaps Lady Cressida will reconcile the Wetheralls to

meeting Carry Fisher," said Miss Bart pacifically.



"I'm sure I hope so! But she is boring all the men horribly, and

if she takes to distributing tracts, as I hear she does, it will

be too depressing. The worst of it is that she would have been so

useful at the right time. You know we have to have the Bishop

once a year, and she would have given just the right tone to

things. I always have horrid luck about the Bishop's visits,"

added Mrs. Trenor, whose present misery was being fed by a

rapidly rising tide of reminiscence; "last year, when he came,

Gus forgot all about his being here, and brought home the Ned

Wintons and the Farleys--five divorces and six sets of children

between them!"



"When is Lady Cressida going?" Lily enquired.



Mrs. Trenor cast up her eyes in despair. "My dear, if one only

knew! I was in such a hurry to get her away from Maria that I

actually forgot to name a date, and Gus says she told some one

she meant to stop here all winter."



"To stop here? In this house?"



"Don't be silly--in America. But if no one else asks her--you

know they NEVER go to hotels."



"Perhaps Gus only said it to frighten you."



"No--I heard her tell Bertha Dorset that she had six months to

put in while her husband was taking the cure in the Engadine. You

should have seen Bertha look vacant! But it's no joke, you

know--if she stays here all the autumn she'll spoil everything,

and Maria Van Osburgh will simply exult.



"At this affecting vision Mrs. Trenor's voice trembled with

self-pity."Oh, Judy--as if any one were ever bored at Bellomont!"

Miss Bart tactfully protested. "You know perfectly well that,

if Mrs. Van Osburgh were to get all the right people and leave you

with all the wrong ones, you'd manage to make things go off,

and she wouldn't."



Such an assurance would usually have restored Mrs. Trenor's complacency;

but on this occasion it did not chase the cloud from her brow.



"It isn't only Lady Cressida," she lamented. "Everything has gone

wrong this week. I can see that Bertha Dorset is furious with

me."



"Furious with you? Why?"



"Because I told her that Lawrence Selden was coming; but he

wouldn't, after all, and she's quite unreasonable enough to think

it's my fault."



Miss Bart put down her pen and sat absently gazing at the note

she had begun.



"I thought that was all over," she said.



"So it is, on his side. And of course Bertha has been idle since.

But I fancy she's out of a job just at present--and some one gave

me a hint that I had better ask Lawrence. Well, I DID ask

him--but I couldn't make him come; and now I suppose she'll take

it out of me by being perfectly nasty to every one else."



"Oh, she may take it out of HIM by being perfectly charming--to

some one else.



"Mrs. Trenor shook her head dolefully. "She knows he wouldn't

mind. And who else is there? Alice Wetherall won't let Lucius out

of her sight. Ned Silverton can't take his eyes off Carry

Fisher--poor boy! Gus is bored by Bertha, Jack Stepney knows her

too well--and--well, to be sure, there's Percy Gryce!"



She sat up smiling at the thought.



Miss Bart's countenance did not reflect the smile.



"Oh, she and Mr. Gryce would not be likely to hit it off."



"You mean that she'd shock him and he'd bore her? Well, that's

not such a bad beginning, you know. But I hope she won't take it

into her head to be nice to him, for I asked him here on purpose

for you."



Lily laughed. "MERCI DU COMPLIMENT! I should certainly have no

show against Bertha."



"Do you think I am uncomplimentary? I'm not really, you know.

Every one knows you're a thousand times handsomer and cleverer

than Bertha; but then you're not nasty. And for always getting

what she wants in the long run, commend me to a nasty woman."



Miss Bart stared in affected reproval. "I thought you were so

fond of Bertha."



"Oh, I am--it's much safer to be fond of dangerous people. But

she IS dangerous--and if I ever saw her up to mischief it's now.

I can tell by poor George's manner. That man is a perfect

barometer--he always knows when Bertha is going to---"



"To fall?" Miss Bart suggested.



"Don't be shocking! You know he believes in her still. And of

course I don't say there's any real harm in Bertha. Only she

delights in making people miserable, and especially poor George."



"Well, he seems cut out for the part--I don't wonder she likes

more cheerful companionship."



"Oh, George is not as dismal as you think. If Bertha did worry

him he would be quite different. Or if she'd leave him alone, and

let him arrange his life as he pleases. But she doesn't dare lose

her hold of him on account of the money, and so when HE isn't

jealous she pretends to be."



Miss Bart went on writing in silence, and her hostess sat

following her train of thought with frowning intensity.



"Do you know," she exclaimed after a long pause, "I believe I'll

call up Lawrence on the telephone and tell him he simply MUST

come?"



"Oh, don't," said Lily, with a quick suffusion of colour. The

blush surprised her almost as much as it did her hostess, who,

though not commonly observant of facial changes, sat staring at

her with puzzled eyes.



"Good gracious, Lily, how handsome you are! Why? Do you dislike

him so much?"



"Not at all; I like him. But if you are actuated by the

benevolent intention of protecting me from Bertha--I don't think

I need your protection.



"Mrs. Trenor sat up with an exclamation. "Lily!---PERCY? Do you

mean to say you've actually done it?"



Miss Bart smiled. "I only mean to say that Mr. Gryce and I are

getting to be very good friends."



"H'm--I see." Mrs. Trenor fixed a rapt eye upon her. "You know

they say he has eight hundred thousand a year--and spends

nothing, except on some rubbishy old books. And his mother has

heart-disease and will leave him a lot more. OH, LILY, DO GO

SLOWLY," her friend adjured her.



Miss Bart continued to smile without annoyance. "I shouldn't, for

instance," she remarked, "be in any haste to tell him that he had

a lot of rubbishy old books."



"No, of course not; I know you're wonderful about getting up

people's subjects. But he's horribly shy, and easily shocked,

and--and---"



"Why don't you say it, Judy? I have the reputation of being on

the hunt for a rich husband?"



"Oh, I don't mean that; he wouldn't believe it of you--at first,"

said Mrs. Trenor, with candid shrewdness. "But you know things

are rather lively here at times--I must give Jack and Gus a

hint--and if he thought you were what his mother would call

fast--oh, well, you know what I mean. Don't wear your scarlet

CREPE-DE-CHINE for dinner, and don't smoke if you can help it,

Lily dear!"



Lily pushed aside her finished work with a dry smile."You're very

kind, Judy: I'll lock up my cigarettes and wear that last year's

dress you sent me this morning. And if you are really interested

in my career, perhaps you'll be kind enough not to ask me to play

bridge again this evening."



"Bridge? Does he mind bridge, too? Oh, Lily, what an awful life

you'll lead! But of course I won't--why didn't you give me a hint

last night? There's nothing I wouldn't do, you poor duck, to see

you happy!"



And Mrs. Trenor, glowing with her sex's eagerness to smooth the

course of true love, enveloped Lily in a long embrace.



"You're quite sure," she added solicitously, as the latter

extricated herself, "that you wouldn't like me to telephone for

Lawrence Selden?"



"Quite sure," said Lily.







The next three days demonstrated to her own complete satifaction

Miss Bart's ability to manage her affairs without extraneous aid.



As she sat, on the Saturday afternoon, on the terrace at

Bellomont, she smiled at Mrs. Trenor's fear that she might go too

fast. If such a warning had ever been needful, the years had

taught her a salutary lesson, and she flattered herself that she

now knew how to adapt her pace to the object of pursuit. In the

case of Mr. Gryce she had found it well to flutter ahead, losing

herself elusively and luring him on from depth to depth of

unconscious intimacy. The surrounding atmosphere was propitious

to this scheme of courtship. Mrs. Trenor, true to her word, had

shown no signs of expecting Lily at the bridge-table, and had

even hinted to the other card-players that they were to betray no

surprise at her unwonted defection. In consequence of this hint,

Lily found herself the centre of that feminine solicitude which

envelops a young woman in the mating season. A solitude was

tacitly created for her in the crowded existence of Bellomont,

and her friends could not have shown a greater readiness for

self-effacement had her wooing been adorned with all the

attributes of romance. In Lily's set this conduct implied a

sympathetic comprehension of her motives, and Mr. Gryce rose in

her esteem as she saw the consideration he inspired. 



The terrace at Bellomont on a September afternoon was a spot

propitious to sentimental musings, and as Miss Bart stood leaning

against the balustrade above the sunken garden, at a little

distance from the animated group about the tea-table, she might

have been lost in the mazes of an inarticulate happiness. In

reality, her thoughts were finding definite utterance in the

tranquil recapitulation of the blessings in store for her. From

where she stood she could see them embodied in the form of Mr.

Gryce, who, in a light overcoat and muffler, sat somewhat

nervously on the edge of his chair, while Carry Fisher, with all

the energy of eye and gesture with which nature and art had

combined to endow her, pressed on him the duty of taking part in

the task of municipal reform.



Mrs. Fisher's latest hobby was municipal reform. It had been

preceded by an equal zeal for socialism, which had in turn

replaced an energetic advocacy of Christian Science. Mrs. Fisher

was small, fiery and dramatic; and her hands and eyes were

admirable instruments in the service of whatever causes he

happened to espouse. She had, however, the fault common to

enthusiasts of ignoring any slackness of response on the part of

her hearers, and Lily was amused by her unconsciousness of the

resistance displayed in every angle of Mr. Gryce's attitude. Lily

herself knew that his mind was divided between the dread of

catching cold if he remained out of doors too long at that hour,

and the fear that, if he retreated to the house, Mrs. Fisher

might follow him up with a paper to be signed. Mr. Gryce had a

constitutional dislike to what he called "committing himself,"

and tenderly as he cherished his health, he evidently concluded

that it was safer to stay out of reach of pen and ink till chance

released him from Mrs. Fisher's toils. Meanwhile he cast agonized

glances in the direction of Miss Bart, whose only response was to

sink into an attitude of more graceful abstraction. She had

learned the value of contrast in throwing her charms into relief,

and was fully aware of the extent to which Mrs. Fisher's

volubility was enhancing her own repose. 



She was roused from her musings by the approach of her cousin

Jack Stepney who, at Gwen Van Osburgh's side, was returning

across the garden from the tennis court.



The couple in question were engaged in the same kind of romance

in which Lily figured, and the latter felt a certain annoyance in

contemplating what seemed to her a caricature of her own

situation. Miss Van Osburgh was a large girl with flat surfaces

and no high lights: Jack Stepney had once said of her that she

was as reliable as roast mutton. His own taste was in the line of

less solid and more highly-seasoned diet; but hunger makes any

fare palatable, and there had been times when Mr. Stepney had

been reduced to a crust.



Lily considered with interest the expression of their faces: the

girl's turned toward her companion's like an empty plate held up

to be filled, while the man lounging at her side already betrayed

the encroaching boredom which would presently crack the thin

veneer of his smile.



"How impatient men are!" Lily reflected. "All Jack has to do to

get everything he wants is to keep quiet and let that girl marry

him; whereas I have to calculate and contrive, and retreat and

advance, as if I were going through an intricate dance,

where one misstep would throw me hopelessly out of time."



As they drew nearer she was whimsically struck by a kind of

family likeness between Miss Van Osburgh and Percy Gryce. There

was no resemblance of feature. Gryce was handsome in a didactic

way--he looked like a clever pupil's drawing from a

plaster-cast--while Gwen's countenance had no more modelling than

a face painted on a toy balloon. But the deeper affinity was

unmistakable: the two had the same prejudices and ideals, and the

same quality of making other standards non-existent by ignoring

them. This attribute was common to most of Lily's set: they had a

force of negation which eliminated everything beyond their own

range of perception. Gryce and Miss Van Osburgh were, in short,

made for each other by every law of moral and physical

correspondence---"Yet they wouldn't look at each other," Lily

mused, "they never do. Each of them wants a creature of a

different race, of Jack's race and mine, with all sorts of

intuitions, sensations and perceptions that they don't even guess

the existence of. And they always get what they want."



She stood talking with her cousin and Miss Van Osburgh, till a

slight cloud on the latter's brow advised her that even cousinly

amenities were subject to suspicion, and Miss Bart, mindful of

the necessity of not exciting enmities at this crucial point of

her career, dropped aside while the happy couple proceeded toward

the tea-table.



Seating herself on the upper step of the terrace, Lily leaned her

head against the honeysuckles wreathing the balustrade. The

fragrance of the late blossoms seemed an emanation of the

tranquil scene, a landscape tutored to the last degree of rural

elegance. In the foreground glowed the warm tints of the gardens.

Beyond the lawn, with its pyramidal pale-gold maples and velvety

firs, sloped pastures dotted with cattle; and through a long

glade the river widened like a lake under the silver light of

September. Lily did not want to join the circle about the

tea-table. They represented the future she had chosen, and she

was content with it, but in no haste to anticipate its joys. The

certainty that she could marry Percy Gryce when she pleased had

lifted a heavy load from her mind, and her money troubles were

too recent for their removal not to leave a sense of

relief which a less discerning intelligence might have taken for

happiness. Her vulgar cares were at an end. She would be able to

arrange her life as she pleased, to soar into that empyrean of

security where creditors cannot penetrate. She would have smarter

gowns than Judy Trenor, and far, far more jewels than Bertha

Dorset. She would be free forever from the shifts, the

expedients, the humiliations of the relatively poor. Instead of

having to flatter, she would be flattered; instead of being

grateful, she would receive thanks. There were old scores she

could pay off as well as old benefits she could return. And she

had no doubts as to the extent of her power. She knew that Mr.

Gryce was of the small chary type most inaccessible to impulses

and emotions. He had the kind of character in which prudence is a

vice, and good advice the most dangerous nourishment. But Lily

had known the species before: she was aware that such a guarded

nature must find one huge outlet of egoism, and she determined to

be to him what his Americana had hitherto been: the one

possession in which he took sufficient pride to spend money on

it. She knew that this generosity to self is one of the forms of

meanness, and she resolved so to identify herself with her

husband's vanity that to gratify her wishes would be to him the

most exquisite form of self-indulgence. The system might at first

necessitate a resort to some of the very shifts and expedients

from which she intended it should free her; but she felt sure

that in a short time she would be able to play the game in her

own way. How should she have distrusted her powers? Her beauty

itself was not the mere ephemeral possession it might have been

in the hands of inexperience: her skill in enhancing it, the care

she took of it, the use she made of it, seemed to give it a kind

of permanence. She felt she could trust it to carry her through

to the end. 



And the end, on the whole, was worthwhile. Life was not the

mockery she had thought it three days ago. There was room for

her, after all, in this crowded selfish world of pleasure whence,

so short a time since, her poverty had seemed to exclude her.

These people whom she had ridiculed and yet envied were glad to

make a place for her in the charmed circle about which all her

desires revolved. They were not as brutal and self-engrossed as

she had fancied--or rather, since it would no longer be

necessary to flatter and humour them, that side of their nature

became less conspicuous. Society is a revolving body which is apt

to be judged according to its place in each man's heaven; and at

present it was turning its illuminated face to Lily.



In the rosy glow it diffused her companions seemed full of

amiable qualities. She liked their elegance, their lightness,

their lack of emphasis: even the self-assurance which at times

was so like obtuseness now seemed the natural sign of social

ascendency. They were lords of the only world she cared for, and

they were ready to admit her to their ranks and let her lord it

with them. Already she felt within her a stealing allegiance to

their standards, an acceptance of their limitations, a disbelief

in the things they did not believe in, a contemptuous pity for

the people who were not able to live as they lived.



The early sunset was slanting across the park. Through the boughs

of the long avenue beyond the gardens she caught the flash of

wheels, and divined that more visitors were approaching. There

was a movement behind her, a scattering of steps and voices: it

was evident that the party about the tea-table was breaking up.

Presently she heard a tread behind her on the terrace. She

supposed that Mr. Gryce had at last found means to escape from

his predicament, and she smiled at the significance of his coming

to join her instead of beating an instant retreat to the

fire-side.



She turned to give him the welcome which such gallantry deserved;

but her greeting wavered into a blush of wonder, for the man who

had approached her was Lawrence Selden. 



"You see I came after all," he said; but before she had time to

answer, Mrs. Dorset, breaking away from a lifeless colloquy with

her host, had stepped between them with a little gesture of

appropriation.



The observance of Sunday at Bellomont was chiefly marked by the

punctual appearance of the smart omnibus destined to convey the

household to the little church at the gates. Whether any one got

into the omnibus or not was a matter of secondary importance,

since by standing there it not only bore witness to the orthodox

intentions of the family, but made Mrs. Trenor feel, when she

finally heard it drive away, that she had somehow vicariously

made use of it. 



It was Mrs. Trenor's theory that her daughters actually did go to

church every Sunday; but their French governess's convictions

calling her to the rival fane, and the fatigues of the week

keeping their mother in her room till luncheon, there was seldom

any one present to verify the fact. Now and then, in a spasmodic

burst of virtue--when the house had been too uproarious over

night--Gus Trenor forced his genial bulk into a tight frock-coat

and routed his daughters from their slumbers; but habitually, as

Lily explained to Mr. Gryce, this parental duty was forgotten

till the church bells were ringing across the park, and the

omnibus had driven away empty. 



Lily had hinted to Mr. Gryce that this neglect of religious

observances was repugnant to her early traditions, and that

during her visits to Bellomont she regularly accompanied Muriel

and Hilda to church. This tallied with the assurance, also

confidentially imparted, that, never having played bridge

before, she had been "dragged into it" on the night of her

arrival, and had lost an appalling amount of money in

consequence of her ignorance of the game and of the rules of

betting. Mr. Gryce was undoubtedly enjoying Bellomont. He liked

the ease and glitter of the life, and the lustre conferred on him

by being a member of this group of rich and conspicuous people.

But he thought it a very materialistic society; there were times

when he was frightened by the talk of the men and the looks of

the ladies, and he was glad to find that Miss Bart, for all her

ease and self-possession, was not at home in so ambiguous an

atmosphere. For this reason he had been especially pleased to

learn that she would, as usual, attend the young Trenors

to church on Sunday morning; and as he paced the gravel sweep

before the door, his light overcoat on his arm and his

prayer-book in one carefully-gloved hand, he reflected agreeably

on the strength of character which kept her true to her early

training in surroundings so subversive to religious principles. 



For a long time Mr. Gryce and the omnibus had the gravel sweep to

themselves; but, far from regretting this deplorable indifference

on the part of the other guests, he found himself nourishing the

hope that Miss Bart might be unaccompanied. The precious minutes

were flying, however; the big chestnuts pawed the ground and

flecked their impatient sides with foam; the coachman seemed to

be slowly petrifying on the box, and the groom on the doorstep;

and still the lady did not come. Suddenly, however, there was a

sound of voices and a rustle of skirts in the doorway, and Mr.

Gryce, restoring his watch to his pocket, turned with a nervous

start; but it was only to find himself handing Mrs. Wetherall

into the carriage. 



The Wetheralls always went to church. They belonged to the vast

group of human automata who go through life without neglecting to

perform a single one of the gestures executed by the surrounding

puppets. It is true that the Bellomont puppets did not go to

church; but others equally important did--and Mr. and Mrs.

Wetherall's circle was so large that God was included in their

visiting-list. They appeared, therefore, punctual and resigned,

with the air of people bound for a dull "At Home," and after them

Hilda and Muriel straggled, yawning and pinning each other's

veils and ribbons as they came. They had promised Lily to go to

church with her, they declared, and Lily was such a dear old duck

that they didn't mind doing it to please her, though they

couldn't fancy what had put the idea in her head, and though for

their own part they would much rather have played lawn tennis

with Jack and Gwen, if she hadn't told them she was coming. The

Misses Trenor were followed by Lady Cressida Raith, a

weather-beaten person in Liberty silk and ethnological trinkets,

who, on seeing the omnibus, expressed her surprise that they were

not to walk across the park; but at Mrs. Wetherall's horrified

protest that the church was a mile away, her ladyship,

after a glance at the height of the other's heels, acquiesced in

the necessity of driving, and poor Mr. Gryce found himself

rolling off between four ladies for whose spiritual welfare he

felt not the least concern. 



It might have afforded him some consolation could he have known

that Miss Bart had really meant to go to church. She had even

risen earlier than usual in the execution of her purpose. She had

an idea that the sight of her in a grey gown of devotional cut,

with her famous lashes drooped above a prayer-book, would put the

finishing touch to Mr. Gryce's subjugation, and render inevitable

a certain incident which she had resolved should form a part of

the walk they were to take together after luncheon. Her

intentions in short had never been more definite; but poor Lily,

for all the hard glaze of her exterior, was inwardly as malleable

as wax. Her faculty for adapting herself, for entering into other

people's feelings, if it served her now and then in small

contingencies, hampered her in the decisive moments of life. She

was like a water-plant in the flux of the tides, and today the

whole current of her mood was carrying her toward Lawrence

Selden. Why had he come? Was it to see herself or Bertha Dorset?

It was the last question which, at that moment, should have

engaged her. She might better have contented herself with

thinking that he had simply responded to the despairing summons

of his hostess, anxious to interpose him between herself and the

ill-humour of Mrs. Dorset. But Lily had not rested till she

learned from Mrs. Trenor that Selden had come of his own accord. 

"He didn't even wire me--he just happened to find the trap at the

station. Perhaps it's not over with Bertha after all," Mrs.

Trenor musingly concluded; and went away to arrange her

dinner-cards accordingly. 



Perhaps it was not, Lily reflected; but it should be soon, unless

she had lost her cunning. If Selden had come at Mrs. Dorset's

call, it was at her own that he would stay. So much the previous

evening had told her. Mrs. Trenor, true to her simple principle

of making her married friends happy, had placed Selden and Mrs.

Dorset next to each other at dinner; but, in obedience to the

time-honoured traditions of the match-maker, she had separated

Lily and Mr. Gryce, sending in the former with George

Dorset, while Mr. Gryce was coupled with Gwen Van Osburgh. 



George Dorset's talk did not interfere with the range of his

neighbour's thoughts. He was a mournful dyspeptic, intent on

finding out the deleterious ingredients of every dish and

diverted from this care only by the sound of his wife's voice. On

this occasion, however, Mrs. Dorset took no part in the general

conversation. She sat talking in low murmurs with Selden, and

turning a contemptuous and denuded shoulder toward her host, who,

far from resenting his exclusion, plunged into the excesses of

the MENU with the joyous irresponsibility of a free man. To Mr.

Dorset, however, his wife's attitude was a subject of such

evident concern that, when he was not scraping the sauce from his

fish, or scooping the moist bread-crumbs from the interior of his

roll, he sat straining his thin neck for a glimpse of her between

the lights. 



Mrs. Trenor, as it chanced, had placed the husband and wife on

opposite sides of the table, and Lily was therefore able to

observe Mrs. Dorset also, and by carrying her glance a few feet

farther, to set up a rapid comparison between Lawrence Selden and

Mr. Gryce. It was that comparison which was her undoing. Why else

had she suddenly grown interested in Selden? She had known him

for eight years or more: ever since her return to America he had

formed a part of her background. She had always been glad to sit

next to him at dinner, had found him more agreeable than most

men, and had vaguely wished that he possessed the other qualities

needful to fix her attention; but till now she had been too busy

with her own affairs to regard him as more than one of the

pleasant accessories of life. Miss Bart was a keen reader of her

own heart, and she saw that her sudden preoccupation with Selden

was due to the fact that his presence shed a new light on her

surroundings. Not that he was notably brilliant or exceptional;

in his own profession he was surpassed by more than one man who

had bored Lily through many a weary dinner. It was rather that he

had preserved a certain social detachment, a happy air of viewing

the show objectively, of having points of contact outside the

great gilt cage in which they were all huddled for the mob to

gape at. How alluring the world outside the cage appeared

to Lily, as she heard its door clang on her! In reality, as she

knew, the door never clanged: it stood always open; but most of

the captives were like flies in a bottle, and having once flown

in, could never regain their freedom. It was Selden's distinction

that he had never forgotten the way out. 



That was the secret of his way of readjusting her vision. Lily,

turning her eyes from him, found herself scanning her little

world through his retina: it was as though the pink lamps had

been shut off and the dusty daylight let in. She looked down the

long table, studying its occupants one by one, from Gus Trenor,

with his heavy carnivorous head sunk between his shoulders, as he

preyed on a jellied plover, to his wife, at the opposite end of

the long bank of orchids, suggestive, with her glaring

good-looks, of a jeweller's window lit by electricity. And

between the two, what a long stretch of vacuity! How dreary and

trivial these people were! Lily reviewed them with a scornful

impatience: Carry Fisher, with her shoulders, her eyes, her

divorces, her general air of embodying a "spicy paragraph"; young

Silverton, who had meant to live on proof-reading and write an

epic, and who now lived on his friends and had become critical of

truffles; Alice Wetherall, an animated visiting-list, whose most

fervid convictions turned on the wording of invitations and the

engraving of dinner-cards; Wetherall, with his perpetual nervous

nod of acquiescence, his air of agreeing with people before he

knew what they were saying; Jack Stepney, with his confident

smile and anxious eyes, half way between the sheriff and an

heiress; Gwen Van Osburgh, with all the guileless confidence of a

young girl who has always been told that there is no one richer

than her father. 



Lily smiled at her classification of her friends. How different

they had seemed to her a few hours ago! Then they had symbolized

what she was gaining, now they stood for what she was giving up.

That very afternoon they had seemed full of brilliant qualities;

now she saw that they were merely dull in a loud way. Under the

glitter of their opportunities she saw the poverty of their

achievement. It was not that she wanted them to be more

disinterested; but she would have liked them to be more

picturesque. And she had a shamed recollection of the way

in which, a few hours since, she had felt the centripetal force

of their standards. She closed her eyes an instant, and the

vacuous routine of the life she had chosen stretched before her

like a long white road without dip or turning: it was true she

was to roll over it in a carriage instead of trudging it on foot,

but sometimes the pedestrian enjoys the diversion of a short cut

which is denied to those on wheels. 



She was roused by a chuckle which Mr. Dorset seemed to eject from

the depths of his lean throat. 



"I say, do look at her," he exclaimed, turning to Miss Bart with

lugubrious merriment--"I beg your pardon, but do just look at my

wife making a fool of that poor devil over there! One would

really suppose she was gone on him--and it's all the other way

round, I assure you." 



Thus adjured, Lily turned her eyes on the spectacle which was

affording Mr. Dorset such legitimate mirth. It certainly

appeared, as he said, that Mrs. Dorset was the more active

participant in the scene: her neighbour seemed to receive her

advances with a temperate zest which did not distract him from

his dinner. The sight restored Lily's good humour, and knowing

the peculiar disguise which Mr. Dorset's marital fears assumed,

she asked gaily: "Aren't you horribly jealous of her?" 



Dorset greeted the sally with delight. "Oh, abominably--you've

just hit it--keeps me awake at night. The doctors tell me that's

what has knocked my digestion out--being so infernally jealous of

her.--I can't eat a mouthful of this stuff, you know," he added

suddenly, pushing back his plate with a clouded countenance; and

Lily, unfailingly adaptable, accorded her radiant attention to

his prolonged denunciation of other people's cooks, with a

supplementary tirade on the toxic qualities of melted butter. 



It was not often that he found so ready an ear; and, being a man

as well as a dyspeptic, it may be that as he poured his

grievances into it he was not insensible to its rosy symmetry. At

any rate he engaged Lily so long that the sweets were being

handed when she caught a phrase on her other side, where Miss

Corby, the comic woman of the company, was bantering Jack Stepney

on his approaching engagement. Miss Corby's role was

jocularity: she always entered the conversation with a

handspring.



"And of course you'll have Sim Rosedale as best man!" Lily heard

her fling out as the climax of her prognostications; and Stepney

responded, as if struck: "Jove, that's an idea. What a thumping

present I'd get out of him!" 



SIM ROSEDALE! The name, made more odious by its diminutive,

obtruded itself on Lily's thoughts like a leer. It stood for one

of the many hated possibilities hovering on the edge of life. If

she did not marry Percy Gryce, the day might come when she would

have to be civil to such men as Rosedale. IF SHE DID NOT MARRY

HIM? But she meant to marry him--she was sure of him and sure of

herself. She drew back with a shiver from the pleasant paths in

which her thoughts had been straying, and set her feet once more

in the middle of the long white road.... When she went upstairs

that night she found that the late post had brought her a fresh

batch of bills. Mrs. Peniston, who was a conscientious woman, had

forwarded them all to Bellomont. 



Miss Bart, accordingly, rose the next morning with the most

earnest conviction that it was her duty to go to church. She tore

herself betimes from the lingering enjoyment of her

breakfast-tray, rang to have her grey gown laid out, and

despatched her maid to borrow a prayer-book from Mrs. Trenor. 



But her course was too purely reasonable not to contain the germs

of rebellion. No sooner were her preparations made than they

roused a smothered sense of resistance. A small spark was enough

to kindle Lily's imagination, and the sight of the grey dress and

the borrowed prayer-book flashed a long light down the years. She

would have to go to church with Percy Gryce every Sunday. They

would have a front pew in the most expensive church in New York,

and his name would figure handsomely in the list of parish

charities. In a few years, when he grew stouter, he would be made

a warden. Once in the winter the rector would come to dine, and

her husband would beg her to go over the list and see that no

DIVORCEES were included, except those who had showed signs of

penitence by being re-married to the very wealthy. There was

nothing especially arduous in this round of relgious

obligations; but it stood for a fraction of that great bulk of

boredom which loomed across her path. And who could consent to be

bored on such a morning? Lily had slept well, and her bath had

filled her with a pleasant glow, which was becomingly reflected

in the clear curve of her cheek. No lines were visible this

morning, or else the glass was at a happier angle. 



And the day was the accomplice of her mood: it was a day for

impulse and truancy. The light air seemed full of powdered gold;

below the dewy bloom of the lawns the woodlands blushed and

smouldered, and the hills across the river swam in molten blue.

Every drop of blood in Lily's veins invited her to happiness. 



The sound of wheels roused her from these musings, and leaning

behind her shutters she saw the omnibus take up its freight. She

was too late, then--but the fact did not alarm her. A glimpse of

Mr. Gryce's crestfallen face even suggested that she had done

wisely in absenting herself, since the disappointment he so

candidly betrayed would surely whet his appetite for the

afternoon walk. That walk she did not mean to miss; one glance at

the bills on her writing-table was enough to recall its

necessity. But meanwhile she had the morning to herself, and

could muse pleasantly on the disposal of its hours. She was

familiar enough with the habits of Bellomont to know that she was

likely to have a free field till luncheon. She had seen the

Wetheralls, the Trenor girls and Lady Cressida packed safely into

the omnibus; Judy Trenor was sure to be having her hair

shampooed; Carry Fisher had doubtless carried off her host for a

drive; Ned Silverton was probably smoking the cigarette of young

despair in his bedroom; and Kate Corby was certain to be playing

tennis with Jack Stepney and Miss Van Osburgh. Of the ladies,

this left only Mrs. Dorset unaccounted for, and Mrs. Dorset never

came down till luncheon: her doctors, she averred, had forbidden

her to expose herself to the crude air of the morning. 



To the remaining members of the party Lily gave no special

thought; wherever they were, they were not likely to interfere

with her plans. These, for the moment, took the shape of assuming

a dress somewhat more rustic and summerlike in style than the

garment she had first selected, and rustling downstairs,

sunshade in hand, with the disengaged air of a lady in quest of

exercise. The great hall was empty but for the knot of dogs by

the fire, who, taking in at a glance the outdoor aspect of Miss

Bart, were upon her at once with lavish offers of companionship.

She put aside the ramming paws which conveyed these offers, and

assuring the joyous volunteers that she might presently have a

use for their company, sauntered on through the empty

drawing-room to the library at the end of the house. The library

was almost the only surviving portion of the old manor-house of

Bellomont: a long spacious room, revealing the traditions of the

mother-country in its classically-cased doors, the Dutch tiles of

the chimney, and the elaborate hob-grate with its shining brass

urns. A few family portraits of lantern-jawed gentlemen in

tie-wigs, and ladies with large head-dresses and small bodies,

hung between the shelves lined with pleasantly-shabby books:

books mostly contemporaneous with the ancestors in question, and

to which the subsequent Trenors had made no perceptible

additions. The library at Bellomont was in fact never used for

reading, though it had a certain popularity as a smoking-room or

a quiet retreat for flirtation. It had occurred to Lily, however,

that it might on this occasion have been resorted to by the only

member of the party in the least likely to put it to its original

use. She advanced noiselessly over the dense old rug scattered

with easy-chairs, and before she reached the middle of the room

she saw that she had not been mistaken. Lawrence Selden was in

fact seated at its farther end; but though a book lay on his

knee, his attention was not engaged with it, but directed to a

lady whose lace-dad figure, as she leaned back in an adjoining

chair, detached itself with exaggerated slimness against the

dusky leather upholstery. 



Lily paused as she caught sight of the group; for a moment she

seemed about to withdraw, but thinking better of this, she

announced her approach by a slight shake of her skirts which made

the couple raise their heads, Mrs. Dorset with a look of frank

displeasure, and Selden with his usual quiet smile. The sight of

his composure had a disturbing effect on Lily; but to be

disturbed was in her case to make a more brilliant effort at

self-possession. 



"Dear me, am I late?" she asked, putting a hand in his as he

advanced to greet her. 



"Late for what?" enquired Mrs. Dorset tartly. "Not for luncheon,

certainly--but perhaps you had an earlier engagement?" 



"Yes, I had," said Lily confidingly. 



"Really? Perhaps I am in the way, then? But Mr. Selden is

entirely at your disposal." Mrs. Dorset was pale with temper, and

her antagonist felt a certain pleasure in prolonging her

distress. 



"Oh, dear, no--do stay," she said good-humouredly. "I don't in

the least want to drive you away." 



"You're awfully good, dear, but I never interfere with Mr.

Selden's engagements." 



The remark was uttered with a little air of proprietorship not

lost on its object, who concealed a faint blush of annoyance by

stooping to pick up the book he had dropped at Lily's approach.

The latter's eyes widened charmingly and she broke into a light

laugh. 



"But I have no engagement with Mr. Selden! My engagement was to

go to church; and I'm afraid the omnibus has started without me.

HAS it started, do you know?" 



She turned to Selden, who replied that he had heard it drive away

some time since. 



"Ah, then I shall have to walk; I promised Hilda and Muriel to go

to church with them. It's too late to walk there, you say? Well,

I shall have the credit of trying, at any rate--and the advantage

of escaping part of the service. I'm not so sorry for myself,

after all!" 



And with a bright nod to the couple on whom she had intruded,

Miss Bart strolled through the glass doors and carried her

rustling grace down the long perspective of the garden walk. 



She was taking her way churchward, but at no very quick pace; a

fact not lost on one of her observers, who stood in the doorway

looking after her with an air of puzzled amusement. The truth is

that she was conscious of a somewhat keen shock of

disappointment. All her plans for the day had been built on the

assumption that it was to see her that Selden had come to

Bellomont. She had expected, when she came down<p 62>stairs, to

find him on the watch for her; and she had found him, instead, in

a situation which might well denote that he had been on the watch

for another lady. Was it possible, after all, that he had come

for Bertha Dorset? The latter had acted on the assumption to the

extent of appearing at an hour when she never showed herself to

ordinary mortals, and Lily, for the moment, saw no way of putting

her in the wrong. It did not occur to her that Selden might have

been actuated merely by the desire to spend a Sunday out of town:

women never learn to dispense with the sentimental motive in

their judgments of men. But Lily was not easily disconcerted;

competition put her on her mettle, and she reflected that

Selden's coming, if it did not declare him to be still in Mrs.

Dorset's toils, showed him to be so completely free from them

that he was not afraid of her proximity. 



These thoughts so engaged her that she fell into a gait hardly

likely to carry her to church before the sermon, and at length,

having passed from the gardens to the wood-path beyond, so far

forgot her intention as to sink into a rustic seat at a bend of

the walk. The spot was charming, and Lily was not insensible to

the charm, or to the fact that her presence enhanced it; but she

was not accustomed to taste the joys of solitude except in

company, and the combination of a handsome girl and a romantic

scene struck her as too good to be wasted. No one, however,

appeared to profit by the opportunity; and after a half hour of

fruitless waiting she rose and wandered on. She felt a stealing

sense of fatigue as she walked; the sparkle had died out of her,

and the taste of life was stale on her lips. She hardly knew what

she had been seeking, or why the failure to find it had so

blotted the light from her sky: she was only aware of a vague

sense of failure, of an inner isolation deeper than the

loneliness about her. 



Her footsteps flagged, and she stood gazing listlessly ahead,

digging the ferny edge of the path with the tip of her sunshade.

As she did so a step sounded behind her, and she saw Selden at

her side. 



"How fast you walk!" he remarked. "I thought I should never catch

up with you." 



She answered gaily: "You must be quite breathless! I've been

sitting under that tree for an hour." 



"Waiting for me, I hope?" he rejoined; and she said with a vague

laugh: 



"Well--waiting to see if you would come." 



"I seize the distinction, but I don't mind it, since doing the

one involved doing the other. But weren't you sure that I should

come?" 



"If I waited long enough--but you see I had only a limited time

to give to the experiment." 



"Why limited? Limited by luncheon?" 



"No; by my other engagement." 



"Your engagement to go to church with Muriel and Hilda?" 



"No; but to come home from church with another person." 



"Ah, I see; I might have known you were fully provided with

alternatives. And is the other person coming home this way?" 



Lily laughed again. "That's just what I don't know; and to find

out, it is my business to get to church before the service is

over." 



"Exactly; and it is my business to prevent your doing so; in

which case the other person, piqued by your absence, will form

the desperate resolve of driving back in the omnibus." 



Lily received this with fresh appreciation; his nonsense was like

the bubbling of her inner mood. "Is that what you would do in

such an emergency?" she enquired. 



Selden looked at her with solemnity. "I am here to prove to you,"

he cried, "what I am capable of doing in an emergency!" 



"Walking a mile in an hour--you must own that the omnibus would

be quicker!" 



"Ah--but will he find you in the end? That's the only test of

success." 



They looked at each other with the same luxury of enjoyment that

they had felt in exchanging absurdities over his tea-table; but

suddenly Lily's face changed, and she said: "Well, if it is, he

has succeeded." 



Selden, following her glance, perceived a party of people

advancing toward them from the farther bend of the path. Lady

Cressida had evidently insisted on walking home, and the rest of

the church-goers had thought it their duty to accompany

her. Lily's companion looked rapidly from one to the other of the

two men of the party; Wetherall walking respectfully at Lady

Cressida's side with his little sidelong look of nervous

attention, and Percy Gryce bringing up the rear with Mrs.

Wetherall and the Trenors. 



"Ah--now I see why you were getting up your Americana!" Selden

exclaimed with a note of the freest admiration but the blush with

which the sally was received checked whatever amplifications he

had meant to give it. 



That Lily Bart should object to being bantered about her suitors,

or even about her means of attracting them, was so new to Selden

that he had a momentary flash of surprise, which lit up a number

of possibilities; but she rose gallantly to the defence of her

confusion, by saying, as its object approached: "That was why I

was waiting for you--to thank you for having given me so many

points!" 



"Ah, you can hardly do justice to the subject in such a short

time," said Selden, as the Trenor girls caught sight of Miss

Bart; and while she signalled a response to their boisterous

greeting, he added quickly: "Won't you devote your afternoon to

it? You know I must be off tomorrow morning. We'll take a walk,

and you can thank me at your leisure."
