







A ring at the door-bell, sounding emphatically through the empty

house, roused her suddenly to the extent of her boredom. It was

as though all the weariness of the past months had culminated in

the vacuity of that interminable evening. If only the ring meant

a summons from the outer world--a token that she was still

remembered and wanted! 



After some delay a parlour-maid presented herself with the

announcement that there was a person outside who was asking to

see Miss Bart; and on Lily's pressing for a more specific

description, she added: 



"It's Mrs. Haffen, Miss; she won't say what she wants." 



Lily, to whom the name conveyed nothing, opened the door upon a

woman in a battered bonnet, who stood firmly planted under the

hall-light. The glare of the unshaded gas shone familiarly on her

pock-marked face and the reddish baldness visible through thin

strands of straw-coloured hair. Lily looked at the char-woman in

surprise. 



"Do you wish to see me?" she asked. 



"I should like to say a word to you, Miss." The tone was

neither aggressive nor conciliatory: it revealed nothing of the

speaker's errand. Nevertheless, some precautionary instinct

warned Lily to withdraw beyond ear-shot of the hovering

parlour-maid. 



She signed to Mrs. Haffen to follow her into the drawing-room,

and closed the door when they had entered. 



"What is it that you wish?" she enquired. 



The char-woman, after the manner of her kind, stood with her arms

folded in her shawl. Unwinding the latter, she produced a small

parcel wrapped in dirty newspaper. 



"I have something here that you might like to see, Miss Bart."

She spoke the name with an unpleasant emphasis, as though her

knowing it made a part of her reason for being there. To Lily the

intonation sounded like a threat. 



"You have found something belonging to me?" she asked, extending

her hand. 



Mrs. Haffen drew back. "Well, if it comes to that, I guess it's

mine as much as anybody's," she returned. 



Lily looked at her perplexedly. She was sure, now, that her

visitor's manner conveyed a threat; but, expert as she was in

certain directions, there was nothing in her experience to

prepare her for the exact significance of the present scene. She

felt, however, that it must be ended as promptly as possible. 



"I don't understand; if this parcel is not mine, why have you

asked for me?" 



The woman was unabashed by the question. She was evidently

prepared to answer it, but like all her class she had to go a

long way back to make a beginning, and it was only after a pause

that she replied: "My husband was janitor to the Benedick till

the first of the month; since then he can't get nothing to do."



Lily remained silent and she continued: "It wasn't no fault of

our own, neither: the agent had another man he wanted the place

for, and we was put out, bag and baggage, just to suit his fancy.

I had a long sickness last winter, and an operation that ate up

all we'd put by; and it's hard for me and the children, Haffen

being so long out of a job." 



After all, then, she had come only to ask Miss Bart to find a

place for her husband; or, more probably, to seek the young

lady's intervention with Mrs. Peniston. Lily had such an air

of always getting what she wanted that she was used to being

appealed to as an intermediary, and, relieved of her vague

apprehension, she took refuge in the conventional formula.



"I am sorry you have been in trouble," she said.



"Oh, that we have, Miss, and it's on'y just beginning. If on'y

we'd 'a got another situation--but the agent, he's dead against

us. It ain't no fault of ours, neither, but---"



At this point Lily's impatience overcame her. "If you have

anything to say to me---" she interposed.



The woman's resentment of the rebuff seemed to spur her lagging ideas.



"Yes, Miss; I'm coming to that," she said. She paused again, with

her eyes on Lily, and then continued, in a tone of diffuse

narrative: "When we was at the Benedick I had charge of some of

the gentlemen's rooms; leastways, I swep' 'em out on Saturdays.

Some of the gentlemen got the greatest sight of letters: I never

saw the like of it. Their waste-paper baskets 'd be fairly

brimming, and papers falling over on the floor. Maybe havin' so

many is how they get so careless. Some of 'em is worse than

others. Mr. Selden, Mr. Lawrence Selden, he was always one of the

carefullest: burnt his letters in winter, and tore 'em in little

bits in summer. But sometimes he'd have so many he'd just bunch

'em together, the way the others did, and tear the lot through

once--like this."



While she spoke she had loosened the string from the parcel in

her hand, and now she drew forth a letter which she laid on the

table between Miss Bart and herself. As she had said, the letter

was torn in two; but with a rapid gesture she laid the torn edges

together and smoothed out the page.



A wave of indignation swept over Lily. She felt herself in the

presence of something vile, as yet but dimly conjectured--the

kind of vileness of which people whispered, but which she had

never thought of as touching her own life. She drew back with a

motion of disgust, but her withdrawal was checked by a sudden

discovery: under the glare of Mrs. Peniston's chandelier she had

recognized the hand-writing of the letter. It was a large

disjointed hand, with a flourish of masculinity which but

slightly disguised its rambling weakness, and the words, scrawled

in heavy ink on pale-tinted note<p 108>paper, smote on Lily's

ear as though she had heard them spoken.



At first she did not grasp the full import of the situation. She

understood only that before her lay a letter written by Bertha

Dorset, and addressed, presumably, to Lawrence Selden. There was

no date, but the blackness of the ink proved the writing to be

comparatively recent. The packet in Mrs. Haffen's hand doubtless

contained more letters of the same kind--a dozen, Lily

conjectured from its thickness. The letter before her was short,

but its few words, which had leapt into her brain before she was

conscious of reading them, told a long history--a history over

which, for the last four years, the friends of the writer had

smiled and shrugged, viewing it merely as one among the countless

"good situations" of the mundane comedy. Now the other side

presented itself to Lily, the volcanic nether side of the surface

over which conjecture and innuendo glide so lightly till the

first fissure turns their whisper to a shriek. Lily knew that

there is nothing society resents so much as having given its

protection to those who have not known how to profit by it: it is

for having betrayed its connivance that the body social punishes

the offender who is found out. And in this case there was no

doubt of the issue. The code of Lily's world decreed that a

woman's husband should be the only judge of her conduct: she was

technically above suspicion while she had the shelter of his

approval, or even of his indifference. But with a man of George

Dorset's temper there could be no thought of condonation--the

possessor of his wife's letters could overthrow with a touch the

whole structure of her existence. And into what hands Bertha

Dorset's secret had been delivered! For a moment the irony of the

coincidence tinged Lily's disgust with a confused sense of

triumph. But the disgust prevailed--all her instinctive

resistances, of taste, of training, of blind inherited scruples,

rose against the other feeling. Her strongest sense was one of

personal contamination. 



She moved away, as though to put as much distance as possible

between herself and her visitor. "I know nothing of these

letters," she said; "I have no idea why you have brought them

here.



"Mrs. Haffen faced her steadily. "I'll tell you why, Miss.

I brought 'em to you to sell, because I ain't got no other way

of raising money, and if we don't pay our rent by tomorrow night

we'll be put out. I never done anythin' of the kind before, and

if you'd speak to Mr. Selden or to Mr. Rosedale about getting

Haffen taken on again at the Benedick--I seen you talking to Mr.

Rosedale on the steps that day you come out of Mr. Selden's

rooms---" 



The blood rushed to Lily's forehead. She understood now--Mrs.

Haffen supposed her to be the writer of the letters. In the first

leap of her anger she was about to ring and order the woman out;

but an obscure impulse restrained her. The mention of Selden's

name had started a new train of thought. Bertha Dorset's letters

were nothing to her--they might go where the current of chance

carried them! But Selden was inextricably involved in their fate.

Men do not, at worst, suffer much from such exposure; and in this

instance the flash of divination which had carried the meaning of

the letters to Lily's brain had revealed also that they were

appeals--repeated and therefore probably unanswered--for the 

renewal of a tie which time had evidently relaxed. Nevertheless,

the fact that the correspondence had been allowed to fall into

strange hands would convict Selden of negligence in a matter

where the world holds it least pardonable; and there were graver

risks to consider where a man of Dorset's ticklish balance was

concerned. 



If she weighed all these things it was unconsciously: she was

aware only of feeling that Selden would wish the letters rescued,

and that therefore she must obtain possession of them. Beyond

that her mind did not travel. She had, indeed, a quick vision of

returning the packet to Bertha Dorset, and of the opportunities

the restitution offered; but this thought lit up abysses from

which she shrank back ashamed. 



Meanwhile Mrs. Haffen, prompt to perceive her hesitation, had

already opened the packet and ranged its contents on the table.

All the letters had been pieced together with strips of thin

paper. Some were in small fragments, the others merely tom in

half. Though there were not many, thus spread out they nearly

covered the table. Lily's glance fell on a word here and

there--then she said in a low voice: "What do you wish me to pay

you?" 



Mrs. Haffen's face reddened with satisfaction. It was clear that

the young lady was badly frightened, and Mrs. Haffen was the

woman to make the most of such fears. Anticipating an easier

victory than she had foreseen, she named an exorbitant sum. 



But Miss Bart showed herself a less ready prey than might have

been expected from her imprudent opening. She refused to pay the

price named, and after a moment's hesitation, met it by a

counter-offer of half the amount.



Mrs. Haffen immediately stiffened. Her hand travelled toward the

outspread letters, and folding them slowly, she made as though to

restore them to their wrapping.



"I guess they're worth more to you than to me, Miss, but the poor

has got to live as well as the rich," she observed sententiously.





Lily was throbbing with fear, but the insinuation fortified her

resistance.



"You are mistaken," she said indifferently. "I have offered all I

am willing to give for the letters; but there may be other ways

of getting them." 



Mrs. Haffen raised a suspicious glance: she was too experienced

not to know that the traffic she was engaged in had perils as

great as its rewards, and she had a vision of the elaborate

machinery of revenge which a word of this commanding young lady's

might set in motion. 



She applied the corner of her shawl to her eyes, and murmured

through it that no good came of bearing too hard on the poor, but

that for her part she had never been mixed up in such a business

before, and that on her honour as a Christian all she and Haffen

had thought of was that the letters mustn't go any farther. 



Lily stood motionless, keeping between herself and the char-woman

the greatest distance compatible with the need of speaking in low

tones. The idea of bargaining for the letters was intolerable to

her, but she knew that, if she appeared to weaken, Mrs. Haffen

would at once increase her original demand. 



She could never afterward recall how long the duel lasted, or

what was the decisive stroke which finally, after a lapse of time

recorded in minutes by the clock, in hours by the pre<p

111>cipitate beat of her pulses, put her in possession of the

letters; she knew only that the door had finally closed, and that

she stood alone with the packet in her hand. 



She had no idea of reading the letters; even to unfold Mrs.

Haffen's dirty newspaper would have seemed degrading. But what

did she intend to do with its contents? The recipient of the

letters had meant to destroy them, and it was her duty to carry

out his intention. She had no right to keep them--to do so was to

lessen whatever merit lay in having secured their possession. But

how destroy them so effectually that there should be no second

risk of their falling in such hands? Mrs. Peniston's icy

drawing-room grate shone with a forbidding lustre: the fire, like

the lamps, was never lit except when there was company. 



Miss Bart was turning to carry the letters upstairs when she

heard the opening of the outer door, and her aunt entered the

drawing-room. Mrs. Peniston was a small plump woman, with a

colourless skin lined with trivial wrinkles. Her grey hair was

arranged with precision, and her clothes looked excessively new

and yet slightly old-fashioned. They were always black and

tightly fitting, with an expensive glitter: she was the kind of

woman who wore jet at breakfast. Lily had never seen her when she

was not cuirassed in shining black, with small tight boots, and

an air of being packed and ready to start; yet she never started.



She looked about the drawing-room with an expression of minute

scrutiny. "I saw a streak of light under one of the blinds as I

drove up: it's extraordinary that I can never teach that woman to

draw them down evenly." 



Having corrected the irregularity, she seated herself on one of

the glossy purple arm-chairs; Mrs. Peniston always sat on a

chair, never in it. 



Then she turned her glance to Miss Bart. "My dear, you look

tired; I suppose it's the excitement of the wedding. Cornelia Van

Alstyne was full of it: Molly was there, and Gerty Farish ran in

for a minute to tell us about it. I think it was odd, their

serving melons before the CONSOMME: a wedding breakfast should

always begin with CONSOMME. Molly didn't care for the

bridesmaids' dresses. She had it straight from Julia Melson that

they cost three hundred dollars apiece at Celeste's, but she says

they didn't look it. I'm glad you decided not to be a

bridesmaid; that shade of salmon-pink wouldn't have suited you." 

Mrs. Peniston delighted in discussing the minutest details of

festivities in which she had not taken part. Nothing would have

induced her to undergo the exertion and fatigue of attending the

Van Osburgh wedding, but so great was her interest in the event

that, having heard two versions of it, she now prepared to

extract a third from her niece. Lily, however, had been

deplorably careless in noting the particulars of the 

entertainment. She had failed to observe the colour of Mrs. Van

Osburgh's gown, and could not even say whether the old Van

Osburgh Sevres had been used at the bride's table: Mrs. Peniston,

in short, found that she was of more service as a listener than

as a narrator.



"Really, Lily, I don't see why you took the trouble to go to the

wedding, if you don't remember what happened or whom you saw

there. When I was a girl I used to keep the MENU of every dinner

I went to, and write the names of the people on the back; and I

never threw away my cotillion favours till after your uncle's

death, when it seemed unsuitable to have so many coloured things

about the house. I had a whole closet-full, I remember; and I can

tell to this day what balls I got them at. Molly Van Alstyne

reminds me of what I was at that age; it's wonderful how she

notices. She was able to tell her mother exactly how the

wedding-dress was cut, and we knew at once, from the fold in the

back, that it must have come from Paquin." 



Mrs. Peniston rose abruptly, and, advancing to the ormolu clock

surmounted by a helmeted Minerva, which throned on the

chimney-piece between two malachite vases, passed her lace

handkerchief between the helmet and its visor. 



"I knew it--the parlour-maid never dusts there!" she exclaimed,

triumphantly displaying a minute spot on the handkerchief; then,

reseating herself, she went on: "Molly thought Mrs. Dorset the

best-dressed woman at the wedding. I've no doubt her dress DID

cost more than any one else's, but I can't quite like the idea--a

combination of sable and POINT DE MILAN. It seems she goes to a

new man in Paris, who won't take an order till his client has

spent a day with him at his villa at Neuilly. He says he must

study his subject's home life--a most peculiar

arrangement, I should say! But Mrs. Dorset told Molly about it

herself: she said the villa was full of the most exquisite things

and she was really sorry to leave. Molly said she never saw her

looking better; she was in tremendous spirits, and said she had

made a match between Evie Van Osburgh and Percy Gryce. She really

seems to have a very good influence on young men. I hear she is

interesting herself now in that silly Silverton boy, who has had

his head turned by Carry Fisher, and has been gambling so

dreadfully. Well, as I was saying, Evie is really engaged: Mrs.

Dorset had her to stay with Percy Gryce, and managed it all, and

Grace Van Osburgh is in the seventh heaven--she had almost

despaired of marrying Evie." 



Mrs. Peniston again paused, but this time her scrutiny addressed

itself, not to the furniture, but to her niece. 



"Cornelia Van Alstyne was so surprised: she had heard that you

were to marry young Gryce. She saw the Wetheralls just after they

had stopped with you at Bellomont, and Alice Wetherall was quite

sure there was an engagement. She said that when Mr. Gryce left

unexpectedly one morning, they all thought he had rushed to town

for the ring." 



Lily rose and moved toward the door. 



"I believe I AM tired: I think I will go to bed," she said; and

Mrs. Peniston, suddenly distracted by the discovery that the

easel sustaining the late Mr. Peniston's crayon-portrait was not

exactly in line with the sofa in front of it, presented an

absent-minded brow to her kiss. 



In her own room Lily turned up the gas-jet and glanced toward the

grate. It was as brilliantly polished as the one below, but here

at least she could burn a few papers with less risk of incurring

her aunt's disapproval. She made no immediate motion to do so,

however, but dropping into a chair looked wearily about her. Her

room was large and comfortably-furnished--it was the envy and

admiration of poor Grace Stepney, who boarded; but, contrasted

with the light tints and luxurious appointments of the

guest-rooms where so many weeks of Lily's existence were spent,

it seemed as dreary as a prison. The monumental wardrobe and

bedstead of black walnut had migrated from Mr. Peniston's

bedroom, and the magenta "flock" wall-paper, of a pattern dear to

the early 'sixties, was hung with large steel engravings

of an anecdotic character. Lily had tried to mitigate this

charmless background by a few frivolous touches, in the shape of

a lace-decked toilet table and a little painted desk surmounted

by photographs; but the futility of the attempt struck her as she

looked about the room. What a contrast to the subtle elegance of

the setting she had pictured for herself--an apartment which

should surpass the complicated luxury of her friends'

surroundings by the whole extent of that artistic sensibility

which made her feel herself their superior; in which every tint

and line should combine to enhance her beauty and give

distinction to her leisure! Once more the haunting sense of

physical ugliness was intensified by her mental depression, so

that each piece of the offending furniture seemed to thrust forth

its most aggressive angle. 



Her aunt's words had told her nothing new; but they had revived

the vision of Bertha Dorset, smiling, flattered, victorious,

holding her up to ridicule by insinuations intelligible to every

member of their little group. The thought of the ridicule struck

deeper than any other sensation: Lily knew every turn of the

allusive jargon which could flay its victims without the shedding

of blood. Her cheek burned at the recollection, and she rose and

caught up the letters. She no longer meant to destroy them: that

intention had been effaced by the quick corrosion of Mrs.

Peniston's words. 



Instead, she approached her desk, and lighting a taper, tied and

sealed the packet; then she opened the wardrobe, drew out a

despatch-box, and deposited the letters within it. As she did so,

it struck her with a flash of irony that she was indebted to Gus

Trenor for the means of buying them.



The autumn dragged on monotonously. Miss Bart had received one

or two notes from Judy Trenor, reproaching her for not returning

to Bellomont; but she replied evasively, alleging the obligation

to remain with her aunt. In truth, however, she was fast wearying

of her solitary existence with Mrs. Peniston, and only the

excitement of spending her newly-acquired money lightened the

dulness of the days. 



All her life Lily had seen money go out as quickly as it came in,

and whatever theories she cultivated as to the prudence of

setting aside a part of her gains, she had unhappily no saving

vision of the risks of the opposite course. It was a keen

satisfaction to feel that, for a few months at least, she would

be independent of her friends' bounty, that she could show

herself abroad without wondering whether some penetrating eye

would detect in her dress the traces of Judy Trenor's refurbished

splendour. The fact that the money freed her temporarily from all

minor obligations obscured her sense of the greater one it

represented, and having never before known what it was to command

so large a sum, she lingered delectably over the amusement of

spending it.



It was on one of these occasions that, leaving a shop where she

had spent an hour of deliberation over a dressing-case of the

most complicated elegance, she ran across Miss Farish, who had

entered the same establishment with the modest object of having

her watch repaired. Lily was feeling unusually virtuous. She had

decided to defer the purchase of the dressing-case till she

should receive the bill for her new opera-cloak, and the resolve

made her feel much richer than when she had entered the shop. In

this mood of self-approval she had a sympathetic eye for others,

and she was struck by her friend's air of dejection.



Miss Farish, it appeared, had just left the committee-meeting of

a struggling charity in which she was interested. The object of

the association was to provide comfortable lodgings, with a

reading-room and other modest distractions, where young women of

the class employed in down town offices might find a home when

out of work, or in need of rest, and the first year's

financial report showed so deplorably small a balance that Miss

Farish, who was convinced of the urgency of the work, felt

proportionately discouraged by the small amount of interest it

aroused. The other-regarding sentiments had not been cultivated

in Lily, and she was often bored by the relation of her friend's

philanthropic efforts, but today her quick dramatizing fancy

seized on the contrast between her own situation and that

represented by some of Gerty's "cases." These were young girls,

like herself; some perhaps pretty, some not without a trace of

her finer sensibilities. She pictured herself leading such a life

as theirs--a life in which achievement seemed as squalid as

failure--and the vision made her shudder sympathetically. The

price of the dressing-case was still in her pocket; and drawing

out her little gold purse she slipped a liberal fraction of the

amount into Miss Farish's hand.





The satisfaction derived from this act was all that the most

ardent moralist could have desired. Lily felt a new interest in

herself as a person of charitable instincts: she had never before

thought of doing good with the wealth she had so often dreamed of

possessing, but now her horizon was enlarged by the vision of a

prodigal philanthropy. Moreover, by some obscure process of

logic, she felt that her momentary burst of generosity had

justified all previous extravagances, and excused any in which

she might subsequently indulge. Miss Farish's surprise and

gratitude confirmed this feeling, and Lily parted from her with a

sense of self-esteem which she naturally mistook for the fruits

of altruism. 



About this time she was farther cheered by an invitation to spend

the Thanksgiving week at a camp in the Adirondacks. The

invitation was one which, a year earlier, would have provoked a

less ready response, for the party, though organized by Mrs.

Fisher, was ostensibly given by a lady of obscure origin and

indomitable social ambitions, whose acquaintance Lily had

hitherto avoided. Now, however, she was disposed to coincide with

Mrs. Fisher's view, that it didn't matter who gave the party, as

long as things were well done; and doing things well (under

competent direction) was Mrs. Wellington Bry's strong point. The

lady (whose consort was known as "Welly" Bry on the Stock

Exchange and in sporting circles) had already sacrificed

one husband, and sundry minor considerations, to her

determination to get on; and, having obtained a hold on Carry

Fisher, she was astute enough to perceive the wisdom of

committing herself entirely to that lady's guidance. Everything,

accordingly, was well done, for there was no limit to Mrs.

Fisher's prodigality when she was not spending her own money, and

as she remarked to her pupil, a good cook was the best

introduction to society. If the company was not as select as the

CUISINE, the Welly Brys at least had the satisfaction of

figuring for the first time in the society columns in company

with one or two noticeable names; and foremost among these was of

course Miss Bart's. The young lady was treated by her hosts with

corresponding deference; and she was in the mood when such

attentions are acceptable, whatever their source. Mrs. Bry's

admiration was a mirror in which Lily's self-complacency

recovered its lost outline. No insect hangs its nest on threads

as frail as those which will sustain the weight of human vanity;

and the sense of being of importance among the insignificant was

enough to restore to Miss Bart the gratifying consciousness of

power. If these people paid court to her it proved that she was

still conspicuous in the world to which they aspired; and she was

not above a certain enjoyment in dazzling them by her fineness,

in developing their puzzled perception of her superiorities.



Perhaps, however, her enjoyment proceeded more than she was aware

from the physical stimulus of the excursion, the challenge of

crisp cold and hard exercise, the responsive thrill of her body

to the influences of the winter woods. She returned to town in a

glow of rejuvenation, conscious of a clearer colour in her

cheeks,

a fresh elasticity in her muscles. The future seemed full of a

vague promise, and all her apprehensions were swept out of sight

on the buoyant current of her mood. 



A few days after her return to town she had the unpleasant

surprise of a visit from Mr. Rosedale. He came late, at the

confidential hour when the tea-table still lingers by the fire in

friendly expectancy; and his manner showed a readiness to adapt

itself to the intimacy of the occasion. 



Lily, who had a vague sense of his being somehow con<p 118>nected

with her lucky speculations, tried to give him the welcome he

expected; but there was something in the quality of his geniality

which chilled her own, and she was conscious of marking each step

in their acquaintance by a fresh blunder. 



Mr. Rosedale--making himself promptly at home in an adjoining

easy-chair, and sipping his tea critically, with the comment:

"You ought to go to my man for something really good"--appeared

totally unconscious of the repugnance which kept her in frozen

erectness behind the urn. It was perhaps her very manner of

holding herself aloof that appealed to his collector's passion

for the rare and unattainable. He gave, at any rate, no sign of

resenting it and seemed prepared to supply in his own manner all

the ease that was lacking in hers. 



His object in calling was to ask her to go to the opera in his

box on the opening night, and seeing her hesitate he said

persuasively: "Mrs. Fisher is coming, and I've secured a

tremendous admirer of yours, who'll never forgive me if you don't

accept." 



As Lily's silence left him with this allusion on his hands, he

added with a confidential smile: "Gus Trenor has promised to come

to town on purpose. I fancy he'd go a good deal farther for the

pleasure of seeing you." 



Miss Bart felt an inward motion of annoyance: it was distasteful

enough to hear her name coupled with Trenor's, and on Rosedale's

lips the allusion was peculiarly unpleasant. 



"The Trenors are my best friends--I think we should all go a long

way to see each other," she said, absorbing herself in the

preparation of fresh tea. 



Her visitor's smile grew increasingly intimate. "Well, I wasn't

thinking of Mrs. Trenor at the moment--they say Gus doesn't

always, you know." Then, dimly conscious that he had not struck

the right note, he added, with a well-meant effort at diversion:

"How's your luck been going in Wall Street, by the way? I hear

Gus pulled off a nice little pile for you last month." 



Lily put down the tea-caddy with an abrupt gesture. She felt that

her hands were trembling, and clasped them on her knee to steady

them; but her lip trembled too, and for a moment she was afraid

the tremor might communicate itself to her voice. When

she spoke, however, it was in a tone of perfect lightness. 



"Ah, yes--I had a little bit of money to invest, and Mr. Trenor,

who helps me about such matters, advised my putting it in stocks

instead of a mortgage, as my aunt's agent wanted me to do; and as

it happened, I made a lucky 'turn'--is that what you call it? For

you make a great many yourself, I believe." 



She was smiling back at him now, relaxing the tension of her

attitude, and admitting him, by imperceptible gradations of

glance and manner, a step farther toward intimacy. The protective

instinct always nerved her to successful dissimulation, and it

was not the first time she had used her beauty to divert

attention from an inconvenient topic. 



When Mr. Rosedale took leave, he carried with him, not only her

acceptance of his invitation, but a general sense of having

comported himself in a way calculated to advance his cause. He

had always believed he had a light touch and a knowing way with

women, and the prompt manner in which Miss Bart (as he would have

phrased it) had "come into line," confirmed his confidence in his

powers of handling this skittish sex. Her way of glossing over

the transaction with Trenor he regarded at once as a tribute to

his own acuteness, and a confirmation of his suspicions. The girl

was evidently nervous, and Mr. Rosedale, if he saw no other means

of advancing his acquaintance with her, was not above taking

advantage of her nervousness. 



He left Lily to a passion of disgust and fear. It seemed

incredible that Gus Trenor should have spoken of her to Rosedale.

With all his faults, Trenor had the safeguard of his traditions,

and was the less likely to overstep them because they were so

purely instinctive. But Lily recalled with a pang that there were

convivial moments when, as Judy had confided to her, Gus "talked

foolishly": in one of these, no doubt, the fatal word had slipped

from him. As for Rosedale, she did not, after the first shock,

greatly care what conclusions he had drawn. Though usually adroit

enough where her own interests were concerned, she made the

mistake, not uncommon to persons in whom the social habits are

instinctive, of supposing that the inability to acquire them

quickly im<p 120>plies a general dulness. Because a blue-bottle

bangs irrationally against a window-pane, the drawing-room

naturalist may forget that under less artificial conditions it is

capable of measuring distances and drawing conclusions with all

the accuracy needful to its welfare; and the fact that Mr.

Rosedale's drawing-room manner lacked perspective made Lily class

him with Trenor and the other dull men she knew, and assume that

a little flattery, and the occasional acceptance of his

hospitality, would suffice to render him innocuous. However,

there could be no doubt of the expediency of showing herself in

his box on the opening night of the opera; and after all, since

Judy Trenor had promised to take him up that winter, it was as

well to reap the advantage of being first in the field.



For a day or two after Rosedale's visit, Lily's thoughts were

dogged by the consciousness of Trenor's shadowy claim, and she

wished she had a clearer notion of the exact nature of the

transaction which seemed to have put her in his power; but her

mind shrank from any unusual application, and she was always

helplessly puzzled by figures. Moreover she had not seen Trenor

since the day of the Van Osburgh wedding, and in his continued

absence the trace of Rosedale's words was soon effaced by other

impressions. 



When the opening night of the opera came, her apprehensions had

so completely vanished that the sight of Trenor's ruddy

countenance in the back of Mr. Rosedale's box filled her with a

sense of pleasant reassurance. Lily had not quite reconciled

herself to the necessity of appearing as Rosedale's guest on so

conspicuous an occasion, and it was a relief to find herself

supported by any one of her own set--for Mrs. Fisher's social

habits were too promiscuous for her presence to justify Miss

Bart's. 



To Lily, always inspirited by the prospect of showing her beauty

in public, and conscious tonight of all the added enhancements of

dress, the insistency of Trenor's gaze merged itself in the

general stream of admiring looks of which she felt herself the

centre. Ah, it was good to be young, to be radiant, to glow with

the sense of slenderness, strength and elasticity, of well-poised

lines and happy tints, to feel one's self lifted to a height

apart by that incommunicable grace which is the bodily

counterpart of genius!



All means seemed justifiable to attain such an end, or rather, by

a happy shifting of lights with which practice had familiarized

Miss Bart, the cause shrank to a pin-point in the general

brightness of the effect. But brilliant young ladies, a little

blinded by their own effulgence, are apt to forget that the

modest satellite drowned in their light is still performing its

own revolutions and generating heat at its own rate. If Lily's

poetic enjoyment of the moment was undisturbed by the base

thought that her gown and opera cloak had been indirectly paid

for by Gus Trenor, the latter had not sufficient poetry in his

composition to lose sight of these prosaic facts. He knew only

that he had never seen Lily look smarter in her life, that there

wasn't a woman in the house who showed off good clothes as she

did, and that hitherto he, to whom she owed the opportunity of

making this display, had reaped no return beyond that of gazing

at her in company with several hundred other pairs of eyes. 



It came to Lily therefore as a disagreeable surprise when, in the

back of the box, where they found themselves alone between two

acts, Trenor said, without preamble, and in a tone of sulky

authority: "Look here, Lily, how is a fellow ever to see anything

of you? I'm in town three or four days in the week, and you know

a line to the club will always find me, but you don't seem to

remember my existence nowadays unless you want to get a tip out

of me." 



The fact that the remark was in distinctly bad taste did not make

it any easier to answer, for Lily was vividly aware that it was

not the moment for that drawing up of her slim figure and

surprised lifting of the brows by which she usually quelled

incipient signs of familiarity. 



"I'm very much flattered by your wanting to see me," she

returned, essaying lightness instead, "but, unless you have

mislaid my address, it would have been easy to find me any

afternoon at my aunt's--in fact, I rather expected you to look me

up there." 



If she hoped to mollify him by this last concession the attempt

was a failure, for he only replied, with the familiar lowering of

the brows that made him look his dullest when he was angry: "Hang

going to your aunt's, and wasting the afternoon listening to a

lot of other chaps talking to you! You know I'm not the

kind to sit in a crowd and jaw--I'd always rather clear out when

that sort of circus is going on. But why can't we go off

somewhere on a little lark together--a nice quiet little

expedition like that drive at Bellomont, the day you met me at

the station?" 



He leaned unpleasantly close in order to convey this suggestion,

and she fancied she caught a significant aroma which explained

the dark flush on his face and the glistening dampness of his

forehead.



The idea that any rash answer might provoke an unpleasant

outburst tempered her disgust with caution, and she answered with

a laugh: "I don't see how one can very well take country drives

in town, but I am not always surrounded by an admiring throng,

and if you will let me know what afternoon you are coming I will

arrange things so that we can have a nice quiet talk." 



"Hang talking! That's what you always say," returned Trenor,

whose expletives lacked variety. "You put me off with that at the

Van Osburgh wedding--but the plain English of it is that, now

you've got what you wanted out of me, you'd rather have any other

fellow about." 



His voice had risen sharply with the last words, and Lily flushed

with annoyance, but she kept command of the situation and laid a

persuasive hand on his arm. 



"Don't be foolish, Gus; I can't let you talk to me in that

ridiculous way. If you really want to see me, why shouldn't we

take a walk in the Park some afternoon? I agree with you that

it's amusing to be rustic in town, and if you like I'll meet you

there, and we'll go and feed the squirrels, and you shall take me

out on the lake in the steam-gondola." 



She smiled as she spoke, letting her eyes rest on his in a way

that took the edge from her banter and made him suddenly

malleable to her will. 



"All right, then: that's a go. Will you come tomorrow? Tomorrow

at three o'clock, at the end of the Mall. I'll be there sharp,

remember; you won't go back on me, Lily?" 



But to Miss Bart's relief the repetition of her promise was cut

short by the opening of the box door to admit George Dorset. 



Trenor sulkily yielded his place, and Lily turned a brilliant

smile on the newcomer. She had not talked with Dorset since

their visit at Bellomont, but something in his look and manner

told her that he recalled the friendly footing on which they had

last met. He was not a man to whom the expression of admiration

came easily: his long sallow face and distrustful eyes seemed

always barricaded against the expansive emotions. But, where her

own influence was concerned, Lily's intuitions sent out

thread-like feelers, and as she made room for him on the narrow

sofa she was sure he found a dumb pleasure in being near her. Few

women took the trouble to make themselves agreeable to Dorset,

and Lily had been kind to him at Bellomont, and was now smiling

on him with a divine renewal of kindness. 



"Well, here we are, in for another six months of caterwauling,"

he began complainingly. "Not a shade of difference between this

year and last, except that the women have got new clothes and the

singers haven't got new voices. My wife's musical, you know--puts

me through a course of this every winter. It isn't so bad on

Italian nights--then she comes late, and there's time to digest.

But when they give Wagner we have to rush dinner, and I pay up

for it. And the draughts are damnable--asphyxia in front and

pleurisy in the back. There's Trenor leaving the box without

drawing the curtain! With a hide like that draughts don't make

any difference. Did you ever watch Trenor eat? If you did, you'd

wonder why he's alive; I suppose he's leather inside too.--But I

came to say that my wife wants you to come down to our place next

Sunday. Do for heaven's sake say yes. She's got a lot of bores

coming--intellectual ones, I mean; that's her new line, you

know, and I'm not sure it ain't worse than the music. Some of 'em

have long hair, and they start an argument with the soup, and

don't notice when things are handed to them. The consequence is

the dinner gets cold, and I have dyspepsia. That silly ass

Silverton brings them to the house--he writes poetry, you know,

and Bertha and he are getting tremendously thick. She could write

better than any of 'em if she chose, and I don't blame her for

wanting clever fellows about; all I say is: 'Don't let me see 'em

eat!'" 



The gist of this strange communication gave Lily a distinct

thrill of pleasure. Under ordinary circumstances, there would

have been nothing surprising in an invitation from Bertha Dorset;

but since the Bellomont episode an unavowed hostility had

kept the two women apart. Now, with a start of inner wonder,

Lily felt that her thirst for retaliation had died out. IF YOU WOULD

FORGIVE YOUR ENEMY, says the Malay proverb, FIRST INFLICT A HURT

ON HIM; and Lily was experiencing the truth of the apothegm.

If she had destroyed Mrs. Dorset's letters, she might have

continued to hate her; but the fact that they remained in her

possession had fed her resentment to satiety. 



She uttered a smiling acceptance, hailing in the renewal of the

tie an escape from Trenor's importunities.



Meanwhile the holidays had gone by and the season was beginning.

Fifth Avenue had become a nightly torrent of carriages surging

upward to the fashionable quarters about the Park, where

illuminated windows and outspread awnings betokened the usual

routine of hospitality. Other tributary currents crossed the

mainstream, bearing their freight to the theatres, restaurants or

opera; and Mrs. Peniston, from the secluded watch-tower of her

upper window, could tell to a nicety just when the chronic volume

of sound was increased by the sudden influx setting toward a Van

Osburgh ball, or when the multiplication of wheels meant merely

that the opera was over, or that there was a big supper at

Sherry's. 



Mrs. Peniston followed the rise and culmination of the season as

keenly as the most active sharer in its gaieties; and, as a

looker-on, she enjoyed opportunities of comparison and

generalization such as those who take part must proverbially

forego. No one could have kept a more accurate record of social

fluctuations, or have put a more unerring finger on the

distinguishing features of each season: its dulness, its

extravagance, its lack of balls or excess of divorces. She had a

special memory for the vicissitudes of the "new people" who rose

to the surface with each recurring tide, and were either

submerged beneath its rush or landed triumphantly beyond the

reach of envious breakers; and she was apt to display a

remarkable retrospective insight into their ultimate fate, so

that, when they had fulfilled their destiny, she was almost

always able to say to Grace Stepney--the recipient of her

prophecies--that she had known exactly what would happen. 



This particular season Mrs. Peniston would have characterized as

that in which everybody "felt poor" except the Welly Brys and Mr.

Simon Rosedale. It had been a bad autumn in Wall Street, where

prices fell in accordance with that peculiar law which proves

railway stocks and bales of cotton to be more sensitive to the

allotment of executive power than many estimable citizens trained

to all the advantages of self-government. Even fortunes supposed

to be independent of the market either betrayed a secret

dependence on it, or suffered from a sympathetic affection:

fashion sulked in its country houses, or came to town incognito,

general entertainments were discountenanced, and informality and

short dinners became the fashion. 



But society, amused for a while at playing Cinderella, soon

wearied of the hearthside role, and welcomed the Fairy Godmother

in the shape of any magician powerful enough to turn the shrunken

pumpkin back again into the golden coach. The mere fact of

growing richer at a time when most people's investments are

shrinking, is calculated to attract envious attention; and

according to Wall Street rumours, Welly Bry and Rosedale had

found the secret of performing this miracle. 



Rosedale, in particular, was said to have doubled his fortune,

and there was talk of his buying the newly-finished house of one

of the victims of the crash, who, in the space of twelve short

months, had made the same number of millions, built a house in

Fifth Avenue, filled a picture-gallery with old masters,

entertained all New York in it, and been smuggled out of the

country between a trained nurse and a doctor, while his creditors

mounted guard over the old masters, and his guests explained to

each other that they had dined with him only because they wanted

to see the pictures. Mr. Rosedale meant to have a less meteoric

career. He knew he should have to go slowly, and the instincts of

his race fitted him to suffer rebuffs and put up with delays. But

he was prompt to perceive that the general dulness of the season

afforded him an unusual opportunity to shine, and he set about

with patient industry to form a background for his growing glory.

Mrs. Fisher was of immense service to him at this period. She had

set off so many newcomers on the social stage that she was like

one of those pieces of stock scenery which tell the experienced

spectator exactly what is going to take place. But Mr. Rosedale

wanted, in the long run, a more individual environment. He was

sensitive to shades of difference which Miss Bart would never

have credited him with perceiving, because he had no

corresponding variations of manner; and it was becoming more and

more clear to him that Miss Bart herself possessed precisely the

complementary qualities needed to round off his social

personality. 



Such details did not fall within the range of Mrs. Peniston's

vision. Like many minds of panoramic sweep, hers was apt to

overlook the MINUTIAE of the foreground, and she was much more

likely to know where Carry Fisher had found the Welly Brys' CHEF

for them, than what was happening to her own niece. She was not,

however, without purveyors of information ready to supplement her

deficiencies. Grace Stepney's mind was like a kind of moral

fly-paper, to which the buzzing items of gossip were drawn by a

fatal attraction, and where they hung fast in the toils of an

inexorable memory. Lily would have been surprised to know how

many trivial facts concerning herself were lodged in Miss

Stepney's head. She was quite aware that she was of interest to

dingy people, but she assumed that there is only one form of

dinginess, and that admiration for brilliancy is the natural

expression of its inferior state. She knew that Gerty Farish

admired her blindly, and therefore supposed that she inspired the

same sentiments in Grace Stepney, whom she classified as a Gerty

Farish without the saving traits of youth and enthusiasm. 



In reality, the two differed from each other as much as they

differed from the object of their mutual contemplation. Miss

Farish's heart was a fountain of tender illusions, Miss Stepney's

a precise register of facts as manifested in their relation to

herself. She had sensibilities which, to Lily, would have seemed

comic in a person with a freckled nose and red eyelids, who lived

in a boarding-house and admired Mrs. Peniston's drawing-room; but

poor Grace's limitations gave them a more concentrated inner

life, as poor soil starves certain plants into intenser

efflorescence. She had in truth no abstract propensity to malice:

she did not dislike Lily because the latter was brilliant and

predominant, but because she thought that Lily disliked her. It

is less mortifying to believe one's self unpopular than

insignificant, and vanity prefers to assume that indifference is

a latent form of unfriendliness. Even such scant civilities as

Lily accorded to Mr. Rosedale would have made Miss Stepney her

friend for life; but how could she foresee that such a friend was

worth cultivating? How, moreover, can a young woman who has never

been ignored measure the pang which this injury inflicts? And,

lastly, how could Lily, accustomed to choose between a

pressure of engagements, guess that she had mortally offended

Miss Stepney by causing her to be excluded from one of Mrs.

Peniston's infrequent dinner-parties? 



Mrs. Peniston disliked giving dinners, but she had a high sense

of family obligation, and on the Jack Stepneys' return from their

honeymoon she felt it incumbent upon her to light the

drawing-room lamps and extract her best silver from the Safe

Deposit vaults. Mrs. Peniston's rare entertainments were preceded

by days of heart-rending vacillation as to every detail of the

feast, from the seating of the guests to the pattern of the

table-cloth, and in the course of one of these preliminary

discussions she had imprudently suggested to her cousin Grace

that, as the dinner was a family affair, she might be included in

it. For a week the prospect had lighted up Miss Stepney's

colourless existence; then she had been given to understand that

it would be more convenient to have her another day. Miss Stepney

knew exactly what had happened. Lily, to whom family reunions

were occasions of unalloyed dulness, had persuaded her aunt that

a dinner of "smart" people would be much more to the taste of the

young couple, and Mrs. Peniston, who leaned helplessly on her

niece in social matters, had been prevailed upon to pronounce

Grace's exile. After all, Grace could come any other day; why

should she mind being put off? 
