







It was precisely because Miss Stepney could come any other

day--and because she knew her relations were in the secret of her

unoccupied evenings--that this incident loomed gigantically on

her horizon. She was aware that she had Lily to thank for it; and

dull resentment was turned to active animosity. 



Mrs. Peniston, on whom she had looked in a day or two after the

dinner, laid down her crochet-work and turned abruptly from her

oblique survey of Fifth Avenue. 



"Gus Trenor?--Lily and Gus Trenor?" she said, growing so suddenly

pale that her visitor was almost alarmed. 



"Oh, cousin Julia . . . of course I don't mean . . ." 



"I don't know what you DO mean," said Mrs. Peniston, with a

frightened quiver in her small fretful voice. "Such things were

never heard of in my day. And my own niece! I'm not sure I

understand you. Do people say he's in love with her?"



Mrs. Peniston's horror was genuine. Though she boasted an

unequalled familiarity with the secret chronicles of society, she

had the innocence of the school-girl who regards wickedness as a

part of "history," and to whom it never occurs that the scandals

she reads of in lesson-hours may be repeating themselves in the

next street. Mrs. Peniston had kept her imagination shrouded,

like the drawing-room furniture. She knew, of course, that

society was "very much changed," and that many women her mother

would have thought "peculiar" were now in a position to be

critical about their visiting-lists; she had discussed the perils

of divorce with her rector, and had felt thankful at times that

Lily was still unmarried; but the idea that any scandal could

attach to a young girl's name, above all that it could be lightly

coupled with that of a married man, was so new to her that she

was as much aghast as if she had been accused of leaving her

carpets down all summer, or of violating any of the other

cardinal laws of housekeeping. 



Miss Stepney, when her first fright had subsided, began to feel

the superiority that greater breadth of mind confers. It was

really pitiable to be as ignorant of the world as Mrs. Peniston! 

She smiled at the latter's question. "People always say

unpleasant things--and certainly they're a great deal together. A

friend of mine met them the other afternoon in the Park-quite

late, after the lamps were lit. It s a pity Lily makes herself so

conspicuous."



"CONSPICUOUS!" gasped Mrs. Peniston. She bent forward, lowering

her voice to mitigate the horror. "What sort of things do they

say? That he means to get a divorce and marry her?" 





Grace Stepney laughed outright. "Dear me, no! He would hardly do

that. It--it's a flirtation--nothing more." 



"A flirtation? Between my niece and a married man? Do you mean to

tell me that, with Lily's looks and advantages, she could find no

better use for her time than to waste it on a fat stupid man

almost old enough to be her father?" This argument had such a

convincing ring that it gave Mrs. Peniston sufficient reassurance

to pick up her work, while she waited for Grace Stepney to rally

her scattered forces.



But Miss Stepney was on the spot in an instant. "That's the worst

of it--people say she isn't wasting her time! Every one knows, as

you say, that Lily is too handsome and-and charming--to devote

herself to a man like Gus Trenor unless--" 



"Unless?" echoed Mrs. Peniston. Her visitor drew breath

nervously. It was agreeable to shock Mrs. Peniston, but not to

shock her to the verge of anger. Miss Stepney was not

sufficiently familiar with the classic drama to have recalled in

advance how bearers of bad tidings are proverbially received, but

she now had a rapid vision of forfeited dinners and a reduced

wardrobe as the possible consequence of her disinterestedness. To

the honour of her sex, however, hatred of Lily prevailed over

more personal considerations. Mrs. Peniston had chosen the wrong

moment to boast of her niece's charms. 



"Unless," said Grace, leaning forward to speak with low-toned

emphasis, "unless there are material advantages to be gained by

making herself agreeable to him." 



She felt that the moment was tremendous, and remembered suddenly

that Mrs. Peniston's black brocade, with the cut jet fringe,

would have been hers at the end of the season. 



Mrs. Peniston put down her work again. Another aspect of the same

idea had presented itself to her, and she felt that it was

beneath her dignity to have her nerves racked by a dependent

relative who wore her old clothes. 



"If you take pleasure in annoying me by mysterious insinuations,"

she said coldly, "you might at least have chosen a more suitable

time than just as I am recovering from the strain of giving a

large dinner." 



The mention of the dinner dispelled Miss Stepney's last scruples.

"I don't know why I should be accused of taking pleasure in

telling you about Lily. I was sure I shouldn't get any thanks for

it," she returned with a flare of temper. "But I have some family

feeling left, and as you are the only person who has any

authority over Lily, I thought you ought to know what is being

said of her." 

 

"Well," said Mrs. Peniston, "what I complain of is that you

haven't told me yet what IS being said."



"I didn't suppose I should have to put it so plainly. People say

that Gus Trenor pays her bills." 



"Pays her bills--her bills?" Mrs. Peniston broke into a laugh. "I

can't imagine where you can have picked up such rubbish. Lily has

her own income--and I provide for her very handsomely--" 



"Oh, we all know that," interposed Miss Stepney drily. "But Lily

wears a great many smart gowns--" 



"I like her to be well-dressed--it's only suitable!" 



"Certainly; but then there are her gambling debts besides." 



Miss Stepney, in the beginning, had not meant to bring up this

point; but Mrs. Peniston had only her own incredulity to blame.

She was like the stiff-necked unbelievers of Scripture, who must

be annihilated to be convinced. 



"Gambling debts? Lily?" Mrs. Peniston's voice shook with anger

and bewilderment. She wondered whether Grace Stepney had gone out

of her mind. "What do you mean by her gambling debts?" 



"Simply that if one plays bridge for money in Lily's set one is

liable to lose a great deal--and I don't suppose Lily always

wins."



"Who told you that my niece played cards for money?" 



"Mercy, cousin Julia, don't look at me as if I were trying to

turn you against Lily! Everybody knows she is crazy about bridge.

Mrs. Gryce told me herself that it was her gambling that

frightened Percy Gryce--it seems he was really taken with her at

first. But, of course, among Lily's friends it's quite the custom

for girls to play for money. In fact, people are inclined to

excuse her on that account---" 



"To excuse her for what?" 



"For being hard up--and accepting attentions from men like Gus

Trenor--and George Dorset---" 



Mrs. Peniston gave another cry. "George Dorset? Is there any one

else? I should like to know the worst, if you please." 



"Don't put it in that way, cousin Julia. Lately Lily has been a

good deal with the Dorsets, and he seems to admire her--but of

course that's only natural. And I'm sure there is no truth in the

horrid things people say; but she HAS been spending a great deal

of money this winter. Evie Van Osburgh was at Celeste's

ordering her trousseau the other day--yes, the marriage takes

place next month--and she told me that Celeste showed her the

most exquisite things she was just sending home to Lily. And

people say that Judy Trenor has quarrelled with her on account of

Gus; but I'm sure I'm sorry I spoke, though I only meant it as a

kindness." 



Mrs. Peniston's genuine incredulity enabled her to dismiss Miss

Stepney with a disdain which boded ill for that lady's prospect

of succeeding to the black brocade; but minds impenetrable to

reason have generally some crack through which suspicion filters,

and her visitor's insinuations did not glide off as easily as she

had expected. Mrs. Peniston disliked scenes, and her

determination to avoid them had always led her to hold herself

aloof from the details of Lily's life. In her youth, girls had

not been supposed to require close supervision. They were

generally assumed to be taken up with the legitimate business of

courtship and marriage, and interference in such affairs on the

part of their natural guardians was considered as unwarrantable

as a spectator's suddenly joining in a game. There had of course

been "fast" girls even in Mrs. Peniston's early experience; but

their fastness, at worst, was understood to be a mere excess of

animal spirits, against which there could be no graver charge

than that of being "unladylike." The modern fastness appeared

synonymous with immorality, and the mere idea of immorality was

as offensive to Mrs. Peniston as a smell of cooking in the

drawing-room: it was one of the conceptions her mind refused to

admit. 



She had no immediate intention of repeating to Lily what she had

heard, or even of trying to ascertain its truth by means of

discreet interrogation. To do so might be to provoke a scene; and

a scene, in the shaken state of Mrs. Peniston's nerves, with the

effects of her dinner not worn off, and her mind still tremulous

with new impressions, was a risk she deemed it her duty to avoid.

But there remained in her thoughts a settled deposit of

resentment against her niece, all the denser because it was not

to be cleared by explanation or discussion. It was horrible of a

young girl to let herself be talked about; however unfounded the

charges against her, she must be to blame for their

having been made. Mrs. Peniston felt as if there had been a

contagious illness in the house, and she was doomed to sit

shivering among her contaminated furniture.



Miss Bart had in fact been treading a devious way, and none of

her critics could have been more alive to the fact than herself;

but she had a fatalistic sense of being drawn from one wrong

turning to another, without ever perceiving the right road till

it was too late to take it.



Lily, who considered herself above narrow prejudices, had not

imagined that the fact of letting Gus Trenor make a little money

for her would ever disturb her self-complacency. And the fact in

itself still seemed harmless enough; only it was a fertile source

of harmful complications. As she exhausted the amusement of

spending the money these complications be came more pressing, and

Lily, whose mind could be severely logical in tracing the causes

of her ill-luck to others, justified herself by the thought that

she owed all her troubles to the enmity of Bertha Dorset. This

enmity, however, had apparently expired in a renewal of

friendliness between the two women. Lily's visit to the Dorsets

had resulted, for both, in the discovery that they could be of

use to each other; and the civilized instinct finds a subtler

pleasure in making use of its antagonist than in confounding him.

Mrs. Dorset was, in fact, engaged in a new sentimental

experiment, of which Mrs. Fisher's late property, Ned Silverton,

was the rosy victim; and at such moments, as Judy Trenor had once

remarked, she felt a peculiar need of distracting her husband's

attention. Dorset was as difficult to amuse as a savage; but even

his self-engrossment was not proof against Lily's arts, or rather

these were especially adapted to soothe an uneasy egoism. Her

experience with Percy Gryce stood her in good stead in

ministering to Dorset's humours, and if the incentive to please

was less urgent, the difficulties of her situation were teaching

her to make much of minor opportunities. 



Intimacy with the Dorsets was not likely to lessen such

difficulties on the material side. Mrs. Dorset had none of Judy

Trenor's lavish impulses, and Dorset's admiration was not likely

to express itself in financial "tips," even had Lily cared to

renew her experiences in that line. What she required, for the

moment, of the Dorsets' friendship, was simply its social

sanction. She knew that people were beginning to talk of her; but

this fact did not alarm her as it had alarmed Mrs. Peniston. In

her set such gossip was not unusual, and a handsome girl who

flirted with a married man was merely assumed to be pressing to

the limit of her opportunities. It was Trenor himself who

frightened her. Their walk in the Park had not been a success.

Trenor had married young, and since his marriage his intercourse

with women had not taken the form of the sentimental small-talk

which doubles upon itself like the paths in a maze. He was first

puzzled and then irritated to find himself always led back to the

same starting-point, and Lily felt that she was gradually losing

control of the situation. Trenor was in truth in an unmanageable

mood. In spite of his understanding with Rosedale he had been

somewhat heavily "touched" by the fall in stocks; his household

expenses weighed on him, and he seemed to be meeting, on all

sides, a sullen opposition to his wishes, instead of the easy

good luck he had hitherto encountered. 



Mrs. Trenor was still at Bellomont, keeping the town-house open,

and descending on it now and then for a taste of the world, but

preferring the recurrent excitement of week-end parties to the

restrictions of a dull season. Since the holidays she had not

urged Lily to return to Bellomont, and the first time they met in

town Lily fancied there was a shade of coldness in her manner.

Was it merely the expression of her displeasure at Miss Bart's

neglect, or had disquieting rumours reached her? The latter

contingency seemed improbable, yet Lily was not without a sense

of uneasiness. If her roaming sympathies had struck root

anywhere, it was in her friendship with Judy Trenor. She believed

in the sincerity of her friend's affection, though it sometimes

showed itself in self-interested ways, and she shrank with

peculiar reluctance from any risk of estranging it. But, aside

from this, she was keenly conscious of the way in which such an

estrangement would react on herself. The fact that Gus Trenor was

Judy's husband was at times Lily's strongest reason for disliking

him, and for resenting the obligation under which he had placed

her. To set her doubts at rest, Miss Bart, soon after the New

Year, "proposed" herself for a week-end at Bellomont. She had

learned in advance that the presence of a large party

would protect her from too great assiduity on Trenor's part, and

his wife's telegraphic "come by all means" seemed to as sure her

of her usual welcome. 



Judy received her amicably. The cares of a large party always

prevailed over personal feelings, and Lily saw no change in her

hostess's manner. Nevertheless, she was soon aware that the

experiment of coming to Bellomont was destined not to be

successful. The party was made up of what Mrs. Trenor called

"poky people"--her generic name for persons who did not play

bridge--and, it being her habit to group all such obstructionists

in one class, she usually invited them together, regardless of

their other characteristics. The result was apt to be an

irreducible combination of persons having no other quality in

common than their abstinence from bridge, and the antagonisms

developed in a group lacking the one taste which might have

amalgamated them, were in this case aggravated by bad weather,

and by the ill-concealed boredom of their host and hostess. In

such emergencies, Judy would usually have turned to Lily to fuse

the discordant elements; and Miss Bart, assuming that such a

service was expected of her, threw herself into it with her

accustomed zeal. But at the outset she perceived a subtle

resistance to her efforts. If Mrs. Trenor's manner toward her was

unchanged, there was certainly a faint coldness in that of the

other ladies. An occasional caustic allusion to "your friends the

Wellington Brys," or to "the little Jew who has bought the

Greiner house--some one told us you knew him, Miss Bart,"--showed

Lily that she was in disfavour with that portion of society

which, while contributing least to its amusement, has assumed the

right to decide what forms that amusement shall take. The

indication was a slight one, and a year ago Lily would have

smiled at it, trusting to the charm of her personality to dispel

any prejudice against her. But now she had grown more sensitive

to criticism and less confident in her power of disarming it. She

knew, moreover, that if the ladies at Bellomont permitted

themselves to criticize her friends openly, it was a proof that

they were not afraid of subjecting her to the same treatment

behind her back. The nervous dread lest anything in Trenor's

manner should seem to justify their disapproval made her seek

every pretext for avoiding him, and she left Bellomont con<p

137>scious of having failed in every purpose which had taken her

there. 



In town she returned to preoccupations which, for the moment, had

the happy effect of banishing troublesome thoughts. The Welly

Brys, after much debate, and anxious counsel with their newly

acquired friends, had decided on the bold move of giving a

general entertainment. To attack society collectively, when one's

means of approach are limited to a few acquaintances, is like

advancing into a strange country with an insufficient number of

scouts; but such rash tactics have sometimes led to brilliant

victories, and the Brys had determined to put their fate to the

touch. Mrs. Fisher, to whom they had entrusted the conduct of the

affair, had decided that TABLEAUX VIVANTS and expensive music

were the two baits most likely to attract the desired prey, and

after prolonged negotiations, and the kind of wire-pulling in

which she was known to excel, she had induced a dozen fashionable

women to exhibit themselves in a series of pictures which, by a

farther miracle of persuasion, the distinguished portrait

painter, Paul Morpeth, had been prevailed upon to organize. 



Lily was in her element on such occasions. Under Morpeth's

guidance her vivid plastic sense, hitherto nurtured on no higher

food than dress-making and upholstery, found eager expression in

the disposal of draperies, the study of attitudes, the shifting

of lights and shadows. Her dramatic instinct was roused by the

choice of subjects, and the gorgeous reproductions of historic

dress stirred an imagination which only visual impressions could

reach. But keenest of all was the exhilaration of displaying her

own beauty under a new aspect: of showing that her loveliness was

no mere fixed quality, but an element shaping all emotions to

fresh forms of grace. 



Mrs. Fisher's measures had been well-taken, and society,

surprised in a dull moment, succumbed to the temptation of Mrs.

Bry's hospitality. The protesting minority were forgotten in the

throng which abjured and came; and the audience was almost as

brilliant as the show. 



Lawrence Selden was among those who had yielded to the proffered

inducements. If he did not often act on the accepted social axiom

that a man may go where he pleases, it was because he had

long since learned that his pleasures were mainly to be found in

a small group of the like-minded. But he enjoyed spectacular

effects, and was not insensible to the part money plays in their

production: all he asked was that the very rich should live up to

their calling as stage-managers, and not spend their money in a

dull way. This the Brys could certainly not be charged with

doing. Their recently built house, whatever it might lack as a

frame for domesticity, was almost as well-designed for the

display of a festal assemblage as one of those airy

pleasure-halls which the Italian architects improvised to set off

the hospitality of princes. The air of improvisation was in fact

strikingly present: so recent, so rapidly-evoked was the whole

MISE-EN-SCENE that one had to touch the marble columns to learn

they were not of cardboard, to seat one's self in one of the

damask-and-gold arm-chairs to be sure it was not painted against

the wall. 



Selden, who had put one of these seats to the test, found

himself, from an angle of the ball-room, surveying the scene with

frank enjoyment. The company, in obedience to the decorative

instinct which calls for fine clothes in fine surroundings, had

dressed rather with an eye to Mrs. Bry's background than to

herself. The seated throng, filling the immense room without

undue crowding, presented a surface of rich tissues and jewelled

shoulders in harmony with the festooned and gilded walls, and the

flushed splendours of the Venetian ceiling. At the farther end of

the room a stage had been constructed behind a proscenium arch

curtained with folds of old damask; but in the pause before the

parting of the folds there was little thought of what they might

reveal, for every woman who had accepted Mrs. Bry's invitation

was engaged in trying to find out how many of her friends had

done the same. 



Gerty Farish, seated next to Selden, was lost in that

indiscriminate and uncritical enjoyment so irritating to Miss

Bart's finer perceptions. It may be that Selden's nearness had

something to do with the quality of his cousin's pleasure; but

Miss Farish was so little accustomed to refer her enjoyment of

such scenes to her own share in them, that she was merely

conscious of a deeper sense of contentment. 



"Wasn't it dear of Lily to get me an invitation? Of course

it would never have occurred to Carry Fisher to put me on

the list, and I should have been so sorry to miss seeing it

all-and especially Lily herself. Some one told me the ceiling was

by Veronese--you would know, of course, Lawrence. I suppose it's

very beautiful, but his women are so dreadfully fat. Goddesses?

Well, I can only say that if they'd been mortals and had to wear

corsets, it would have been better for them. I think our women

are much handsomer. And this room is wonderfully becoming--every

one looks so well! Did you ever see such jewels? Do look at Mrs.

George Dorset's pearls--I suppose the smallest of them would pay

the rent of our Girls' Club for a year. Not that I ought to

complain about the dub; every one has been so wonderfully kind.

Did I tell you that Lily had given us three hundred dollars?

Wasn't it splendid of her? And then she collected a lot of money

from her friends--Mrs. Bry gave us five hundred, and Mr. Rosedale

a thousand. I wish Lily were not so nice to Mr. Rosedale, but she

says it's no use being rude to him, because he doesn't see the

difference. She really can't bear to hurt people's feelings--it

makes me so angry when I hear her called cold and conceited! The

girls at the dub don't call her that. Do you know she has been

there with me twice?--yes, Lily! And you should have seen their

eyes! One of them said it was as good as a day in the country

just to look at her. And she sat there, and laughed and talked

with them--not a bit as if she were being CHARITABLE, you know,

but as if she liked it as much as they did. They've been asking

ever since when she's coming back; and she's promised me---oh!" 



Miss Farish's confidences were cut short by the parting of the

curtain on the first TABLEAU--a group of nymphs dancing across

flower-strewn sward in the rhythmic postures of Botticelli's

Spring. TABLEAUX VIVANTS depend for their effect not only on the

happy disposal of lights and the delusive-interposition of layers

of gauze, but on a corresponding adjustment of the mental vision.

To unfurnished minds they remain, in spite of every enhancement

of art, only a superior kind of wax-works; but to the responsive

fancy they may give magic glimpses of the boundary world between

fact and imagination. Selden's mind was of this order: he could

yield to vision-making influences as completely as a child to the

spell of a fairy-tale. Mrs. Bry's TABLEAUX wanted none of

the qualities which go to the producing of such illusions, and

under Morpeth's organizing hand the pictures succeeded each other

with the rhythmic march of some splendid frieze, in which the

fugitive curves of living flesh and the wandering light of young

eyes have been subdued to plastic harmony without losing the

charm of life. 



The scenes were taken from old pictures, and the participators

had been cleverly fitted with characters suited to their types.

No one, for instance, could have made a more typical Goya than

Carry Fisher, with her short dark-skinned face, the exaggerated

glow of her eyes, the provocation of her frankly-painted smile. A

brilliant Miss Smedden from Brooklyn showed to perfection the

sumptuous curves of Titian's Daughter, lifting her gold salver

laden with grapes above the harmonizing gold of rippled hair and

rich brocade, and a young Mrs. Van Alstyne, who showed the

frailer Dutch type, with high blue-veined forehead and pale eyes

and lashes, made a characteristic Vandyck, in black satin,

against a curtained archway. Then there were Kauffmann nymphs

garlanding the altar of Love; a Veronese supper, all sheeny

textures, pearl-woven heads and marble architecture; and a

Watteau group of lute-playing comedians, lounging by a fountain

in a sunlit glade. 



Each evanescent picture touched the vision-building faculty in

Selden, leading him so far down the vistas of fancy that even

Gerty Farish's running commentary--"Oh, how lovely Lulu Melson

looks!" or: "That must be Kate Corby, to the right there, in

purple"--did not break the spell of the illusion. Indeed, so

skilfully had the personality of the actors been subdued to the

scenes they figured in that even the least imaginative of the

audience must have felt a thrill of contrast when the curtain

suddenly parted on a picture which was simply and undisguisedly

the portrait of Miss Bart. 



Here there could be no mistaking the predominance of

personality--the unanimous "Oh!" of the spectators was a tribute,

not to the brush-work of Reynolds's "Mrs. Lloyd" but to the flesh

and blood loveliness of Lily Bart. She had shown her artistic

intelligence in selecting a type so like her own that she could

embody the person represented without ceasing to be

herself. It was as though she had stepped, not out of, but into,

Reynolds's canvas, banishing the phantom of his dead beauty by

the beams of her living grace. The impulse to show herself in a

splendid setting--she had thought for a moment of representing

Tiepolo's Cleopatra--had yielded to the truer instinct of

trusting to her unassisted beauty, and she had purposely chosen a

picture without distracting accessories of dress or surroundings.

Her pale draperies, and the background of foliage against which

she stood, served only to relieve the long dryad-like curves that

swept upward from her poised foot to her lifted arm. The noble

buoyancy of her attitude, its suggestion of soaring grace,

revealed the touch of poetry in her beauty that Selden always

felt in her presence, yet lost the sense of when he was not with

her. Its expression was now so vivid that for the first time he

seemed to see before him the real Lily Bart, divested of the

trivialities of her little world, and catching for a moment a

note of that eternal harmony of which her beauty was a part. 



"Deuced bold thing to show herself in that get-up; but, gad,

there isn't a break in the lines anywhere, and I suppose she

wanted us to know it!" 



These words, uttered by that experienced connoisseur, Mr. Ned Van

Alstyne, whose scented white moustache had brushed Selden's

shoulder whenever the parting of the curtains presented any

exceptional opportunity for the study of the female outline,

affected their hearer in an unexpected way. It was not the first

time that Selden had heard Lily's beauty lightly remarked on, and

hitherto the tone of the comments had imperceptibly coloured his

view of her. But now it woke only a motion of indignant contempt.

This was the world she lived in, these were the standards by

which she was fated to be measured! Does one go to Caliban for a

judgment on Miranda? 



In the long moment before the curtain fell, he had time to feel

the whole tragedy of her life. It was as though her beauty, thus

detached from all that cheapened and vulgarized it, had held out

suppliant hands to him from the world in which he and she had

once met for a moment, and where he felt an overmastering longing

to be with her again. 



He was roused by the pressure of ecstatic fingers. "Wasn't she

too beautiful, Lawrence? Don't you like her best in that simple dress?

It makes her look like the real Lily--the Lily I know." 



He met Gerty Farish's brimming gaze. "The Lily we know," he

corrected; and his cousin, beaming at the implied understanding,

exclaimed joyfully: "I'll tell her that! She always says you

dislike her." 





The performance over, Selden's first impulse was to seek Miss

Bart. During the interlude of music which succeeded the TABLEAUX,

the actors had seated themselves here and there in the audience,

diversifying its conventional appearance by the varied

picturesqueness of their dress. Lily, however, was not among

them, and her absence served to protract the effect she had

produced on Selden: it would have broken the spell to see her too

soon in the surroundings from which accident had so happily

detached her. They had not met since the day of the Van Osburgh

wedding, and on his side the avoidance had been intentional.

Tonight, however, he knew that, sooner or later, he should find

himself at her side; and though he let the dispersing crowd drift

him whither it would, without making an immediate effort to reach

her, his procrastination was not due to any lingering resistance,

but to the desire to luxuriate a moment in the sense of complete

surrender. 



Lily had not an instant's doubt as to the meaning of the murmur

greeting her appearance. No other tableau had been received with

that precise note of approval: it had obviously been called forth

by herself, and not by the picture she impersonated. She had

feared at the last moment that she was risking too much in

dispensing with the advantages of a more sumptuous setting, and

the completeness of her triumph gave her an intoxicating sense of

recovered power. Not caring to diminish the impression she had

produced, she held herself aloof from the audience till the

movement of dispersal before supper, and thus had a second

opportunity of showing herself to advantage, as the throng poured

slowly into the empty drawing-room where she was standing. 



She was soon the centre of a group which increased and renewed

itself as the circulation became general, and the individual

comments on her success were a delightful prolon<p 143>gation of

the collective applause. At such moments she lost something of

her natural fastidiousness, and cared less for the quality of the

admiration received than for its quantity. Differences of

personality were merged in a warm atmosphere of praise, in which

her beauty expanded like a flower in sunlight; and if Selden had

approached a moment or two sooner he would have seen her turning

on Ned Van Alstyne and George Dorset the look he had dreamed of

capturing for himself. 



Fortune willed, however, that the hurried approach of Mrs.

Fisher, as whose aide-de-camp Van Alstyne was acting, should

break up the group before Selden reached the threshold of the

room. One or two of the men wandered off in search of their

partners for supper, and the others, noticing Selden's approach,

gave way to him in accordance with the tacit freemasonry of the

ball-room. Lily was therefore standing alone when he reached her;

and finding the expected look in her eye, he had the satisfaction

of supposing he had kindled it. The look did indeed deepen as it

rested on him, for even in that moment of self-intoxication Lily

felt the quicker beat of life that his nearness always produced.

She read, too, in his answering gaze the delicious confirmation

of her triumph, and for the moment it seemed to her that it was

for him only she cared to be beautiful. 



Selden had given her his arm without speaking. She took it in

silence, and they moved away, not toward the supper-room, but

against the tide which was setting thither. The faces about her

flowed by like the streaming images of sleep: she hardly noticed

where Selden was leading her, till they passed through a glass

doorway at the end of the long suite of rooms and stood suddenly

in the fragrant hush of a garden. Gravel grated beneath their

feet, and about them was the transparent dimness of a midsummer

night. Hanging lights made emerald caverns in the depths of

foliage, and whitened the spray of a fountain falling among

lilies. The magic place was deserted: there was no sound but the

splash of the water on the lily-pads, and a distant drift of

music that might have been blown across a sleeping lake. 



Selden and Lily stood still, accepting the unreality of the scene

as a part of their own dream-like sensations. It would not have

surprised them to feel a summer breeze on their faces, or

to see the lights among the boughs reduplicated in the arch of a

starry sky. The strange solitude about them was no stranger than

the sweetness of being alone in it together. At length Lily

withdrew her hand, and moved away a step, so that her white-robed

slimness was outlined against the dusk of the branches. Selden

followed her, and still without speaking they seated themselves

on a bench beside the fountain. 



Suddenly she raised her eyes with the beseeching earnestness of a

child. "You never speak to me--you think hard things of me," she

murmured. 



"I think of you at any rate, God knows!" he said. 



"Then why do we never see each other? Why can't we be friends?

You promised once to help me," she continued in the same tone, as

though the words were drawn from her unwillingly. 



"The only way I can help you is by loving you," Selden said in a

low voice. 



She made no reply, but her face turned to him with the soft

motion of a flower. His own met it slowly, and their lips

touched. She drew back and rose from her seat. Selden rose too,

and they stood facing each other. Suddenly she caught his hand

and pressed it a moment against her cheek. 



"Ah, love me, love me--but don't tell me so!" she sighed with her

eyes in his; and before he could speak she had turned and slipped

through the arch of boughs, disappearing in the brightness of the

room beyond. 



Selden stood where she had left him. He knew too well the

transiency of exquisite moments to attempt to follow her; but

presently he reentered the house and made his way through the

deserted rooms to the door. A few sumptuously-cloaked ladies were

already gathered in the marble vestibule, and in the coat-room he

found Van Alstyne and Gus Trenor. 



The former, at Selden's approach, paused in the careful selection

of a cigar from one of the silver boxes invitingly set out near

the door. 



"Hallo, Selden, going too? You're an Epicurean like myself, I

see: you don't want to see all those goddesses gobbling terrapin.

Gad, what a show of good-looking women; but not one of

'em could touch that little cousin of mine. Talk of

jewels--what's a woman want with jewels when she's got herself to

show? The trouble is that all these fal-bals they wear cover up

their figures when they've got 'em. I never knew till tonight

what an outline Lily has." 



"It's not her fault if everybody don't know it now," growled

Trenor, flushed with the struggle of getting into his fur-lined

coat. "Damned bad taste, I call it--no, no cigar for me. You

can't tell what you're smoking in one of these new houses--likely

as not the CHEF buys the cigars. Stay for supper? Not if I know

it! When people crowd their rooms so that you can't get near any

one you want to speak to, I'd as soon sup in the elevated at the

rush hour. My wife was dead right to stay away: she says life's

too short to spend it in breaking in new people."



Lily woke from happy dreams to find two notes at her bedside.



One was from Mrs. Trenor, who announced that she was coming to

town that afternoon for a flying visit, and hoped Miss Bart would

be able to dine with her. The other was from Selden. He wrote

briefly that an important case called him to Albany, whence he

would be unable to return till the evening, and asked Lily to let

him know at what hour on the following day she would see him.



Lily, leaning back among her pillows, gazed musingly at his

letter. The scene in the Brys' conservatory had been like a part

of her dreams; she had not expected to wake to such evidence of

its reality. Her first movement was one of annoyance: this

unforeseen act of Selden's added another complication to life. It

was so unlike him to yield to such an irrational impulse! Did he

really mean to ask her to marry him? She had once shown him the

impossibility of such a hope, and his subsequent behaviour seemed

to prove that he had accepted the situation with a reasonableness

somewhat mortifying to her vanity. It was all the more agreeable

to find that this reason ableness was maintained only at the cost

of not seeing her; but, though nothing in life was as sweet as

the sense of her power over him, she saw the danger of allowing

the episode of the previous night to have a sequel. Since she

could not marry him, it would be kinder to him, as well as easier

for herself, to write a line amicably evading his request to see

her: he was not the man to mistake such a hint, and when next

they met it would be on their usual friendly footing.



Lily sprang out of bed, and went straight to her desk. She wanted

to write at once, while she could trust to the strength of her

resolve. She was still languid from her brief sleep and the

exhilaration of the evening, and the sight of Selden's writing

brought back the culminating moment of her triumph: the moment

when she had read in his eyes that no philosophy was proof

against her power. It would be pleasant to have that sensation

again . . . no one else could give it to her in its fulness; and

she could not bear to mar her mood of luxu<p 147>rious

retrospection by an act of definite refusal. She took up her pen

and wrote hastily: "TOMORROW AT FOUR;" murmuring to herself, as

she slipped the sheet into its envelope: "I can easily put him

off when tomorrow comes." 







Judy Trenor's summons was very welcome to Lily. It was the first

time she had received a direct communication from Bellomont since

the close of her last visit there, and she was still visited by

the dread of having incurred Judy's displeasure. But this

characteristic command seemed to reestablish their former

relations; and Lily smiled at the thought that her friend had

probably summoned her in order to hear about the Brys'

entertainment. Mrs. Trenor had absented herself from the feast,

perhaps for the reason so frankly enunciated by her husband,

perhaps because, as Mrs. Fisher somewhat differently put it, she

"couldn't bear new people when she hadn't discovered them

herself." At any rate, though she remained haughtily at

Bellomont, Lily suspected in her a devouring eagerness to hear of

what she had missed, and to learn exactly in what measure Mrs.

Wellington Bry had surpassed all previous competitors for social

recognition. Lily was quite ready to gratify this curiosity, but

it happened that she was dining out. She determined, however, to

see Mrs. Trenor for a few moments, and ringing for her maid she

despatched a telegram to say that she would be with her friend

that evening at ten.



She was dining with Mrs. Fisher, who had gathered at an informal

feast a few of the performers of the previous evening. There was

to be plantation music in the studio after dinner-for Mrs.

Fisher, despairing of the republic, had taken up modelling, and

annexed to her small crowded house a spacious apartment, which,

whatever its uses in her hours of plastic inspiration, served at

other times for the exercise of an indefatigable hospitality.

Lily was reluctant to leave, for the dinner was amusing, and she

would have liked to lounge over a cigarette and hear a few songs;

but she could not break her engagement with Judy, and shortly

after ten she asked her hostess to ring for a hansom, and drove

up Fifth Avenue to the Trenors'.



She waited long enough on the doorstep to wonder that

Judy's presence in town was not signalized by a greater

promptness in admitting her; and her surprise was increased when,

instead of the expected footman, pushing his shoulders into a

tardy coat, a shabby care-taking person in calico let her into

the shrouded hall. Trenor, however, appeared at once on the

threshold of the drawing-room, welcoming her with unusual

volubility while he relieved her of her cloak and drew her into

the room. 



"Come along to the den; it's the only comfortable place in the

house. Doesn't this room look as if it was waiting for the body

to be brought down? Can't see why Judy keeps the house wrapped up

in this awful slippery white stuff--it's enough to give a fellow

pneumonia to walk through these rooms on a cold day. You look a

little pinched yourself, by the way: it's rather a sharp night

out. I noticed it walking up from the club. Come along, and I'll

give you a nip of brandy, and you can toast yourself over the

fire and try some of my new Egyptians--that little Turkish chap

at the Embassy put me on to a brand that I want you to try, and

if you like 'em I'll get out a lot for you: they don't have 'em

here yet, but I'll cable." 



He led her through the house to the large room at the back, where

Mrs. Trenor usually sat, and where, even in her absence, there

was an air of occupancy. Here, as usual, were flowers,

newspapers, a littered writing-table, and a general aspect of

lamp-lit familiarity, so that it was a surprise not to see Judy's

energetic figure start up from the arm-chair near the fire. 



It was apparently Trenor himself who had been occupying the seat

in question, for it was overhung by a cloud of cigar smoke, and

near it stood one of those intricate folding tables which British

ingenuity has devised to facilitate the circulation of tobacco

and spirits. The sight of such appliances in a drawing-room was

not unusual in Lily's set, where smoking and drinking were

unrestricted by considerations of time and place, and her first

movement was to help herself to one of the cigarettes recommended

by Trenor, while she checked his loquacity by asking, with a

surprised glance: "Where's Judy?" 



Trenor, a little heated by his unusual flow of words, and

perhaps by prolonged propinquity with the decanters, was bending

over the latter to decipher their silver labels. 



"Here, now, Lily, just a drop of cognac in a little fizzy

water--you do look pinched, you know: I swear the end of your

nose is red. I'll take another glass to keep you

company--Judy?--Why, you see, Judy's got a devil of a head

ache--quite knocked out with it, poor thing--she asked me to

explain--make it all right, you know--Do come up to the fire,

though; you look dead-beat, really. Now do let me make you

comfortable, there's a good girl." 



He had taken her hand, half-banteringly, and was drawing her

toward a low seat by the hearth; but she stopped and freed

herself quietly.



"Do you mean to say that Judy's not well enough to see me?

Doesn't she want me to go upstairs?" 



Trenor drained the glass he had filled for himself, and paused to

set it down before he answered.



"Why, no--the fact is, she's not up to seeing anybody. It came on

suddenly, you know, and she asked me to tell you how awfully

sorry she was--if she'd known where you were dining she'd have

sent you word."



"She did know where I was dining; I mentioned it in my telegram.

But it doesn't matter, of course. I suppose if she's so poorly

she won't go back to Bellomont in the morning, and I can come and

see her then."



"Yes: exactly--that's capital. I'll tell her you'll pop in to

morrow morning. And now do sit down a minute, there's a dear, and

let's have a nice quiet jaw together. You won't take a drop, just

for sociability? Tell me what you think of that cigarette. Why,

don't you like it? What are you chucking it away for?" 



"I am chucking it away because I must go, if you'll have the

goodness to call a cab for me," Lily returned with a smile. 



She did not like Trenor's unusual excitability, with its too

evident explanation, and the thought of being alone with him,

with her friend out of reach upstairs, at the other end of the

great empty house, did not conduce to a desire to prolong their

TETE-A-TETE.



But Trenor, with a promptness which did not escape her, had moved

between herself and the door.



"Why must you go, I should like to know? If Judy'd been here

you'd have sat gossiping till all hours--and you can't even give

me five minutes! It's always the same story. Last night I

couldn't get near you--I went to that damned vulgar party just to

see you, and there was everybody talking about you, and asking me

if I'd ever seen anything so stunning, and when I tried to come

up and say a word, you never took any notice, but just went on

laughing and joking with a lot of asses who only wanted to be

able to swagger about afterward, and look knowing when you were

mentioned." 



He paused, flushed by his diatribe, and fixing on her a look in

which resentment was the ingredient she least disliked. But she

had regained her presence of mind, and stood composedly in the

middle of the room, while her slight smile seemed to put an ever

increasing distance between herself and Trenor. 



Across it she said: "Don't be absurd, Gus. It's past eleven, and

I must really ask you to ring for a cab." 



He remained immovable, with the lowering forehead she had grown

to detest. 



"And supposing I won't ring for one--what'll you do then?" 



"I shall go upstairs to Judy if you force me to disturb her." 



Trenor drew a step nearer and laid his hand on her arm. "Look

here, Lily: won't you give me five minutes of your own accord?" 



"Not tonight, Gus: you---" 



"Very good, then: I'll take 'em. And as many more as I want." He

had squared himself on the threshold, his hands thrust deep in

his pockets. He nodded toward the chair on the hearth. 



"Go and sit down there, please: I've got a word to say to you." 



Lily's quick temper was getting the better of her fears. She drew

herself up and moved toward the door. 



"If you have anything to say to me, you must say it another time.

I shall go up to Judy unless you call a cab for me at once." 



He burst into a laugh. "Go upstairs and welcome, my dear; but you

won't find Judy. She ain't there."



Lily cast a startled look upon him. "Do you mean that Judy is not

in the house--not in town?" she exclaimed. 



"That's just what I do mean," returned Trenor, his bluster

sinking to sullenness under her look. 



"Nonsense--I don't believe you. I am going upstairs," she said

impatiently. 



He drew unexpectedly aside, letting her reach the threshold

unimpeded.



"Go up and welcome; but my wife is at Bellomont." 



But Lily had a flash of reassurance. "If she hadn't come she

would have sent me word---" 



"She did; she telephoned me this afternoon to let you know." 



"I received no message." 



"I didn't send any." 



The two measured each other for a moment, but Lily still saw her

opponent through a blur of scorn that made all other

considerations indistinct. 



"I can't imagine your object in playing such a stupid trick on

me; but if you have fully gratified your peculiar sense of humour

I must again ask you to send for a cab." 



It was the wrong note, and she knew it as she spoke. To be stung

by irony it is not necessary to understand it, and the angry

streaks on Trenor's face might have been raised by an actual

lash. 



"Look here, Lily, don't take that high and mighty tone with me."

He had again moved toward the door, and in her instinctive

shrinking from him she let him regain command of the threshold.

"I DID play a trick on you; I own up to it; but if you think I'm

ashamed you're mistaken. Lord knows I've been patient

enough--I've hung round and looked like an ass. And all the while

you were letting a lot of other fellows make up to you . . .

letting 'em make fun of me, I daresay . . . I'm not sharp, and

can't dress my friends up to look funny, as you do . . . but I

can tell when it's being done to me . . . I can tell fast enough

when I'm made a fool of . . ." 



"Ah, I shouldn't have thought that!" flashed from Lily; but her

laugh dropped to silence under his look. 



"No; you wouldn't have thought it; but you'll know better

now. That's what you're here for tonight. I've been waiting for a

quiet time to talk things over, and now I've got it I mean to

make you hear me out." 



His first rush of inarticulate resentment had been followed by a

steadiness and concentration of tone more disconcerting to Lily

than the excitement preceding it. For a moment her presence of

mind forsook her. She had more than once been in situations where

a quick sword-play of wit had been needful to cover her retreat;

but her frightened heart-throbs told her that here such skill

would not avail. 



To gain time she repeated: "I don't understand what you want." 



Trenor had pushed a chair between herself and the door. He threw

himself in it, and leaned back, looking up at her.



"I'll tell you what I want: I want to know just where you and I

stand. Hang it, the man who pays for the dinner is generally

allowed to have a seat at table." 



She flamed with anger and abasement, and the sickening need of

having to conciliate where she longed to humble. 



"I don't know what you mean--but you must see, Gus, that I can't

stay here talking to you at this hour---"



"Gad, you go to men's houses fast enough in broad day

light--strikes me you're not always so deuced careful of

appearances." 



The brutality of the thrust gave her the sense of dizziness that

follows on a physical blow. Rosedale had spoken then--this was

the way men talked of her--She felt suddenly weak and

defenceless: there was a throb of self-pity in her throat. But

all the while another self was sharpening her to vigilance,

whispering the terrified warning that every word and gesture must

be measured. 



"If you have brought me here to say insulting things---" she

began. 



Trenor laughed. "Don't talk stage-rot. I don't want to insult

you. But a man's got his feelings--and you've played with mine

too long. I didn't begin this business--kept out of the way, and

left the track clear for the other chaps, till you rummaged me

out and set to work to make an ass of me--and an easy job you had

of it, too. That's the trouble--it was too easy for

you--you got reckless--thought you could turn me inside out, and

chuck me in the gutter like an empty purse. But, by gad, that

ain't playing fair: that's dodging the rules of the game. Of

course I know now what you wanted--it wasn't my beautiful eyes

you were after--but I tell you what, Miss Lily, you've got to pay

up for making me think so---" 



He rose, squaring his shoulders aggressively, and stepped toward

her with a reddening brow; but she held her footing, though every

nerve tore at her to retreat as he advanced. 



"Pay up?" she faltered. "Do you mean that I owe you money?" 



He laughed again. "Oh, I'm not asking for payment in kind. But

there's such a thing as fair play--and interest on one's

money--and hang me if I've had as much as a look from you---"



"Your money? What have I to do with your money? You advised me

how to invest mine . . . you must have seen I knew nothing of

business . . . you told me it was all right---"



"It WAS all right--it is, Lily: you're welcome to all of it, and

ten times more. I'm only asking for a word of thanks from you."

He was closer still, with a hand that grew formidable; and the

frightened self in her was dragging the other down. 



"I HAVE thanked you; I've shown I was grateful. What more have

you done than any friend might do, or any one accept from a

friend?" 



Trenor caught her up with a sneer. "I don't doubt you've accepted

as much before--and chucked the other chaps as you'd like to

chuck me. I don't care how you settled your score with them--if

you fooled 'em I'm that much to the good. Don't stare at me like

that--I know I'm not talking the way a man is supposed to talk to

a girl--but, hang it, if you don't like it you can stop me quick

enough--you know I'm mad about you--damn the money, there's

plenty more of it--if THAT bothers you . . . I was a brute,

Lily--Lily!--just look at me---" 



Over and over her the sea of humiliation broke--wave crashing on

wave so close that the moral shame was one with the physical

dread. It seemed to her that self-esteem would have made

her invulnerable--that it was her own dishonour which put a

fearful solitude about her. 
