







Lily's mind had reverted from the intrusive personality of Mr.

Rosedale to the train of thought set in motion by Trenor's first

words. This vast mysterious Wall Street world of "tips" and

"deals"--might she not find in it the means of escape from her

dreary predicament? She had often heard of women making money in

this way through their friends: she had no more notion than most

of her sex of the exact nature of the transaction, and its

vagueness seemed to diminish its indelicacy. She could not,

indeed, imagine herself, in any extremity, stooping to extract a

"tip" from Mr. Rosedale; but at her side was a man in possession

of that precious commodity, and who, as the husband of her

dearest friend, stood to her in a relation of almost fraternal

intimacy. 



In her inmost heart Lily knew it was not by appealing to the

fraternal instinct that she was likely to move Gus Trenor; but

this way of explaining the situation helped to drape its crudity,

and she was always scrupulous about keeping up appearances to

herself. Her personal fastidiousness had a moral equivalent, and

when she made a tour of inspection in her own mind there were

certain closed doors she did not open. 



As they reached the gates of Bellomont she turned to Trenor with

a smile. "The afternoon is so perfect--don't you want to drive me

<p 85> a little farther? I've been rather out of spirits all day,

and it's so restful to be away from people, with some one who

won't mind if I'm a little dull." 



She looked so plaintively lovely as she proffered the request, so

trustfully sure of his sympathy and understanding, that Trenor

felt himself wishing that his wife could see how other women

treated him--not battered wire-pullers like Mrs. Fisher, but a

girl that most men would have given their boots to get such a

look from. 



"Out of spirits? Why on earth should you ever be out of spirits?

Is your last box of Doucet dresses a failure, or did Judy rook

you out of everything at bridge last night?" 



Lily shook her head with a sigh. "I have had to give up Doucet;

and bridge too--I can't afford it. In fact I can't afford any of

the things my friends do, and I am afraid Judy often thinks me a

bore because I don't play cards any longer, and because I am not

as smartly dressed as the other women. But you will think me a

bore too if I talk to you about my worries, and I only mention

them because I want you to do me a favour--the very greatest of

favours." 



Her eyes sought his once more, and she smiled inwardly at the

tinge of apprehension that she read in them. 



"Why, of course--if it's anything I can manage---" He broke off,

and she guessed that his enjoyment was disturbed by the

remembrance of Mrs. Fisher's methods. 



"The greatest of favours," she rejoined gently. "The fact is,

Judy is angry with me, and I want you to make my peace." 



"Angry with you? Oh, come, nonsense---" his relief broke through

in a laugh. "Why, you know she's devoted to you." 



"She is the best friend I have, and that is why I mind having to

vex her. But I daresay you know what she has wanted me to do. She

has set her heart--poor dear--on my marrying--marrying a great

deal of money." 



She paused with a slight falter of embarrassment, and Trenor,

turning abruptly, fixed on her a look of growing intelligence. 



"A great deal of money? Oh, by Jove--you don't mean Gryce?

What--you do? Oh, no, of course I won't mention it--you can trust

me to keep my mouth shut--but Gryce--<p 86> good Lord, GRYCE! Did

Judy really think you could bring yourself to marry that

portentous little ass? But you couldn't, eh? And so you gave him

the sack, and that's the reason why he lit out by the first train

this morning?" He leaned back, spreading himself farther across

the seat, as if dilated by the joyful sense of his own

discernment. "How on earth could Judy think you would do such a

thing? I could have told her you'd never put up with such a

little milksop!" 



Lily sighed more deeply. "I sometimes think," she murmured, "that

men understand a woman's motives better than other women do." 



"Some men--I'm certain of it! I could have TOLD Judy," he

repeated, exulting in the implied superiority over his wife. 



"I thought you would understand; that's why I wanted to speak to

you," Miss Bart rejoined. "I can't make that kind of marriage;

it's impossible. But neither can I go on living as all the women

in my set do. I am almost entirely dependent on my aunt, and

though she is very kind to me she makes me no regular allowance,

and lately I've lost money at cards, and I don't dare tell her

about it. I have paid my card debts, of course, but there is

hardly anything left for my other expenses, and if I go on with

my present life I shall be in horrible difficulties. I have a

tiny income of my own, but I'm afraid it's badly invested, for it

seems to bring in less every year, and I am so ignorant of money

matters that I don't know if my aunt's agent, who looks after it,

is a good adviser." She paused a moment, and added in a lighter

tone: "I didn't mean to bore you with all this, but I want your

help in making Judy understand that I can't, at present, go on

living as one must live among you all. I am going away tomorrow

to join my aunt at Richfield, and I shall stay there for the rest

of the autumn, and dismiss my maid and learn how to mend my own

clothes." 



At this picture of loveliness in distress, the pathos of which

was heightened by the light touch with which it was drawn, a

murmur of indignant sympathy broke from Trenor. Twenty-four hours

earlier, if his wife had consulted him on the subject of Miss

Bart's future, he would have said that a girl with extravagant

tastes and no money had better marry the first rich man she could

get; but with the subject of dis<p 87>cussion at his side,

turning to him for sympathy, making him feel that he understood

her better than her dearest friends, and confirming the assurance

by the appeal of her exquisite nearness, he was ready to swear

that such a marriage was a desecration, and that, as a man of

honour, he was bound to do all he could to protect her from the

results of her disinterestedness. This impulse was reinforced by

the reflection that if she had married Gryce she would have been

surrounded by flattery and approval, whereas, having refused to

sacrifice herself to expediency, she was left to bear the whole

cost of her resistance. Hang it, if he could find a way out of

such difficulties for a professional sponge like Carry Fisher,

who was simply a mental habit corresponding to the physical

titillations of the cigarette or the cock-tail, he could surely

do as much for a girl who appealed to his highest sympathies, and

who brought her troubles to him with the trustfulness of a child.



Trenor and Miss Bart prolonged their drive till long after

sunset; and before it was over he had tried, with some show of

success, to prove to her that, if she would only trust him, he

could make a handsome sum of money for her without endangering

the small amount she possessed. She was too genuinely ignorant of

the manipulations of the stock-market to understand his technical

explanations, or even perhaps to perceive that certain points in

them were slurred; the haziness enveloping the transaction served

as a veil for her embarrassment, and through the general blur her

hopes dilated like lamps in a fog. She understood only that her

modest investments were to be mysteriously multiplied without

risk to herself; and the assurance that this miracle would take

place within a short time, that there would be no tedious

interval for suspense and reaction, relieved her of her lingering

scruples. 



Again she felt the lightening of her load, and with it the

release of repressed activities. Her immediate worries conjured,

it was easy to resolve that she would never again find herself in

such straits, and as the need of economy and self-denial receded

from her foreground she felt herself ready to meet any other

demand which life might make. Even the immediate one of letting

Trenor, as they drove homeward, lean a little nearer and

rest his hand reassuringly on hers, cost her only a momentary

shiver of reluctance. It was part of the game to make him feel

that her appeal had been an uncalculated impulse, provoked by the

liking he inspired; and the renewed sense of power in handling

men, while it consoled her wounded vanity, helped also to obscure

the thought of the claim at which his manner hinted. He was a

coarse dull man who, under all his show of authority, was a mere

supernumerary in the costly show for which his money paid:

surely, to a clever girl, it would be easy to hold him by his

vanity, and so keep the obligation on his side. 



The first thousand dollar cheque which Lily received with a

blotted scrawl from Gus Trenor strengthened her self-confidence

in the exact degree to which it effaced her debts.



The transaction had justified itself by its results: she saw now

how absurd it would have been to let any primitive scruple

deprive her of this easy means of appeasing her creditors. Lily

felt really virtuous as she dispensed the sum in sops to her

tradesmen, and the fact that a fresh order accompanied each

payment did not lessen her sense of disinterestedness. How many

women, in her place, would have given the orders without making

the payment!



She had found it reassuringly easy to keep Trenor in a good

humour. To listen to his stories, to receive his confidences and

laugh at his jokes, seemed for the moment all that was required

of her, and the complacency with which her hostess regarded these

attentions freed them of the least hint of ambiguity. Mrs. Trenor

evidently assumed that Lily's growing intimacy with her husband

was simply an indirect way of returning her own kindness.



"I'm so glad you and Gus have become such good friends," she said

approvingly. "It's too delightful of you to be so nice to him,

and put up with all his tiresome stories. I know what they are,

because I had to listen to them when we were engaged--I'm sure he

is telling the same ones still. And now I shan't always have to

be asking Carry Fisher here to keep him in a good-humour. She's a

perfect vulture, you know; and she hasn't the least moral sense.

She is always getting Gus to speculate for her, and I'm sure she

never pays when she loses."



Miss Bart could shudder at this state of things without the

embarrassment of a personal application. Her own position was

surely quite different. There could be no question of her not

paying when she lost, since Trenor had assured her that she was

certain not to lose. In sending her the cheque he had explained

that he had made five thousand for her out of Rosedale's "tip,"

and had put four thousand back in the same venture, as

there was the promise of another "big rise"; she understood

therefore that he was now speculating with her own money, and

that she consequently owed him no more than the gratitude which

such a trifling service demanded. She vaguely supposed that, to

raise the first sum, he had borrowed on her securities; but this

was a point over which her curiosity did not linger. It was

concentrated, for the moment, on the probable date of the next

"big rise."



The news of this event was received by her some weeks later, on

the occasion of Jack Stepney's marriage to Miss Van Osburgh. As a

cousin of the bridegroom, Miss Bart had been asked to act as

bridesmaid; but she had declined on the plea that, since she was

much taller than the other attendant virgins, her presence might

mar the symmetry of the group. The truth was, she had attended

too many brides to the altar: when next seen there she meant to

be the chief figure in the ceremony. She knew the pleasantries

made at the expense of young girls who have been too long before

the public, and she was resolved to avoid such assumptions of

youthfulness as might lead people to think her older than she

really was.



The Van Osburgh marriage was celebrated in the village church

near the paternal estate on the Hudson. It was the "simple

country wedding" to which guests are convoyed in special trains,

and from which the hordes of the uninvited have to be fended off

by the intervention of the police. While these sylvan rites were

taking place, in a church packed with fashion and festooned with

orchids, the representatives of the press were threading their

way, note-book in hand, through the labyrinth of wedding

presents, and the agent of a cinematograph syndicate was setting

up his apparatus at the church door. It was the kind of scene in

which Lily had often pictured herself as taking the principal

part, and on this occasion the fact that she was once more merely

a casual spectator, instead of the mystically veiled figure

occupying the centre of attention, strengthened her resolve to

assume the latter part before the year was over. The fact that

her immediate anxieties were relieved did not blind her to a

possibility of their recurrence; it merely gave her enough

buoyancy to rise once more above her doubts and feel a renewed

faith in her beauty, her power, and her general fitness to

attract a brilliant destiny. It could not be that one

conscious of such aptitudes for mastery and enjoyment was doomed

to a perpetuity of failure; and her mistakes looked easily

reparable in the light of her restored self-confidence.



A special appositeness was given to these reflections by the

discovery, in a neighbouring pew, of the serious profile and

neatly-trimmed beard of Mr. Percy Gryce. There was something

almost bridal in his own aspect: his large white gardenia had a

symbolic air that struck Lily as a good omen. After all, seen in

an assemblage of his kind he was not ridiculous-looking: a

friendly critic might have called his heaviness weighty, and he

was at his best in the attitude of vacant passivity which brings

out the oddities of the restless. She fancied he was the kind of

man whose sentimental associations would be stirred by the

conventional imagery of a wedding, and she pictured herself, in

the seclusion of the Van Osburgh conservatories, playing

skillfully upon sensibilities thus prepared for her touch. In

fact, when she looked at the other women about her, and recalled

the image she had brought away from her own glass, it did not

seem as though any special skill would be needed to repair her

blunder and bring him once more to her feet.



The sight of Selden's dark head, in a pew almost facing her,

disturbed for a moment the balance of her complacency. The rise

of her blood as their eyes met was succeeded by a contrary

motion, a wave of resistance and withdrawal. She did not wish to

see him again, not because she feared his influence, but because

his presence always had the effect of cheapening her aspirations,

of throwing her whole world out of focus. Besides, he was a

living reminder of the worst mistake in her career, and the fact

that he had been its cause did not soften her feelings toward

him. She could still imagine an ideal state of existence in

which, all else being superadded, intercourse with Selden might

be the last touch of luxury; but in the world as it was, such a

privilege was likely to cost more than it was worth.



"Lily, dear, I never saw you look so lovely! You look as if

something delightful had just happened to you!"



The young lady who thus formulated her admiration of her

brilliant friend did not, in her own person, suggest such

happy possibilities. Miss Gertrude Farish, in fact, typified the

mediocre and the ineffectual. If there were compensating

qualities in her wide frank glance and the freshness of her

smile, these were qualities which only the sympathetic observer

would perceive before noticing that her eyes were of a workaday

grey and her lips without haunting curves. Lily's own view of her

wavered between pity for her limitations and impatience at her

cheerful acceptance of them. To Miss Bart, as to her mother,

acquiescence in dinginess was evidence of stupidity; and there

were moments when, in the consciousness of her own power to look

and to be so exactly what the occasion required, she almost felt

that other girls were plain and inferior from choice. Certainly

no one need have confessed such acquiescence in her lot as was

revealed in the "useful" colour of Gerty Farish's gown and the

subdued lines of her hat: it is almost as stupid to let your

clothes betray that you know you are ugly as to have them

proclaim that you think you are beautiful.



Of course, being fatally poor and dingy, it was wise of Gerty to

have taken up philanthropy and symphony concerts; but there was

something irritating in her assumption that existence yielded no

higher pleasures, and that one might get as much interest and

excitement out of life in a cramped flat as in the splendours of

the Van Osburgh establishment. Today, however, her chirping

enthusiasms did not irritate Lily. They seemed only to throw her

own exceptionalness into becoming relief, and give a soaring

vastness to her scheme of life.



"Do let us go and take a peep at the presents before everyone

else leaves the dining-room!" suggested Miss Farish, linking her

arm in her friend's. It was characteristic of her to take a

sentimental and unenvious interest in all the details of a

wedding: she was the kind of person who always kept her

handkerchief out during the service, and departed clutching a box

of wedding-cake.



"Isn't everything beautifully done?" she pursued, as they entered

the distant drawing-room assigned to the display of Miss Van

Osburgh's bridal spoils. "I always say no one does things better

than cousin Grace! Did you ever taste anything more delicious

than that MOUSSE of lobster with champagne sauce? I made up my

mind weeks ago that I wouldn't miss this wedding, and just

fancy how delightfully it all came about. When Lawrence Selden

heard I was coming, he insisted on fetching me himself and

driving me to the station, and when we go back this evening I am

to dine with him at Sherry's. I really feel as excited as if I

were getting married myself!"



Lily smiled: she knew that Selden had always been kind to his

dull cousin, and she had sometimes wondered why he wasted so much

time in such an unremunerative manner; but now the thought gave

her a vague pleasure.



"Do you see him often?" she asked.



"Yes; he is very good about dropping in on Sundays. And now and

then we do a play together; but lately I haven't seen much of

him. He doesn't look well, and he seems nervous and unsettled.

The dear fellow! I do wish he would marry some nice girl. I told

him so today, but he said he didn't care for the really nice

ones, and the other kind didn't care for him--but that was just

his joke, of course. He could never marry a girl who WASN'T nice.

Oh, my dear, did you ever see such pearls?"



They had paused before the table on which the bride's jewels were

displayed, and Lily's heart gave an envious throb as she caught

the refraction of light from their surfaces--the milky gleam of

perfectly matched pearls, the flash of rubies relieved against

contrasting velvet, the intense blue rays of sapphires kindled

into light by surrounding diamonds: all these precious tints

enhanced and deepened by the varied art of their setting. The

glow of the stones warmed Lily's veins like wine. More completely

than any other expression of wealth they symbolized the life she

longed to lead, the life of fastidious aloofness and refinement

in which every detail should have the finish of a jewel, and the

whole form a harmonious setting to her own jewel-like rareness.



"Oh, Lily, do look at this diamond pendant--it's as big as a

dinner-plate! Who can have given it?" Miss Farish bent

short-sightedly over the accompanying card. "MR. SIMON ROSEDALE.

What, that horrid man? Oh, yes--I remember he's a friend of

Jack's, and I suppose cousin Grace had to ask him here today; but

she must rather hate having to let Gwen accept such a present

from him." 



Lily smiled. She doubted Mrs. Van Osburgh's reluctance, but was

aware of Miss Farish's habit of ascribing her own delicacies of

feeling to the persons least likely to be encumbered by them.



"Well, if Gwen doesn't care to be seen wearing it she can always

exchange it for something else," she remarked.



"Ah, here is something so much prettier," Miss Farish continued.

"Do look at this exquisite white sapphire. I'm sure the person

who chose it must have taken particular pains. What is the name?

Percy Gryce? Ah, then I'm not surprised!" She smiled

significantly as she replaced the card. "Of course you've heard

that he's perfectly devoted to Evie Van Osburgh? Cousin Grace is

so pleased about it--it's quite a romance! He met her first at

the George Dorsets', only about six weeks ago, and it's just the

nicest possible marriage for dear Evie. Oh, I don't mean the

money--of course she has plenty of her own--but she's such a

quiet stay-at-home kind of girl, and it seems he has just the

same tastes; so they are exactly suited to each other."



Lily stood staring vacantly at the white sapphire on its velvet

bed. Evie Van Osburgh and Percy Gryce? The names rang derisively

through her brain. EVIE VAN OSBURGH? The youngest, dumpiest,

dullest of the four dull and dumpy daughters whom Mrs. Van

Osburgh, with unsurpassed astuteness, had "placed" one by one in

enviable niches of existence! Ah, lucky girls who grow up in the

shelter of a mother's love--a mother who knows how to contrive

opportunities without conceding favours, how to take advantage of

propinquity without allowing appetite to be dulled by habit! The

cleverest girl may miscalculate where her own interests are

concerned, may yield too much at one moment and withdraw too far

at the next: it takes a mother's unerring vigilance and foresight

to land her daughters safely in the arms of wealth and

suitability.



Lily's passing light-heartedness sank beneath a renewed sense of

failure. Life was too stupid, too blundering! Why should Percy

Gryce's millions be joined to another great fortune, why should

this clumsy girl be put in possession of powers she would never

know how to use?



She was roused from these speculations by a familiar touch

on her arm, and turning saw Gus Trenor beside her. She felt a

thrill of vexation: what right had he to touch her? Luckily Gerty

Farish had wandered off to the next table, and they were alone.



Trenor, looking stouter than ever in his tight frock-coat, and

unbecomingly flushed by the bridal libations, gazed at her with

undisguised approval.



"By Jove, Lily, you do look a stunner!" He had slipped insensibly

into the use of her Christian name, and she had never found the

right moment to correct him. Besides, in her set all the men and

women called each other by their Christian names; it was only on

Trenor's lips that the familiar address had an unpleasant

significance.



"Well," he continued, still jovially impervious to her annoyance,

"have you made up your mind which of these little trinkets you

mean to duplicate at Tiffany's tomorrow? I've got a cheque for

you in my pocket that will go a long way in that line!"



Lily gave him a startled look: his voice was louder than usual,

and the room was beginning to fill with people. But as her glance

assured her that they were still beyond ear-shot a sense of


pleasure replaced her apprehension.



"Another dividend?" she asked, smiling and drawing near him in

the desire not to be overheard.



"Well, not exactly: I sold out on the rise and I've pulled off

four thou' for you. Not so bad for a beginner, eh? I suppose

you'll begin to think you're a pretty knowing speculator. And

perhaps you won't think poor old Gus such an awful ass as some

people do."



"I think you the kindest of friends; but I can't thank you

properly now." 



She let her eyes shine into his with a look that made up for the

hand-clasp he would have claimed if they had been alone--and how

glad she was that they were not! The news filled her with the

glow produced by a sudden cessation of physical pain. The world

was not so stupid and blundering after all: now and then a stroke

of luck came to the unluckiest. At the thought her spirits began

to rise: it was characteristic of her that one trifling piece of

good fortune should give wings to all her hopes. Instantly came

the reflection that Percy Gryce was not irretrievably

lost; and she smiled to think of the excitement of recapturing

him from Evie Van Osburgh. What chance could such a simpleton

have against her if she chose to exert herself? She glanced

about, hoping to catch a glimpse of Gryce; but her eyes lit

instead on the glossy countenance of Mr. Rosedale, who was

slipping through the crowd with an air half obsequious, half

obtrusive, as though, the moment his presence was recognized, it

would swell to the dimensions of the room.



Not wishing to be the means of effecting this enlargement, Lily

quickly transferred her glance to Trenor, to whom the expression

of her gratitude seemed not to have brought the complete

gratification she had meant it to give.



"Hang thanking me--I don't want to be thanked, but I SHOULD like

the chance to say two words to you now and then," he grumbled. "I

thought you were going to spend the whole autumn with us, and

I've hardly laid eyes on you for the last month. Why can't you

come back to Bellomont this evening? We're all alone, and Judy is

as cross as two sticks. Do come and cheer a fellow up. If you say

yes I'll run you over in the motor, and you can telephone your

maid to bring your traps from town by the next train."



Lily shook her head with a charming semblance of regret. "I wish

I could--but it's quite impossible. My aunt has come back to

town, and I must be with her for the next few days."



"Well, I've seen a good deal less of you since we've got to be

such pals than I used to when you were Judy's friend," he

continued with unconscious penetration.



"When I was Judy's friend? Am I not her friend still? Really, you

say the most absurd things! If I were always at Bellomont you

would tire of me much sooner than Judy--but come and see me at my

aunt's the next afternoon you are in town; then we can have a

nice quiet talk, and you can tell me how I had better invest my

fortune."



It was true that, during the last three or four weeks, she had

absented herself from Bellomont on the pretext of having other

visits to pay; but she now began to feel that the reckoning she

had thus contrived to evade had rolled up interest in the

interval.



The prospect of the nice quiet talk did not appear as all-<p

97>sufficing to Trenor as she had hoped, and his brows continued

to lower as he said: "Oh, I don't know that I can promise you a

fresh tip every day. But there's one thing you might do for me;

and that is, just to be a little civil to Rosedale. Judy has

promised to ask him to dine when we get to town, but I can't

induce her to have him at Bellomont, and if you would let me

bring him up now it would make a lot of difference. I don't

believe two women have spoken to him this afternoon, and I can

tell you he's a chap it pays to be decent to."



Miss Bart made an impatient movement, but suppressed the words

which seemed about to accompany it. After all, this was an

unexpectedly easy way of acquitting her debt; and had she not

reasons of her own for wishing to be civil to Mr. Rosedale?



"Oh, bring him by all means," she said smiling; "perhaps I can

get a tip out of him on my own account."



Trenor paused abruptly, and his eyes fixed themselves on hers

with a look which made her change colour.



"I say, you know--you'll please remember he's a blooming

bounder," he said; and with a slight laugh she turned toward the

open window near which they had been standing.



The throng in the room had increased, and she felt a desire for

space and fresh air. Both of these she found on the terrace,

where only a few men were lingering over cigarettes and liqueur,

while scattered couples strolled across the lawn to the

autumn-tinted borders of the flower-garden.



As she emerged, a man moved toward her from the knot of smokers,

and she found herself face to face with Selden. The stir of the

pulses which his nearness always caused was increased by a slight

sense of constraint. They had not met since their Sunday

afternoon walk at Bellomont, and that episode was still so vivid

to her that she could hardly believe him to be less conscious of

it. But his greeting expressed no more than the satisfaction

which every pretty woman expects to see reflected in masculine

eyes; and the discovery, if distasteful to her vanity, was

reassuring to her nerves. Between the relief of her escape from

Trenor, and the vague apprehension of her meeting with Rosedale,

it was pleasant to rest a moment on the sense of complete

understanding which Lawrence Selden's manner always conveyed.



"This is luck," he said smiling. "I was wondering if I should be

able to have a word with you before the special snatches us away.

I came with Gerty Farish, and promised not to let her miss the

train, but I am sure she is still extracting sentimental solace

from the wedding presents. She appears to regard their number and

value as evidence of the disinterested affection of the

contracting parties."



There was not the least trace of embarrassment in his voice, and

as he spoke, leaning slightly against the jamb of the window, and

letting his eyes rest on her in the frank enjoyment of her grace,

she felt with a faint chill of regret that he had gone back

without an effort to the footing on which they had stood before

their last talk together. Her vanity was stung by the sight of

his unscathed smile. She longed to be to him something more than

a piece of sentient prettiness, a passing diversion to his eye

and brain; and the longing betrayed itself in her reply.



"Ah," she said, "I envy Gerty that power she has of dressing up

with romance all our ugly and prosaic arrangements! I have never

recovered my self-respect since you showed me how poor and

unimportant my ambitions were."



The words were hardly spoken when she realized their infelicity.

It seemed to be her fate to appear at her worst to Selden.



"I thought, on the contrary," he returned lightly, "that I had

been the means of proving they were more important to you than

anything else."



It was as if the eager current of her being had been checked by a

sudden obstacle which drove it back upon itself. She looked at

him helplessly, like a hurt or frightened child: this real self

of hers, which he had the faculty of drawing out of the depths,

was so little accustomed to go alone!



The appeal of her helplessness touched in him, as it always did,

a latent chord of inclination. It would have meant nothing to him

to discover that his nearness made her more brilliant, but this

glimpse of a twilight mood to which he alone had the clue seemed

once more to set him in a world apart with her.



"At least you can't think worse things of me than you say!" she

exclaimed with a trembling laugh; but before he could

answer, the flow of comprehension between them was abruptly

stayed by the reappearance of Gus Trenor, who advanced with Mr.

Rosedale in his wake.



"Hang it, Lily, I thought you'd given me the slip: Rosedale and I

have been hunting all over for you!"



His voice had a note of conjugal familiarity: Miss Bart fancied

she detected in Rosedale's eye a twinkling perception of the

fact, and the idea turned her dislike of him to repugnance.



She returned his profound bow with a slight nod, made more

disdainful by the sense of Selden's surprise that she should

number Rosedale among her acquaintances. Trenor had turned away,

and his companion continued to stand before Miss Bart, alert and

expectant, his lips parted in a smile at whatever she might be

about to say, and his very back conscious of the privilege of

being seen with her.



It was the moment for tact; for the quick bridging over of gaps;

but Selden still leaned against the window, a detached observer

of the scene, and under the spell of his observation Lily felt

herself powerless to exert her usual arts. The dread of Selden's

suspecting that there was any need for her to propitiate such a

man as Rosedale checked the trivial phrases of politeness.

Rosedale still stood before her in an expectant attitude, and she

continued to face him in silence, her glance just level with his

polished baldness. The look put the finishing touch to what her

silence implied.



He reddened slowly, shifting from one foot to the other, fingered

the plump black pearl in his tie, and gave a nervous twist to his

moustache; then, running his eye over her, he drew back, and

said, with a side-glance at Selden: "Upon my soul, I never saw a

more ripping get-up. Is that the last creation of the dress-maker

you go to see at the Benedick? If so, I wonder all the other

women don't go to her too!"



The words were projected sharply against Lily's silence, and she

saw in a flash that her own act had given them their emphasis. In

ordinary talk they might have passed unheeded; but following on

her prolonged pause they acquired a special meaning. She felt,

without looking, that Selden had immediately seized it, and would

inevitably connect the allusion with her visit to himself. The

consciousness increased her irritation against Rosedale, but also

her feeling that now, if ever, was the moment to

propitiate him, hateful as it was to do so in Selden's presence.



"How do you know the other women don't go to my dress-maker?" she

returned. "You see I'm not afraid to give her address to my

friends!" 



Her glance and accent so plainly included Rosedale in this

privileged circle that his small eyes puckered with

gratification, and a knowing smile drew up his moustache.



"By Jove, you needn't be!" he declared. "You could give 'em the

whole outfit and win at a canter!"



"Ah, that's nice of you; and it would be nicer still if you would

carry me off to a quiet corner, and get me a glass of lemonade or

some innocent drink before we all have to rush for the train."



She turned away as she spoke, letting him strut at her side

through the gathering groups on the terrace, while every nerve in

her throbbed with the consciousness of what Selden must have

thought of the scene. 



But under her angry sense of the perverseness of things, and the

light surface of her talk with Rosedale, a third idea persisted:

she did not mean to leave without an attempt to discover the

truth about Percy Gryce. Chance, or perhaps his own resolve, had

kept them apart since his hasty withdrawal from Bellomont; but

Miss Bart was an expert in making the most of the unexpected, and

the distasteful incidents of the last few minutes--the revelation

to Selden of precisely that part of her life which she most

wished him to ignore--increased her longing for shelter, for

escape from such humiliating contingencies. Any definite

situation would be more tolerable than this buffeting of chances,

which kept her in an attitude of uneasy alertness toward every

possibility of life.



Indoors there was a general sense of dispersal in the air, as of

an audience gathering itself up for departure after the principal

actors had left the stage; but among the remaining groups, Lily

could discover neither Gryce nor the youngest Miss Van Osburgh.

That both should be missing struck her with foreboding; and she

charmed Mr. Rosedale by proposing that they should make their way

to the conservatories at the farther end of the house. There were

just enough people left in the long suite of rooms to make their

progress con<p 101>spicuous, and Lily was aware of being followed

by looks of amusement and interrogation, which glanced off as

harmlessly from her indifference as from her companion's

self-satisfaction. She cared very little at that moment about

being seen with Rosedale: all her thoughts were centred on the

object of her search. The latter, however, was not discoverable

in the conservatories, and Lily, oppressed by a sudden conviction

of failure, was casting about for a way to rid herself of her now

superfluous companion, when they came upon Mrs. Van Osburgh,

flushed and exhausted, but beaming with the consciousness of duty

performed.



She glanced at them a moment with the benign but vacant eye of

the tired hostess, to whom her guests have become mere whirling

spots in a kaleidoscope of fatigue; then her attention became

suddenly fixed, and she seized on Miss Bart with a confidential

gesture. "My dear Lily, I haven't had time for a word with you,

and now I suppose you are just off. Have you seen Evie? She's

been looking everywhere for you: she wanted to tell you her

little secret; but I daresay you have guessed it already. The

engagement is not to be announced till next week--but you are

such a friend of Mr. Gryce's that they both wished you to be the

first to know of their happiness."



In Mrs. Peniston's youth, fashion had returned to town in

October; therefore on the tenth day of the month the blinds of

her Fifth Avenue residence were drawn up, and the eyes of the

Dying Gladiator in bronze who occupied the drawing-room window

resumed their survey of that deserted thoroughfare. 



The first two weeks after her return represented to Mrs. Peniston

the domestic equivalent of a religious retreat. She "went

through" the linen and blankets in the precise spirit of the

penitent exploring the inner folds of conscience; she sought for

moths as the stricken soul seeks for lurking infirmities. The

topmost shelf of every closet was made to yield up its secret,

cellar and coal-bin were probed to their darkest depths and, as a

final stage in the lustral rites, the entire house was swathed in

penitential white and deluged with expiatory soapsuds. 



It was on this phase of the proceedings that Miss Bart entered on

the afternoon of her return from the Van Osburgh wedding. The

journey back to town had not been calculated to soothe her

nerves. Though Evie Van Osburgh's engagement was still officially

a secret, it was one of which the innumerable intimate friends of

the family were already possessed; and the trainful of returning

guests buzzed with allusions and anticipations. Lily was acutely

aware of her own part in this drama of innuendo: she knew the

exact quality of the amusement the situation evoked. The crude

forms in which her friends took their pleasure included a loud

enjoyment of such complications: the zest of surprising destiny

in the act of playing a practical joke. Lily knew well enough how

to bear herself in difficult situations. She had, to a shade, the

exact manner between victory and defeat: every insinuation was

shed without an effort by the bright indifference of her manner.

But she was beginning to feel the strain of the attitude; the

reaction was more rapid, and she lapsed to a deeper self-disgust.





As was always the case with her, this moral repulsion found a

physical outlet in a quickened distaste for her surroundings.

She revolted from the complacent ugliness of Mrs. Peniston's

black walnut, from the slippery gloss of the vestibule tiles,

and the mingled odour of sapolio and furniture-polish that

met her at the door. 



The stairs were still carpetless, and on the way up to her room

she was arrested on the landing by an encroaching tide of

soapsuds. Gathering up her skirts, she drew aside with an

impatient gesture; and as she did so she had the odd sensation of

having already found herself in the same situation but in

different surroundings. It seemed to her that she was again

descending the staircase from Selden's rooms; and looking down to

remonstrate with the dispenser of the soapy flood, she found

herself met by a lifted stare which had once before confronted

her under similar circumstances. It was the char-woman of the

Benedick who, resting on crimson elbows, examined her with the

same unflinching curiosity, the same apparent reluctance to let

her pass. On this occasion, however, Miss Bart was on her own

ground. 



"Don't you see that I wish to go by? Please move your pail," she

said sharply. 



The woman at first seemed not to hear; then, without a word of

excuse, she pushed back her pail and dragged a wet floor-cloth

across the landing, keeping her eyes fixed on Lily while the

latter swept by. It was insufferable that Mrs. Peniston should

have such creatures about the house; and Lily entered her room

resolved that the woman should be dismissed that evening. 



Mrs. Peniston, however, was at the moment inaccessible to

remonstrance: since early morning she had been shut up with her

maid, going over her furs, a process which formed the culminating

episode in the drama of household renovation. In the evening also

Lily found herself alone, for her aunt, who rarely dined out, had

responded to the summons of a Van Alstyne cousin who was passing

through town. The house, in its state of unnatural immaculateness

and order, was as dreary as a tomb, and as Lily, turning from her

brief repast between shrouded sideboards, wandered into the

newly-uncovered glare of the drawing-room she felt as though she

were buried alive in the stifling limits of Mrs. Peniston's

existence.



She usually contrived to avoid being at home during the season of

domestic renewal. On the present occasion, however, a variety of

reasons had combined to bring her to town; and foremost among

them was the fact that she had fewer invitations than usual for

the autumn. She had so long been accustomed to pass from one

country-house to another, till the close of the holidays brought

her friends to town, that the unfilled gaps of time confronting

her produced a sharp sense of waning popularity. It was as she

had said to Selden--people were tired of her. They would welcome

her in a new character, but as Miss Bart they knew her by heart.

She knew herself by heart too, and was sick of the old story.

There were moments when she longed blindly for anything

different, anything strange, remote and untried; but the utmost

reach of her imagination did not go beyond picturing her usual

life in a new setting. She could not figure herself as anywhere

but in a drawing-room, diffusing elegance as a flower sheds

perfume. 



Meanwhile, as October advanced she had to face the alternative of

returning to the Trenors or joining her aunt in town. Even the

desolating dulness of New York in October, and the soapy

discomforts of Mrs. Peniston's interior, seemed preferable to

what might await her at Bellomont; and with an air of heroic

devotion she announced her intention of remaining with her

aunt till the holidays. 



Sacrifices of this nature are sometimes received with feelings as

mixed as those which actuate them; and Mrs. Peniston remarked to

her confidential maid that, if any of the family were to be with

her at such a crisis (though for forty years she had been thought

competent to see to the hanging of her own curtains), she would

certainly have preferred Miss Grace to Miss Lily. Grace Stepney

was an obscure cousin, of adaptable manners and vicarious

interests, who "ran in" to sit with Mrs. Peniston when Lily dined

out too continuously; who played bezique, picked up dropped

stitches, read out the deaths from the Times, and sincerely

admired the purple satin drawing-room curtains, the Dying

Gladiator in the window, and the seven-by-five painting of

Niagara which represented the one artistic excess of Mr.

Peniston's temperate career. 



Mrs. Peniston, under ordinary circumstances, was as much

bored by her excellent cousin as the recipient of such services

usually is by the person who performs them. She greatly preferred

the brilliant and unreliable Lily, who did not know one end of a

crochet-needle from the other, and had frequently wounded her

susceptibilities by suggesting that the drawing-room should be

"done over." But when it came to hunting for missing napkins, or

helping to decide whether the backstairs needed re-carpeting,

Grace's judgment was certainly sounder than Lily's: not to

mention the fact that the latter resented the smell of beeswax

and brown soap, and behaved as though she thought a house ought

to keep clean of itself, without extraneous assistance. 



Seated under the cheerless blaze of the drawing-room

chandelier--Mrs. Peniston never lit the lamps unless there was

"company"--Lily seemed to watch her own figure retreating down

vistas of neutral-tinted dulness to a middle age like Grace

Stepney's. When she ceased to amuse Judy Trenor and her friends

she would have to fall back on amusing Mrs. Peniston; whichever

way she looked she saw only a future of servitude to the whims of

others, never the possibility of asserting her own eager

individuality. 
