




		CHAPTER TWENTY-SECOND.

	Most righteous judge! a sentence.---Come, prepare.
					Merchant of Venice.


  It is by no means my intention to describe minutely the forms
of a Scottish criminal trial, nor am I sure that I could draw up
an account so intelligible and accurate as to abide the criticism
of the gentlemen of the long robe. It is enough to say that the
jury was impanelled, and the case proceeded. The prisoner was
again required to plead to the charge, and she again replied,
``Not Guilty,'' in the same heart-thrilling tone as before.

  The crown counsel then called two or three female witnesses,
by whose testimony it was established, that Effie's situation had
been remarked by them, that they had taxed her with the fact,
and that her answers had amounted to an angry and petulant
denial of what they charged her with. But, as very frequently
happens, the declaration of the panel or accused party herself
was the evidence which bore hardest upon her case.

  In the event of these tales ever finding their way across the
Border, it may be proper to apprise the southern reader that it
is the practice in Scotland, on apprehending a suspected person,
to subject him to a judicial examination before a magistrate.
He is not compelled to answer any of the questions asked of
him, but may remain silent if he sees it his interest to do so.
But whatever answers he chooses to give are formally written
down, and being subscribed by himself and the magistrate, are
produced against the accused in case of his being brought to
trial. It is true, that these declarations are not produced as
being in themselves evidence properly so called, but only as
adminicles of testimony, tending to corroborate what is considered
as legal and proper evidence. Notwithstanding this
nice distinction, however, introduced by lawyers to reconcile
this procedure to their own general rule, that a man cannot be
required to bear witness against himself, it nevertheless usually
happens that these declarations become the means of condemning
the accused, as it were, out of their own mouths.
The prisoner, upon these previous examinations, has indeed the
privilege of remaining silent if he pleases; but every man
necessarily feels that a refusal to answer natural and pertinent
interrogatories, put by judicial authority, is in itself a strong
proof of guilt, and will certainly lead to his being committed to
prison; and few can renounce the hope of obtaining liberty by
giving some specious account of themselves, and showing apparent
frankness in explaining their motives and accounting for
their conduct. It, therefore, seldom happens that the prisoner
refuses to give a judicial declaration, in which, nevertheless,
either by letting out too much of the truth, or by endeavouring
to substitute a fictitious story, he almost always exposes himself
to suspicion and to contradictions, which weigh heavily in the
minds of the jury.

  The declaration of Effie Deans was uttered on other principles,
and the following is a sketch of its contents, given in the
judicial form, in which they may still be found in the Books of
Adjournal.

  The declarant admitted a criminal intrigue with an individual
whose name she desired to conceal. ``Being interrogated,
what her reason was for secrecy on this point? She
declared, that she had no right to blame that person's conduct
more than she did her own, and that she was willing to confess
her own faults, but not to say anything which might criminate
the absent. Interrogated, if she confessed her situation to any
one, or made any preparation for her confinement? Declares,
she did not. And being interrogated, why she forbore to take
steps which her situation so peremptorily required? Declares,
she was ashamed to tell her friends, and she trusted the person
she has mentioned would provide for her and the infant.
Interrogated if he did so? Declares, that he did not do so personally;
but that it was not his fault, for that the declarant is
convinced he would have laid down his life sooner than the
bairn or she had come to harm. Interrogated, what prevented
him from keeping his promise? Declares, that it was impossible
for him to do so, he being under trouble at the time, and
declines farther answer to this question. Interrogated, where
she was from the period she left her master, Mr. Saddletree's
family, until her appearance at her father's, at St. Leonard's,
the day before she was apprehended? Declares, she does not
remember. And, on the interrogatory being repeated, declares,
she does not mind muckle about it, for she was very ill. On
the question being again repeated, she declares, she will tell
the truth, if it should be the undoing of her, so long as she
is not asked to tell on other folk; and admits, that she passed
that interval of time in the lodging of a woman, an acquaintance
of that person who had wished her to that place to be
delivered, and that she was there delivered accordingly of a
male child. Interrogated, what was the name of that person?
Declares and refuses to answer this question. Interrogated,
where she lives? Declares, she has no certainty, for that she
was taken to the lodging aforesaid under cloud of night.
Interrogated, if the lodging was in the city or suburbs? Declares
and refuses to answer that question. Interrogated,
whether, when she left the house of Mr. Saddletree, she went
up or down the street? Declares and refuses to answer the
question. Interrogated, whether she had ever seen the woman
before she was wished to her, as she termed it, by the person
whose name she refuses to answer? Declares and replies, not
to her knowledge. Interrogated, whether this woman was
introduced to her by the said person verbally, or by word of
mouth? Declares, she has no freedom to answer this question.
Interrogated, if the child was alive when it was born? Declares,
that---God help her and it!---it certainly was alive.
Interrogated, if it died a natural death after birth? Declares,
not to her knowledge. Interrogated, where it now is? Declares,
she would give her right hand to ken, but that she never hopes
to see mair than the banes of it. And being interrogated, why
she supposes it is now dead? the declarant wept bitterly and
made no answer. Interrogated, if the woman, in whose lodging
she was, seemed to be a fit person to be with her in that situation?
Declares, she might  be fit enough for skill, but that she
was an hardhearted bad woman. Interrogated, if there was
any other person in the lodging excepting themselves two?
Declares, that she thinks there was another woman; but her
head was so carried with pain of body and trouble of mind,
that she minded her very little. Interrogated, when the child
was taken away from her? Declared that she fell in a fever,
and was light-headed, and when she came to her own mind, the
woman told her the bairn was dead; and that the declarant
answered, if it was dead it had had foul play. That, thereupon,
the woman was very sair on her, and gave her much ill
language; and that the deponent was frightened, and crawled
out of the house when her back was turned, and went home to
Saint Leonard's Crags, as well as a woman in her condition
dought.<*> Interrogated, why she did not tell her story to her

* _i.e._ Was able to do.

sister and father, and get force to search the house for her
child, dead or alive? Declares, it was her purpose to do so, but
she had not time. Interrogated, why she now conceals the
name of the woman, and the place of her abode? The declarant
remained silent for a time, and then said, that to do so could
not repair the skaith that was done, but might be the occasion
of more. Interrogated, whether she had herself, at any time,
had any purpose of putting away the child by violence? Declares,
never; so might God be merciful to her---and then
again declares, never, when she was in her perfect senses; but
what bad thoughts the Enemy might put into her brain when
she was out of herself, she cannot answer. And again solemnly
interrogated, declares, that she would have been drawn with
wild horses, rather than have touched the bairn with an unmotherly
hand. Interrogated, declares, that among the ill-language
the woman gave her, she did say sure enough that
the declarant had hurt the bairn when she was in the brain
fever; but that the declarant does not believe that she said this
from any other cause than to frighten her, and make her be
silent. Interrogated, what else the woman said to her? Declares,
that when the declarant cried loud for her bairn, and
was like to raise the neighbours, the woman threatened her,
that they that could stop the wean's skirling would stop hers,
if she did not keep a' the founder.<*> And that this threat, with

* _i.e._ The quieter.

the manner of the woman, made the declarant conclude, that
the bairn's life was gone, and her own in danger, for that the
woman was a desperate bad woman, as the declarant judged
from the language she used. Interrogated, declares, that the
fever and delirium were brought on her by hearing bad news,
suddenly told to her, but refuses to say what the said news
related to. Interrogated, why she does not now communicate
these particulars, which might, perhaps, enable the magistrate
to ascertain whether the child is living or dead; and requested
to observe, that her refusing to do so, exposes her own life, and
leaves the child in bad hands; as also that her present refusal
to answer on such points is inconsistent with her alleged intention
to make a clean breast to her sister? Declares, that she
kens the bairn is now dead, or, if living, there is one that will
look after it; that for her own living or dying, she is in God's
hands, who knows her innocence of harming her bairn with her
will or knowledge; and that she has altered her resolution of
speaking out, which she entertained when she left the woman's
lodging, on account of a matter which she has since Learned.
And declares, in general, that she is wearied, and will answer
no more questions at this time.''

  Upon a subsequent examination, Euphemia Deans adhered
to the declaration she had formerly made, with this addition,
that a paper found in her trunk being shown to her, she
admitted that it contained the credentials, in consequence of
which she resigned herself to the conduct of the woman at
whose lodgings she was delivered of the child. Its tenor ran
thus:---

  ``Dearest Effie,---I have gotten the means to send to you
by a woman who is well qualified to assist you in your approaching
streight; she is not what I could wish her, but I cannot do
better for you in my present condition. I am obliged to trust
to her in this present calamity, for myself and you too. I hope
for the best, though I am now in a sore pinch; yet thought is
free---I think Handie Dandie and I may queer the stifler<*> for

* Avoid the gallows.

all that is come and gone. You will be angry for me writing
this to my little Cameronian Lily; but if I can but live to be
a comfort to you, and a father to your babie, you will have
plenty of time to scold.---Once more, let none knew your counsel
---my life depends on this hag, d---n her---she is both deep
and dangerous, but she has more wiles and wit than ever were
in a beldam's head, and has cause to be true to me. Farewell,
my Lily---Do not droop on my account---in a week I will be
yours or no more my own.''

  Then followed a postscript. ``If they must truss me, I will
repent of nothing so much, even at the last hard pinch, as of the
injury I have done my Lily.''

  Effie refused to say from whom she had received this letter,
but enough of the story was now known, to ascertain that it
came from Robertson; and from the date, it appeared to have
been written about the time when Andrew Wilson (called for a
nickname Handie Dandie) and he were meditating their first
abortive attempt to escape, which miscarried in the manner
mentioned in the beginning of this history.

  The evidence of the Crown being concluded, the counsel for
the prisoner began to lead a proof in her defence. The first
witnesses were examined upon the girl's character. All gave
her an excellent one, but none with more feeling than worthy
Mrs. Saddletree, who, with the tears on her cheeks, declared,
that she could not have had a higher opinion of Effie Deans,
nor a more sincere regard for her, if she had been her own
daughter. All present gave the honest woman credit for her
goodness of heart, excepting her husband, who whispered to
Dumbiedikes, ``That Nichil Novit of yours is but a raw hand
at leading evidence, I'm thinking. What signified his bringing
a woman here to snotter and snivel, and bather their Lordships?
He should hae ceeted me, sir, and I should hae gien them sic
a screed o' testimony, they shauldna hae touched a hair o' her
head.''

  ``Hadna ye better get up and tryt yet?'' said the Laird.
``I'll mak a sign to Novit.''

  ``Na, na,'' said Saddletree, ``thank ye for naething, neighbour
---that would be ultroneous evidence, and I ken what
belangs to that; but Nichil Novit suld hae had me ceeted
_debito tempore._'' And wiping his mouth with his silk handkerchief
with great importance, he resumed the port and manner of
an edified and intelligent auditor.

  Mr. Fairbrother now premised, in a few words, ``that he
meant to bring forward his most important witness, upon whose
evidence the cause must in a great measure depend. What his
client was, they had learned from the preceding witnesses; and
so far as general character, given in the most forcible terms, and
even with tears, could interest every one in her fate, she had
already gained that advantage. It was necessary, he admitted,
that he should produce more positive testimony of her innocence
than what arose out of general character, and this he undertook
to do by the mouth of the person to whom she had communicated
her situation---by the mouth of her natural counsellor
and guardian---her sister.---Macer, call into court, Jean, or
Jeanie Deans, daughter of David Deans, cowfeeder, at Saint
Leonard's Crags!''

  When he uttered these words, the poor prisoner instantly
started up, and stretched herself half-way over the bar, towards
the side at which her sister was to enter. And when, slowly
following the officer, the witness advanced to the foot of the
table, Effie, with the whole expression of her countenance
altered, from that of confused shame and dismay, to an eager,
imploring, and almost ecstatic earnestness of entreaty, with
outstretched hands, hair streaming back, eyes raised eagerly to
her sister's face, and glistening through tears, exclaimed in a
tone which went through the heart of all who heard her,---``O
Jeanie, Jeanie, save me, save me!''

  With a different feeling, yet equally appropriated to his
proud and self-dependent character, old Deans drew himself
back still farther under the cover of the bench; so that when
Jeanie, as she entered the court, cast a timid glance towards
the place at which she had left him seated, his venerable figure
was no longer visible. He sate down on the other side of
Dumbiedikes, wrung his hand hard, and whispered, ``Ah, Laird,
this is warst of a'---if I can but win ower this part---I feel my
head unco dizzy; but my Master is strong in his servant's weakness.''
After a moment's mental prayer, he again started up,
as if impatient of continuing in any one posture, and gradually
edged himself forward towards the place he had just quitted.

  Jeanie in the meantime had advanced to the bottom of the
table, when, unable to resist the impulse of affections she suddenly
extended her hand to her sister. Effie was just within
the distance that she could seize it with both hers, press it to
her mouth, cover it with kisses, and bathe it in tears, with the
fond devotion that a Catholic would pay to a guardian saint
descended for his safety; while Jeanie, hiding her own face
with her other hand, wept bitterly. The sight would have
moved a heart of stone, much more of flesh and blood. Many
of the spectators shed tears, and it was some time before the
presiding Judge himself could so far subdue his emotion as to
request the witness to compose herself, and the prisoner to forbear
those marks of eager affection, which, however natural,
could not be permitted at that time, and in that presence.

  The solemn oath,---``the truth to tell, and no truth to conceal,
as far as she knew or should be asked,'' was then administered
by the Judge ``in the name of God, and as the witness
should answer to God at the great day of judgment;'' an awful
adjuration, which seldom fails to make impression even on the
most hardened characters, and to strike with fear even the most
upright. Jeanie, educated in deep and devout reverence for the
name and attributes of the Deity, was, by the solemnity of a
direct appeal to his  person and justice, awed, but at the same
time elevated above all considerations, save those which she
could, with a clear conscience, call Him to witness. She repeated
the form in a low and reverent, but distinct tone of voice, after
the Judge, to whom, and not to any inferior officer of the Court,
the task is assigned in Scotland of directing the witness in that
solemn appeal which is the sanction of his testimony.

  When the Judge had finished the established form, he added
in a feeling, but yet a monitory tone, an advice, which the circumstances
appeared to him to call for.

  ``Young woman,'' these were his words, ``you come before
this Court in circumstances, which it would be worse than
cruel not to pity and to sympathise with. Yet it is my duty to
tell you, that the truth, whatever its consequences may be, the
truth is what you owe to your country, and to that God whose
word is truth, and whose name you have now invoked. Use
your own time in answering the questions that gentleman''
(pointing to the counsel) ``shall put to you.---But remember,
that what you may be tempted to say beyond what is the actual
truth, you must answer both here and hereafter.''

  The usual questions were then put to her:---Whether any
one had instructed her what evidence she had to deliver?
Whether any one had given or promised her any good deed, hire,
or reward, for her testimony? Whether she had any malice or
ill-will at his Majesty's Advocate, being the party against whom
she was cited as a witness? To which questions she successively
answered by a quiet negative. But their tenor gave great
scandal and offence to her father, who was not aware that they
are put to every witness as a matter of form.

  ``Na, na,'' he exclaimed, loud enough to be heard, ``my
bairn is no like the Widow of Tekoah---nae man has putten
words into her mouth.''

  One of the judges, better acquainted, perhaps, with the Books
of Adjournal than with the Book of Samuel, was disposed to
make some instant inquiry after this Widow of Tekoah, who,
as he construed the matter, had been tampering with the evidence.
But the presiding Judge, better versed in Scripture
history, whispered to his learned brother the necessary explanation;
and the pause occasioned by this mistake had the good
effect of giving Jeanie Deans time to collect her spirits for the
painful task she had to perform.

  Fairbrother, whose practice and intelligence were considerable,
saw the necessity of letting the witness compose herself. In
his heart he suspected that she came to bear false witness in
her sister's cause.

  ``But that is her own affair,'' thought Fairbrother; ``and
it is my business to see that she has plenty of time to regain
composure, and to deliver her evidence, be it true, or be it false
---_valeat quantum._''

  Accordingly, he commenced his interrogatories with uninteresting
questions, which admitted of instant reply.

  ``You are, I think, the sister of the prisoner?''

  ``Yes, sir.''

  ``Not the full sister, however?''

  ``No, sir---we are by different mothers.''

  ``True; and you are, I think, several years older than your
sister?''

  ``Yes, sir,'' etc.

  After the advocate had conceived that, by these preliminary
and unimportant questions, he had familiarised the witness with
the situation in which she stood, he asked, ``whether she had
not remarked her sister's state of health to be altered, during
the latter part of the term when she had lived with Mrs. Saddletree?''

  Jeanie answered in the affirmative.

  ``And she told you the cause of it, my dear, I suppose?'' said
Fairbrother, in an easy, and, as one may say, an inductive sort
of tone.

  ``I am sorry to interrupt my brother,'' said the Crown Counsel,
rising; ``but I am in your Lordships' judgment, whether this
be not a leading question?''

  ``If this point is to be debated,'' said the presiding Judge,
``the witness must be removed.''

  For the Scottish lawyers regard with a sacred and scrupulous
horror every question so shaped by the counsel examining, as
to convey to a witness the least intimation of the nature of the
answer which is desired from him. These scruples, though
founded on an excellent principle, are sometimes carried to an
absurd pitch of nicety, especially as it is generally easy for a
lawyer who has his wits about him to elude the objection.
Fairbrother did so in the present case.

  ``It is not necessary to waste the time of the Court, my Lord
since the King's Counsel thinks it worth while to object to the
form of my question, I will shape it otherwise.---Pray, young
woman, did you ask your sister any question when you observed
her looking unwell?---take courage---speak out.''

  ``I asked her,'' replied Jeanie, `` what ailed her.''

  ``Very well---take your own time---and what was the answer
she made?'' continued Mr. Fairbrother.

  Jeanie was silent, and looked deadly pale. It was not that
she at any one instant entertained an idea of the possibility of
prevarication---it was the natural hesitation to extinguish the
last spark of hope that remained for her sister.

  ``Take courage, young woman,'' said Fairbrother.---``I asked
what your sister said ailed her when you inquired?''

  ``Nothing,'' answered Jeanie, with a faint voice, which was
yet heard distinctly in the most distant corner of the Court-room,
---such an awful and profound silence had been preserved
during the anxious interval, which had interposed betwixt the
lawyer's question and the answer of the witness.

  Fairbrother's countenance fell; but with that ready presence
of mind, which is as useful in civil as in military emergencies,
he immediately rallied.---``Nothing? True; you mean nothing
at _first_---but when you asked her again, did she not tell you
what ailed her?''

  The question was put in a tone meant to make her comprehend
the importance of her answer, had she not been already
aware of it. The ice was broken, however, and with less pause
than at first, she now replied,---``Alack! alack! she never
breathed word to me about it.''

  A deep groan passed through the Court. It was echoed by
one deeper and more agonised from the unfortunate father.
The hope to which unconsciously, and in spite of himself, he
had still secretly clung, had now dissolved, and the venerable old
man fell forward senseless on the floor of the Court-house, with
his head at the foot of his terrified daughter. The unfortunate
prisoner, with impotent passion, strove with the guards betwixt
whom she was placed. ``Let me gang to my father!---I _will_
gang to him---I _will_ gang to him---he is dead---he is killed---
I hae killed him!''---she repeated, in frenzied tones of grief,
which those who heard them did not speedily forget.

  Even in this moment of agony and general confusion, Jeanie
did not lose that superiority, which a deep and firm mind assures
to its possessor under the most trying circumstances.

  ``He is my father---he is our father,'' she mildly repeated
to those who endeavoured to separate them, as she stooped,---
shaded aside his grey hairs, and began assiduously to chafe his
temples.

  The Judge, after repeatedly wiping his eyes, gave directions
that they should be conducted into a neighbouring apartment,
and carefully attended. The prisoner, as her father was borne
from the Court, and her sister slowly followed, pursued them
with her eyes so earnestly fixed, as if they would have started
from their sockets. But when they were no longer visible, she
seemed to find, in her despairing and deserted state, a courage
which she had not yet exhibited.

  ``The bitterness of it is now past,'' she said, and then boldly,
addressed the Court. ``My Lords, if it is your pleasure to gang
on wi' this matter, the weariest day will hae its end at last.''

  The Judge, who, much to his honour, had shared deeply in
the general sympathy, was surprised at being recalled to his duty
by the prisoner. He collected himself, and requested to know if
the panel's counsel had more evidence to produce. Fairbrother
replied, with an air of dejection, that his proof was concluded.

  The King's Counsel addressed the jury for the crown. He
said in a few words, that no one could be more concerned than
he was for the distressing scene which they had just witnessed.
But it was the necessary consequence of great crimes to bring
distress and ruin upon all connected with the perpetrators. He
briefly reviewed the proof, in which he showed that all the
circumstances of the case concurred with those required by the
act under which the unfortunate prisoner was tried: That the
counsel for the panel had totally failed in proving, that Euphemia
Deans had communicated her situation to her sister: That,
respecting her previous good character, he was sorry to observe,
that it was females who possessed the world's good report, and
to whom it was justly valuable, who were most strongly tempted,
by shame and fear of the world's censure, to the crime of infanticide:
That the child was murdered, he professed to entertain
no doubt. The vacillating and inconsistent declaration of the
prisoner herself, marked as it was by numerous refusals to speak
the truth on subjects, when, according. to her own story, it
would have been natural, as well as advantageous, to have been
candid; even this imperfect declaration left no doubt in his
mind as to the fate of the unhappy infant. Neither could he
doubt that the panel was a partner in this guilt. Who else
had an interest in a deed so inhuman? Surely neither Robertson,
nor Robertson's agent, in whose house she was delivered,
had  the least temptation to commit such a crime, unless upon
her account, with her connivance, and for the sake of saying
her reputation. But it was not required of him, by the law,
that he should bring precise proof of the murder, or of the
prisoner's accession to it. It was the very purpose of the statute
to substitute a certain chain of presumptive evidence in place
of a probation, which, in such cases, it was peculiarly difficult
to obtain. The jury might peruse the statute itself, and they
had also the libel and interlocutor of relevancy to direct them
in point of law. He put it to the conscience of the jury, that
under both he was entitled to a verdict of Guilty.

  The charge of Fairbrother was much cramped by his having
failed in the proof which he expected to lead. But he fought
his losing cause with courage and constancy. He ventured to
arraign the severity of the statute under which the young woman
was tried. ``In all other cases,'' he said, ``the first thing required
of the criminal prosecutor was to prove unequivocally
that the crime libelled had actually been committed, which
lawyers called proving the _corpus delicti._ But this statute,
made doubtless with the best intentions, and under the impulse
of a just horror for the unnatural crime of infanticide, ran the
risk of itself occasioning the worst of murders, the death of an
innocent person, to atone for a supposed crime which may never
have been committed by anyone. He was so far from acknowledging
the alleged probability of the child's violent death, that
he could not even allow that there was evidence of its having
ever lived.''

  The King's Counsel pointed to the woman's declaration; to
which the counsel replied---``A production concocted in a
moment of terror and agony, and which approached to insanity,''
he said, ``his learned brother well knew was no sound evidence
against the party who emitted it. It was true, that a judicial
confession, in presence of the Justices themselves, was the
strongest of all proof, insomuch that it is said in law, that `_in
confitentem null<ae> sunt partes judicis._' But this was true of judicial
confession only, by which law meant that which is made in
presence of the justices, and the sworn inquest. Of extrajudicial
confession, all authorities held with the illustrious Farinaceus
and Matth<ae>us, `_confessio extrajudicialis in se nulla est; et quod
nullum est, non potest adminiculari._' It was totally inept, and
void of all strength and effect from the beginning; incapable,
therefore, of being bolstered up or supported, or, according to the
law phrase, adminiculated, by other presumptive circumstances.
In the present case, therefore, letting the extrajudicial confession
go, as it ought to go, for nothing,'' he contended, ``the prosecutor
had not made out the second quality of the statute, that a live
child had been born; and _that,_ at least, ought to be established
before presumptions were received that it had been murdered.
If any of the assize,'' he said, ``should be of opinion that this
was dealing rather narrowly with the statute, they ought to
consider that it was in its nature highly penal, and therefore
entitled to no favourable construction.''

  He concluded a learned speech, with an eloquent peroration
on the scene they had just witnessed, during which Saddletree
fell fast asleep.

  It was now the presiding Judge's turn to address the jury.
He did so briefly and distinctly.

  ``It was for the jury,'' he said, ``to consider whether the
prosecutor had made out his plea. For himself, he sincerely
grieved to say, that a shadow of doubt remained not upon his
mind concerning the verdict which the inquest had to bring in.
He would not follow the prisoner's counsel through the impeachment
which he had brought against the statute of King
William and Queen Mary. He and the jury were sworn to
judge according to the laws as they stood, not to criticise, or
evade, or even to justify them. In no civil case would a counsel
have been permitted to plead his client's case in the teeth of
the law; but in the hard situation in which counsel were often
placed in the Criminal Court, as well as out of favour to all
presumptions of innocence, he had not inclined to interrupt the
learned gentleman, or narrow his plea. The present law, as it
now stood, had been instituted by the wisdom of their fathers,
to check the alarming progress of a dreadful crime; when it
was found too severe for its purpose it would doubtless be
altered by the wisdom of the Legislature; at present it was the
law of the land, the rule of the Court, and, according to the
oath which they had taken, it must be that of the jury. This
unhappy girl's situation could not be doubted; that she had
borne a child, and that the child had disappeared, were certain
facts. The learned counsel had failed to show that she had
communicated her situation. All the requisites of the case
required by the statute were therefore before the jury. The
learned gentleman had, indeed, desired them to throw out of
consideration the panel's own confession, which was the plea
usually urged, in penury of all others, by counsel in his situation,
who usually felt that the declarations of their clients bore hard
on them. But that the Scottish law designed that a certain
weight should be laid on these declarations, which, he admitted,
were _quodammodo_ extrajudicial, was evident from the universal
practice by which they were always produced and read, as part
of the prosecutor's probation. In the present case, no person
who had heard the witnesses describe the appearance of the
young woman before she left Saddletree's house, and contrasted
it with that of her state and condition at her return to her
father's, could have any doubt that the fact of delivery had
taken place, as set forth in her own declaration, which was,
therefore, not a solitary piece of testimony, but adminiculated
and supported by the strongest circumstantial proof.

  ``He did not,'' he said, ``state the impression upon his own
mind with the purpose of biassing theirs. He had felt no less
than they had done from the scene of domestic misery which
had been exhibited before them; and if they, having God and
a good conscience, the sanctity of their oath, and the regard
due to the law of the country, before their eyes, could come to
a conclusion favourable to this unhappy prisoner, he should rejoice
as much as anyone in Court; for never had he found his
duty more distressing than in discharging it that day, and glad
he would be to be relieved from the still more painful task which
would otherwise remain for him.''

  The jury, having heard the Judge's address, bowed and retired,
preceded by a macer of Court, to the apartment destined
for their deliberation.
