



		CHAPTER SECOND.

	And thou, great god of aquavit<ae>!
	Wha sways the empire of this city
	(When fou we're sometimes capernoity),
		Be thou prepared,
	To save us frae that black banditti,
		The City Guard!
			Fergusson's _Daft Days._

  Captain John Porteous, a name memorable in the traditions
of Edinburgh, as well as in the records of criminal jurisprudence,
was the son of a citizen of Edinburgh, who endeavoured to breed
him up to his own mechanical trade of a tailor. The youth,
however, had a wild and irreclaimable propensity to dissipation,
which finally sent him to serve in the corps long maintained in
the service of the States of Holland, and called the Scotch
Dutch. Here he learned military discipline; and, returning
afterwards, in the course of an idle and wandering life, to his
native city, his services were required by the magistrates of
Edinburgh in the disturbed year 1715, for disciplining their
City Guard, in which he shortly afterwards received a captain's
commission. It was only by his military skill and an alert and
resolute character as an officer of police, that he merited this
promotion, for he is said to have been a man of profligate habits,
an unnatural son, and a brutal husband. He was, however,
useful in his station, and his harsh and fierce habits rendered
him formidable to rioters or disturbers of the public peace.

  The corps in which he held his command is, or perhaps we
should rather say _was,_ a body of about one hundred and twenty
soldiers divided into three companies, and regularly armed,
clothed, and embodied. They were chiefly veterans who enlisted
in this cogs, having the benefit of working at their trades
when they were off duty. These men had the charge of preserving
public order, repressing riots and street robberies, acting,
in short, as an armed police, and attending on all public
occasions where confusion or popular disturbance might be expected.<*>

* The Lord Provost was ex-officio commander and colonel of the corps,
* which might be increased to three hundred men when the times required
* it. No other drum but theirs was allowed to sound on the High Street
* between the Luckenbooths and the Netherbow.

Poor Fergusson, whose irregularities sometimes led
him into unpleasant rencontres with these military conservators
of public order, and who mentions them so often that he may
be termed their poet laureate,<*> thus admonishes his readers,

* [Robert Fergusson, the Scottish Poet, born 1750, died 1774.]

warned doubtless by his own experience:---

	``Gude folk, as ye come frae the fair,
	    Bide yont frae this black squad:
	There's nae sic savages elsewhere
	    Allowed to wear cockad.''

  In fact, the soldiers of the City Guard, being, as we have
said, in general discharged veterans, who had strength enough
remaining for this municipal duty, and being, moreover, for the
greater part, Highlanders, were neither by birth, education, nor
former habits, trained to endure with much patience the insults
of the rabble, or the provoking petulance of truant schoolboys,
and idle debauchees of all descriptions, with whom their occupation
brought them into contact. On the contrary, the tempers
of the poor old fellows were soured by the indignities with
which the mob distinguished them on many occasions, and frequently
might have required the soothing strains of the poet we
have just quoted---

	``O soldiers! for your ain dear sakes,
	For Scotland's love, the Land o' Cakes,
	Gie not her bairns sic deadly paiks,
			Nor be sae rude,
	Wi' firelock or Lochaber-axe,
			As spill their bluid!''

  On all occasions when a holiday licensed some riot and
irregularity, a skirmish with these veterans was a favourite
recreation with the rabble of Edinburgh. These pages may
perhaps see the light when many have in fresh recollection such
onsets as we allude to. But the venerable corps, with whom
the contention was held, may now be considered as totally
extinct. Of late the gradual diminution of these civic soldiers
reminds one of the abatement of King Lear's hundred knights.
The edicts of each succeeding set of magistrates have, like those
of Goneril and Regan, diminished this venerable band with the
similar question, ``What need we five-and-twenty?---ten?---or
five?'' And it is now nearly come to, ``What need one?'' A
spectre may indeed here and there still be seen, of an old grey-headed
and grey-bearded Highlander, with war-worn features,
but bent double by age; dressed in an old fashioned cocked-hat,
bound with white tape instead of silver lace; and in coat, waistcoat,
and breeches, of a muddy-coloured red, bearing in his
withered hand an ancient weapon, called a Lochaber-axe; a long
pole, namely, with an axe at the extremity, and a hook at the
back of the hatchet.<*> Such a phantom of former days still

* This hook was to enable the bearer of the Lochaber-axe to scale a
* gateway, by grappling the top of the door, and swinging himself up by the
* staff of his weapon.

creeps, I have been informed, round the statue of Charles the
Second, in the Parliament Square, as if the image of a Stuart
were the last refuge for any memorial of our ancient manners;
and one or two others are supposed to glide around the door of
the guardhouse assigned to them in the Luckenbooths, when
their ancient refuge in the High Street was laid low.<*> But the

* This ancient corps is now entirely disbanded. Their last march to do
* duty at Hallowfair had something in it affecting. Their drums and fifes
* had been wont on better days to play, on this joyous occasion, the lively
* tune of
*
*	``Jockey to the fair;''
*
* but on his final occasion the afflicted veterans moved slowly to the dirge of
*
*	``The last time I came ower the muir.''

fate of manuscripts bequeathed to friends and executors is so
uncertain, that the narrative containing these frail memorials
of the old Town Guard of Edinburgh, who, with their grim and
valiant corporal, John Dhu (the fiercest-looking fellow I ever
saw), were, in my boyhood, the alternate terror and derision of
the petulant brood of the High School, may, perhaps, only come
to light when all memory of the institution has faded away,
and then serve as an illustration of Kay's caricatures, who has
preserved the features of some of their heroes. In the preceding
generation, when there was a perpetual alarm for the plots
and activity of the Jacobites, some pains were taken by the
magistrates of Edinburgh to keep this corps, though composed
always of such materials as we have noticed, in a more effective
state than was afterwards judged necessary, when their most
dangerous service was to skirmish with the rabble on the king's
birthday. They were, therefore, more the objects of hatred,
and less that of scorn, than they were afterwards accounted.

  To Captain John Porteous, the honour of his command and
of his corps seems to have been a matter of high interest and
importance. He was exceedingly incensed against Wilson for
the affront which he construed him to have put upon his soldiers,
in the effort he made for the liberation of his companion, and expressed
himself most ardently on the subject. He was no less
indignant at the report, that there was an intention to rescue
Wilson himself from the gallows, and uttered many threats and
imprecations upon that subject, which were afterwards remembered
to his disadvantage. In fact, if a good deal of determination
and promptitude rendered Porteous, in one respect, fit to
command guards designed to suppress popular commotion, he
seems, on the other, to have been disqualified for a charge so
delicate, by a hot and surly temper, always too ready to come
to blows and violence; a character void of principle; and a
disposition to regard the rabble, who seldom failed to regale him
and his soldiers with some marks of their displeasure, as declared
enemies, upon whom it was natural and justifiable that he should
seek opportunities of vengeance. Being, however, the most
active and trustworthy among the captains of the City Guard,
he was the person to whom the magistrates confided the command
of the soldiers appointed to keep the peace at the time of Wilson's
execution. He was ordered to guard the gallows and scaffold,
with about eighty men, all the disposable force that could be
spare for that duty.

  But the magistrates took farther precautions, which affected
Porteous's pride very deeply. They requested the assistance of
part of a regular infantry regiment, not to attend upon the
execution, but to remain drawn up on the principal street of
the city, during the time that it went forward, in order to intimidate
the multitude, in case they should be disposed to be
unruly, with a display of force which could not be resisted
without desperation. It may sound ridiculous in our ears, considering
the fallen state of this ancient civic corps, that its
officer should have felt punctiliously jealous of its honour. Yet
so it was. Captain Porteous resented, as an indignity, the
introducing the Welsh Fusileers within the city, and drawing
them up in the street where no drums but his own were allowed
to be sounded without the special command or permission of
the magistrates. As he could not show his ill-humour to his
patrons the magistrates, it increased his indignation and his
desire to be revenged on the unfortunate criminal Wilson, and
all who favoured him. These internal emotions of jealousy
and rage wrought a change on the man's mien and bearing,
visible to all who saw him on the fatal morning when Wilson
was appointed to suffer. Porteous's ordinary appearance was
rather favourable. He was about the middle size, stout, and
well made, having a military air, and yet rather a gentle and
mild countenance. His complexion was brown, his face somewhat
fretted with the sears of the smallpox, his eyes rather
languid than keen or fierce. On the present occasion, however,
it seemed to those who saw him as if he were agitated by some
evil demon. His step was irregular, his voice hollow and broken,
his countenance pale, his eyes staring and wild, his speech imperfect
and confused, and his whole appearance so disordered,
that many remarked he seemed to be _fey,_ a Scottish expression,
meaning the state of those who are driven on to their
impending fate by the strong impulse of some irresistible
necessity.

  One part of his conduct was truly diabolical, if indeed it has
not been exaggerated by the general prejudice entertained against
his memory. When Wilson, the unhappy criminal, was delivered
to him by the keeper of the prison, in order that he might be
conducted to the place of execution, Porteous, not satisfied with
the usual precautions to prevent escape, ordered him to be
manacled. This might be justifiable from the character and
bodily strength of the malefactor, as well as from the apprehensions
so generally entertained of an expected rescue. But
the handcuffs which were produced being found too small for
the wrists of a man so big-boned as Wilson, Porteous proceeded
with his own hands, and by great exertion of strength, to force
them till they clasped together, to the exquisite torture of the
unhappy criminal. Wilson remonstrated against such barbarous
usage, declaring that the pain distracted his thoughts from the
subjects of meditation proper to his unhappy condition.

  ``It signifies little,'' replied Captain Porteous; ``your pain
will soon be at an end.''

  ``Your cruelty is great,'' answered the sufferer. ``You know
not how soon you yourself may have occasion to ask the mercy
which you are now refusing to a fellow-creature. May God
forgive you!''

  These words, long afterwards quoted and remembered, were
all that passed between Porteous and his prisoner; but as they
took air, and became known to the people, they greatly increased
the popular compassion for Wilson, and excited a proportionate
degree of indignation against Porteous; against whom, as strict,
and even violent in the discharge of his unpopular office, the
common people had some real, and many imaginary causes of
complaint.

  When the painful procession was completed, and Wilson,
with the escort, had arrived at the scaffold in the Grassmarket,
there appeared no signs of that attempt to rescue him which had
occasioned such precautions. The multitude, in general, looked
on with deeper interest than at ordinary executions; and there
might be seen, on the countenances of many, a stern and indignant
expression, like that with which the ancient Cameronians
might be supposed to witness the execution of their brethren,
who glorified the Covenant on the same occasion, and at the
same spot. But there was no attempt at violence. Wilson
himself seemed disposed to hasten over the space that divided
time from eternity. The devotions proper and usual on such
occasions were no sooner finished than he submitted to his fate,
and the sentence of the law was fulfilled.

  He had been suspended on the gibbet so long as to be totally
deprived of life, when at once, as if occasioned by some newly
received impulse, there arose a tumult among the multitude.
Many stones were thrown at Porteous and his guards; some
mischief was done; and the mob continued to press forward
with whoops, shrieks, howls, and exclamations. A young fellow,
with a sailor's cap slouched over his face, sprung on the scaffold,
and cut the rope by which the criminal was suspended. Others
approached to carry off the body, either to secure for it a decent
grave, or to try, perhaps, some means of resuscitation. Captain
Porteous was wrought, by this appearance of insurrection
against his authority, into a rage so headlong as made him
forget, that, the sentence having been fully executed, it was his
duty not to engage in hostilities with the misguided multitude,
but to draw off his men as fast as possible. He sprung from
the scaffold, snatched a musket from one of his soldiers, commanded
the party to give fire, and, as several eye-witnesses concurred
in swearing, set them the example, by discharging his
piece, and shooting a man dead on the spot. Several soldiers
obeyed his command or followed his example; six or seven
persons were slain, and a great many were hurt and wounded.

  After this act of violence, the Captain proceeded to withdraw
his men towards their guard-house in the High Street. The
mob were not so much intimidated as incensed by what had
been done. They pursued the soldiers with execrations, accompanied
by volleys of stones. As they pressed on them, the
rearmost soldiers turned, and again fired with fatal aim and
execution. It is not accurately known whether Porteous commanded
this second act of violence; but of course the odium of
the whole transactions of the fatal day attached to him, and to
him alone. He arrived at the guard-house, dismissed his soldiers,
and went to make his report to the magistrates concerning the
unfortunate events of the day.

  Apparently by this time Captain Porteous had began to doubt
the propriety of his own conduct, and the reception he met with
from the magistrates was such as to make him still more anxious
to gloss it over. He denied that he had given orders to fire;
he denied he had fired with his own hand; he even produced
the fusee which he carried as an officer for examination; it was
found still loaded. Of three cartridges which he was seen to
put in his pouch that morning, two were still there; a white
handkerchief was thrust into the muzzle of the piece, and re-
turned unsoiled or blackened. To the defence founded on
these circumstances it was answered, that Porteous had not used
his own piece, but had been seen to take one from a soldier.
Among the many who had been killed and wounded by the
unhappy fire, there were several of better rank; for even the
humanity of such soldiers as fired over the heads of the mere
rabble around the scaffold, proved in some instances fatal to
persons who were stationed in windows, or observed the melancholy
scene from a distance. The voice of public indignation
was loud and general; and, ere men's tempers had time to cool,
the trial of Captain Porteous took place before the High Court
of Justiciary. After a long and patient hearing, the jury had
the difficult duty of balancing the positive evidence of many
persons, and those of respectability, who deposed positively to
the prisoner's commanding his soldiers to fire, and himself firing
his piece, of which some swore that they saw the smoke and
flash, and beheld a man drop at whom it was pointed, with the
negative testimony of others, who, though well stationed for
seeing what had passed, neither heard Porteous give orders to
fire, nor saw him fire himself; but, on the contrary, averred
that the first shot was fired by a soldier who stood close by him.
A great part of his defence was also founded on the turbulence
of the mob, which witnesses, according to their feelings, their
predilections, and their opportunities of observation, represented
differently; some describing as a formidable riot, what others
represented as a trifling disturbance such as always used to take
place on the like occasions, when the executioner of the law, and
the men commissioned to protect him in his task, were generally
exposed to some indignities. The verdict of the jury sufficiently
shows how the evidence preponderated in their minds. It declared
that John Porteous fired a gun among the people assembled at
the execution; that he gave orders to his soldiers to fire, by
which many persons were killed and wounded; but, at the same
time, that the prisoner and his guard had been wounded and
beaten, by stones thrown at them by the multitude. Upon this
verdict, the Lords of Justiciary passed sentence of death against
Captain John Porteous, adjudging him, in the common form, to
be hanged on a gibbet at the common place of execution, on
Wednesday, 8th September 1736, and all his movable property
to be forfeited to the king's use, according to the Scottish law
in cases of wilful murder.<*>

* The signatures affixed to the death-warrant of Captain Porteous were---
*
* 	Andrew Fletcher of Milton, Lord Justice-Clerk.
*	Sir James Mackenzie, Lord Royston.
*	David Erskine, Lord Dun.
*	Sir Walter Pringle, Lord Newhall.
*	Sir Gilbert Elliot, Lord Minto.
