




		CHAPTER SEVENTH

	Arthur's Seat shall be my bed,
	  The sheets shall ne'er be pressed by me,
	St. Anton's well shall be my drink,
	  Sin' my true-love's forsaken me.
				Old Song.

  If I were to choose a spot from which the rising or setting sun
could be seen to the greatest possible advantage, it would be
that wild path winding around the foot of the high belt of
semicircular rocks, called Salisbury Crags, and marking the
verge of the steep descent which slopes down into the glen on
the south-eastern side of the city of Edinburgh. The
prospect, in its general outline, commands a close-built, high-piled
city, stretching itself out beneath in a form, which, to a
romantic imagination, may be supposed to represent that of a
dragon; now, a noble arm of the sea, with its rocks, isles,
distant shores, and boundary of mountains; and now, a fair and
fertile champaign country, varied with hill, dale, and rock, and
skirted by the picturesque ridge of the Pentland mountains.
But as the path gently circles around the base of the cliffs, the
prospect, composed as it is of these enchanting and sublime
objects, changes at every step, and presents them blended with,
or divided from, each other, in every possible variety which can
gratify the eye and the imagination. When a piece of scenery
so beautiful, yet so varied,---so exciting by its intricacy, and yet
so sublime,---is lighted up by the tints of morning or of evening,
and displays all that variety of shadowy depth, exchanged with
partial brilliancy, which gives character even to the tamest of
landscapes, the effect approaches near to enchantment. This
path used to be my favourite evening and morning resort, when
engaged with a favourite author, or new subject of study. It
is, I am informed, now become totally impassable; a circumstance
which, if true, reflects little credit on the taste of the
Good Town or its leaders.<*>

* A beautiful and solid pathway has, within a few years, been formed
* around these romantic rocks; and the Author has the pleasure to think,
* that the passage in the text gave rise to the undertaking.


  It was from this fascinating path---the scene to me of so
much delicious musing, when life was young and promised to be
happy, that I have been unable to pass it over without an
episodical description---it was, I say, from this romantic path
that Butler saw the morning arise the day after the murder of
Porteous. It was possible for him with ease to have found a
much shorter road to the house to which he was directing his
course, and, in fact, that which he chose was extremely circuitous.
But to compose his own spirits, as well as to while away
the time, until a proper hour for visiting the family without
surprise or disturbance, he was induced to extend his circuit by
the foot of the rocks, and to linger upon his way until the
morning should be considerably advanced. While, now standing
with his arms across, and waiting the slow progress of the sun
above the horizon, now sitting upon one of the numerous fragments
which storms had detached from the rocks above him,
he is meditating, alternately upon the horrible catastrophe
which he had witnessed, and upon the melancholy, and to him
most interesting, news which he had learned at Saddletree's, we
will give the reader to understand who Butler was, and how his
fate was connected with that of Effie Deans, the unfortunate
handmaiden of the careful Mrs. Saddletree.

  Reuben Butler was of English extraction, though born in
Scotland. His grandfather was a trooper in Monk's army, and
one of the party of dismounted dragoons which formed the
forlorn hope at the storming of Dundee in 1651. Stephen
Butler (called from his talents in reading and expounding,
Scripture Stephen, and Bible Butler) was a stanch Independent,
and received in its fullest comprehension the promise that the
saints should inherit the earth. As hard knocks were what
had chiefly fallen to his share hitherto in the division of this
common property, he lost not the opportunity which the storm
and plunder of a commercial place afforded him, to appropriate
as large a share of the better things of this world as he could
possibly compass. It would seem that he had succeeded indifferently
well, for his exterior circumstances appeared, in consequence
of this event, to have been much mended.

  The troop to which he belonged was quartered at the village
of Dalkeith, as forming the bodyguard of Monk, who, in the
capacity of general for the Commonwealth, resided in the neighbouring
castle. When, on the eve of the Restoration, the
general commenced his march from Scotland, a measure pregnant
with such important consequences, he new-modelled his troops,
and more especially those immediately about his person, in order
that they might consist entirely of individuals devoted to himself.
On this occasion Scripture Stephen was weighed in the
balance, and found wanting. It was supposed he felt no call
to any expedition which might endanger the reign of the
military sainthood, and that he did not consider himself as
free in conscience to join with any party which might be likely
ultimately to acknowledge the interest of Charles Stuart, the
son of ``the last man,'' as Charles I. was familiarly and irreverently
termed by them in their common discourse, as well as in
their more elaborate predications and harangues. As the time
did not admit of cashiering such dissidents, Stephen Butler was
only advised in a friendly way to give up his horse and accoutrements
to one of Middleton's old troopers who possessed an
accommodating conscience of a military stamp, and which
squared itself chiefly upon those of the colonel and paymaster.
As this hint came recommended by a certain sum of arrears
presently payable, Stephen had carnal wisdom enough to embrace
the proposal, and with great indifference saw his old corps
depart for Coldstream, on their route for the south, to establish
the tottering Government of England on a new basis.

  The _zone_ of the ex-trooper, to use Horace's phrase, was
weighty enough to purchase a cottage and two or three fields
(still known by the name of Beersheba), within about a Scottish
mile of Dalkeith; and there did Stephen establish himself with
a youthful helpmate, chosen out of the said village, whose disposition
to a comfortable settlement on this side of the grave
reconciled her to the gruff manners, serious temper, and weather-beaten
features of the martial enthusiast. Stephen did not long
survive the falling on ``evil days and evil tongues,'' of which
Milton, in the same predicament, so mournfully complains. At
his death his consort remained an early widow, with a male
child of three years old, which, in the sobriety wherewith it
demeaned itself, in the old-fashioned and even grim cast of its
features, and in its sententious mode of expressing itself, would
sufficiently have vindicated the honour of the widow of Beersheba,
had any one thought proper to challenge the babe's
descent from Bible Butler.

  Butler's principles had not descended to his family, or extended
themselves among his neighbours. The air of Scotland
was alien to the growth of independency, however favourable to
fanaticism under other colours. But, nevertheless, they were
not forgotten; and a certain neighbouring Laird, who piqued
himself upon the loyalty of his principles ``in the worst of times''
(though I never heard they exposed him to more peril than that
of a broken head, or a night's lodging in the main guard, when
wine and cavalierism predominated in his upper storey), had
found it a convenient thing to rake up all matter of accusation
against the deceased Stephen. In this enumeration his
religious principles made no small figure, as, indeed, they must
have seemed of the most exaggerated enormity to one whose
own were so small and so faintly traced, as to be well nigh imperceptible.
In these circumstances, poor widow Butler was
supplied with her full proportion of fines for nonconformity,
and all the other oppressions of the time, until Beersheba was
fairly wrenched out of her hands, and became the property of
the Laird who had so wantonly, as it had hitherto appeared,
persecuted this poor forlorn woman. When his purpose was
fairly achieved, he showed some remorse or moderation, of
whatever the reader may please to term it, in permitting her to
occupy her husband's cottage, and cultivate, on no very heavy
terms, a croft of land adjacent. Her son, Benjamin, in the
meanwhile, grew up to mass estate, and, moved by that impulse
which makes men seek marriage, even when its end can only be
the perpetuation of misery, he wedded and brought a wife, and,
eventually, a son, Reuben, to share the poverty of Beersheba.

  The Laird of Dumbiedikes<*> had hitherto been moderate in

* Dumbiedikes, selected as descriptive of the taciturn character of the
* imaginary owner, is really the name of a house bordering on the King's
* Park, so called because the late Mr. Braidwood, an instructor of the deaf
* and dumb, resided there with his pupils. The situation of the real house
* is different from that assigned to the ideal mansion.

his exactions, perhaps because he was ashamed to tax too highly
the miserable means of support which remained to the widow
Butler. But when a stout active young fellow appeared as the
labourer of the croft in question, Dumbiedikes began to think
so broad a pair of shoulders might bear an additional burden.
He regulated, indeed, his management of his dependants (who
fortunately were but few in number) much upon the principle
of the carters whom he observed loading their carts at a neighbouring
coal-hill, and who never failed to clap an additional
brace of hundredweights on their burden, so soon as by any
means they had compassed a new horse of somewhat superior
strength to that which had broken down the day before. However
reasonable this practice appeared to the Laird of Dumbiedikes,
he ought to have observed, that it may be overdone, and
that it infers, as a matter of course, the destruction and loss of
both horse, and cart, and loading. Even so it befell when
the additional ``prestations'' came to be demanded of Benjamin
Butler. A man of few words, and few ideas, but attached to
Beersheba with a feeling like that which a vegetable entertains
to the spot in which it chances to be planted, he neither remonstrated
with the Laird, nor endeavoured to escape from him,
but, toiling night and day to accomplish the terms of his taskmaster,
fell into a burning fever and died. His wife did not
long survive him; and, as if it had been the fate of this family
to be left orphans, our Reuben Butler was, about the year 1704-5,
left in the same circumstances in which his father had been
placed, and under the same guardianship, being that of his
grandmother, the widow of Monk's old trooper. 

  The same prospect of misery hung over the head of another
tenant of this hardhearted lord of the soil. This was a tough
true-blue Presbyterian, called Deans, who, though most obnoxious
to the Laird on account of principles in church and state,
contrived to maintain his ground upon the estate by regular
payment of mail-duties, kain, arriage, carriage, dry multure, lock,
gowpen, and knaveship, and all the various exactions now
commuted for money, and summed up in the emphatic word
=rent.= But the years 1700 and 1701, long remembered in
Scotland for dearth and general distress, subdued the stout heart
of the agricultural whig. Citations by the ground-officer,
decreets of the Baron Court, sequestrations, poindings of outside
and inside plenishing, flew about his ears as fast as the
tory bullets whistled around those of the Covenanters at Pentland,
Bothwell Brigg, or Airsmoss. Struggle as he might, and
he struggled gallantly, ``Douce David Deans'' was routed horse
and foot, and lay at the mercy of his grasping landlord just at
the time that Benjamin Butler died. The fate of each family was
anticipated; but they who prophesied their expulsion to beggary
and ruin were disappointed by an accidental circumstance.

  On the very term-day when their ejection should have taken
place, when all their neighbours were prepared to pity, and not
one to assist them, the minister of the parish, as well as a
doctor from Edinburgh, received a hasty summons to attend the
Laird of Dumbiedikes. Both were surprised, for his contempt
for both faculties had been pretty commonly his theme over an
extra bottle, that is to say, at least once every day. The leech
for the soul, and he for the body, alighted in the court of the
little old manor-house at almost the same time; and when they
had gazed a moment at each other with some surprise, they in
the same breath expressed their conviction that Dumbiedikes must
needs be very ill indeed, since he summoned them both to his
presence at once. Ere the servant could usher them to his apartment,
the party was augmented by a man of law, Nichil Novit,
writing himself procurator before the sheriff-court, for in those
days there were no solicitors. This latter personage was first
summoned to the apartment of the Laird, where, after some short
space, the soul-curer and the body-curer were invited to join him.

  Dumbiedikes had been by this time transported into the best
bedroom, used only upon occasions of death and marriage, and
called, from the former of these occupations, the Dead-Room.
There were in this apartment, besides the sick person himself
and Mr. Novit, the son and heir of the patient, a tall gawky
silly-looking boy of fourteen or fifteen, and a housekeeper, a good
buxom figure of a woman, betwixt forty and fifty, who had kept
the keys and managed matters at Dumbiedikes since the lady's
death. It was to these attendants that Dumbiedikes addressed
himself pretty nearly in the following words; temporal and
spiritual matters, the care of his health and his affairs, being
strangely jumbled in a head which was never one of the clearest.

  ``These are sair times wi' me, gentlemen and neighbours!
amaist as ill as at the aughty-nine, when I was rabbled by the
collegeaners.<*>---They mistook me muckle---they ca'd me a papist,

* Immediately previous to the Revolution, the students at the Edinburgh
* College were violent anti-catholics. They were strongly suspected of
* burning the house of Prestonfield, belonging to Sir James Dick, the Lord
* Provost; and certainly were guilty of creating considerable riots in 1688-9.

but there was never a papist bit about me, minister.---Jock, ye'll
take warning---it's a debt we maun a' pay, and there stands
Nichil Novit that will tell ye I was never gude at paying debts
in my life.---Mr. Novit, ye'll no forget to draw the annual rent
that's due on the yerl's band---if I pay debt to other folk, I
think they suld pay it to me---that equals aquals.---Jock, when
ye hae naething else to do, ye may be aye sticking in a tree; it
will be growing, Jock, when ye're sleeping.<*> My father tauld

* The Author has been flattered by the assurance, that this _na<i:>ve_ mode
* of recommending arboriculture (which was actually delivered in these very
* words by a Highland laird, while on his death-bed, to his son) had so much
* weight with a Scottish earl as to lead to his planting a large tract of country.

me sae forty years sin', but I ne'er fand time to mind him---Jock,
ne'er drink brandy in the morning, it files the stamach sair; gin
ye take a morning's draught, let it be aqua mirabilis; Jenny
there makes it weel---Doctor, my breath is growing as scant as
a broken-winded piper's, when he has played for four-and-twenty
hours at a penny wedding---Jenny, pit the cod aneath my head
--but it's a' needless!---Mass John, could ye think o' rattling
ower some bit short prayer, it wad do me gude maybe, and keep
some queer thoughts out o' my head, Say something, man.''

  ``I cannot use a prayer like a rat-rhyme,'' answered the honest
clergyman; ``and if you would have your soul redeemed like a
prey from the fowler, Laird, you must needs show me your state
of mind.''

  ``And shouldna ye ken that without my telling you?'' answered
the patient. ``What have I been paying stipend and teind, parsonage
and vicarage, for, ever sin' the aughty-nine, and I canna
get a spell of a prayer for't, the only time I ever asked for ane
in my life?---Gang awa wi' your whiggery, if that's a' ye can
do; auld Curate Kilstoup wad hae read half the prayer-book to
me by this time---Awa wi' ye!---Doctor, let's see if ye can do
onything better for me.''

  The doctor, who had obtained some information in the meanwhile
from the housekeeper on the state of his complaints,
assured him the medical art could not prolong his life many hours.

  ``Then damn Mass John and you baith!'' cried the furious
and intractable patient. ``Did ye come here for naething but
to tell me that ye canna help me at the pinch? Out wi' them,
Jenny---out o' the house! and, Jock, my curse, and the curse of
Cromwell, go wi' ye, if ye gie them either fee or bountith, or sae
muckle as a black pair o' cheverons!''<*>

*  _Cheverons_---gloves.


  The clergyman and doctor made a speedy retreat out of the
apartment, while Dumbiedikes fell into one of those transports
of violent and profane language, which had procured him the
surname of Damn-me-dikes. ``Bring me the brandy bottle,
Jenny, ye b---,'' he cried, with a voice in which passion contended
with pain. ``I can die as I have lived, without fashing
ony o' them. But there's ae thing,'' he said, sinking his voice
---``there's ae fearful thing hings about my heart, and an anker
of brandy winna wash it away.---The Deanses at Woodend!---I
sequestrated them in the dear years, and now they are to flit,
they'll starve---and that Beersheba, and that auld trooper's wife
and her oe, they'll starve---they'll starve!---Look out, Jock;
what kind o' night is't?''

  ``On-ding o' snaw, father,'' answered Jock, after having opened
the window, and looked out with great composure.

  ``They'll perish in the drifts!'' said the expiring sinner---
``they'll perish wi' cauld!---but I'll be het eneugh, gin a' tales
be true.''

  This last observation was made under breath, and in a tone
which made the very attorney shudder. He tried his hand at
ghostly advice, probably for the first time in his life, and recommended
as an opiate for the agonised conscience of the Laird,
reparation of the injuries he had done to these distressed families,
which, he observed by the way, the civil law called _restitutio
in integrum._ But Mammon was struggling with Remorse for
retaining his place in a bosom he had so long possessed; and he
partly succeeded, as an old tyrant proves often too strong for his
insurgent rebels.

  ``I canna do't,'' he answered, with a voice of despair. ``It
would kill me to do't---how can ye bid me pay back siller, when
ye ken how I want it? or dispone Beersheba, when it lies sae
weel into my ain plaid-nuik? Nature made Dumbiedikes and
Beersheba to be ae man's land---She did, by ------. Nichil, it
wad kill me to part them.''

  ``But ye maun die whether or no, Laird,'' said Mr. Novit;
``and maybe ye wad die easier---it's but trying. I'll scroll the
disposition in nae time.''

  ``Dinna speak o't, sir,'' replied Dumbiedikes, ``or I'll fling
the stoup at your head.---But, Jock, lad, ye see how the warld
warstles wi' me on my deathbed---be kind to the puir creatures,
the Deanses and the Butlers---be kind to them, Jock. Dinna
let the warld get a grip o' ye, Jock---but keep the gear thegither!
and whate'er ye do, dispone Beersheba at no rate. Let the
creatures stay at a moderate mailing, and hae bite and soup; it
will maybe be the better wi' your father whare he's gaun, lad.''

  After these contradictory instructions, the Laird felt his mind
so much at ease, that he drank three bumpers of brandy continuously,
and ``soughed awa,'' as Jenny expressed it, in an attempt
to sing ``Deil stick the Minister.''

  His death made a revolution in favour of the distressed families.
John Dumbie, now of Dumbiedikes, in his own right,
seemed to be close and selfish enough, but wanted the grasping
spirit and active mind of his father; and his guardian happened
to agree with him in opinion, that his father's dying recommendation
should be attended to. The tenants, therefore, were not
actually turned out of doors among the snow-wreaths, and were
allowed wherewith to procure butter-milk and peas-bannocks,
which they ate under the full force of the original malediction.
The cottage of Deans, called Woodend, was not very distant
from that at Beersheba. Formerly there had been but little
intercourse between the families. Deans was a sturdy Scotsman,
with all sort of prejudices against the southern, and the spawn
of the southern. Moreover, Deans was, as we have said, a
stanch Presbyterian, of the most rigid and unbending adherence
to what he conceived to be the only possible straight line, as he
was wont to express himself, between right-hand heats and extremes
and left-hand defections; and, therefore, he held in high
dread and horror all Independents, and whomsoever he supposed
allied to them.

  But, notwithstanding these national prejudices and religious
professions, Deans and the widow Butler were placed in such a
situation, as naturally and at length created some intimacy
between the families. They had shared a common danger and
a mutual deliverance. They needed each other's assistance, like
a company, who, crossing a mountain stream, are compelled to
cling close together, lest the current should be too powerful for
any who are not thus supported.

  On nearer acquaintance, too, Deans abated some of his prejudices.
He found old Mrs. Butler, though not thoroughly
grounded in the extent and bearing of the real testimony against
the defections of the times, had no opinions in favour of the
Independent party; neither was she an Englishwoman. Therefore,
it was to be hoped, that, though she was the widow of an
enthusiastic corporal of Cromwell's dragoons, her grandson
might be neither schismatic nor anti-national, two qualities
concerning which Goodman Deans had as wholesome a terror as
against papists and malignants, Above all (for Douce Davie
Deans had his weak side), he perceived that widow Butler
looked up to him with reverence, listened to his advice, and
compounded for an occasional fling at the doctrines of her
deceased husbands to which, as we have seen, she was by no
means warmly attached, in consideration of the valuable counsels
which the Presbyterian afforded her for the management of her
little farm. These usually concluded with ``they may do otherwise
in England, neighbour Butler, for aught I ken;'' or, ``it
may be different in foreign parts;'' or, ``they wha think differently
on the great foundation of our covenanted reformation, overturning
and mishguggling the government and discipline of the
kirk, and breaking down the carved work of our Zion, might
be for sawing the craft wi' aits; but I say peace, peace.'' And
as his advice was shrewd and sensible, though conceitedly given,
it was received with gratitude, and followed with respect.

  The intercourse which took place betwixt the families at Beersheba
and Woodend became strict and intimate, at a very early
period, betwixt Reuben Butler, with whom the reader is already
in some degree acquainted, and Jeanie Deans, the only child of
Douce Davie Deans by his first wife, ``that singular Christian
woman,'' as he was wont to express himself, ``whose name was
savoury to all that knew her for a desirable professor, Christian
Menzies in Hochmagirdle.'' The manner of which intimacy,
and the consequences thereof, we now proceed to relate.
