




		CHAPTER FORTY-SEVENTH.

	Happy thou art! then happy be,
	    Nor envy me my lot;
	Thy happy state I envy thee,
	    And peaceful cot.
			Lady Charlotte Campbell.

  The letter, which Mrs. Butler, when retired into her own apartment,
perused with anxious wonder, was certainly from Effie,
although it had no other signature than the letter E.; and although
the orthography, style, and penmanship, were very far
superior not only to anything which Effie could produce, who,
though a lively girl, had been a remarkably careless scholar, but
even to her more considerate sister's own powers of composition
and expression. The manuscript was a fair Italian hand, though
something stiff and constrained---the spelling and the diction
that of a person who had been accustomed to read good composition,
and mix in good society.

  The tenor of the letter was as follows:---

  ``My Dearest Sister,---At many risks I venture to write
to you, to inform you that I am still alive, and, as to worldly
situation, that I rank higher than I could expect or merit. If
wealth, and distinction, and an honourable rank, could make a
woman happy, I have them all; but you, Jeanie, whom the
world might think placed far beneath me in all these respects,
are far happier than I am. I have had means of hearing of
your welfare, my dearest Jeanie, from time to time---I think I
should have broken my heart otherwise. I have learned with
great pleasure of your increasing family. We have not been
worthy of such a blessing; two infants have been successively
removed, and we are now childless---God's will be done! But,
if we had a child, it would perhaps divert him from the gloomy
thoughts which make him terrible to himself and others. Yet
do not let me frighten you, Jeanie; he continues to be kind,
and I am far better off than I deserve. You will wonder at
my better scholarship; but when I was abroad, I had the best
teachers, and I worked hard, because my progress pleased him.
He is kind, Jeanie, only he has much to distress him, especially
when he looks backward. When I look backward myself, I
have always a ray of comfort: it is in the generous conduct of
a sister, who forsook me not when I was forsaken by every one.
You have had your reward. You live happy in the esteem and
love of all who know you, and I drag on the life of a miserable
impostor, indebted for the marks of regard I receive to a tissue
of deceit and lies, which the slightest accident may unravel.
He has produced me to his friends, since the estate opened to
him, as a daughter of a Scotchman of rank, banished on account
of the Viscount of Dundee's wars---that is, our Fr's old friend
Clavers, you know---and he says I was educated in a Scotch
convent; indeed, I lived in such a place long enough to enable
me to support the character. But when a countryman approaches
me, and begins to talk, as they all do, of the various
families engaged in Dundee's affair, and to make inquiries into
my connections, and when I see his eye bent on mine with such
an expression of agony, my terror brings me to the very risk of
detection. Good-nature and politeness have hitherto saved me,
as they prevented people from pressing on me with distressing
questions. But how long---O how long, will this be the case!---
And if I bring this disgrace on him, he will hate me---he will
kill me, for as much as he loves me; he is as jealous of his
family honour now, as ever he was careless about it. I have
been in England four months, and have often thought of writing
to you; and yet, such are the dangers that might arise from an
intercepted letter, that I have hitherto forborne. But now I
am obliged to run the risk. Last week I saw your great friend,
the D. of A. He came to my box, and sate by me; and something
in the play put him in mind of you---Gracious Heaven!
he told over your whole London journey to all who were in the
box, but particularly to the wretched creature who was the
occasion of it all. If he had known---if he could have conceived,
beside whom he was sitting, and to whom the story was told!---
I suffered with courage, like an Indian at the stake, while they
are rending his fibres and boring his eyes, and while he smiles
applause at each well-imagined contrivance of his torturers.
It was too much for me at last, Jeanie---I fainted; and my
agony was imputed partly to the heat of the place, and partly
to my extreme sensibility; and, hypocrite all over, I encouraged
both opinions---anything but discovery! Luckily, _he_ was not
there. But the incident has more alarms. I am obliged to
meet your great man often; and he seldom sees me without
talking of E. D. and J. D., and R. B. and D. D., as persons
in whom my amiable sensibility is interested. My amiable
sensibility!!!---And then the cruel tone of light indifference
with which persons in the fashionable world speak together on
the most affecting subjects! To hear my guilt, my folly, my
agony, the foibles and weaknesses of my friends---even your
heroic exertions, Jeanie, spoken of in the drolling style which
is the present tone in fashionable life---Scarce all that I formerly
endured is equal to this state of irritation---then it was
blows and stabs---now it is pricking to death with needles and
pins.---He---I mean the D.---goes down next month to spend
the shooting-season in Scotland---he says, he makes a point of
always dining one day at the Manse---be on your guard, and do
not betray yourself, should he mention me---Yourself, alas! _you_
have nothing to betray---nothing to fear; you, the pure, the
virtuous, the heroine of unstained faith, unblemished purity,
what can you have to fear from the world or its proudest
minions? It is E. whose life is once more in your hands---it
is E. whom you are to save from being plucked of her borrowed
plumes, discovered, branded, and trodden down, first by him,
perhaps, who has raised her to this dizzy pinnacle!---The
enclosure will reach you twice a-year---do not refuse it---it is
out of my own allowance, and may be twice as much when you
want it. With you it may do good---with me it never can.

  ``Write to me soon, Jeanie, or I shall remain in the agonising
apprehension that this has fallen into wrong hands---Address
simply to L. S., under cover, to the Reverend George Whiterose,
in the Minster-Close, York. He thinks I correspond with
some of my noble Jacobite relations who are in Scotland. How
high-church and jacobitical zeal would burn in his checks, if
he knew he was the agent, not of Euphemia Setoun, of the
honourable house of Winton, but of E. D., daughter of a
Cameronian cowfeeder!---Jeanie, I can laugh yet sometimes---
but God protect you from such mirth.---My father---I mean
your father, would say it was like the idle crackling of thorns;
but the thorns keep their poignancy, they remain unconsumed.
Farewell, my dearest Jeanie---Do not show this even to Mr.
Butler, much less to any one else. I have every respect for him,
but his principles are over strict, and my case will not endure
severe handling.---I rest your affectionate sister, E.''

  In this long letter there was much to surprise as well as to
distress Mrs. Butler. That Effie---her sister Effie, should be
mingling freely in society, and apparently on not unequal
terms, with the Duke of Argyle, sounded like something so
extraordinary, that she even doubted if she read truly. Not
was it less marvellous, that, in the space of four years, her
education should have made such progress. Jeanie's humility
readily allowed that Effie had always, when she chose it, been
smarter at her book than she herself was, but then she was
very idle, and, upon the whole, had made much less proficiency.
Love, or fear, or necessity, however, had proved an able school-mistress,
and completely supplied all her deficiencies.

  What Jeanie least liked in the tone of the letter, was a
smothered degree of egotism. ``We should have heard little
about her,'' said Jeanie to herself, ``but that she was feared the
Duke might come to learn wha she was, and a' about her puir
friends here; but Effie, puir thing, aye looks her ain way, and
folk that do that think mair o' themselves than of their neighbours.
---I am no clear about keeping her siller,'' she added,
taking up a <L>50 note which had fallen out of the paper to the
floor. ``We hae eneugh, and it looks unco like theftboot, or
hushmoney, as they ca' it; she might hae been sure that I wad
say naething wad harm her, for a' the gowd in Lunnon. And
I maun tell the minister about it. I dinna see that she suld be
sae feared for her ain bonny bargain o' a gudeman, and that I
shouldna reverence Mr. Butler just as much; and sae I'll e'en
tell him, when that tippling body the Captain has ta'en boat in
the morning.---But I wonder at my ain state of mind,'' she
added, turning back, after she had made a step or two to the
door to join the gentlemen; ``surely I am no sic a fule as to
be angry that Effie's a braw lady, while I am only a minister's
wife?---and yet I am as petted as a bairn, when I should bless
God, that has redeemed her from shame, and poverty, and
guilt, as ower likely she might hae been plunged into.''

  Sitting down upon a stool at the foot of the bed, she folded
her arms upon her bosom, saying within herself, ``From this
place will I not rise till I am in a better frame of mind;'' and
so placed, by dint of tearing the veil from the motives of her
little temporary spleen against her sister, she compelled herself
to be ashamed of them, and to view as blessings the advantages
of her sister's lot, while its embarrassments were the necessary
consequences of errors long since committed. And thus she
fairly vanquished the feeling of pique which she naturally
enough entertained, at seeing Effie, so long the object of her
care and her pity, soar suddenly so high above her in life, as to
reckon amongst the chief objects of her apprehension the risk
of their relationship being discovered.

  When this unwonted burst of _amour propre_ was thoroughly
subdued, she walked down to the little parlour where the
gentlemen were finishing their game, and heard from the Captain
a confirmation of the news intimated in her letter, that
the Duke of Argyle was shortly expected at Roseneath.

  ``He'll find plenty of moor-fowls and plack-cock on the moors
of Auchingower, and he'll pe nae doubt for taking a late dinner,
and a ped at the Manse, as he has done pefore now.''

  ``He has a gude right, Captain,'' said Jeanie.

  ``Teil ane potter to ony ped in the kintra,'' answered the
Captain. ``And ye had potter tell your father, puir body, to get
his beasts a' in order, and put his tamn'd Cameronian nonsense
out o' his head for twa or three days, if he can pe so opliging;
for fan I speak to him apout prute pestil, he answers me out o'
the Pible, whilk is not using a shentleman weel, unless it be a
person of your cloth, Mr. Putler.''

  No one understood better than Jeanie the merit of the soft
answer, which turneth away wrath; and she only smiled, and
hoped that his Grace would find everything that was under
her father's care to his entire satisfaction. 

  But the Captain, who had lost the whole postage of the letter
at backgammon, was in the pouting mood not unusual to losers,
and which, says the proverb, must be allowed to them.

  ``And, Master Putler, though you know I never meddle with
the things of your kirk-sessions, yet I must pe allowed to say
that I will not be pleased to allow Ailie MacClure of Deepheugh
to be poonished as a witch, in respect she only spaes fortunes,
and does not lame, or plind, or pedevil any persons, or coup
cadger's carts, or ony sort of mischief; put only tells people
good fortunes, as anent our poats killing so many seals and
doug-fishes, whilk is very pleasant to hear.''

  ``The woman,'' said Butler, ``is, I believe, no witch, but a
cheat: and it is only on that head that she is summoned to the
kirk-session, to cause her to desist in future from practising her
impostures upon ignorant persons.''

  ``I do not know,'' replied the gracious Duncan, ``what her
practices or postures are, but I pelieve that if the poys take
hould on her to duck her in the Clachan purn, it will be a very
sorry practice---and I pelieve, moreover, that if I come in
thirdsman among you at the kirk-sessions, you will be all in a
tamn'd pad posture indeed.''

  Without noticing this threat, Mr. Butler replied, ``That he
had not attended to the risk of ill-usage which the poor woman
might undergo at the hands of the rabble, and that he would
give her the necessary admonition in private, instead of bringing
her before the assembled session.''

  ``This,'' Duncan said, ``was speaking like a reasonable
shentleman;'' and so the evening passed peaceably off.

  Next morning, after the Captain had swallowed his morning
draught of Athole brose, and departed in his coach and six,
Mrs. Butler anew deliberated upon communicating to her
husband her sister's letter. But she was deterred by the recollection,
that, in doing so, she would unveil to him the whole of
a dreadful secret, of which, perhaps, his public character might
render him an unfit depositary. Butler already had reason to
believe that Effie had eloped with that same Robertson who
had been a leader in the Porteous mob, and who lay under
sentence of death for the robbery at Kirkcaldy. But he did not
know his identity with George Staunton, a man of birth and
fortune, who had now apparently reassumed his natural rank
in society. Jeanie had respected Staunton's own confession as
sacred, and upon reflection she considered the letter of her sister 
as equally so, and resolved to mention the contents to no one.

  On reperusing the letter, she could not help observing the
staggering and unsatisfactory condition of those who have risen
to distinction by undue paths, and the outworks and bulwarks
of fiction and falsehood, by which they are under the necessity
of surrounding and defending their precarious advantages. But
she was not called upon, she thought, to unveil her sister's
original history---it would restore no right to any one, for she
was usurping none---it would only destroy her happiness, and
degrade her in the public estimation. Had she been wise, Jeanie
thought she would have chosen seclusion and privacy, in place
of public life and gaiety; but the power of choice might not be
hers. The money, she thought, could not be returned without
her seeming haughty and unkind. She resolved, therefore,
upon reconsidering this point, to employ it as occasion should
serve, either in educating her children better than her own
means could compass, or for their future portion. Her sister
had enough, was strongly bound to assist Jeanie by any means
in her power, and the arrangement was so natural and proper,
that it ought not to be declined out of fastidious or romantic
delicacy. Jeanie accordingly wrote to her sister, acknowledging
her letter, and requesting to hear from her as often as she
could. In entering into her own little details of news, chiefly
respecting domestic affairs, she experienced a singular vacillation
of ideas; for sometimes she apologised for mentioning
things unworthy the notice of a lady of rank, and then recollected
that everything which concerned her should be interesting
to Effie. Her letter, under the cover of Mr. Whiterose, she
committed to the post-office at Glasgow, by the intervention of
a parishioner who had business at that city.

  The next week brought the Duke to Roseneath, and shortly
afterwards he intimated his intention of sporting in their
neighbourhood, and taking his bed at the Manse; an honour
which he had once or twice done to its inmates on former
occasions.

  Effie proved to be perfectly right in her auticipations. The
Duke had hardly set himself down at Mrs. Butler's right hand,
and taken upon himself the task of carving the excellent ``barn-door
chucky,'' which had been selected as the high dishes upon
this honourable occasion, before he began to speak of Lady
Staunton of Willingham, in Lincolnshire, and the great noise
which her wit and beauty made in London. For much of this
Jeanie was, in some measure, prepared---but Effie's wit! that
would never have entered into her imagination, being ignorant
how exactly raillery in the higher rank resembles flippancy
among their inferiors.

  ``She has been the ruling belle---the blazing star---the universal
toast of the winter,'' said the Duke; ``and is really the
most beautiful creature that was seen at court upon the birth-day.''

  The birthday! and at court!---Jeanie was annihilated, remembering
well her own presentation, all its extraordinary
circumstances, and particularly the cause of it.

  ``I mention this lady particularly to you, Mrs. Butler,'' said
the Duke, ``because she has something in the sound of her
voice, and cast of her countenance, that reminded me of you---
not when you look so pale though---you have over-fatigued
yourself---you must pledge me in a glass of wine.''

  She did so, and Butler observed, ``It was dangerous flattery
in his Grace to tell a poor minister's wife that she was like a
court-beauty.''

  ``Oho, Mr. Butler,'' said the Duke, ``I find you are growing
jealous; but it's rather too late in the day, for you know how
long I have admired your wife. But seriously, there is betwixt
them one of those inexplicable likenesses which we see in
countenances, that do not otherwise resemble each other.''

  ``The perilous part of the compliment has flown off,'' thought
Mr. Butler.

  His wife, feeling the awkwardness of silence, forced herself to
say, ``That, perhaps, the lady might be her countrywoman, and
the language might have made some resemblance.''

  ``You are quite right,'' replied the Duke. ``She is a Scotch-woman,
and speaks with a Scotch accent, and now and then a
provincial word drops out so prettily, that it is quite Doric,
Mr. Butler.''

  ``I should have thought,'' said the clergyman, ``that would
have sounded vulgar in the great city.''

  ``Not at all,'' replied the Duke; ``you must suppose it is not
the broad coarse Scotch that is spoken in the Cowgate of Edinburgh,
or in the Gorbals. This lady has been very little in
Scotland, in fact she was educated in a convent abroad, and
speaks that pure court-Scotch, which was common in my
younger days; but it is so generally disused now, that it sounds
like a different dialect, entirely distinct from our modern _patois._''

  Notwithstanding her anxiety, Jeanie could not help admiring
within herself, how the most correct judges of life and manners
can be imposed on by their own preconceptions, while the Duke
proceeded thus: ``She is of the unfortunate house of Winton,
I believe; but, being bred abroad, she had missed the opportunity
of learning her own pedigree, and was obliged to me
for informing her, that she must certainly come of the Setons
of Windygoul. I wish you could have seen how prettily she
blushed at her own ignorance. Amidst her noble and elegant
manners, there is now and then a little touch of bashfulness and
conventual rusticity, if I may call it so, that makes her quite
enchanting. You see at once the rose that had bloomed untouched
amid the chaste precincts of the cloister, Mr. Butler.''

  True to the hint, Mr. Butler failed not to start with his

  	``Ut flos in septis secretus nascitur hortis,'' etc.,

while his wife could hardly persuade herself that all this was
spoken of Effie Deans, and by so competent a judge as the Duke
of Argyle; and had she been acquainted with Catullus, would
have thought the fortunes of her sister had reversed the whole
passage.

  She was, however, determined to obtain some indemnification
for the anxious feelings of the moment, by gaining all the
intelligence she could; and therefore ventured to make some
inquiry about the husband of the lady his Grace admired so
much.

  ``He is very rich,'' replied the Duke; ``of an ancient family,
and has good manners: but he is far from being such a general
favourite as his wife. Some people say he can be very pleasant
---I never saw him so; but should rather judge him reserved,
and gloomy, and capricious. He was very wild in his youth,
they say, and has bad health; yet he is a good-looking man
enough---a great friend of your Lord High Commissioner of the
Kirk, Mr. Butler.''

  ``Then he is the friend of a very worthy and honourable
nobleman,'' said Butler.

  ``Does he admire his lady as much as other people do?'' said
Jeanie, in a low voice.

  ``Who---Sir George? They say he is very fond of her,'' said
the Duke; ``but I observe she trembles a little when he fixes
his eye on her, and that is no good sign---But it is strange
how I am haunted by this resemblance of yours to Lady Staunton,
in look and tone of voice. One would almost swear you
were sisters.''

  Jeanie's distress became uncontrollable, and beyond concealment.
The Duke of Argyle was much disturbed, good-naturedly
ascribing it to his having unwittingly recalled, to her remembrance
her family misfortunes. He was too well-bred to attempt
to apologise; but hastened to change the subject, and arrange
certain points of dispute which had occurred betwixt Duncan
of Knock and the minister, acknowledging that his worthy
substitute was sometimes a little too obstinate, as well as too
energetic, in his executive measures.

  Mr. Butler admitted his general merits; but said, ``He would
presume to apply to the worthy gentleman the words of the poet
to Marrucinus Asinius,

			Manu------
	Non belle uteris in joco atque vino.''

  The discourse being thus turned on parish business, nothing
farther occurred that can interest the reader.
