




		CHAPTER FIFTY-FIRST.

		------I did send for thee,
	*	*	*	*	*
	That Talbot's name might be in thee revived,
	When sapless age and weak, unable limbs,
	Should bring thy father to his drooping chair.
	But---O malignant and ill-boding stars!---
				First part of Henry the Sixth.

  Duncan and his party had not proceeded very far in the direction
of the Caird's Cove before they heard a shot, which was
quickly followed by one or two others. ``Some tamn'd villains
among the roe-deer,'' said Duncan; ``look sharp out, lads.''

  The clash of swords was next heard, and Duncan and his
myrmidons, hastening to the spot, found Butler and Sir George
Staunton's servant in the hands of four ruffians. Sir George
himself lay stretched on the ground, with his drawn sword in
his hand. Duncan, who was as brave as a lion, instantly fired
his pistol at the leader of the band, unsheathed his sword, cried
out to his men, _Claymore!_ and run his weapon through the
body of the fellow whom he had previously wounded, who was
no other thau Donacha dhu na Dunaigh himself. The other
banditti were speedily overpowered, excepting one young lad,
who made wonderful resistance for his years, and was at length
secured with difficulty.

  Butler, so soon as he was liberated from the ruffians, ran to
raise Sir George Staunton, but life had wholly left him.

  ``A creat misfortune,'' said Duncan; ``I think it will pe pest
that I go forward to intimate it to the coot lady.---Tavie, my
dear, you hae smelled pouther for the first time this day---take
my sword and hack off Donacha's head, whilk will pe coot
practice for you against the time you may wish to do the same
kindness to a living shentleman---or hould! as your father
does not approve, you may leave it alone, as he will pe a greater
object of satisfaction to Leddy Staunton to see him entire; and
I hope she will do me the credit to pelieve that I can afenge a
shentleman's plood fery speedily and well.''

  Such was the observation of a man too much accustomed to
the ancient state of manners in the Highlands, to look upon
the issue of such a skirmish as anything worthy of wonder or
emotion.

  We will not attempt to describe the very contrary effect
which the unexpected disaster produced upon Lady Staunton,
when the bloody corpse of her husband was brought to the
house, where she expected to meet him alive and well. All was
forgotten, but that he was the lover of her youth; and whatever
were his faults to the world, that he had towards her
exhibited only those that arose from the inequality of spirits
and temper, incident to a situation of unparalleled difficulty.
In the vivacity of her grief she gave way to all the natural irritability
of her temper; shriek followed shriek, and swoon succeeded
to swoon. It required all Jeanie's watchful affection to
prevent her from making known, in these paroxysms of affliction,
much which it was of the highest importance that she
should keep secret.

  At length silence and exhaustion succeeded to frenzy, and
Jeanie stole out to take counsel with her husband, and to
exhort him to anticipate the Captain's interference, by taking
possession, in Lady Staunton's name, of the private papers of
her deceased husband. To the utter astonishment of Butler,
she now, for the first time, explained the relation betwixt herself
and Lady Staunton, which authorised, nay, demanded, that
he should prevent any stranger from being unnecessarily made
acquainted with her family affairs. It was in such a crisis that
Jeanie's active and undaunted habits of virtuous exertion were
most conspicuous. While the Captain's attention was still
engaged by a prolonged refreshment, and a very tedious examination,
in Gaelic and English, of all the prisoners, and every
other witness of the fatal transaction, she had the body of her
brother-in-law undressed and properly disposed. It then appeared,
from the crucifix, the beads, and the shirt of hair which
he wore next his person, that his sense of guilt had induced
him to receive the dogmata of a religion, which pretends, by
the maceration of the body, to expiate the crimes of the soul.
In the packet of papers which the express had brought to Sir
George Staunton from Edinburgh, and which Butler, authorised
by his connection with the deceased, did not scruple to
examine, he found new and astonishing intelligence, which gave
him reason to thank God he had taken that measure.

  Ratcliffe, to whom all sorts of misdeeds and misdoers were
familiar, instigated by the promised reward, soon found himself
in a condition to trace the infant of these unhappy parents.
The woman to whom Meg Murdockson had sold that most
unfortunate child, had made it the companion of her wanderings
and her beggary, until he was about seven or eight years
old, when, as Ratcliffe learned from a companion of hers, then
in the Correction House of Edinburgh, she sold him in her turn
to Donacha dhu na Dunaigh. This man, to whom no act of
mischief was unknown, was occasionally an agent in a horrible
trade then carried on betwixt Scotland and America, for supplying
the plantations with servants, by means of _kidnapping,_ as it
was termed, both men and women, but especially children under
age. Here Ratcliffe lost sight of the boy, but had no doubt
but Donacha Dhu could give an account of him. The gentleman
of the law, so often mentioned, despatched therefore an
express, with a letter to Sir George Staunton, and another
covering a warrant for apprehension of Donacha, with instructions
to the Captain of Knockdunder to exert his utmost energy
for that purpose.

  Possessed of this information, and with a mind agitated by
the most gloomy apprehensions, Butler now joined the Captain,
and obtained from him with some difficulty a sight of the
examinations. These, with a few questions to the elder of the
prisoners, soon confirmed the most dreadful of Butler's anticipations.
We give the heads of the information, without descending
into minute details.

  Donacha Dhu had indeed purchased Effie's unhappy child,
with the purpose of selling it to the American traders, whom
he had been in the habit of supplying with human flesh. But
no opportunity occurred for some time; and the boy, who was
known by the name of ``The Whistler,'' made some impression
on the heart and affections even of this rude savage, perhaps
because he saw in him flashes of a spirit as fierce and vindictive
as his own. When Donacha struck or threatened him---a very
common occurrence---he did not answer with complaints and
entreaties like other children, but with oaths and efforts at
revenge---he had all the wild merit, too, by which Woggarwolfe's
arrow-bearing page won the hard heart of his master:

	Like a wild cub, rear'd at the ruffian's feet,
	He could say biting jests, bold ditties sing,
	And quaff his foaming bumper at the board,
	With all the mockery of a little man.<*>

* Ethwald.


  In short, as Donacha Dhu said, the Whistler was a born imp
of Satan, and _therefore_ he should never leave him. Accordingly,
from his eleventh year forward, he was one of the band,
and often engaged in acts of violence. The last of these was
more immediately occasioned by the researches which the
Whistler's real father made after him whom he had been
taught to consider as such. Donacha Dhu's fears had been for
some time excited by the strength of the means which began
now to be employed against persons of his description. He was
sensible he existed only by the precarious indulgence of his
namesake, Duncan of Knockdunder, who was used to boast that
he could put him down or string him up when he had a mind.
He resolved to leave the kingdom by means of one of those
sloops which were engaged in the traffic of his old kidnapping
friends, and which was about to sail for America; but he was
desirous first to strike a bold stroke.

  The ruffian's cupidity was excited by the intelligence, that a
wealthy Englishman was coming to the Manse---he had neither
forgotten the Whistler's report of the gold he had seen in Lady
Staunton's purse, nor his old vow of revenge against the minister;
and, to bring the whole to a point, he conceived the hope
of appropriating the money, which, according to the general
report of the country, the minister was to bring from Edinburgh
to pay for his pew purchase. While he was considering how
he might best accomplish his purpose, he received the intelligence
from one quarter, that the vessel in which he proposed to
sail was to sail immediately from Greenock; from another, that
the minister and a rich English lord, with a great many thousand
pounds, were expected the next evening at the Manse;
and from a third, that he must consult his safety by leaving his
ordinary haunts as soon as possible, for that the Captain had
ordered out a party to scour the glens for him at break of day.
Donacha laid his plans with promptitude and decision. He embarked
with the Whistler and two others of his band (whom,
by the by, he meant to sell to the kidnappers), and set sail
for the Caird's Cove. He intended to lurk till nightfall in the
wood adjoining to this place, which he thought was too near
the habitation of men to excite the suspicion of Duncan Knock,
then break into Butler's peaceful habitation, and flesh at once
his appetite for plunder and revenge. When his villany was
accomplished, his boat was to convey him to the vessel, which,
according to previous agreement with the master, was instantly
to set sail.

  This desperate design would probably have succeeded, but
for the ruffians being discovered in their lurking-place by Sir
George Staunton and Butler, in their accidental walk from the
Caird's Cove towards the Manse. Finding himself detected,
and at the same time observing that the servant carried a
casket, or strong-box, Donacha conceived that both his prize
and his victims were within his power, and attacked the travellers
without hesitation. Shots were fired and swords drawn
on both sides; Sir George Staunton offered the bravest resistance
till he fell, as there was too much reason to believe, by
the hand of a son, so long sought, and now at length so
unhappily met.

  While Butler was half-stunned with this intelligence, the
hoarse voice of Knockdunder added to his consternation.

  ``I will take the liperty to take down the pell-ropes, Mr.
Putler, as I must pe taking order to hang these idle people up
to-morrow morning, to teach them more consideration in their
doings in future.''

  Butler entreated him to remember the act abolishing the
heritable jurisdictions, and that he ought to send them to
Glasgow or Inverary, to be tried by the Circuit. Duncan
scorned the proposal.

  ``The Jurisdiction Act,'' he said, ``had nothing to do put
with the rebels, and specially not with Argyle's country; and
he would hang the men up all three in one row before coot
Leddy Staunton's windows, which would be a great comfort to
her in the morning to see that the coot gentleman, her husband,
had been suitably afenged.''

  And the utmost length that Butler's most earnest entreaties
could prevail was, that he would, reserve ``the twa pig carles
for the Circuit, but as for him they ca'd the Fustler, he should
try how he could fustle in a swinging tow, for it suldna be said
that a shentleman, friend to the Duke, was killed in his country,
and his people didna take at least twa lives for ane.''

  Butler entreated him to spare the victim for his soul's sake.
But Knockdunder answered, ``that the soul of such a scum had
been long the tefil's property, and that, Cot tam! he was determined
to gif the tefil his due.''

  All persuasion was in vain, and Duncan issued his mandate
for execution on the succeeding morning. The child of guilt
and misery was separated from his companions, strongly
pinioned, and committed to a separate room, of which the
Captain kept the key.

  In the silence of the night, however, Mrs. Butler arose,
resolved, if possible, to avert, at least to delay, the fate which
hung over her nephew, especially if, upon conversing with him,
she should see any hope of his being brought to better temper.
She had a master-key that opened every lock in the house; and
at midnight, when all was still, she stood before the eyes of the
astonished young savage, as, hard bound with cords, he lay, like
a sheep designed for slaughter, upon a quantity of the refuse of
flax which filled a corner in the apartment. Amid features
sunburnt, tawny, grimed with dirt, and obscured by his shaggy
hair of a rusted black colour, Jeanie tried in vain to trace the
likeness of either of his very handsome parents. Yet how could
she refuse compassion to a creature so young and so wretched,---
so much more wretched than even he himself could be aware of,
since the murder he had too probably committed with his own
hand, but in which he had at any rate participated, was in
fact a parricide? She placed food on a table near him, raised
him, and slacked the cords on his arms, so as to permit him
to feed himself. He stretched out his hands, still smeared with
blood perhaps that of his father, and he ate voraciously and in
silence.

  ``What is your first name?'' said Jeanie, by way of opening
the conversation.

  ``The Whistler.''

  ``But your Christian name, by which you were baptized?''

  ``I never was baptized that I know of---I have no other
name than the Whistler.''

  ``Poor unhappy abandoned lad!'' said Jeanie. ``What
would ye do if you could escape from this place, and the death
you are to die to-morrow morning? ''

  ``Join wi' Rob Roy, or wi' Sergeant More Cameron'' (noted
freebooters at that time), ``and revenge Donacha's death on all
and sundry.''

  ``O ye unhappy boy,'' said Jeanie, ``do ye ken what will
come o' ye when ye die?''

  ``I shall neither feel cauld nor hunger more,'' said the youth
doggedly.

  ``To let him be execute in this dreadful state of mind would
be to destroy baith body and soul---and to let him gang I dare
not---what will be done?---But he is my sister's son---my own
nephew---our flesh and blood---and his hands and feet are
yerked as tight as cords can be drawn.---Whistler, do the cords
hurt you?''

  ``Very much.''

  ``But, if I were to slacken them, you would harm me?''

  ``No, I would not---you never harmed me or mine.''

  There may be good in him yet, thought Jeanie; I will try
fair play with him.

  She cut his bonds---he stood upright, looked round with a
laugh of wild exultation, clapped his hands together, and
sprung from the ground, as if in transport on finding himself
at liberty. He looked so wild, that Jeanie trembled at what
she had done.

  ``Let me out,'' said the young savage.

  ``I wunna, unless you promise''------

  ``Then I'll make you glad to let us both out.''

  He seized the lighted candle and threw it among the flax,
which was instantly in a flame. Jeanie screamed, and ran out
of the room; the prisoner rushed past her, threw open a window
in the passage, jumped into the garden, sprung over its enclosure,
bounded through the woods like a deer, and gained the seashore.
Meantime, the fire was extinguished, but the prisoner
was sought in vain. As Jeanie kept her own secret, the share
she had in his escape was not discovered: but they learned his
fate some time afterwards---it was as wild as his life had hitherto
been.

  The anxious inquiries of Butler at length learned, that the
youth had gained the ship in which his master, Donacha, had
designed to embark. But the avaricious shipmaster, inured by
his evil trade to every species of treachery, and disappointed of
the rich booty which Donacha had proposed to bring aboard,
secured the person of the fugitive, and having transported him
to America, sold him as a slave, or indented servant, to a
Virginian planter, far up the country. When these tidings
reached Butler, he sent over to America a sufficient sum to
redeem the lad from slavery, with instructions that measures
should be taken for improving his mind, restraining his evil
propensities, and encouraging whatever good might appear in
his character. But this aid came too late. The young man
had headed a conspiracy in which his inhuman master was put
to death, and had then fled to the next tribe of wild Indians.
He was never more heard of; and it may therefore be presumed
that he lived and died after the manner of that savage people,
with whom his previous habits had well fitted him to associate.

  All hopes of the young man's reformation being now ended,
Mr. and Mrs. Butler thought it could serve no purpose to
explain to Lady Staunton a history so full of horror. She
remained their guest more than a year, during the greater part
of which period her grief was excessive. In the latter months,
it assumed the appearance of listlessness and low spirits, which
the monotony of her sister's quiet establishment afforded no
means of dissipating. Effie, from her earliest youth, was never
formed for a quiet low content. Far different from her sister,
she required the dissipation of society to divert her sorrow, or
enhance her joy. She left the seclusion of Knocktarlitie with
tears of sincere affection, and after heaping its inmates with all
she could think of that might be valuable in their eyes. But
she _did_ leave it; and, when the anguish of the parting was
over, her departure was a relief to both sisters.

  The family at the Manse of Knocktarlitie, in their own
quiet happiness, heard of the well-dowered and beautiful Lady
Staunton resuming her place in the fashionable world. They
learned it by more substantial proofs, for David received a
commission; and as the military spirit of Bible Butler seemed
to have revived in him, his good behaviour qualified the envy
of five hundred young Highland cadets, ``come of good houses,''
who were astonished at the rapidity of his promotion. Reuben
followed the law, and rose more slowly, yet surely. Euphemia
Butler, whose fortune, augmented by her aunt's generosity, and
added to her own beauty, rendered her no small prize, married
a Highland laird, who never asked the name of her grand-father,
and was loaded on the occasion with presents from
Lady Staunton, which made her the envy of all the beauties in
Dumbarton and Argyle shires.

  After blazing nearly ten years in the fashionable world, and
hiding, like many of her compeers, an aching heart with a gay
demeanour---after declining repeated offers of the most respectable
kind for a second matrimonial engagement, Lady Staunton
betrayed the inward wound by retiring to the Continent, and
taking up her abode in the convent where she had received
her education. She never took the veil, but lived and died in
severe seclusion, and in the practice of the Roman Catholic
religion, in all its formal observances, vigils, and austerities.

  Jeanie had so much of her father's spirit as to sorrow bitterly
for this apostasy, and Butler joined in her regret. ``Yet any
religion, however imperfect,'' he said, ``was better than cold
scepticism, or the hurrying din of dissipation, which fills the
ears of worldlings, until they care for none of these things.''

  Meanwhile, happy in each other, in the prosperity of their
family, and the love and honour of all who knew them, this
simple pair lived beloved, and died lamented.



		READER,

  THIS TALE WILL NOT BE TOLD IN VAIN, IF IT SHALL BE
FOUND TO ILLUSTRATE THE GREAT TRUTH, THAT GUILT, THOUGH
IT MAY ATTAIN TEMPORAL SPLENDOUR, CAN NEVER CONFER
REAL HAPPINESS; THAT THE EVIL CONSEQUENCES OF OUR
CRIMES LONG SURVIVE THEIR COMMISSION, AND, LIKE THE
GHOSTS OF THE MURDERED, FOR EVER HAUNT THE STEPS OF
THE MALEFACTOR; AND THAT THE PATHS OF VIRTUE, THOUGH
SELDOM THOSE OF WORLDLY GREATNESS, ARE ALWAYS THOSE
OF PLEASANTNESS AND PEACE.




		L'ENVOY,

	BY JEDEDIAH CLEISHBOTHAM.

  Thus concludeth the Tale of ``The Heart of Mid-Lothian,''
which hath filled more pages than I opined. The Heart of Mid-Lothian
is now no more, or rather it is transferred to the extreme
side of the city, even as the Sieur Jean Baptiste Poquelin hath it,
in his pleasant comedy called _Le M<e'>decin Malgr<e'> Lui,_ where the
simulated doctor wittily replieth to a charge, that he had placed the
heart on the right side, instead of the left, ``_Cela <e'>tait autrefois ainsi,
mais nous avons chang<e'> tout cela._'' Of which witty speech if any
reader shall demand the purport, I have only to respond, that I teach
the French as well as the Classical tongues, at the easy rate of five
shillings per quarter, as my advertisements are periodically making
known to the public.
