




		CHAPTER THIRTY-FOURTH.

	My name is Argyle, you may well think it strange,
	To live at the court and never to change.
						Ballad.


  Few names deserve more honourable mention in the history of
Scotland, during this period, than that of John, Duke of Argyle
and Greenwich. His talents as a statesman and a soldier were
generally admitted; he was not without ambition, but ``without
the illness that attends it''---without that irregularity of thought
and aim, which often excites great men, in his peculiar situation,
(for it was a very peculiar one), to grasp the means of raising
themselves to power, at the risk of throwing a kingdom into
confusion. Pope has distinguished him as

	Argyle, the state's whole thunder born to wield,
	And shake alike the senate and the field.

  He was alike free from the ordinary vices of statesmen, falsehood,
namely, and dissimulation; and from those of warriors,
inordinate and violent thirst after self-aggrandisement.

  Scotland, his native country, stood at this time in a very
precarious and doubtful situation. She was indeed united to
England, but the cement had not had time to acquire consistence.
The irritation of ancient wrongs still subsisted, and
betwixt the fretful jealousy of the Scottish, and the supercilious
disdain of the English, quarrels repeatedly occurred, in the
course of which the national league, so important to the safety
of both, was in the utmost danger of being dissolved. Scotland
had, besides, the disadvantage of being divided into intestine
factions, which hated each other bitterly, and waited but a
signal to break forth into action.

  In such circumstances, another man, with the talents and
rank of Argyle, but without a mind so happily regulated, would
have sought to rise from the earth in the whirlwind, and direct
its fury. He chose a course more safe and more honourable.
Soaring above the petty distinctions of faction, his voice was
raised, whether in office or opposition, for those measures which
were at once just and lenient. His high military talents enabled
him, during the memorable year 1715, to render such services
to the House of Hanover, as, perhaps, were too great to be
either acknowledged or repaid. He had employed, too, his
utmost influence in softening the consequences of that insurrection
to the unfortunate gentlemen whom a mistaken sense of
loyalty had engaged in the affair, and was rewarded by the
esteem and affection of his country in an uncommon degree.
This popularity, with a discontented and warlike people, was
supposed to be a subject of jealousy at court, where the power
to become dangerous is sometimes of itself obnoxious, though
the inclination is not united with it. Besides, the Duke of
Argyle's independent and somewhat haughty mode of expressing
himself in Parliament, and acting in public, were ill calculated
to attract royal favour. He was, therefore, always respected,
and often employed; but he was not a favourite of George the
Second, his consort, or his ministers. At several different periods
in his life, the Duke might be considered as in absolute disgrace
at court, although he could hardly be said to be a declared
member of opposition. This rendered him the dearer to Scotland,
because it was usually in her cause that he incurred the
displeasure of his sovereign; and upon this very occasion of the
Porteous mob, the animated and eloquent opposition which he
had offered to the severe measures which were about to be
adopted towards the city of Edinburgh, was the more gratefully
received in that metropolis, as it was understood that the Duke's
interposition had given personal offence to Queen Caroline.

  His conduct upon this occasion, as, indeed, that of all the
Scottish members of the legislature, with one or two unworthy
exceptions, had been in the highest degree spirited. The popular
tradition, concerning his reply to Queen Caroline, has
been given already, and some fragments of his speech against
the Porteous Bill are still remembered. He retorted upon the
Chancellor, Lord Hardwicke, the insinuation that he had stated
himself in this case rather as a party than as a judge:---``I
appeal,'' said Argyle, ``to the House---to the nation, if I can be
justly branded with the infamy of being a jobber or a partisan.
Have I been a briber of votes?---a buyer of boroughs?---the
agent of corruption for any purpose, or on behalf of any party?
---Consider my life; examine my actions in the field and in the
cabinet, and see where there lies a blot that can attach to my
honour. I have shown myself the friend of my country---the
loyal subject of my king. I am ready to do so again, without
an instant's regard to the frowns or smiles of a court. I have
experienced both, and am prepared with indifference for either.
I have given my reasons for opposing this bill, and have made
it appear that it is repugnant to the international treaty of
union, to the liberty of Scotland, and, reflectively, to that of
England, to common justice, to common sense, and to the
public interest. Shall the metropolis of Scotland, the capital of
an independent nation. the residence of a long line of monarchs,
by whom that noble city was graced and dignified---shall such
a city, for the fault of an obscure and unknown body of rioters,
be deprived of its honours and its privileges---its gates and its
guards?---and shall a native Scotsman tamely behold the havoc?
I glory, my Lords, in opposing such unjust rigour, and reckon
it my dearest pride and honour to stand up in defence of my
native country while thus laid open to undeserved shame, and
unjust spoliation.''

  Other statesmen and orators, both Scottish and English, used
the same arguments, the bill was gradually stripped of its most
oppressive and obnoxious clauses, and at length ended in a fine
upon the city of Edinburgh in favour of Porteous's widow. So
that, as somebody observed at the time, the whole of these fierce
debates ended in making the fortune of an old cook-maid, such
having been the good woman's original capacity.

  The court, however, did not forget the baffle they had received
in this affair, and the Duke of Argyle, who had contributed so
much to it, was thereafter considered as a person in disgrace.
It is necessary to place these circumstances under the reader's
observation, both because they are connected with the preceding
and subsequent part of our narrative.

  The Duke was alone in his study, when one of his gentlemen
acquainted him, that a country-girl, from Scotland, was desirous
of speaking with his Grace.

  ``A country-girl, and from Scotland!'' said the Duke; ``what
can have brought the silly fool to London?---Some lover pressed
and sent to sea, or some stock sank in the South-Sea funds, or
some such hopeful concern, I suppose, and then nobody to
manage the matter but MacCallummore,---Well, this same
popularity has its inconveniences.---However, show our countrywoman
up, Archibald---it is ill manners to keep her in
attendance.''

  A young woman of rather low stature, and whose countenance
might be termed very modest and pleasing in expression,
though sun-burnt, somewhat freckled, and not possessing regular
features, was ushered into the splendid library. She wore
the tartan plaid of her country, adjusted so as partly to cover
her head, and partly to fall back over her shoulders. A quantity
of fair hair, disposed with great simplicity and neatness,
appeared in front of her round and good-humoured face, to
which the solemnity of her errand, and her sense of the Duke's
rank and importance, gave an appearance of deep awe, but not of
slavish fear, or fluttered bashfulness. The rest of Jeanie's dress
was in the style of Scottish maidens of her own class; but
arranged with that scrupulous attention to neatness and cleanliness,
which we often find united with that purity of mind, of
which it is a natural emblem.

  She stopped near the entrance of the room, made her deepest
reverence, and crossed her hands upon her bosom, without
uttering a syllable. The Duke of Argyle advanced towards
her; and, if she admired his graceful deportment and rich
dress, decorated with the orders which had been deservedly
bestowed on him, his courteous manner, and quick and intelligent
cast of countenance, he on his part was not less, or less
deservedly, struck with the quiet simplicity and modesty expressed
in the dress, manners, and countenance of his humble
countrywoman.

  ``Did you wish to speak with me, my bonny lass?'' said the
Duke, using the encouraging epithet which at once acknowledged
the connection betwixt them as country-folk; ``or did you wish
to see the Duchess?''

  ``My business is with your honour, my Lord---I mean your
Lordship's Grace.''

  ``And what is it, my good girl?'' said the Duke, in the
same mild and encouraging tone of voice. Jeanie looked at
the attendant. ``Leave us, Archibald,'' said the Duke, ``and
wait in the anteroom.'' The domestic retired. ``And now sit
down, my good lass,'' said the Duke; ``take your breath---take
your time, and tell me what you have got to say. I guess by
your dress, you are just come up from poor Scotland---Did you
come through the streets in your tartan plaid?''

  ``No, sir,'' said Jeanie; ``a friend brought me in ane o' their
street coaches---a very decent woman,'' she added, her courage
increasing as she became familiar with the sound of her own
voice in such a presence; ``your Lordship's Grace kens her---
it's Mrs. Glass, at the sign o' the Thistle.''

  ``O, my worthy snuff-merchant---I have always a chat with
Mrs. Glass when I purchase my Scots high-dried. Well, but
your business, my bonny woman---time and tide, you know,
wait for no one.''

  ``Your honour---I beg your Lordship's pardon---I mean your
Grace,''---for it must be noticed, that this matter of addressing
the Duke by his appropriate title had been anxiously inculcated
upon Jeanie by her friend Mrs. Glass, in whose eyes it was a
matter of such importance, that her last words, as Jeanie left
the coach, were, ``Mind to say your Grace;'' and Jeanie, who
had scarce ever in her life spoke to a person of higher quality
than the Laird of Dumbiedikes, found great difficulty in arranging
her language according to the rules of ceremony.

  The Duke, who saw her embarrassment, said, with his usual
affability, ``Never mind my grace, lassie; just speak out a plain
tale, and show you have a Scots tongue in your head.''

  ``Sir, I am muckle obliged---Sir, I am the sister of that poor
unfortunate criminal, Effie Deans, who is ordered for execution
at Edinburgh.'''

  ``Ah!'' said the Duke, ``I have heard of that unhappy
story, I think---a case of child-murder, under a special act of
parliament---Duncan Forbes mentioned it at dinner the other
day.''

  ``And I was come up frae the north, sir, to see what could
be done for her in the way of getting a reprieve or pardon, sir,
or the like of that.''

  ``Alas! my poor girl,'' said the Duke; ``you have made a
long and a sad journey to very little purpose---Your sister is
ordered for execution.''

  ``But I am given to understand that there is law for reprieving
her, if it is in the king's pleasure,'' said Jeanie.

  ``Certainly, there is,'' said the Duke; ``but that is purely in
the king's breast. The crime has been but too common---the
Scots crown-lawyers think it is right there should be an example.
Then the late disorders in Edinburgh have excited a prejudice
in government against the nation at large, which they think
can only be managed by measures of intimidation and severity.
What argument have you, my poor girl, except the warmth of
your sisterly affection, to offer against all this?---What is your
interest?---What friends have you at court?''

  ``None, excepting God and your Grace,'' said Jeanie, still
keeping her ground resolutely, however.

  ``Alas!'' said the Duke, ``I could almost say with old
Ormond, that there could not be any, whose influence was
smaller with kings and ministers. It is a cruel part of our
situation, young woman---I mean of the situation of men in my
circumstances, that the public ascribe to them influence which
they do not possess; and that individuals are led to expect from
them assistance which we have no means of rendering. But
candour and plain dealing is in the power of every one, and I
must not let you imagine you have resources in my influence,
which do not exist, to make your distress the heavier---I have
no means of averting your sister's fate---She must die.''

  ``We must a' die, sir,'' said Jeanie; ``it is our common doom
for our father's transgression; but we shouldna hasten ilk other
out o' the world, that's what your honour kens better than
me.''

  ``My good young woman,'' said the Duke, mildly, ``we are
all apt to blame the law under which we immediately suffer;
but you seem to have been well educated in your line of life,
and you must know that it is alike the law of God and man,
that the murderer shall surely die.''

  ``But, sir, Effie---that is, my poor sister, sir---canna be
proved to be a murderer; and if she be not, and the law
take her life notwithstanding, wha is it that is the murderer
then?''

  ``I am no lawyer,'' said the Duke; ``and I own I think the
statute a very severe one.''

  ``You are a law-maker, sir, with your leave; and, therefore,
ye have power over the law,'' answered Jeanie.

  ``Not in my individual capacity,'' said the Duke; ``though,
as one of a large body, I have a voice in the legislation. But
that cannot serve you---nor have I at present, I care not who
knows it, so much personal influence with the sovereign, as
would entitle me to ask from him the most insignificant favour.
What could tempt you, young woman, to address yourself to
me?''

  ``It was yourself, sir.''

  ``Myself?'' he replied---``I am sure you have never seen me
before.''

  ``No, sir; but a' the world kens that the Duke of Argyle is
his country's friend; and that ye fight for the right, and speak
for the right, and that there's nane like you in our present Israel,
and so they that think themselves wranged draw to refuge under
your shadow; and if ye wunna stir to save the blood of an innocent
countrywoman of your ain, what should we expect frae
southerns and strangers? And maybe I had another reason for
troubling your honour.''

  ``And what is that?'' asked the Duke.

  ``I hae understood from my father, that your honour's house,
and especially your gudesire and his father, laid down their
lives on the scaffold in the persecuting time. And my father
was honoured to gie his testimony baith in the cage and in the
pillory, as is specially mentioned in the books of Peter Walker
the packman, that your honour, I dare say, kens, for he uses
maist partly the westland of Scotland. And, sir, there's ane
that takes concern in me, that wished me to gang to your
Grace's presence, for his gudesire had done your gracious gudesire
some good turn, as ye will see frae these papers.''

  With these words, she delivered to the Duke the little parcel
which she had received from Butler. He opened it, and, in the
envelope, read with some surprise, `` `Musterroll of the men
serving in the troop of that godly gentleman, Captain Salathiel
Bangtext.---Obadiah Muggleton, Sin-Despise Double-knock,
Stand-fast-in-faith Gipps, Turn-to-the-right Thwack-away'---
What the deuce is this? A list of Praise-God Barebone's
Parliament I think, or of old Noll's evangelical army---that last
fellow should understand his wheelings, to judge by his name.---
But what does all this mean, my girl?''

  ``It was the other paper, sir,'' said Jeanie, somewhat abashed
at the mistake.

  ``O, this is my unfortunate grandfather's hand sure enough---
`To all who may have friendship for the house of Argyle, these
are to certify, that Benjamin Butler, of Monk's regiment of
dragoons, having been, under God, the means of saving my life
from four English troopers who were about, to slay me, I, having
no other present means of recompense in my power, do give
him this acknowledgment, hoping that it may be useful to him
or his during these troublesome times; and do conjure my
friends, tenants, kinsmen, and whoever will do aught for me,
either in the Highlands or Lowlands, to protect and assist the
said Benjamin Butler, and his friends or family, on their lawful
occasions, giving them such countenance, maintenance, and
supply, as may correspond with the benefit he hath bestowed on
me; witness my hand---                               Lorne.'

  ``This is a strong injunction---This Benjamin Butler was your
grandfather, I suppose?---You seem too young to have been his
daughter.''

  ``He was nae akin to me, sir---he was grandfather to ane---to
a neighbour's son---to a sincere weel-wisher of mine, sir,'' dropping
her little courtesy as she spoke.

  ``O, I understand,'' said the Duke---``a true-love affair. He
was the grandsire of one you are engaged to?''

  ``One I _was_ engaged to, sir,'' said Jeanie, sighing; ``but this
unhappy business of my poor sister''------

  ``What!'' said the Duke, hastily---``he has not deserted you
on that account, has he?''

  ``No, sir; he wad be the last to leave a friend in difficulties,''
said Jeanie; ``but I maun think for him as weel as for mysell.
He is a clergyman, sir, and it would not beseem him to marry
the like of me, wi' this disgrace on my kindred.''

  ``You are a singular young woman,'' said the Duke. ``You
seem to me to think of every one before yourself. And have
you really come up from Edinburgh on foot, to attempt this
hopeless solicitation for your sister's life?''

  ``It was not a'thegither on foot, sir,'' answered Jeanie; ``for
I sometimes got a cast in a waggon, and I had a horse from
Ferrybridge, and then the coach''------

  ``Well, never mind all that,'' interrupted the Duke---``What
reason have you for thinking your sister innocent?''

  ``Because she has not been proved guilty, as will appear from
looking at these papers.''

  She put into his hand a note of the evidence, and copies of
her sister's declaration. These papers Butler had procured after
her departure, and Saddletree had them forwarded to London,
to Mrs. Glass's care, so that Jeanie found the documents, so
necessary for supporting her suit, lying in readiness at her
arrival.

  ``Sit down in that chair, my good girl,'' said the Duke,---``until
I glance over the papers.''

  She obeyed, and watched with the utmost anxiety each
change in his countenance as he cast his eye through the papers
briefly, yet with attention, and making memoranda as he went
along. After reading them hastily over, he looked up, and
seemed about to speak, yet changed his purpose, as if afraid of
committing himself by giving too hasty an opinion, and read
over again several passages which he had marked as being
most important. All this he did in shorter time than can be
supposed by men of ordinary talents; for his mind was of that
acute and penetrating character which discovers, with the glance
of intuition, what facts bear on the particular point that chances
to be subjected to consideration. At length he rose, after a few
minutes' deep reflection.---``Young woman,'' said he, ``your
sister's case must certainly be termed a hard one.''

  ``God bless you, sir, for that very word!'' said Jeanie.

  ``It seems contrary to the genius of British law,'' continued
the Duke, ``to take that for granted which is not proved, or to
punish with death for a crime, which, for aught the prosecutor
has been able to show, may not have been committed at all.''

  ``God bless you, sir!'' again said Jeanie, who had risen from
her seat, and, with clasped hands, eyes glittering through tears,
and features which trembled with anxiety, drank in every word
which the Duke uttered.

  ``But, alas! my poor girl,'' he continued, ``what good will
my opinion do you, unless I could impress it upon those in
whose hands your sister's life is placed by the law? Besides, I
am no lawyer; and I must speak with some of our Scottish
gentlemen of the gown about the matter.''

  ``O, but, sir, what seems reasonable to your honour, will certainly
be the same to them,'' answered Jeanie.

  ``I do not know that,'' replied the Duke; ``ilka man buckles
his belt his ain gate---you know our old Scots proverb?---But
you shall not have placed this reliance on me altogether in vain.
Leave these papers with me, and you shall hear from me to-morrow
or next day. Take care to be at home at Mrs. Glass's,
and ready to come to me at a moment's warning. It will be
unnecessary for you to give Mrs. Glass the trouble to attend
you;---and by the by, you will please to be dressed just as you
are at present.''

  ``I wad hae putten on a cap, sir,'' said Jeanie, ``but your
honour kens it isna the fashion of my country for single women;
and I judged that, being sae mony hundred miles frae hame,
your Grace's heart wad warm to the tartan,'' looking at the
corner of her plaid.

  ``You judged quite right,'' said the Duke. ``I know the full
value of the snood; and MacCallummore's heart will be as cold
as death can make it, when it does _not_ warm to the tartan.
Now, go away, and don't be out of the way when I send.''

  Jeanie replied,---``There is little fear of that, sir, for I have
little heart to go to see sights amang this wilderness of black
houses. But if I might say to your gracious honour, that if ye
ever condescend to speak to ony ane that is of greater degree
than yoursell, though maybe it isna civil in me to say sae, just
if you would think there can be nae sic odds between you and
them, as between poor Jeanie Deans from St. Leonard's and
the Duke of Argyle; and so dinna be chappit back or cast down
wi' the first rough answer.''

  ``I am not apt,'' said the Duke, laughing, ``to mind rough
answers much---Do not you hope too much from what I
have promised. I will do my best, but God has the hearts of
Kings in his own hand.''

  Jeanie courtesied reverently and withdrew, attended by the
Duke's gentleman, to her hackney-coach, with a respect which
her appearance did not demand, but which was perhaps paid
to the length of the interview with which his master had
honoured her.
