




		CHAPTER FORTY-NINTH.

	But who is this? what thing of sea or land---
	Female of sex it seems---
	That so bedeck'd, ornate, and gay,
	Comes this way sailing?
					Milton.

  Not long after the incident of the Bible and the bank-notes,
Fortune showed that she could surprise Mrs Butler as well as
her husband. The Minister, in order to accomplish the various
pieces of business which his unwonted visit to Edinburgh rendered
necessary, had been under the necessity of setting out
from home in the latter end of the month of February, concluding
justly that he would find the space betwixt his departure
and the term of Whitsunday (24th May) short enough for the
purpose of bringing forward those various debtors of old David
Deans, out of whose purses a considerable part of the price of
his new purchase was to be made good.

  Jeanie was thus in the unwonted situation of inhabiting a
lonely house, and she felt yet more solitary from the death of
the good old man who used to divide her cares with her husband.
Her children were her principal resource, and to them she paid
constant attention.

  It happened a day or two after Butler's departure that, while
she was engaged in some domestic duties, she heard a dispute
among the young folk, which, being maintained with obstinacy,
appeared to call for her interference. All came to their natural
umpire with their complaints. Femie, not yet ten years old,
charged Davie and Reubie with an attempt to take away her
book by force; and David and Reuben replied, the elder, ``That
it was not a book for Femie to read,'' and Reuben, ``That it
was about a bad woman.''

  ``Where did you get the book, ye little hempie?'' said Mrs.
Butler. ``How dare ye touch papa's books when he is away?''
But the little lady, holding fast a sheet of crumpled paper,
declared ``It was nane o' papa's books, and May Hettly had
taken it off the muckle cheese which came from Inverara;'' for,
as was very natural to suppose, a friendly intercourse, with
interchange of mutual civilities, was kept up from time to time
between Mrs. Dolly Dutton, now Mrs. MacCorkindale, and her
former friends.

  Jeanie took the subject of contention out of the child's hand,
to satisfy herself of the propriety of her studies; but how much
was she struck when she read upon the title of the broadside-sheet,
``The Last Speech, Confession, and Dying Words of
Margaret MacCraw, or Murdockson, executed on Harabee Hill,
near Carlisle, the ------ day of ------ 1737.'' It was, indeed,
one of those papers which Archibald had bought at Longtown,
when he monopolised the pedlar's stock, which Dolly had thrust
into her trunk out of sheer economy. One or two copies, it
seems, had remained in her repositories at Inverary, till she
chanced to need them in packing a cheese, which, as a very
superior production, was sent, in the way of civil challenge, to
the dairy at Knocktarlitie.

  The title of this paper, so strangely fallen into the very hands
from which, in well-meant respect to her feelings, it had been
so long detained, was of itself sufficiently startling; but the
narrative itself was so interesting, that Jeanie, shaking herself
loose from the children, ran upstairs to her own apartment, and
bolted the door, to peruse it without interruption.

  The narrative, which appeared to have been drawn up, or at
least corrected, by the clergyman who attended this unhappy
woman, stated the crime for which she suffered to have been
``her active part in that atrocious robbery and murder, committed
near two years since near Haltwhistle, for which the
notorious Frank Levitt was committed for trial at Lancaster
assizes. It was supposed the evidence of the accomplice Thomas
Tuck, commonly called Tyburn Tom, upon which the woman
had been convicted, would weigh equally heavy against him;
although many were inclined to think it was Tuck himself who
had struck the fatal blow, according to the dying statement of
Meg Murdockson.''

  After a circumstantial account of the crime for which she
suffered, there was a brief sketch of Margaret's life. It was
stated that she was a Scotchwoman by birth, and married a
soldier in the Cameronian regiment---that she long followed the
camp, and had doubtless acquired in fields of battle, and similar
scenes, that ferocity and love of plunder for which she had been
afterwards distinguished---that her husband, having obtained
his discharge, became servant to a beneficed clergyman of high
situation and character in Lincolnshire, and that she acquired
the confidence and esteem of that honourable family. She had
lost this many years after her husband's death, it was stated, in
consequence of conniving at the irregularities of her daughter
with the heir of the family, added to the suspicious circumstances
attending the birth of a child, which was strongly suspected to
have met with foul play, in order to preserve, if possible, the
girl's reputation. After this she had led a wandering life both
in England and Scotland, under colour sometimes of telling fortunes,
sometimes of driving a trade in smuggled wares, but, in
fact, receiving stolen goods, and occasionally actively joining in
the exploits by which they were obtained. Many of her crimes
she had boasted of after conviction, and there was one circumstance
for which she seemed to feel a mixture of joy and occasional
compunction. When she was residing in the suburbs of
Edinburgh during the preceding summer, a girl, who had been
seduced by one of her confederates, was intrusted to her charge,
and in her house delivered of a male infant. Her daughter,
whose mind was in a state of derangement ever since she had
lost her own child, according to the criminal's account, carried
off the poor girl's infant, taking it for her own, of the reality of
whose death she at times could not be persuaded.

  Margaret Murdockson stated that she, for some time, believed
her daughter had actually destroyed the infant in her mad fits,
and that she gave the father to understand so, but afterwards
learned that a female stroller had got it from her. She showed
some compunction at having separated mother and child, especially
as the mother had nearly suffered death, being condemned,
on the Scotch law, for the supposed murder of her infant.
When it was asked what possible interest she could have had in
exposing the unfortunate girl to suffer for a crime she had not
committed, she asked, if they thought she was going to put her
own daughter into trouble to save another? She did not know
what the Scotch law would have done to her for carrying the
child away. This answer was by no means satisfactory to the
clergyman, and he discovered, by close examination, that she had
a deep and revengeful hatred against the young person whom
she had thus injured. But the paper intimated, that, whatever
besides she had communicated upon this subject was confided by
her in private to the worthy and reverend Archdeacon who had
bestowed such particular pains in affording her spiritual assistance.
The broadside went on to intimate, that, after her execution,
of which the particulars were given, her daughter, the
insane person mentioned more than once, and who was generally
known by the name of Madge Wildfire, had been very ill-used
by the populace, under the belief that she was a sorceress, and an
accomplice in her mother's crimes, and had been with difficulty
rescued by the prompt interference of the police.

  Such (for we omit moral reflections, and all that may seem
unnecessary to the explanation of our story) was the tenor of
the broadside. To Mrs. Butler it contained intelligence of the
highest importance, since it seemed to afford the most unequivocal
proof of her sister's innocence respecting the crime for
which she had so nearly suffered. It is true, neither she nor
her husband, nor even her father, had ever believed her capable
of touching her infant with an unkind hand when in possession
of her reason; but there was a darkness on the subject, and
what might have happened in a moment of insanity was dreadful
to think upon. Besides, whatever was their own conviction,
they had no means of establishing Effie's innocence to the world,
which, according to the tenor of this fugitive publication, was
now at length completely manifested by the dying confession of
the person chiefly interested in concealing it.

  After thanking God for a discovery so dear to her feelings,
Mrs. Butler began to consider what use she should make of it.
To have shown it to her husband would have been her first
impulse; but, besides that he was absent from home, and the
matter too delicate to be the subject of correspondence by an
indifferent penwoman, Mrs. Butler recollected that he was not
possessed of the information necessary to form a judgment upon
the occasion; and that, adhering to the rule which she had
considered as most advisable, she had best transmit the information
immediately to her sister, and leave her to adjust with
her husband the mode in which they should avail themselves of
it. Accordingly, she despatched a special messenger to Glasgow
with a packet, enclosing the Confession of Margaret Murdockson,
addressed, as usual, under cover, to Mr. Whiterose of York.
She expected, with anxiety, an answer, but none arrived in the
usual course of post, and she was left to imagine how many
various causes might account for Lady Staunton's silence. She
began to be half sorry that she had parted with the printed
paper, both for fear of its having fallen into bad hands, and
from the desire of regaining the document which might be
essential to establish her sister's innocence. She was even
doubting whether she had not better commit the whole matter
to her husband's consideration, when other incidents occurred
to divert her purpose.

  Jeanie (she is a favourite, and we beg her pardon for still
using the familiar title) had walked down to the sea-side with
her children one morning after breakfast, when the boys, whose
sight was more discriminating than hers, exclaimed, that ``the
Captain's coach and six was coming right for the shore, with
ladies in it.'' Jeanie instinctively bent her eyes on the approaching
boat, and became soon sensible that there were two females
in the stern, seated beside the gracious Duncan, who acted as
pilot. It was a point of politeness to walk towards the landing-place,
in order to receive them, especially as she saw that the
Captain of Knockdunder was upon honour and ceremony. His
piper was in the bow of the boat, sending forth music, of which
one half sounded the better that the other was drowned by the
waves and the breeze. Moreover, he himself had his brigadier
wig newly frizzed, his bonnet (he had abjured the cocked-hat)
decorated with Saint George's red cross, his uniform mounted
as a captain of militia, the Duke's flag with the boar's head
displayed---all intimated parade and gala.

  As Mrs. Butler approached the landing-place, she observed
the Captain hand the ladies ashore with marks of great attention,
and the parties advanced towards her, the Captain a few
steps before the two ladies, of whom the taller and elder leaned
on the shoulder of the other, who seemed to be an attendant
or servant.

  As they met, Duncan, in his best, most important, and deepest
tone of Highland civility, ``pegged leave to introduce to Mrs.
Putler, Lady---eh---eh---I hae forgotten your leddyship's
name!''

  ``Never mind my name, sir,'' said the lady; ``I trust Mrs.
Butler will be at no loss. The Duke's letter''---And, as she
observed Mrs. Butler look confused, she said again to Duncan
somethin sharply, ``Did you not send the letter last night,
sir?''

  ``In troth and I didna, and I crave your leddyship's pardon;
but you see, matam, I thought it would do as weel to-tay,
pecause Mrs. Putler is never taen out o'sorts---never---and the
coach was out fishing---and the gig was gane to Greenock for a
cag of prandy---and---Put here's his Grace's letter.''

  ``Give it me, sir,'' said the lady, taking it out of his hand;
``since you have not found it convenient to do me the favour
to send it before me, I will deliver it myself.''

  Mrs. Butler looked with great attention, and a certain dubious
feeling of deep interest, on the lady, who thus expressed
herself with authority over the man of authority, and to whose
mandates he seemed to submit, resigning the letter with a
``Just as your leddyship is pleased to order it.''

  The lady was rather above the middle size, beautifully made,
though something _embonpoint,_ with a hand and arm exquisitely
formed. Her manner was easy, dignified, and commanding,
and seemed to evince high birth and the habits of elevated
society. She wore a travelling dress---a grey beaver hat, and a
veil of Flanders lace. Two footmen, in rich liveries, who got
out of the barge, and lifted out a trunk and portmanteau,
appeared to belong to her suite.

  ``As you did not receive the letter, madam, which should
have served for my introduction---for I presume you are Mrs.
Butler---I will not present it to you till you are so good as to
admit me into your house without it.''

  ``To pe sure, matam,'' said Knockdunder, ``ye canna doubt
Mrs. Putler will do that.---Mrs. Putler, this is Lady---Lady---
these tamned Southern names rin out o' my head like a stane
trowling down hill---put I believe she is a Scottish woman porn
---the mair our credit---and I presume her leddyship is of the
house of''------

  ``The Duke of Argyle knows my family very well, sir,'' said
the lady, in a tone which seemed designed to silence Duncan,
or, at any rate, which had that effect completely.

  There was something about the whole of this stranger's address,
and tone, and manner, which acted upon Jeanie's feelings
like the illusions of a dream, that tease us with a puzzling
approach to reality. Something there was of her sister in the
gait and manner of the stranger, as well as in the sound of her
voice, and something also, when, lifting her veil, she showed
features, to which, changed as they were in expression and
complexion, she could not but attach many remembrances.

  The stranger was turned of thirty certainly; but so well were
her personal charms assisted by the power of dress, and arrangement
of ornament, that she might well have passed for one-and-twenty.
And her behaviour was so steady and so composed,
that, as often as Mrs. Butler perceived anew some point of
resemblance to her unfortunate sister, so often the sustained
self-command and absolute composure of the stranger destroyed
the ideas which began to arise in her imagination. She led the
way silently towards the Manse, lost in a confusion of reflections,
and trusting the letter with which she was to be there
intrusted, would afford her satisfactory explanation of what was
a most puzzling and embarrassing scene.

  The lady maintained in the meanwhile the manners of a
stranger of rank. She admired the various points of view like
one who has studied nature, and the best representations of art.
At length she took notice of the children.

  ``These are two fine young mountaineers---Yours, madam, I
presume?''

  Jeanie replied in the affirmative. The stranger sighed, and
sighed once more as they were presented to her by name.

  ``Come here, Femie,'' said Mrs. Butler, ``and hold your head
up.''

  ``What is your daughter's name, madam?'' said the lady.

  ``Euphemia, madam,'' answered Mrs. Butler.

  ``I thought the ordinary Scottish contraction of the name
had been Effie;'' replied the stranger, in a tone which went to
Jeanie's heart; for in that single word there was more of her
sister---more of _lang syne_ ideas---than in all the reminiscences
which her own heart had anticipated, or the features and manner
of the stranger had suggested.

  When they reached the Manse, the lady gave Mrs. Butler the
letter which she had taken out of the hands of Knockdunder;
and as she gave it she pressed her hand, adding aloud, ``Perhaps,
madam, you will have the goodness to get me a little
milk!''

  ``And me a drap of the grey-peard, if you please, Mrs. Putler,''
added Duncan.

  Mrs. Butler withdrew; but, deputing to May Hettly and to
David the supply of the strangers' wants, she hastened into her
own room to read the letter. The envelope was addressed in the
Duke of Argyle's hand, and requested Mrs. Butler's attentions
and civility to a lady of rank, a particular friend of his late
brother, Lady Staunton of Willingham, who, being recommended
to drink goats' whey by the physicians, was to honour
the Lodge at Roseneath with her residence, while her husband
made a short tour in Scotland. But within the same cover,
which had been given to Lady Staunton unsealed, was a letter
from that lady, intended to prepare her sister for meeting her,
and which, but for the Captain's negligence, she ought to have
received on the preceding evening. It stated that the news in
Jeanie's last letter had been so interesting to her husband, that
he was determined to inquire farther into the confession made
at Carlisle, and the fate of that poor innocent, and that, as he
had been in some degree successful, she had, by the most earnest
entreaties, extorted rather than obtained his permission, under
promise of observing the most strict incognito, to spend a week
or two with her sister, or in her neighbourhood, while he was
prosecuting researches, to which (though it appeared to her very
vainly) he seemed to attach some hopes of success.

  There was a postscript, desiring that Jeanie would trust to
Lady S. the management of their intercourse, and be content
with assenting to what she should propose. After reading and
again reading the letter, Mrs. Butler hurried down stairs,
divided betwixt the fear of betraying her secret, and the desire
to throw herself upon her sister's neck. Effie received her with
a glance at once affectionate and cautionary, and immediately
proceeded to speak.

  ``I have been telling Mr. ------, Captain ------, this gentleman,
Mrs. Butler, that if you could accommodate me with an apartment
in your house, and a place for Ellis to sleep, and for the
two men, it would suit me better than the Lodge, which his
Grace has so kindly placed at my disposal. I am advised I
should reside as near where the goats feed as possible.''

  ``I have peen assuring my leddy, Mrs. Putler,'' said Duncan,
``that though it could not discommode you to receive any of his
Grace's visitors or mine, yet she had mooch petter stay at the
Lodge; and for the gaits, the creatures can be fetched there, in
respect it is mair fitting they suld wait upon her Leddyship, than
she upon the like o' them.''

  ``By no means derange the goats for me,'' said Lady Staunton;
``I am certain the milk must be much better here.'' And
this she said with languid negligence, as one whose slightest
intimation of humour is to bear down all argument.

  Mrs. Butler hastened to intimate, that her house, such as it
was, was heartily at the disposal of Lady Staunton; but the
Captain continued to remonstrate..

  ``The Duke,'' he said, ``had written''------

  ``I will settle all that with his Grace''------

  ``And there were the things had been sent down frae Glasco''------

  ``Anything necessary might be sent over to the Parsonage
---She would beg the favour of Mrs. Butler to show her an
apartment, and of the Captain to have her trunks, etc., sent over
from Roseneath.''

  So she courtesied off poor Duncan, who departed, saying in
his secret soul, ``Cot tamn her English impudence!---she takes
possession of the minister's house as an it were her ain---and
speaks to shentlemens as if they were pounden servants, and per
tamned to her!---And there's the deer that was shot too---but
we will send it ower to the Manse, whilk will pe put civil, seeing
I hae prought worthy Mrs. Putler sic a fliskmahoy.''---And
with these kind intentions, he went to the shore to give his
orders accordingly.

  In the meantime, the meeting of the sisters was as affectionate
as it was extraordinary, and each evinced her feelings in
the way proper to her character. Jeanie was so much overcome
by wonder, and even by awe, that her feelings were deep,
stunning, and almost overpowering. Effie, on the other hand,
wept, laughed, sobbed, screamed, and clapped her hands for
joy, all in the space of five minutes, giving way at once, and
without reserve, to a natural excessive vivacity of temper, which
no one, however, knew better how to restrain under the rules
of artificial breeding.

  After an hour had passed like a moment in their expressions
of mutual affection, Lady Staunton observed the Captain walking
with impatient steps below the window. ``That tiresome
Highland fool has returned upon our hands,'' she said. ``I will
pray him to grace us with his absence.''

  ``Hout no! hout no!'' said Mrs. Butler, in a tone of entreaty;
``ye maunna affront the Captain.''

  ``Affront?'' said Lady Staunton; ``nobody is ever affronted
at what I do or say, my dear. However, I will endure him,
since you think it proper.''

  The Captain was accordingly graciously requested by Lady
Staunton to remain during dinner. During this visit his
studious and punctilious complaisance towards the lady of rank
was happily contrasted by the cavalier air of civil familiarity
in which he indulged towards the minister's wife.

  ``I have not been able to persuade Mrs. Butler,'' said Lady
Staunton to the Captain, during the interval when Jeanie had
left the parlour, ``to let me talk of making any recompense
for storming her house, and garrisoning it in the way I have
done.''

  ``Doubtless, matam,'' said the Captain, ``it wad ill pecome
Mrs. Putler, wha is a very decent pody, to make any such
sharge to a lady who comes from my house, or his Grace's,
which is the same thing.---And speaking of garrisons, in the
year forty-five, I was poot with a garrison of twenty of my lads
in the house of Inver-Garry, whilk had near been unhappily,
for''------

  ``I beg your pardon, sir---But I wish I could think of some
way of indemnifying this good lady.''

  ``O, no need of intemnifying at all---no trouble for her,
nothing at all---So, peing in the house of Inver-Garry, and the
people about it being uncanny, I doubted the warst, and''------

  ``Do you happen to know, sir,'' said Lady Staunton, ``if any
of these two lads, these young Butlers, I mean, show any turn
for the army?''

  ``Could not say, indeed, my leddy,'' replied Knockdunder---
``So, I knowing the people to pe unchancy, and not to lippen
to, and hearing a pibroch in the wood, I pegan to pid my lads
look to their flints, and then''------

  ``For,'' said Lady Staunton, with the most ruthless disregard
to the narrative which she mangled by these interruptions,
``if that should be the case, it should cost Sir George but the
asking a pair of colours for one of them at the War-Office, since
we have always supported Government, and never had occasion
to trouble ministers.''

  ``And if you please, my leddy,'' said Duncan, who began to
find some savour in this proposal, ``as I hae a braw weel-grown
lad of a nevoy, ca'd Duncan MacGilligan, that is as pig as paith
the Putler pairns putten thegither, Sir George could ask a pair
for him at the same time, and it wad pe put ae asking for a'.''

  Lady Staunton only answered this hint with a well-bred stare,
which gave no sort of encouragement.

  Jeanie, who now returned, was lost in amazement at the
wonderful difference betwixt the helpless and despairing girl,
whom she had seen stretched on a flock-bed in a dungeon,
expecting a violent and disgraceful death, and last as a forlorn
exile upon the midnight beach, with the elegant, well-bred,
beautiful woman before her. The features, now that her sister's
veil was laid aside, did not appear so extremely different, as the
whole manner, expression, look, and bearing. In outside show,
Lady Staunton seemed completely a creature too soft and fair
for sorrow to have touched; so much accustomed to have all
her whims complied with by those around her, that she seemed
to expect she should even be saved the trouble of forming them;
and so totally unacquainted with contradiction, that she did not
even use the tone of self-will, since to breathe a wish was to
have it fulfilled. She made no ceremony of ridding herself of
Duncan as soon as the evening approached; but complimented
him out of the house under pretext of fatigue, with the utmost
_nonchalance._

  When they were alone, her sister could not help expressing
her wonder at the self-possession with which Lady Staunton
sustained her part.

  ``I daresay you are surprised at it,'' said Lady Staunton
composedly; ``for you, my dear Jeanie, have been truth itself
from your cradle upwards; but you must remember that I am
a liar of fifteen years' standing, and therefore must by this time
be used to my character.''

  In fact, during the feverish tumult of feelings excited during
the two or three first days, Mrs. Butler thought her sister's
manner was completely contradictory of the desponding tone
which pervaded her correspondence. She was moved to tears,
indeed, by the sight of her father's grave, marked by a modest
stone recording his piety and integrity; but lighter impressions
and associations had also power over her. She amused
herself with visiting the dairy, in which she had so long been
assistant, and was so near discovering herself to May Hettly,
by betraying her acquaintance with the celebrated receipt for
Dunlop cheese, that she compared herself to Bedreddin Hassan,
whom the vizier, his father-in-law, discovered by his superlative
skill in composing cream-tarts with pepper in them. But when
the novelty of such avocations ceased to amuse her, she showed
to her sister but too plainly, that the gaudy colouring with
which she veiled her unhappiness afforded as little real comfort,
as the gay uniform of the soldier when it is drawn over his
mortal wound. There were moods and moments, in which her
despondence seemed to exceed even that which she herself had
described in her letters, and which too well convinced Mrs.
Butler how little her sister's lot, which in appearance was so
brilliant, was in reality to be envied.

  There was one source, however, from which Lady Staunton
derived a pure degree of pleasure. Gifted in every particular
with a higher degree of imagination than that of her sister, she
was an admirer of the beauties of nature, a taste which compensates
many evils to those who happen to enjoy it. Here
her character of a fine lady stopped short, where she ought
to have

	Scream'd at ilk cleugh, and screech'd at ilka how,
	As loud as she had seen the worrie-cow.

On the contrary, with the two boys for her guides, she undertook
long and fatiguing walks among the neighbouring mountains,
to visit glens, lakes, waterfalls, or whatever scenes of natural
wonder or beauty lay concealed among their recesses. It is
Wordsworth, I think, who, talking of an old man under difficulties,
remarks, with a singular attention to nature,

	------ whether it was care that spurr'd him,
	God only knows; but to the very last,
	He had the lightest foot in Ennerdale.

  In the same manner, languid, listless, and unhappy, within
doors, at times even indicating something which approached
near to contempt of the homely accommodations of her sister's
house, although she instantly endeavoured, by a thousand
kindnesses, to atone for such ebullitions of spleen, Lady Staunton
appeared to feel interest and energy while in the open air,
and traversing the mountain landscapes in society with the two
boys, whose ears she delighted with stories of what she had seen
in other countries, and what she had to show them at Willingham
Manor. And they, on the other hand, exerted themselves
in doing the honours of Dumbartonshire to the lady who seemed
so kind, insomuch that there was scarce a glen in the neighbouring
hills to which they did not introduce her.

  Upon one of these excursions, while Reuben was otherwise
employed, David alone acted as Lady Staunton's guide, and
promised to show her a cascade in the hills, grander and higher
than any they had yet visited. It was a walk of five long miles,
and over rough ground, varied, however, and cheered, by
mountain views, and peeps now of the firth and its islands,
now of distant lakes, now of rocks and precipices. The scene
itself, too, when they reached it, amply rewarded the labour of
the walk. A single shoot carried a considerable stream over
the face of a black rock, which contrasted strongly in colour
with the white foam of the cascade, and, at the depth of about
twenty feet, another rock intercepted the view of the bottom of
the fall. The water, wheeling out far beneath, swept round
the crag, which thus bounded their view, and tumbled down
the rocky glen in a torrent of foam. Those who love nature
always desire to penetrate into its utmost recesses, and Lady
Staunton asked David whether there was not some mode of
gaining a view of the abyss at the foot of the fall. He said that
he knew a station on a shelf on the farther side of the intercepting
rock, from which the whole waterfall was visible, but
that the road to it was steep and slippery and dangerous. Bent,
however, on gratifying her curiosity, she desired him to lead the
way; and accordingly he did so over crag and stone, anxiously
pointing out to her the resting-places where she ought to step,
for their mode of advancing soon ceased to be walking, and
became scrambling.

  In this manner, clinging like sea-birds to the face of the rock,
they were enabled at length to turn round it, and came full in
front of the fall, which here had a most tremendous aspect,
boiling, roaring, and thundering with unceasing din, into a
black cauldron, a hundred feet at least below them, which
resembled the crater of a volcano. The noise, the dashing of
the waters, which gave an unsteady appearance to all around
them, the trembling even of the huge crag on which they stood,
the precariousness of their footing, for there was scarce room
for them to stand on the shelf of rock which they had thus
attained, had so powerful an effect on the senses and imagination
of Lady Staunton, that she called out to David she was
falling, and would in fact have dropped from the crag had he
not caught hold of her. The boy was bold and stout of his
age---still he was but fourteen years old, and as his assistance
gave no confidence to Lady Staunton, she felt her situation
become really perilous. The chance was, that, in the appalling
novelty of the circumstances, he might have caught the infection
of her panic, in which case it is likely that both must have
perished. She now screamed with terror, though without hope
of calling any one to her assistance. To her amazement, the
scream was answered by a whistle from above, of a tone so
clear and shrill, that it was heard even amid the noise of the
waterfall.

  In this moment of terror and perplexity, a human face, black,
and having grizzled hair hanging down over the forehead and
cheeks, and mixing with mustaches and a beard of the same
colour, and as much matted and tangled, looked down on them
from a broken part of the rock above.

  ``It is the Enemy!'' said the boy, who had very nearly
become incapable of supporting Lady Staunton.

  ``No, no,'' she exclaimed, inaccessible to supernatural terrors,
and restored to the presence of mind of which she had been deprived
by the danger of her situation, ``it is a man---For God's
sake, my friend, help us!''

  The face glared at them, but made no answer; in a second
or two afterwards, another, that of a young lad, appeared beside
the first, equally swart and begrimed, but having tangled black
hair, descending in elf-locks, which gave an air of wildness and
ferocity to the whole expression of the countenance. Lady
Staunton repeated her entreaties, clinging to the rock with
more energy, as she found that, from the superstitious terror of
her guide, he became incapable of supporting her. Her words
were probably drowned in the roar of the falling stream, for,
though she observed the lips of the young being whom she
supplicated move as he spoke in reply, not a word reached
her ear.

  A moment afterwards it appeared he had not mistaken the
nature of her supplication, which, indeed, was easy to be understood
from her situation and gestures. The younger apparition
disappeared, and immediately after lowered a ladder of twisted
osiers, about eight feet in length, and made signs to David to
hold it fast while the lady ascended. Despair gives courage,
and finding herself in this fearful predicament, Lady Staunton
did not hesitate to risk the ascent by the precarious means which
this accommodation afforded; and, carefully assisted by the
person who had thus providentially come to her aid, she reached
the summit in safety. She did not, however, even look around
her until she saw her nephew lightly and actively follow her
examples although there was now no one to hold the ladder fast.
When she saw him safe she looked round, and could not help
shuddering at the place and company in which she found herself.
They were on a sort of platform of rock, surrounded on every
side by precipices, or overhanging cliffs, and which it would
have been scarce possible for any research to have discovered, as
it did not seem to be commanded by any accessible position.
It was partly covered by a huge fragment of stone, which, having
fallen from the cliffs above, had been intercepted by others in
its descent, and jammed so as to serve for a sloping roof to the
farther part of the broad shelf or platform on which they stood.
A quantity of withered moss and leaves, strewed beneath this
rude and wretched shelter, showed the lairs,---they could not be
termed the beds,---of those who dwelt in this eyrie, for it deserved
no other name. Of these, two were before Lady Staunton.
One, the same who had afforded such timely assistance, stood
upright before them, a tall, lathy, young savage; his dress a
tattered plaid and philabeg, no shoes, no stockings, no hat or
bonnet, the place of the last being supplied by his hair, twisted
and matted like the _glibbe_ of the ancient wild Irish, and, like
theirs, forming a natural thick-set stout enough to bear off the
cut of a sword. Yet the eyes of the lad were keen and
sparkling; his gesture free and noble, like that of all savages.
He took little notice of David Butler, but gazed with wonder on
Lady Staunton, as a being different probably in dress, and
superior in beauty, to anything he had ever beheld. The old
man, whose face they had first seen, remained recumbent in the
same posture as when he had first looked down on them, only
his face was turned towards them as he lay and looked up with
a lazy and listless apathy, which belied the general expression
of his dark and rugged features. He seemed a very tall man,
but was scarce better clad than the younger. He had on a loose
Lowland greatcoat, and ragged tartan trews or pantaloons.
All around looked singularly wild and unpropitious. Beneath
the brow of the incumbent rock was a charcoal fire, on which
there was a still working, with bellows, pincers, hammers, a
movable anvil, and other smith's tools; three guns, with two
or three sacks and barrels, were disposed against the wall of
rock, under shelter of the superincumbent crag; a dirk and
two swords, and a Lochaber axe, lay scattered around the fire,
of which the red glare cast a ruddy tinge on the precipitous
foam and mist of the cascade. The lad, when he had satisfied
his curiosity with staring at Lady Staunton, fetched an earthen
jar and a horn-cup, into which he poured some spirits, apparently
hot from the still, and offered them successively to the
lady and to the boy. Both declined, and the young savage
quaffed off the draught, which could not amount to less than
three ordinary glasses. He then fetched another ladder from
the corner of the cavern, if it could be termed so, adjusted it
against the transverse rock, which served as a roof, and made
signs for the lady to ascend it, while he held it fast below. She
did so, and found herself on the top of a broad rock, near the
brink of the chasm into which the brook precipitates itself.
She could see the crest of the torrent flung loose down the rock,
like the mane of a wild horse, but without having any view of
the lower platform from which she had ascended.

  David was not suffered to mount so easily; the lad, from
sport or love of mischief, shook the ladder a good deal as he
ascended, and seemed to enjoy the terror of young Butler, so
that, when they had both come up, they looked on each other
with no friendly eyes. Neither, however, spoke. The young
caird, or tinker, or gipsy, with a good deal of attention, assisted
Lady Staunton up a very perilous ascent which she had still
to encounter, and they were followed by David Butler, until
all three stood clear of the ravine on the side of a mountain,
whose sides were covered with heather and sheets of loose
shingle. So narrow was the chasm out of which they ascended,
that, unless when they were on the very verge, the eye passed
to the other side without perceiving the existence of a rent so
fearful, and nothing was seen of the cataract, though its deep
hoarse voice was still heard. 

  Lady Staunton, freed from the danger of rock and river, had
now a new subject of anxiety. Her two guides confronted each
other with angry countenances; for David, though younger by
two years at least, and much shorter, was a stout, well-set, and
very bold boy.

  ``You are the black-coat's son of Knocktarlitie,'' said the
young caird; ``if you come here again, I'll pitch you down
the linn like a foot-ball.''

  ``Ay, lad, ye are very short to be sae lang,'' retorted young
Butler undauntedly, and measuring his opponent's height with
an undismayed eye; ``I am thinking you are a gillie of Black
Donacha; if you come down the glen, we'll shoot you like a
wild buck.''

  ``You may tell your father,'' said the lad, ``that the leaf on
the timber is the last he shall see---we will hae amends for the
mischief he has done to us.''

  ``I hope he will live to see mony simmers, and do ye muckle
mair,'' answered David.

  More might have passed, but Lady Staunton stepped between
them with her purse in her hand, and taking out a guinea, of
which it contained several, visible through the net-work, as
well as some silver in the opposite end, offered it to the caird.

  ``The white siller, lady---the white siller,'' said the young
savage, to whom the value of gold was probably unknown.
Lady Staunton poured what silver she had into his hand, and
the juvenile savage snatched it greedily, and made a sort of
half inclination of acknowledgment and adieu.

  ``Let us make haste now, Lady Staunton,'' said David, ``for
there will be little peace with them since they hae seen your
purse.''

  They hurried on as fast as they could; but they had not
descended the hill a hundred yards or two before they heard a
halloo behind them, and looking back, saw both the old man
and the young one pursuing them with great speed, the former
with a gun on his shoulder. Very fortunately, at this moment
a sportsman, a gamekeeper of the Duke, who was engaged in
stalking deer, appeared on the face of the hill. The bandits
stopped on seeing him, and Lady Staunton hastened to put
herself under his protection. He readily gave them his escort
home, and it required his athletic form and loaded rifle to
restore to the lady her usual confidence and courage.

  Donald listened with much gravity to the account of their
adventure; and answered with great composure to David's
repeated inquiries, whether he could have suspected that the
cairds had been lurking there,---``Inteed, Master Tavie, I might
hae had some guess that they were there, or thereabout, though
maybe I had nane. But I am aften on the hill; and they
are like wasps---they stang only them that fashes them; sae,
for my part, I make a point not to see them, unless I were
ordered out on the preceese errand by MacCallummore or
Knockdunder, whilk is a clean different case.''

  They reached the Manse late; and Lady Staunton, who had
suffered much both from fright and fatigue, never again permitted
her love of the picturesque to carry her so far among
the mountains without a stronger escort than David, though
she acknowledged he had won the stand of colours by the
intrepidity he had displayed, so soon as assured he had to do
with an earthly antagonist. ``I couldna maybe hae made
muckle o' a bargain wi' yon lang callant,'' said David, when
thus complimented on his valour; ``but when ye deal wi' thae
folk, it's tyne heart tyne a'.''

