





		CHAPTER TWENTY-FIRST.

	We have strict statutes, and most biting laws---
	The needful bits and curbs for headstrong steeds---
	Which, for these fourteen years, we have let sleep,
	Like to an o'ergrown lion in a cave,
	That goes not out to prey.
				Measure for Measure.


  ``Euphemia Deans,'' said the presiding Judge, in an accent
in which pity was blended with dignity, ``stand up and listen
to the criminal indictment now to be preferred against you.''

  The unhappy girl, who had been stupified by the confusion
through which the guards had forced a passage, cast a bewildered
look on the multitude of faces around her, which seemed
to tapestry, as it were, the walls, in one broad slope from the
ceiling to the floor, with human countenances, and instinctively
obeyed a command, which rung in her ears like the trumpet of
the judgment-day.

  ``Put back your hair, Effie,'' said one of the macers. For her
beautiful and abundant tresses of long fair hair, which, according
to the costume of the country, unmarried women were not
allowed to cover with any sort of cap, and which, alas! Effie
dared no longer confine with the snood or riband, which implied
purity of maiden-fame, now hung unbound and dishevelled
over her face, and almost concealed her features. On receiving
this hint from the attendant, the unfortunate young woman,
with a hasty, trembling, and apparently mechanical compliance,
shaded back from her face her luxuriant locks, and showed
to the whole court, excepting one individual, a countenance,
which, though pale and emaciated, was so lovely amid its
agony, that it called forth a universal murmur of compassion
and sympathy. Apparently the expressive sound of human
feeling recalled the poor girl from the stupor of fear, which
predominated at first over every other sensation, and awakened
her to the no less painful sense of shame and exposure attached
to her present situation. Her eye, which had at first glanced
wildly around, was turned on the ground; her cheek, at first
so deadly pale, began gradually to be overspread with a faint
blush, which increased so fast, that, when in agony of shame
she strove to conceal her face, her temples, her brow, her neck,
and all that her slender fingers and small palms could not
cover, became of the deepest crimson.

  All marked and were moved by these changes, excepting one.
It was old Deans, who, motionless in his seat, and concealed, as
we have said, by the corner of the bench, from seeing or being
seen, did nevertheless keep his eyes firmly fixed on the ground,
as if determined that, by no possibility whatever, would he be
an ocular witness of the shame of his house.

  ``Ichabod!'' he said to himself---``Ichabod! my glory is
departed!''

  While these reflections were passing through his mind, the
indictment, which set forth in technical form the crime of which
the panel stood accused, was read as usual, and the prisoner was
asked if she was Guilty, or Not Guilty.

  ``Not guilty of my poor bairn's death,'' said Effie Deans, in
an accent corresponding in plaintive softness of tone to the
beauty of her features, and which was not heard by the audience
without emotion.

  The presiding Judge next directed the counsel to plead to
the relevancy; that is, to state on either part the arguments in
point of law, and evidence in point of fact, against and in
favour of the criminal; after which it is the form of the Court
to pronounce a preliminary judgment, sending the cause to the
cognisance of the jury, or assize.

  The counsel for the crown briefly stated the frequency of the
crime of infanticide, which had given rise to the special statute
under which the panel stood indicted. He mentioned the
various instances, many of them marked with circumstances of
atrocity, which had at length induced the King's Advocate,
though with great reluctance, to make the experiment, whether,
by strictly enforcing the Act of Parliament which had been
made to prevent such enormities, their occurrence might be
prevented. ``He expected,'' he said, ``to be able to establish
by witnesses, as well as by the declaration of the panel herself,
that she was in the state described by the statute. According
to his information, the panel had communicated her pregnancy
to no one, nor did she allege in her own declaration that she
had done so. This secrecy was the first requisite in support of
the indictment. The same declaration admitted, that she had
borne a male child, in circumstances which gave but too much
reason to believe it had died by the hands, or at least with the
knowledge or consent, of the unhappy mother. It was not,
however, necessary for him to bring positive proof that the
panel was accessory to the murder, nay, nor even to prove, that
the child was murdered at all. It was sufficient to support
the indictment, that it could not be found. According to the
stern, but necessary severity of this statute, she who should
conceal her pregnancy, who should omit to call that assistance
which is most necessary on such occasions, was held already
to have meditated the death of her offspring, as an event most
likely to be the consequence of her culpable and cruel concealment.
And if, under such circumstances, she could not
alternatively show by proof that the infant had died a natural
death, or produce it still in life, she must, under the construction
of the law, be held to have murdered it, and suffer death
accordingly.''

  The counsel for the prisoner, Mr. Fairbrother, a man of considerable
fame in his profession, did not pretend directly to
combat the arguments of the King's Advocate. He began by
lamenting that his senior at the bar, Mr. Langtale, had been
suddenly called to the county of which he was sheriff, and
that he had been applied to, on short warning, to give the panel
his assistance in this interesting case. He had had little time,
he said, to make up for his inferiority to his learned brother by
long and minute research; and he was afraid he might give a
specimen of his incapacity, by being compelled to admit the
accuracy of the indictment under the statute. ``It was enough
for their Lordships,'' he observed, ``to know that such was the
law, and he admitted the advocate had a right to call for the
usual interlocutor of relevancy.'' But he stated, ``that when
he came to establish his case by proof, he trusted to make out
circumstances which would satisfactorily elide the charge in the
libel. His client's story was a short, but most melancholy one.
She was bred up in the strictest tenets of religion and virtue,
the daughter of a worthy and conscientious person, who, in evil
times, had established a character for courage and religion, by
becoming a sufferer for conscience' sake.''

  David Deans gave a convulsive start at hearing himself thus
mentioned, and then resumed the situation, in which, with his
face stooped against his hands, and both resting against the
corner of the elevated bench on which the Judges sate, he had
hitherto listened to the procedure in the trial. The Whig
lawyers seemed to be interested; the Tories put up their lip.

  ``Whatever may be our difference of opinion,'' resumed the
lawyer, whose business it was to carry his whole audience with
him if possible, ``concerning the peculiar tenets of these people''
(here Deans groaned deeply), ``it is impossible to deny them the
praise of sound, and even rigid morals, or the merit of training
up their children in the fear of God; and yet it was the
daughter of such a person whom a jury would shortly be called
upon, in the absence of evidence, and upon mere presumptions,
to convict of a crime more properly belonging to a heathen, or
a savage, than to a Christian and civilised country. It was
true,'' he admitted, ``that the excellent nurture and early
instruction which the poor girl had received, had not been
sufficient to preserve her from guilt and error. She had fallen
a sacrifice to an inconsiderate affection for a young man of
prepossessing manners, as he had been informed, but of a very
dangerous and desperate character. She was seduced under
promise of marriage---a promise, which the fellow might have,
perhaps, done her justice by keeping, had he not at that time
been called upon by the law to atone for a crime, violent and
desperate in itself, but which became the preface to another eventful
history, every step of which was marked by blood and guilt,
and the final termination of which had not even yet arrived.
He believed that no one would hear him without surprise, when
he stated that the father of this infant now amissing, and said
by the learned Advocate to have been murdered, was no other
than the notorious George Robertson, the accomplice of Wilson,
the hero of the memorable escape from the Tolbooth Church,
and as no one knew better than his learned friend the Advocate,
the principal actor in the Porteous conspiracy''------

  ``I am sorry to interrupt a counsel in such a case as the
present,'' said, the presiding Judge; ``but I must remind the
learned gentleman that he is travelling out of the case before
us.''

  The counsel bowed and resumed. ``He only judged it necessary,''
he said, ``to mention the name and situation of Robertson,
because the circumstance in which that character was
placed, went a great way in accounting for the silence on which
his Majesty's counsel had laid so much weight, as affording
proof that his client proposed to allow no fair play for its life
to the helpless being whom she was about to bring into the
world. She had not announced to her friends that she had
been seduced from the path of honour---and why had she not
done so?---Because she expected daily to be restored to character,
by her seducer doing her that justice which she knew to
be in his power, and believed to be in his inclination. Was it
natural---was it reasonable---was it fair, to expect that she
should in the interim, become _felo de se_ of her own character,
and proclaim her frailty to the world, when she had every
reason to expect, that, by concealing it for a season, it might be
veiled for ever? Was it not, on the contrary, pardonable, that,
in such an emergency, a young woman, in such a situation,
should be found far from disposed to make a confidant of every
prying gossip, who, with sharp eyes, and eager ears, pressed
upon her for an explanation of suspicious circumstances, which
females in the lower---he might say which females of all ranks,
are so alert in noticing, that they sometimes discover them
where they do not exist? Was it strange or was it criminal,
that she should have repelled their inquisitive impertinence
with petulant denials? The sense and feeling of all who heard
him would answer directly in the negative. But although his
client had thus remained silent towards those to whom she was
not called upon to communicate her situation,---to whom,'' said
the learned gentleman, ``I will add, it would have been unadvised
and improper in her to have done so; yet, I trust, I
shall remove this case most triumphantly from under the
statute, and obtain the unfortunate young woman an honourable
dismission from your Lordships' bar, by showing that she
did, in due time and place, and to a person most fit for such
confidence, mention the calamitous circumstances in which she
found herself. This occurred after Robertson's conviction, and
when he was lying in prison in expectation of the fate which
his comrade Wilson afterwards suffered, and from which he
himself so strangely escaped. It was then, when all hopes of
having her honour repaired by wedlock vanished from her eyes,
---when an union with one in Robertson's situation, if still
practicable, might, perhaps, have been regarded rather as an
addition to her disgrace,---it was _then,_ that I trust to be able to
prove that the prisoner communicated and consulted with her
sister, a young woman several years older than herself, the
daughter of her father, if I mistake not, by a former marriage,
upon the perils and distress of her unhappy situation.''

  ``If, indeed, you are able to instruct _that_ point, Mr. Fairbrother,''
said the presiding Judge------

  ``If I am indeed able to instruct that point, my Lord,''
resumed Mr. Fairbrother, ``I trust not only to serve my client,
but to relieve your Lordships from that which I know you feel
the most painful duty of your high office; and to give all who
now hear me the exquisite pleasure of beholding a creature, so
young, so ingenuous, and so beautiful, as she that is now at the
bar of your Lordships' Court, dismissed from thence in safety
and in honour.''

  This address seemed to affect many of the audience, and was
followed by a slight murmur of applause. Deans, as he heard
his daughter's beauty and innocent appearance appealed to, was
involuntarily about to turn his eyes towards her; but, recollecting
himself, he bent them again on the ground with stubborn
resolution.

  ``Will not my learned brother, on the other side of the bar,''
continued the advocate, after a short pause, ``share in this
general joy, since, I know, while he discharges his duty in
bringing an accused person here, no one rejoices more in their
being freely and honourably sent hence? My learned brother
shakes his head doubtfully, and lays his hand on the panel's
declaration. I understand him perfectly---he would insinuate
that the facts now stated to your Lordships are inconsistent
with the confession of Euphemia Deans herself. I need not
remind your Lordships, that her present defence is no whit to
be narrowed within the bounds of her former confession; and
that it is not by any account which she may formerly have
given of herself, but by what is now to be proved for or against
her, that she must ultimately stand or fall. I am not under
the necessity of accounting for her choosing to drop out of her
declaration the circumstances of her confession to her sister.
She might not be aware of its importance; she might be afraid
of implicating her sister; she might even have forgotten the
circumstance entirely, in the terror and distress of mind incidental
to the arrest of so young a creature on a charge so
heinous. Any of these reasons are sufficient to account for her
having suppressed the truth in this instance, at whatever risk to
herself; and I incline most to her erroneous fear of criminating
her sister, because I observe she has had a similar tenderness
towards her lover (however undeserved on his part), and has
never once mentioned Robertson's name from beginning to end
of her declaration.

  ``But, my Lords,'' continued Fairbrother, ``I am aware the
King's Advocate will expect me to show, that the proof I offer
is consistent with other circumstances of the, case, which I do
not and cannot deny. He will demand of me how Effie Deans's
confession to her sister, previous to her delivery, is reconcilable
with the mystery of the birth,---with the disappearance, perhaps
the murder (for I will not deny a possibility which I cannot
disprove) of the infant. My Lords, the explanation of this is to
be found in the placability, perchance, I may say, in the facility
and pliability, of the female sex. The _dulcis Amaryllidis ir<ae>,_
as your Lordships well know, are easily appeased; nor is it
possible to conceive a woman so atrociously offended by the man
whom she has loved, but that she will retain a fund of forgiveness,
upon which his penitence, whether real or affected,
may draw largely, with a certainty that his bills will be answered.
We can prove, by a letter produced in evidence, that
this villain Robertson, from the bottom of the dungeon whence
he already probably meditated the escape, which he afterwards
accomplished by the assistance of his comrade, contrived to
exercise authority over the mind, and to direct the motions, of
this unhappy girl. It was in compliance with his injunctions,
expressed in that letter, that the panel was prevailed upon to
alter the line of conduct which her own better thoughts had
suggested; and, instead of resorting, when her time of travail
approached, to the protection of her own family, was induced to
confide herself to the charge of some vile agent of this nefarious
seducer, and by her conducted to one of those solitary and
secret purlieus of villany, which, to the shame of our police,
still are suffered to exist in the suburbs of this city, where, with
the assistance, and under the charge, of a person of her own sex,
she bore a male child, under circumstances which added treble
bitterness to the woe denounced against our original mother.
What purpose Robertson had in all this, it is hard to tell, or
even to guess. He may have meant to marry the girl, for her
father is a man of substance. But, for the termination of the
story, and the conduct of the woman whom he had placed about
the person of Euphemia Deans, it is still more difficult to
account. The unfortunate young woman was visited by the
fever incidental to her situation. In this fever she appears to
have been deceived by the person that waited on her, and, on
recovering her senses, she found that she was childless in that
abode of misery. Her infant had been carried off, perhaps for
the worst purposes, by the wretch that waited on her. It may
have been murdered, for what I can tell.''

  He was here interrupted by a piercing shriek, uttered by the
unfortunate prisoner. She was with difficulty brought to compose
herself. Her counsel availed himself of the tragical interruption,
to close his pleading with effect.

  ``My Lords,'' said he, ``in that piteous cry you heard the
eloquence of maternal affection, far surpassing the force of my
poor words---Rachel weeping for her children! Nature herself
bears testimony in favour of the tenderness and acuteness of the
prisoner's parental feelings. I will not dishonour her plea by
adding a word more.''

  ``Heard ye ever the like o' that, Laird?'' said Saddletree to
Dumbiedikes, when the counsel had ended his speech. ``There's
a chield can spin a muckle pirn out of a wee tait of tow! Deil
haet he kens mair about it than what's in the declaration, and
a surmise that Jeanie Deans suld hae been able to say something
about her sister's situation, whilk surmise, Mr. Crossmyloof
says, rests on sma' authority. And he's cleckit this great muckle
bird out o' this wee egg! He could wile the very flounders out
o' the Firth.---What garr'd my father no send me to Utrecht?
---But whisht, the Court is gaun to pronounce the interlocutor
of relevancy.''

  And accordingly the Judges, after a few words, recorded their
judgment, which bore, that the indictment, if proved, was relevant
to infer the pains of law: And that the defence, that the
panel had communicated her situation to her sister, was a relevant
defence: And, finally, appointed the said indictment and
defence to be submitted to the judgment of an assize.

