




		CHAPTER TWENTIETH.

	Yet though thou mayst be dragg'd in scorn
	    To yonder ignominious tree,
	Thou shalt not want one faithful friend
	    To share the cruel fates' decree.
					Jemmy Dawson.


  After spending the greater part of the morning in his devotions
(for his benevolent neighbours had kindly insisted upon discharging
his task of ordinary labour), David Deans entered the apartment
when the breakfast meal was prepared. His eyes were
involuntarily cast down, for he was afraid to look at Jeanie,
uncertain as he was whether she might feel herself at liberty,
with a good conscience, to attend the Court of Justiciary that
day, to give the evidence which he understood that she possessed,
in order to her sister's exculpation. At length, after a minute
of apprehensive hesitation, he looked at her dress to discover
whether it seemed to be in her contemplation to go abroad that
morning. Her apparel was neat and plain, but such as conveyed
no exact intimation of her intentions to go abroad. She had
exchanged her usual garb for morning labour, for one something
inferior to that with which, as her best, she was wont to
dress herself for church, or any more rare occasion of going into
society. Her sense taught her, that it was respectful to be
decent in her apparel on such an occasion, while her feelings
induced her to lay aside the use of the very few and simple
personal ornaments, which, on other occasions, she permitted
herself to wear. So that there occurred nothing in her external
appearance which could mark out to her father, with anything
like certainty, her intentions on this occasion.

  The preparations for their humble meal were that morning
made in vain. The father and daughter sat, each assuming the
appearance of eating, when the other's eyes were turned to them,
and desisting from the effort with disgust, when the affectionate
imposture seemed no longer necessary.

  At length these moments of constraint were removed. The
sound of St. Giles's heavy toll announced the hour previous to
the commencement of the trial; Jeanie arose, and with a
degree of composure for which she herself could not account,
assumed her plaid, and made her other preparations for a
distant walking. It was a strange contrast between the firmness
of her demeanour, and the vacillation and cruel uncertainty of
purpose indicated in all her father's motions; and one unacquainted
with both could scarcely have supposed that the former
was, in her ordinary habits of life, a docile, quiet, gentle, and
even timid country maiden, while her father, with a mind naturally
proud and strong, and supported by religious opinions of
a stern, stoical, and unyielding character, had in his time
undergone and withstood the most severe hardships, and the
most imminent peril, without depression of spirit, or subjugation of
his constancy. The secret of this difference was, that Jeanie's
mind had already anticipated the line of conduct which she
must adopt, with all its natural and necessary consequences;
while her father, ignorant of every other circumstance, tormented
himself with imagining what the one sister might say or swear,
or what effect her testimony might have upon the awful event
of the trial.

  He watched his daughter, with a faltering and indecisive look,
until she looked back upon him, with a look of unutterable
anguish, as she was about to leave the apartment.

  ``My dear lassie,'' said he, ``I will''------His action, hastily
and confusedly searching for his worsted mittans<*> and staff,

* A kind of worsted gloves, used by the lower orders.

showed his purpose of accompanying her, though his tongue
failed distinctly to announce it.

  ``Father,'' said Jeanie, replying rather to his action than his
words, ``ye had better not.''

  ``In the strength of my God,'' answered Deans, assuming
firmness, ``I will go forth.''

  And, taking his daughter's arm under his, he began to walk
from the door with a step so hasty, that she was almost unable
to keep up with him. A trifling circumstance, but which
marked the perturbed state of his mind, checked his course.

  ``Your bonnet, father?'' said Jeanie, who observed he had come
out with his grey hairs uncovered. He turned back with a
slight blush on his cheek, being ashamed to have been detected
in an omission which indicated so much mental confusion, assumed
his large blue Scottish bonnet, and with a step slower, but
more composed, as if the circumstance, had obliged him to
summon up his resolution, and collect his scattered ideas, again
placed his daughter's arm under his, and resumed the way to
Edinburgh.

  The courts of justice were then, and are still, held in what is
called the Parliament Close, or, according to modern phrase,
Parliament Square, and occupied the buildings intended for the
accommodation of the Scottish Estates. This edifice, though
in an imperfect and corrupted style of architecture, had then a
grave, decent, and, as it were, a judicial aspect, which was at
least entitled to respect from its antiquity. For which venerable
front, I observed, on my last occasional visit to the
metropolis, that modern taste had substituted, at great apparent
expense, a pile so utterly inconsistent with every monument of
antiquity around, and in itself so clumsy at the same time and
fantastic, that it may be likened to the decorations of Tom
Errand the porter, in the _Trip to the Jubilee,_ when he appears
bedizened with the tawdry finery of Beau Clincher. _Sed transeat
cum c<ae>teris erroribus._

  The small quadrangle, or Close, if we may presume still to
give it that appropriate, though antiquated title, which at Lichfield,
Salisbury, and elsewhere, is properly applied to designate
the enclosure adjacent to a cathedral, already evinced tokens of
the fatal scene which was that day to be acted. The soldiers
of the City Guard were on their posts, now enduring, and now
rudely repelling with the butts of their muskets, the motley
crew who thrust each other forward, to catch a glance at the
unfortunate object of trial, as she should pass from the adjacent
prison to the Court in which her fate was to be determined.
All must have occasionally observed, with disgust, the apathy
with which the vulgar gaze on scenes of this nature, and how
seldom, unless when their sympathies are called forth by some
striking and extraordinary circumstance, the crowd evince any
interest deeper than that of callous, unthinking bustle, and
brutal curiosity. They laugh, jest, quarrel, and push each other
to and fro, with the same unfeeling indifference as if they were
assembled for some holiday sport, or to see an idle procession.
Occasionally, however, this demeanour, so natural to the degraded
populace of a large town, is exchanged for a temporary
touch of human affections; and so it chanced on the present
occasion.

  When Deans and his daughter presented themselves in the
Close, and endeavoured to make their way forward to the door
of the Court-house, they became involved in the mob, and subject,
of course, to their insolence. As Deans repelled with some
force the rude pushes which he received on all sides, his figure
and antiquated dress caught the attention of the rabble, who
often show an intuitive sharpness in ascribing the proper character
from external appearance,---

	``Ye're welcome, whigs,
	    Frae Bothwell briggs,''

sung one fellow (for the mob of Edinburgh were at that time
jacobitically disposed, probably because that was the line of
sentiment most diametrically opposite to existing authority).

	``Mess David Williamson,
	    Chosen of twenty,
	Ran up the pu'pit stair,
	    And sang Killiecrankie,''

chanted a siren, whose profession might be guessed by her
appearance. A tattered caidie, or errand-porter, whom David
Deans had jostled in his attempt to extricate himself from the
vicinity of these scorners, exclaimed in a strong north-country
tone, ``Ta deil ding out her Cameronian een---what gies her
titles to dunch gentlemans about?''

  ``Make room for the ruling elder,'' said yet another; ``he
comes to see a precious sister glorify God in the Grassmarket!''

  ``Whisht; shame's in ye, sirs,'' said the voice of a man very
loudly, which, as quickly sinking, said in a low but distinct
tone, ``It's her father and sister.''

  All fell back to make way for the sufferers; and all, even
the very rudest and most profligate, were struck with shame
and silence. In the space thus abandoned to them by the mob,
Deans stood, holding his daughter by the hand, and said to
her, with a countenance strongly and sternly expressive of his
internal emotion, ``Ye hear with your ears, and ye see with
your eyes, where and to whom the backslidings and defections
of professors are ascribed by the scoffers. Not to themselves
alone, but to the kirk of which they are members, and to its
blessed and invisible Head. Then, weel may we take wi' patience
our share and portion of this outspreading reproach.''

  The man who had spoken, no other than our old friend,
Dumbiedikes, whose mouth, like that of the prophet's ass, had
been opened by the emergency of the case, now joined them,
and, with his usual taciturnity, escorted them into the Court-house.
No opposition was offered to their entrance either by
the guards or doorkeepers; and it is even said that one of the
latter refused a shilling of civility-money tendered him by the
Laird of Dumbiedikes, who was of opinion that ``siller wad
make a' easy.'' But this last incident wants confirmation.

  Admitted within the precincts of the Court-house, they found
the usual number of busy office-bearers, and idle loiterers, who
attend on these scenes by choice, or from duty. Burghers gaped
and stared; young lawyers sauntered, sneered, and laughed, as
in the pit of the theatre; while others apart sat on a bench
retired, and reasoned highly, _inter apices juris,_ on the doctrines
of constructive crime, and the true import of the statute. The
bench was prepared for the arrival of the judges. The jurors
were in attendance. The crown-counsel, employed in looking
over their briefs and notes of evidence, looked grave, and whispered
with each other. They occupied one side of a large table
placed beneath the bench; on the other sat the advocates, whom
the humanity of the Scottish law (in this particular more liberal
than that of the sister-country) not only permits, but enjoins, to
appear and assist with their advice and skill all persons under
trial. Mr. Nichil Novit was seen actively instructing the counsel
for the panel (so the prisoner is called in Scottish law-phraseology),
busy, bustling, and important. When they entered the
Court-room, Deans asked the Laird, in a tremulous whisper,
``Where will _she_ sit?''

  Dumbiedikes whispered Novit, who pointed to a vacant space
at the bar, fronting the judges, and was about to conduct Deans
towards it.

  ``No!'' he said; ``I cannot sit by her---I cannot own her---
not as yet, at least---I will keep out of her sight, and turn mine
own eyes elsewhere---better for us baith.''

  Saddletree, whose repeated interference with the counsel had
procured him one or two rebuffs, and a special request that he
would concern himself with his own matters, now saw with
pleasure an opportunity of playing the person of importance.
He bustled up to the poor old man, and proceeded to exhibit
his consequence, by securing, through his interest with the bar-keepers
and macers, a seat for Deans, in a situation where he
was hidden from the general eye by the projecting corner of the
bench.

  ``It's gude to have a friend at court,'' he said, continuing
his heartless harangues to the passive auditor, who neither
heard nor replied to them; ``few folk but mysell could hae
sorted ye out a seat like this---the Lords will be here incontinent,
and proceed _instanter_ to trial. They wunna fence the
Court as they do at the Circuit---the High Court of Justiciary
is aye fenced.---But, Lord's sake, what's this o't---Jeanie, ye are
a cited witness---Macer, this lass is a witness---she maun be
enclosed---she maun on nae account be at large.---Mr. Novit,
suldna Jeanie Deans be enclosed?''

  Novit answered in the affirmative, and offered to conduct
Jeanie to the apartment, where, according to the scrupulous
practice of the Scottish Court, the witnesses remain in readiness
to be called into Court to give evidence; and separated, at the
same time, from all who might influence their testimony, or
give them information concerning that which was passing upon
the trial.

  ``Is this necessary?'' said Jeanie, still reluctant to quit her
father's hand.

  ``A matter of absolute needcessity,'' said Saddletree, ``wha
ever heard of witnesses no being enclosed?''

  ``It is really a matter of necessity,'' said the younger counsellor,
retained for her sister; and Jeanie reluctantly followed
the macer of the Court to the place appointed.

  ``This, Mr. Deans,'' said Saddletree, ``is ca'd sequestering a
witness; but it's clean different (whilk maybe ye wadna fund
out o' yoursell) frae sequestering ane's estate or effects, as in
cases of bankruptcy. I hae aften been sequestered as a witness,
for the Sheriff is in the use whiles to cry me in to witness the
declarations at precognitions, and so is Mr. Sharpitlaw; but I
was ne'er like to be sequestered o' land and gudes but ance,
and that was lang syne, afore I was married. But whisht,
whisht! here's the Court coming.''

  As he spoke, the five Lords of Justiciary, in their long robes
of scarlet, faced with white, and preceded by their mace-bearer,
entered with the usual formalities, and took their places upon
the bench of judgment.

  The audience rose to receive them; and the bustle occasioned
by their entrance was hardly composed, when a great noise and
confusion of persons struggling, and forcibly endeavouring to
enter at the doors of the Court-room, and of the galleries,
announced that the prisoner was about to be placed at the bar.
This tumult takes place when the doors, at first only opened to
those either having right to be present, or to the better and more
qualified ranks, are at length laid open to all whose curiosity
induces them to be present on the occasion. With inflamed
countenances and dishevelled dresses, struggling with, and sometimes
tumbling over each other, in rushed the rude multitude,
while a few soldiers, forming, as it were, the centre of the tide,
could scarce, with all their efforts, clear a passage for the
prisoner to the place which she was to occupy. By the authority
of the Court, and the exertions of its officers, the tumult among
the spectators was at length appeased, and the unhappy girl
brought forward, and placed betwixt two sentinels with drawn
bayonets, as a prisoner at the bar, where she was to abide her
deliverance for good or evil, according to the issue of her trial.
