





		CHAPTER SIXTH.

	The evil you teach us, we will execute; 
	and it shall go hard, but we will
	better the instruction.
					Merchant of Venice.

  The unhappy object of this remarkable disturbance had been
that day delivered from the apprehension of public execution,
and his joy was the greater, as he had some reason to question
whether Government would have run the risk of unpopularity
by interfering in his favour, after he had been legally convicted
by the verdict of a jury, of a crime so very obnoxious. Relieved
from this doubtful state of mind, his heart was merry within
him, and he thought, in the emphatic words of Scripture on
a similar occasion, that surely the bitterness of death was past.
Some of his friends, however, who had watched the manner and
behaviour of the crowd when they were made acquainted with
the reprieve, were of a different opinion. They augured, from
the unusual sternness and silence with which they bore their
disappointment, that the populace nourished some scheme of
sudden and desperate vengeance; and they advised Porteous to
lose no time in petitioning the proper authorities, that he might
be conveyed to the Castle under a sufficient guard, to remain
there in security until his ultimate fate should be determined.
Habituated, however, by his office, to overawe the rabble of the
city, Porteous could not suspect them of an attempt so audacious
as to storm a strong and defensible prison; and, despising the
advice by which he might have been saved, he spent the afternoon
of the eventful day in giving an entertainment to some
friends who visited him in jail, several of whom, by the indulgence
of the Captain of the Tolbooth, with whom he had an old
intimacy, arising from their official connection, were even permitted
to remain to supper with him, though contrary to the
rules of the jail.

  It was, therefore, in the hour of unalloyed mirth, when this
unfortunate wretch was ``full of bread,'' hot with wine, and high
in mistimed and ill-grounded confidence, and alas! with all his
sins full blown, when the first distant' shouts of the rioters
mingled with the song of merriment and intemperance. The
hurried call of the jailor to the guests, requiring them instantly
to depart, and his yet more hasty intimation that a dreadful and
determined mob had possessed themselves of the city gates and
guard-house, were the first explanation of these fearful clamours.

  Porteous might, however, have eluded the fury from which
the force of authority could not protect him, had he thought of
slipping on some disguise, and leaving the prison along with his
guests. It is probable that the jailor might have connived at
his escape, or even that in the hurry of this alarming contingency,
he might not have observed it. But Porteous and his friends
alike wanted presence of mind to suggest or execute such a plan
of escape. The former hastily fled from a place where their own
safety seemed compromised, and the latter, in a state resembling
stupefaction, awaited in his apartment the termination of the
enterprise of the rioters. The cessation of the clang of the
instruments with which they had at first attempted to force the
door, gave him momentary relief. The flattering hopes, that
the military had marched into the city, either from the Castle
or from the suburbs, and that the rioters were intimidated, and
dispersing, were soon destroyed by the broad and glaring light
of the flames, which, illuminating through the grated window
every corner of his apartment, plainly showed that the mob,
determined on their fatal purpose, had adopted a means of forcing
entrance equally desperate and certain.

  The sudden glare of light suggested to the stupified and astonished
object of popular hatred the possibility of concealment
or escape. To rush to the chimney, to ascend it at the risk of
suffocation, were the only means which seemed to have occurred
to him; but his progress was speedily stopped by one of those
iron gratings, which are, for the sake of security, usually placed
across the vents of buildings designed for imprisonment. The
bars, however, which impeded his farther progress, served to
support him in the situation which he had gained, and he seized
them with the tenacious grasp of one who esteemed himself clinging
to his last hope of existence. The lurid light which had filled
the apartment, lowered and died away; the sound of shouts was
heard within the walls, and on the narrow and winding stair,
which, eased within one of the turrets, gave access to the upper
apartments of the prison. The huzza of the rioters was answered
by a shout wild and desperate as their own, the cry, namely, of
the imprisoned felons, who, expecting to be liberated in the
general confusion, welcomed the mob as their deliverers. By
some of these the apartment of Porteous was pointed out to his
enemies. The obstacle of the lock and bolts was soon overcome,
and from his hiding place the unfortunate man heard his enemies
search every corner of the apartment, with oaths and maledictions,
which would but shock the reader if we recorded them,
but which served to prove, could it have admitted of doubt, the
settled purpose of soul with which they sought his destruction.

  A place of concealment so obvious to suspicion and scrutiny
as that which Porteous had chosen, could not long screen him
from detection. He was dragged from his lurking-place, with a
violence which seemed to argue an intention to put him to death
on the spot. More than one weapon was directed towards him,
when one of the rioters, the same whose female disguise had
been particularly noticed by Butler, interfered in an authoritative
tone. ``Are ye mad?'' he said, ``or would ye execute an act
of justice as if it were a crime and a cruelty? This sacrifice
will lose half its savour if we do not offer it at the very horns
of the altar. We will have him die where a murderer should
die, on the common gibbet---We will have him die where he
spilled the blood of so many innocents!''

  A loud shout of applause followed the proposal, and the cry,
``To the gallows with the murderer!---to the Grassmarket with
him!'' echoed on all hands.

  ``Let no man hurt him,'' continued the speaker; ``let him
make his peace with God, if he can; we will not kill both his
soul and body.''

  ``What time did he give better folk for preparing their account?''
answered several voices. ``Let us mete to him with the
same measure he measured to them.''

  But the opinion of the spokesman better suited the temper of
those he addressed, a temper rather stubborn than impetuous,
sedate though ferocious, and desirous of colouring their cruel and
revengeful action with a show of justice and moderation.

  For an instant this man quitted the prisoner, whom he consigned
to a selected guard, with instructions to permit him to
give his money and property to whomsoever he pleased. A person
confined in the jail for debt received this last deposit from
the trembling hand of the victim, who was at the same time
permitted to make some other brief arrangements to meet his
approaching fate. The felons, and all others who, wished to leave
the jail, were now at full liberty to do so; not that their liberation
made any part of the settled purpose of the rioters, but it
followed as almost a necessary consequence of forcing the jail
doors. With wild cries of jubilee they joined the mob, or disappeared
among the narrow lanes to seek out the hidden
receptacles of vice and infamy, where they were accustomed to
lurk and conceal themselves from justice.

  Two persons, a man about fifty years old and a girl about
eighteen, were all who continued within the fatal walls, excepting
two or three debtors, who probably saw no advantage in
attempting their escape. The persons we have mentioned remained
in the strong room of the prison, now deserted by all
others. One of their late companions in misfortune called out
to the man to make his escape, in the tone of an acquaintance.
``Rin for it, Ratcliffe---the road's clear.''

  ``It may be sae, Willie,'' answered Ratcliffe, composedly,
``but I have taen a fancy to leave aff trade, and set up for an
honest man.''

  ``Stay there, and be hanged, then, for a donnard auld deevil!''
said the other, and ran down the prison stair.

  The person in female attire whom we have distinguished as
one of the most active rioters, was about the same time at the
ear of the young woman. ``Flee, Effie, flee!'' was all he had
time to whisper. She turned towards him an eye of mingled
fear, affection, and upbraiding, all contending with a sort of
stupified surprise. He again repeated, ``Flee, Effie, flee! for
the sake of all that's good and dear to you!'' Again she gazed
on him, but was unable to answer. A loud noise was now
heard, and the name of Madge Wildfire was repeatedly called
from the bottom of the staircase.

  ``I am coming,---I am coming,'' said the person who answered
to that appellative; and then reiterating hastily, ``For God's
sake---for your own sake---for my sake, flee, or they'll take your
life!'' he left the strong room.

  The girl gazed after him for a moment, and then, faintly
muttering, ``Better tyne life, since tint is gude fame,'' she sunk
her head upon her hand, and remained, seemingly, unconscious
as a statue of the noise and tumult which passed around her.

  That tumult was now transferred from the inside to the outside
of the Tolbooth. The mob had brought their destined
victim forth, and were about to conduct him to the common
place of execution, which they had fixed as the scene of his
death. The leader, whom they distinguished by the name of
Madge Wildfire, had been summoned to assist at the procession
by the impatient shouts of his confederates.

  ``I will insure you five hundred pounds,'' said the unhappy
man, grasping Wildfire's hand,---``five hundred pounds for to
save my life.''

  The other answered in the same undertone, and returning
his grasp with one equally convulsive, ``Five hundredweight
of coined gold should not save you.---Remember Wilson!''

  A deep pause of a minute ensued, when Wildfire added, in a
more composed tone, ``Make your peace with Heaven.---Where
is the clergyman?''

  Butler, who in great terror and anxiety, had been detained
within a few yards of the Tolbooth door, to wait the event of
the search after Porteous, was now brought forward, and commanded
to walk by the prisoner's side, and to prepare him for
immediate death. His answer was a supplication that the
rioters would consider what they did. ``You are neither judges
nor jury,'' said he. ``You cannot have, by the laws of God or
man, power to take away the life of a human creature, however
deserving he may be of death. If it is murder even in a lawful
magistrate to execute an offender otherwise than in the place, time,
and manner which the judges' sentence prescribes, what must it
be in you, who have no warrant for interference but your own
wills? In the name of Him who is all mercy, show mercy to
this unhappy man, and do not dip your hands in his blood, nor
rush into the very crime which you are desirous of avenging!''

  ``Cut your sermon short---you are not in your pulpit,''
answered one of the rioters.

  ``If we hear more of your clavers,'' said another, ``we are
like to hang you up beside him.''

  ``Peace---hush!'' said Wildfire. ``Do the good man no
harm---he discharges his conscience, and I like him the better.''

  He then addressed Butler. ``Now, sir, we have patiently
heard you, and we just wish you to understand, in the way of
answer, that you may as well argue to the ashlar-work and
iron stanchels of the Tolbooth as think to change our purpose---
Blood must have blood. We have sworn to each other by the
deepest oaths ever were pledged, that Porteous shall die the
death he deserves so richly; therefore, speak no more to us, but
prepare him for death as well as the briefness of his change
will permit.''

  They had suffered the unfortunate Porteous to put on his
night-gown and slippers, as he had thrown off his coat and
shoes, in order to facilitate his attempted escape up the chimney.
In this garb he was now mounted on the hands of two of the
rioters, clasped together, so as to form what is called in Scotland,
``The King's Cushion.'' Butler was placed close to his
side, and repeatedly urged to perform a duty always the most
painful which can be imposed on a clergyman deserving of the
name, and now rendered more so by the peculiar and horrid
circumstances of the criminal's case. Porteous at first uttered
some supplications for mercy, but when he found that there
was no chance that these would be attended to, his military
education, and the natural stubbornness of his disposition, combined
to support his spirits.

  ``Are you prepared for this dreadful end?'' said Butler, in a
faltering voice. ``O turn to Him, in whose eyes time and space
have no existence, and to whom a few minutes are as a lifetime,
and a lifetime as a minute.''

  ``I believe I know what you would say,'' answered Porteous
sullenly. ``I was bred a soldier; if they will murder me without
time, let my sins as well as my blood lie at their door.''

  ``Who was it,'' said the stern voice of Wildfire, ``that said
to Wilson at this very spot, when he could not pray, owing to
the galling agony of his fetters, that his pains would soon be
over?---I say to you to take your own tale home; and if you
cannot profit by the good man's lessons, blame not them that
are still more merciful to you than you were to others.''

  The procession now moved forward with a slow and determined
pace. It was enlightened by many blazing, links and
torches; for the actors of this work were so far from affecting
any secrecy on the occasion, that they seemed even to court
observation. Their principal leaders kept close to the person of
the prisoner, whose pallid yet stubborn features were seen distinctly
by the torch-light, as his person was raised considerably
above the concourse which thronged around him. Those who
bore swords, muskets, and battle-axes, marched on each side, as
if forming a regular guard to the procession. The windows, as
they went along, were filled with the inhabitants, whose slumbers
had been broken by this unusual disturbance. Some of the
spectators muttered accents of encouragement; but in general
they were so much appalled by a sight so strange and audacious,
that they looked on with a sort of stupified astonishment. No
one offered, by act or word, the slightest interruption.

  The rioters, on their part, continued to act with the same air
of deliberate confidence and security which had marked all their
proceedings. When the object of their resentment dropped one of
his slippers, they stopped, sought for it, and replaced it upon his
foot with great deliberation.<*> As they descended the Bow towards

* This little incident, characteristic of the extreme composure of this
* extraordinary mob, was witnessed by a lady, who, disturbed like others
* from her slumbers, had gone to the window. It was told to the Author by
* the lady's daughter.

the fatal spot where they designed to complete their
purpose, it was suggested that there should be a rope kept in
readiness. For this purpose the booth of a man who dealt in
cordage was forced open, a coil of rope fit for their purpose was
selected to serve as a halter, and the dealer next morning found
that a guinea had been left on his counter in exchange; so
anxious were the perpetrators of this daring action to show that
they meditated not the slightest wrong or infraction of law, excepting
so far as Porteous was himself concerned.

  Leading, or carrying along with them, in this determined and
regular manner, the object of their vengeance, they at length
reached the place of common execution, the scene of his crime,
and destined spot of his sufferings. Several of the rioters (if
they should not rather be described as conspirators) endeavoured
to remove the stone which filled up the socket in which the end
of the fatal tree was sunk when it was erected for its fatal
purpose; others sought for the means of constructing a temporary
gibbet, the place in which the gallows itself was deposited
being reported too secure to be forced, without much loss of
time. Butler endeavoured to avail himself of the delay afforded
by these circumstances, to turn the people from their desperate
design. ``For God's sake,'' he exclaimed, ``remember it is the
image of your Creator which you are about to deface in the
person of this unfortunate man! Wretched as he is, and wicked
as he may be, he has a share in every promise of Scripture, and
you cannot destroy him in impenitence without blotting his
name from the Book of Life---Do not destroy soul and body;
give time for preparation.''

  ``What time had they,'' returned a stern voice, ``whom he
murdered on this very spot?---The laws both of God and man
call for his death.''

  ``But what, my friends,'' insisted Butler, with a generous disregard
to his own safety---``what hath constituted you his judges?''

  ``We are not his judges,'' replied the same person; ``he has
been already judged and condemned by lawful authority. We
are those whom Heaven, and our righteous anger, have stirred
up to execute judgment, when a corrupt Government would have
protected a murderer.''

  ``I am none,'' said the unfortunate Porteous; ``that which
you charge upon me fell out in self-defence, in the lawful
exercise of my duty.''

  ``Away with him---away with him!'' was the general cry.

  ``Why do you trifle away time in making a gallows?---that
dyester's pole is good enough for the homicide.''

  The unhappy man was forced to his fate with remorseless
rapidity. Butler, separated from him by the press, escaped the
last horrors of his struggles. Unnoticed by those who had
hitherto detained him as a prisoner,---he fled from the fatal spot,
without much caring in what direction his course lay. A loud
shout proclaimed the stern delight with which the agents of
this deed regarded its completion. Butler, then, at the opening
into the low street called the Cowgate, cast back a terrified
glance, and, by the red and dusky light of the torches, he could
discern a figure wavering and struggling as it hung suspended
above the heads of the multitude, and could even observe men
striking at it with their Lochaber-axes and partisans. The
sight was of a nature to double his horror, and to add wings to
his flight.

  The street down which the fugitive ran opens to one of the
eastern ports or gates of the city. Butler did not stop till he
reached it, but found it still shut. He waited nearly an hour,
walking up and down in inexpressible perturbation of mind.
At length he ventured to call out, and rouse the attention of
the terrified keepers of the gate, who now found themselves at
liberty to resume their office without interruption. Butler
requested them to open the gate. They hesitated. He told
them his name and occupation.

  ``He is a preacher,'' said one; ``I have heard him preach in
Haddo's-hole.''

  ``A fine preaching has he been at the night,'' said another
``but maybe least said is sunest mended.''

  Opening then the wicket of the main gate, the keepers
suffered Butler to depart, who hastened to carry his horror and
fear beyond the walls of Edinburgh. His first purpose was
instantly to take the road homeward; but other fears and
cares, connected with the news he had learned in that remarkable
day, induced him to linger in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh
until daybreak. More than one group of persons passed him as
he was whiling away the hours of darkness that yet remained,
whom, from the stifled tones of their discourse, the unwonted
hour when they travelled, and the hasty pace at which they
walked, he conjectured to have been engaged in the late fatal
transaction.

  Certain it was, that the sudden and total dispersion of the
rioters, when their vindictive purpose was accomplished, seemed
not the least remarkable feature of this singular affair. In
general, whatever may be the impelling motive by which a mob
is at first raised, the attainment of their object has usually been
only found to lead the way to farther excesses. But not so in
the present case. They seemed completely satiated with the
vengeance they had prosecuted with such stanch and sagacious
activity. When they were fully satisfied that life had abandoned
their victim, they dispersed in every direction, throwing down
the weapons which they had only assumed to enable them to
carry through their purpose. At daybreak there remained not
the least token of the events of the night, excepting the corpse
of Porteous, which still hung suspended in the place where he
had suffered, and the arms of various kinds which the rioters
had taken from the city guard-house, which were found scattered
about the streets as they had thrown them from their hands
when the purpose for which they had seized them was accomplished.

  The ordinary magistrates of the city resumed their power,
not without trembling at the late experience of the fragility of
its tenure. To march troops into the city, and commence a
severe inquiry into the transactions of the preceding night, were
the first marks of returning energy which they displayed. But
these events had been conducted on so secure and well-calculated
a plan of safety and secrecy, that there was little or nothing
learned to throw light upon the authors or principal actors in a
scheme so audacious. An express was despatched to London
with the tidings, where they excited great indignation and
surprise in the council of regency, and particularly in the bosom
of Queen Caroline, who considered her own authority as exposed
to contempt by the success of this singular conspiracy. Nothing
was spoke of for some time save the measure of vengeance
which should be taken, not only on the actors of this tragedy,
so soon as they should be discovered, but upon the magistrates
who had suffered it to take place, and upon the city which had
been the scene where it was exhibited. On this occasion, it
is still recorded in popular tradition, that her Majesty, in
the height of her displeasure, told the celebrated John Duke
of Argyle, that, sooner than submit to such an insult, she
would make Scotland a hunting-field. ``In that case, Madam,''
answered that high-spirited nobleman, with a profound bow, ``I
will take leave of your Majesty, and go down to my own country
to get my hounds ready.''

  The import of the reply had more than met the ear; and as
most of the Scottish nobility and gentry seemed actuated by
the same national spirit, the royal displeasure was necessarily
checked in mid-volley, and milder courses were recommended
and adopted, to some of which we may hereafter have occasion
to advert.<*>

* Note D. Memorial concerning the murder of Captain Porteous.
