




		CHAPTER TWENTY-THIRD.

	Law, take thy victim---May she find the mercy
	In yon mild heaven, which this hard world denies her!


  It was an hour ere the jurors returned, and as they traversed
the crowd with slow steps, as men about to discharge themselves
of a heavy and painful responsibility, the audience was hushed
into profound, earnest, and awful silence.

  ``Have you agreed on your chancellor, gentlemen?'' was the
first question of the Judge.

  The foreman, called in Scotland the chancellor of the jury,
usually the man of best rank and estimation among the assizers,
stepped forward, and with a low reverence, delivered to the
Court a sealed paper, containing the verdict, which, until of
late years, that verbal returns are in some instances permitted,
was always couched in writing. The jury remained standing
while the Judge broke the seals, and having perused the paper,
handed it with an air of mournful gravity down to the clerk of
Court, who proceeded to engross in the record the yet unknown
verdict, of which, however, all omened the tragical contents.
A form still remained, trifling and unimportant in itself, but to
which imagination adds a sort of solemnity, from the awful
occasion upon which it is used. A lighted candle was placed on
the table, the original paper containing the verdict was enclosed
in a sheet of paper, and, sealed with the Judge's own signet,
was transmitted to the Crown Office, to be preserved among
other records of the same kind. As all this is transacted in
profound silence, the producing and extinguishing the candle
seems a type of the human spark which is shortly afterwards
doomed to be quenched, and excites in the spectators something
of the same effect which in England is obtained by the Judge
assuming the fatal cap of judgment. When these preliminary
forms had been gone through, the Judge required Euphemia
Deans to attend to the verdict to be read.

  After the usual words of style, the verdict set forth, that the
Jury having made choice of John Kirk, Esq., to be their chancellor,
and Thomas Moore, merchant, to be their clerk, did, by
a plurality of voices, find the said Euphemia Deans =Guilty= of
the crime libelled; but, in consideration of her extreme youth,
and the cruel circumstances of her case, did earnestly entreat
that the Judge would recommend her to the mercy of the
Crown.

  ``Gentlemen,'' said the Judge, ``you have done your duty---
and a painful one it must have been to men of humanity like
you. I will undoubtedly transmit your recommendation to
the throne. But it is my duty to tell all who now hear me, but
especially to inform that unhappy young woman, in order that
her mind may be settled accordingly, that I have not the least
hope of a pardon being granted in the present case. You know
the crime has been increasing in this land, and I know farther,
that this has been ascribed to the lenity in which the laws have
been exercised, and that there is therefore no hope whatever of
obtaining a remission for this offence.'' The jury bowed again,
and, released from their painful office, dispersed themselves
among the mass of bystanders.

  The Court then asked Mr. Fairbrother whether he had anything
to say, why judgment should not follow on the verdict?
The counsel had spent some time in persuing and reperusing
the verdict, counting the letters in each juror's name, and
weighing every phrase, nay, every syllable, in the nicest scales
of legal criticism. But the clerk of the jury had understood
his business too well. No flaw was to be found, and Fairbrother
mournfully intimated, that he had nothing to say in
arrest of judgment.

  The presiding Judge then addressed the unhappy prisoner:---
``Euphemia Deans, attend to the sentence of the Court now to
be pronounced against you.''

  She rose from her seat, and with a composure far greater
than could have been augured from her demeanour during
some parts of the trial, abode the conclusion of the awful scene.
So nearly does the mental portion of our feelings resemble those
which are corporeal, that the first severe blows which we receive
bring with them a stunning apathy, which renders us indifferent
to those that follow them. Thus said Mandrin, when he was
undergoing the punishment of the wheel; and so have all felt,
upon whom successive inflictions have descended with continuous
and reiterated violence.<*>

* [The notorious Mandrin was known as the Captain-General of French
& smugglers. See a Tract on his exploits, printed 1753.]


  ``Young woman,'' said the Judge, ``it is my painful duty to
tell you, that your life is forfeited under a law, which, if it may
seem in some degree severe, is yet wisely so, to render those of
your unhappy situation aware what risk they run, by concealing,
out of pride or false shame, their lapse from virtue, and making
no preparation to save the lives of the unfortunate infants whom
they are to bring into the world. When you concealed your
situation from your mistress, your sister, and other worthy and
compassionate persons of your own sex, in whose favour your
former conduct had given you a fair place, you seem to me to
have had in your contemplation, at least, the death of the helpless
creature, for whose life you neglected to provide. How the
child was disposed of---whether it was dealt upon by another,
or by yourself---whether the extraordinary story you have told
is partly false, or altogether so, is between God and your own
conscience. I will not aggravate your distress by pressing on
that topic, but I do most solemnly adjure you to employ the
remaining space of your time in making your peace with God,
for which purpose such reverend clergymen, as you yourself
may name, shall have access to you. Notwithstanding the
humane recommendation of the jury, I cannot afford to you, in
the present circumstances of the country, the slightest hope that
your life will be prolonged beyond the period assigned for the
execution of your sentence. Forsaking, therefore, the thoughts
of this world, let your mind be prepared by repentance for
those of more awful moments---for death, judgment, and eternity.
---Doomster, read the sentence.''<*>

* Note N. Doomster, or Dempster, of Court.


  When the Doomster showed himself, a tall haggard figure,
arrayed in a fantastic garment of black and grey, passmented
with silver lace, all fell back with a sort of instinctive horror,
and made wide way for him to approach the foot of the table.
As this office was held by the common executioner, men
shouldered each other backward to avoid even the touch of his
garment, and some were seen to brush their own clothes, which
had accidentally become subject to such contamination. A sound
went through the Court, produced by each person drawing in
their breath hard, as men do when they expect or witness what
is frightful, and at the same time affecting. The caitiff villain
yet seemed, amid his hardened brutality, to have some sense of
his being the object of public detestation, which made him
impatient of being in public, as birds of evil omen are anxious
to escape from daylight, and from pure air.

  Repeating after the Clerk of Court, he gabbled over the words
of the sentence, which condemned Euphemia Deans to be conducted
back to the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, and detained there
until Wednesday the ------ day of ------; and upon that day,
betwixt the hours of two and four o'clock afternoon, to be conveyed
to the common place of execution, and there hanged by
the neck upon a gibbet. ``And this,'' said the Doomster,
aggravating his harsh voice, ``I pronounce for _doom._''

  He vanished when he had spoken the last emphatic word,
like a foul fiend after the purpose of his visitation had been
accomplished; but the impression of horror excited by his presence
and his errand, remained upon the crowd of spectators.

  The unfortunate criminal,---for so she must now be termed,
---with more susceptibility, and more irritable feelings than her
father and sister, was found, in this emergence, to possess a
considerable share of their courage. She had remained standing
motionless at the bar while the sentence was pronounced,
and was observed to shut her eyes when the Doomster appeared.
But she was the first to break silence when that evil form had
left his place.

  ``God forgive ye, my Lords,'' she said, ``and dinna be angry
wi' me for wishing it---we a' need forgiveness.---As for myself,
I canna blame ye, for ye act up to your lights; and if I havena
killed my poor infant, ye may witness a' that hae seen it this
day, that I hae been the means of killing my greyheaded father
---I deserve the warst frae man, and frae God too---But God is
mair mercifu' to us than we are to each other.''

  With these words the trial concluded. The crowd rushed,
bearing forward and shouldering each other, out of the Court,
in the same tumultuary mode in which they had entered; and,
in excitation of animal motion and animal spirits, soon forgot
whatever they had felt as impressive in the scene which they
had witnessed. The professional spectators, whom habit and
theory had rendered as callous to the distress of the scene as
medical men are to those of a surgical operation, walked homeward
in groups, discussing the general principle of the statute
under which the young woman was condemned, the nature
of the evidence, and the arguments of the counsel, without considering
even that of the Judge as exempt from their criticism.

  The female spectators, more compassionate, were loud in
exclamation against that part of the Judge's speech which
seemed to cut off the hope of pardon.

  ``Set him up, indeed,'' said Mrs. Howden, ``to tell us that
the poor lassie behoved to die, when Mr. John Kirk, as civil a
gentleman as is within the ports of the town, took the pains to
prigg for her himsell.''

  ``Ay, but, neighbour,'' said Miss Damahoy, drawing up her
thin maidenly form to its full height of prim dignity---``I really
think this unnatural business of having bastard-bairns should
be putten a stop to.---There isna a hussy now on this side of
thirty that you can bring within your doors, but there will be
chields---writer-lads, prentice-lads, and what not---coming traiking
after them for their destruction, and discrediting ane's
honest house into the bargain---I hae nae patience wi' them.''

  ``Hout, neighbour,'' said Mrs. Howden, ``we suld live and
let live---we hae been young oursells, and we are no aye to
judge the warst when lads and lasses forgather.''

  ``Young oursells! and judge the warst!'' said Miss Damahoy.
``I am no sae auld as that comes to, Mrs. Howden; and
as for what ye ca' the warst, I ken neither good nor bad about
the matter, I thank my stars!''

  ``Ye are thankfu' for sma' mercies, then,'' said Mrs. Howden
with a toss of her head; ``and as for you and young---I trow
ye were doing for yoursell at the last riding of the Scots Parliament,
and that was in the gracious year seven, sae ye can be
nae sic chicken at ony rate.''

  Plumdamas, who acted as squire of the body to the two
contending dames, instantly saw the hazard of entering into
such delicate points of chronology, and being a lover of peace
and good neighbourhood, lost no time in bringing back the conversation
to its original subject.

  ``The Judge didna tell us a' he could hae tell'd us, if he had
liked, about the application for pardon, neighbours,'' said he
``there is aye a wimple in a lawyer's clew; but it's a wee bit of
a secret.''

  ``And what is't---what is't, neighbour Plumdamas?'' said
Mrs. Howden and Miss Damahoy at once, the acid fermentation
of their dispute being at once neutralised by the powerful alkali
implied in the word secret.

  ``Here's Mr. Saddletree can tell ye that better than me, for
it was him that tauld me,'' said Plumdamas as Saddletree came
up, with his wife hanging on his arm, and looking very disconsolate.

  When the question was put to Saddletree, he looked very
scornful. ``They speak about stopping the frequency of child-murder,''
said he, in a contemptuous tone; ``do ye think our
auld enemies of England, as Glendook aye ca's them in his
printed Statute-book, care a boddle whether we didna kill ane
anither, skin and birn, horse and foot, man, woman, and bairns,
all and sindry, _omnes et singulos,_ as Mr. Crossmyloof says? Na,
na, it's no _that_ hinders them frae pardoning the bit lassie. But
here is the pinch of the plea. The king and queen are sae ill
pleased wi' that mistak about Porteous, that deil a kindly Scot
will they pardon again, either by reprieve or remission, if the
haill town o' Edinburgh should be a' hanged on ae tow.''

  ``Deil that they were back at their German kale-yard then,
as my neighbour MacCroskie ca's it,'' said Mrs. Howden, ``an
that's the way they're gaun to guide us!''

  ``They say for certain,'' said Miss Damahoy, ``that King
George flang his periwig in the fire when he heard o' the
Porteous mob.''

  ``He has done that, they say,'' replied Saddletree, ``for less
thing.''

  ``Aweel,'' said Miss Damahoy, ``he might keep mair wit in
his anger---but it's a' the better for his wigmaker, I'se warrant.''

  ``The queen tore her biggonets for perfect anger,---ye'll hae
heard o' that too?'' said Plumdamas. ``And the king, they
say, kickit Sir Robert Walpole for no keeping down the mob of
Edinburgh; but I dinna believe he wad behave sae ungenteel.''

  ``It's dooms truth, though,'' said Saddletree; ``and he was
for kickin' the Duke of Argyle<*> too.''

* Note O. John Duke of Argyle and Greenwich.


  ``Kickin' the Duke of Argyle!'' exclaimed the hearers at once,
in all the various combined keys of utter astonishment.

  ``Ay, but MacCallummore's blood wadna sit down wi' that;
there was risk of Andro Ferrara coming in thirdsman.''

  ``The duke is a real Scotsman---a true friend to the country,''
answered Saddletree's hearers.

  ``Ay, troth is he, to king and country baith, as ye sall hear,''
continued the orator, ``if ye will come in bye to our house, for
it's safest speaking of sic things _inter parietes._''

  When they entered his shop, he thrust his prentice boy out
of it, and, unlocking his desk, took out, with an air of grave
and complacent importance, a dirty and crumpled piece of
printed paper; he observed, ``This is new corn---it's no every
body could show you the like o' this. It's the duke's speech
about the Porteous mob, just promulgated by the hawkers.
Ye shall hear what Ian Roy Cean<*> says for himsell. My correspondent

* Red John the warrior, a name personal and proper in the Highlands
* to John Duke of Argyle and Greenwich, as MacCummin was that of his
* race or dignity.

bought it in the Palace-yard, that's like just under
the king's nose---I think he claws up their mittans!---It came
in a letter about a foolish bill of exchange that the man wanted
me to renew for him. I wish ye wad see about it, Mrs. Saddletree.''

  Honest Mrs. Saddletree had hitherto been so sincerely distressed
about the situation of her unfortunate prot<e'>g<e'>e, that
she had suffered her husband to proceed in his own way, without
attending to what he was saying. The words bills and
renew had, however, an awakening sound in them; and she
snatched the letter which her husband held towards her, and
wiping her eyes, and putting on her spectacles, endeavoured, as
fast as the dew which collected on her glasses would permit, to
get at the meaning of the needful part of the epistle; while
her husband, with pompous elevation, read an extract from the
speech.

  ``I am no minister, I never was a minister, and I never will
be one''------

  ``I didna ken his Grace was ever designed for the ministry,''
interrupted Mrs. Howden.

  ``He disna mean a minister of the gospel, Mrs. Howden, but
a minister of state,'' said Saddletree, with condescending goodness,
and then proceeded: ``The time was when I might have
been a piece of a minister, but I was too sensible of my own
incapacity to engage in any state affair. And I thank God that
I had always too great a value for those few abilities which
Nature has given me, to employ them in doing any drudgery,
or any job of what kind soever. I have, ever since I set out in
the world (and I believe few have set out more early), served
my prince with my tongue; I have served him with any little
interest I had, and I have served him with my sword, and in
my profession of arms. I have held employments which I have
lost, and were I to be to-morrow deprived of those which still
remain to me, and which I have endeavoured honestly to
deserve, I would still serve him to the last acre of my inheritance,
and to the last drop of my blood''------

  Mrs. Saddletree here broke in upon the orator:---``Mr.
Saddletree, what _is_ the meaning of a' this? Here are ye
clavering about the Duke of Argyle, and this man Martingale
gaun to break on our hands, and lose us gude sixty pounds---I
wonder what duke will pay that, quotha---I wish the Duke of
Argyle would pay his ain accounts---He is in a thousand punds
Scots on thae very books when he was last at Roystoun---I'm
no saying but he's a just nobleman, and that it's gude siller---
but it wad drive ane daft to be confused wi' deukes and drakes,
and thae distressed folk up-stairs, that's Jeanie Deans and her
father. And then, putting the very callant that was sewing
the curpel out o' the shop, to play wi' blackguards in the close
---Sit still, neighbours, it's no that I mean to disturb _you;_ but
what between courts o' law and courts o' state, and upper and
under parliaments, and parliament houses, here and in London,
the gudeman's gane clean gyte, I think.''

  The gossips understood civility, and the rule of doing as they
would be done by, too well, to tarry upon the slight invitation
implied in the conclusion of this speech, and therefore made
their farewells and departure as fast as possible, Saddletree
whispering to Plundamas that he would ``meet him at MacCroskie's''
(the low-browed shop in the Luckenbooths, already
mentioned), ``in the hour of cause, and put MacCallummore's
speech in his pocket, for a' the gudewife's din.''

  When Mrs. Saddletree saw the house freed of her importunate
visitors, and the little boy reclaimed from the pastimes of the
wynd to the exercise of the awl, she went to visit her unhappy
relative, David Deans, and his elder daughter, who had found
in her house the nearest place of friendly refuge.
