




		CHAPTER FIFTH.

	But up then raise all Edinburgh.
	They all rose up by thousands three.
			Johnnie Armstrang's _Goodnight._

  Butler, on his departure from the sign of the Golden Nag,
went in quest of a friend of his connected with the law, of
whom he wished to make particular inquiries concerning the
circumstances in which the unfortunate young woman mentioned
in the last chapter was placed, having, as the reader has
probably already conjectured, reasons much deeper than those
dictated by mere humanity for interesting himself in her fate.
He found the person he sought absent from home, and was
equally unfortunate in one or two other calls which he made
upon acquaintances whom he hoped to interest in her story.
But everybody was, for the moment, stark-mad on the subject
of Porteous, and engaged busily in attacking or defending the
measures of Government in reprieving him; and the ardour of
dispute had excited such universal thirst, that half the young
lawyers and writers, together with their very clerks, the class
whom Butler was looking after, had adjourned the debate to
some favourite tavern. It was computed by an experienced
arithmetician, that there was as much twopenny ale consumed
on the discussion as would have floated a first-rate man-of-war.

  Butler wandered about until it was dusk, resolving to take
that opportunity of visiting the unfortunate young woman,
when his doing so might be least observed; for he had his own
reasons for avoiding the remarks of Mrs. Saddletree, whose shop-door
opened at no great distance from that of the jail, though on
the opposite or south side of the street, and a little higher up.
He passed, therefore, through the narrow and partly covered
passage leading from the north-west end of the Parliament
Square.

  He stood now before the Gothic entrance of the ancient
prison, which, as is well known to all men, rears its ancient front
in the very middle of the High Street, forming, as it were, the
termination to a huge pile of buildings called the Luckenbooths,
which, for some inconceivable reason, our ancestors had jammed
into the midst of the principal street of the town, leaving for
passage a narrow street on the north; and on the south, into
which the prison opens, a narrow crooked lane, winding betwixt
the high and sombre walls of the Tolbooth and the adjacent
houses on the one side, and the butresses and projections of the
old Cathedral upon the other. To give some gaiety to this
sombre passage (well known by the name of the Krames), a
number of little booths, or shops, after the fashion of cobblers'
stalls, are plastered, as it were, against the Gothic projections
and abutments, so that it seemed as if the traders had occupied
with nests, bearing the same proportion to the building, every
buttress and coign of vantage, as the martlett did in Macbeth's
Castle. Of later years these booths have degenerated into mere
toy-shops, where the little loiterers chiefly interested in such
wares are tempted to linger, enchanted by the rich display of
hobby-horses, babies, and Dutch toys, arranged in artful and
gay confusion; yet half-scared by the cross looks of the withered
pantaloon, or spectacled old lady, by whom these tempting stores
are watched and superintended. But, in the times we write of,
the hosiers, the glovers, the hatters, the mercers, the milliners,
and all who dealt in the miscellaneous wares now termed haberdasher's
goods, were to be found in this narrow alley.

  To return from our digression. Butler found the outer turnkey,
a tall thin old man, with long silver hair, in the act of
locking the outward door of the jail. He addressed himself to
this person, and asked admittance to Effie Deans, confined upon
accusation of child-murder. The turnkey looked at him earnestly,
and, civilly touching his hat out of respect to Butler's black coat
and clerical appearance, replied, ``It was impossible any one
could be admitted at present.''

  ``You shut up earlier than usual, probably on account of
Captain Porteous's affair?'' said Butler.

  The turnkey, with the true mystery of a person in office, gave
two grave nods, and withdrawing from the wards a ponderous
key of about two feet in length, he proceeded to shut a strong
plate of steel, which folded down above the keyhole, and was
secured by a steel spring and catch. Butler stood still instinctively
while the door was made fast, and then looking at
his watch, walked briskly up the street, muttering to himself,
almost unconsciously---

	Porta adversa, ingens, solidoque adamante column<ae>;
	Vis ut nulla vir<u^>m, non ipsi exscindere ferro
	C<oe>licol<ae> valeant---Stat ferrea turris ad auras---etc.<*>

* Wide is the fronting gate, and, raised on high,
* With adamantine columns threats the sky;
* Vain is the force of man, and Heaven's as vain,
* To crush the pillars which the pile sustain:
* Sublime on these a tower of steel is reard.
* 			Dryden's _Virgil,_ Book vi.


  Having wasted half-an-hour more in a second fruitless
attempt to find his legal friend and adviser, he thought it time
to leave the city and return to his place of residence, in a small
village about two miles and a half to the southward of Edinburgh.
The metropolis was at this time surrounded by a high
wall, with battlements and flanking projections at some intervals,
and the access was through gates, called in the Scottish language
_ports,_ which were regularly shut at night. A small fee to the
keepers would indeed procure egress and ingress at any time,
through a wicket left for that purpose in the large gate; but it
was of some importance, to a man so poor as Butler, to avoid
even this slight pecuniary mulct; and fearing the hour of shutting
the gates might be near, he made for that to which he found
himself nearest, although, by doing so, he somewhat lengthened
his walk homewards. Bristo Port was that by which his direct
road lay, but the West Port, which leads out of the Grassmarket,
was the nearest of the city gates to the place where he found
himself, and to that, therefore, he directed his course. He
reached the port in ample time to pass the circuit of the walls,
and entered a suburb called Portsburgh, chiefly inhabited by the
lower order of citizens and mechanics. Here he was unexpectedly
interrupted.

  He had not gone far from the gate before he heard the sound
of a drum, and, to his great surprise, met a number of persons,
sufficient to occupy the whole front of the street, and form a
considerable mass behind, moving with great speed towards the
gate he had just come from, and having in front of them a drum
beating to arms. While he considered how he should escape a
party, assembled, as it might be presumed, for no lawful purpose,
they came full on him and stopped him.

  ``Are you a clergyman?'' one questioned him.

  Butler replied that ``he was in orders, but was not a placed
minister.''

  ``It's Mr. Butler from Liberton,'' said a voice from behind.
``he'll discharge the duty as weel as ony man.''

  ``You must turn back with us, sir,'' said the first speaker, in
a tone civil but peremptory.

  ``For what purpose, gentlemen?'' said Mr. Butler. ``I live
at some distance from town---the roads are unsafe by night---
you will do me a serious injury by stopping me.''

  ``You shall be sent safely home---no man shall touch a hair
of your head---but you must and shall come along with us.''

  ``But to what purpose or end, gentlemen?'' said Butler. ``I
hope you will be so civil as to explain that to me.''

  ``You shall know that in good time. Come along---for come
you must, by force or fair means; and I warn you to look
neither to the right hand nor the left, and to take no notice of
any man's face, but consider all that is passing before you as a
dream.''

  ``I would it were a dream I could awaken from,'' said Butler
to himself; but having no means to oppose the violence with
which he was threatened, he was compelled to turn round and
march in front of the rioters, two men partly supporting and
partly holding him. During this parley the insurgents had
made themselves masters of the West Port, rushing upon the
Waiters (so the people were called who had the charge of the
gates), and possessing themselves of the keys. They bolted and
barred the folding doors, and commanded the person, whose
duty it usually was, to secure the wicket, of which they did not
understand the fastenings. The man, terrified at an incident
so totally unexpected, was unable to perform his usual office,
and gave the matter up, after several attempts. The
rioters, who seemed to have. come prepared for every emergency,
called for torches, by the light of which they nailed up the
wicket with long nails, which, it seemed probable, they had
provided on purpose.

  While this was going on, Butler could not, even if he had
been willing, avoid making remarks on the individuals who
seemed to lead this singular mob. The torch-light, while it fell
on their forms and left him in the shade, gave him an opportunity
to do so without their observing him. Several of those
who seemed most active were dressed in sailors' jackets, trousers,
and sea-caps; others in large loose-bodied greatcoats, and
slouched hats; and there were several who, judging from
their dress, should have been called women, whose rough deep
voices, uncommon size, and masculine, deportment and mode of
walking, forbade them being so interpreted. They moved as
if by some well-concerted plan of arrangement. They had
signals by which they knew, and nicknames by which they
distinguished each other. Butler remarked, that the name of
Wildfire was used among them, to which one stout Amazon
seemed to reply.

  The rioters left a small party to observe the West Port, and
directed the Waiters, as they valued their lives, to remain
within their lodge, and make no attempt for that night to repossess
themselves of the gate. They then moved with rapidity
along the low street called the Cowgate, the mob of the city
everywhere rising at the sound of their drum, and joining them.
When the multitude arrived at the Cowgate Port, they secured
it with as little opposition as the former, made it fast, and left
a small party to observe it. It was afterwards remarked, as a
striking instance of prudence and precaution, singularly combined
with audacity, that the parties left to guard those gates did not
remain stationary on their posts, but flitted to and fro, keeping
so near the gates as to see that no efforts were made to open
them, yet not remaining so long as to have their persons closely
observed. The mob, at first only about one hundred strong,
now amounted to thousands, and were increasing every moment.
They divided themselves so as to ascend with more speed the
various narrow lanes which lead up from the Cowgate to the
High Street; and still beating to arms as they went, an calling
on all true Scotsmen to join them, they now filled the principal
street of the city.

  The Netherbow Port might be called the Temple Bar of Edinburgh,
as, intersecting the High Street at its termination, it
divided Edinburgh, properly so called, from the suburb named
the Canongate, as Temple Bar separates London from Westminster.
It was of the utmost importance to the rioters to
possess themselves of this pass, because there was quartered
in the Canongate at that time a regiment of infantry, commanded
by Colonel Moyle, which might have occupied the city by advancing
through this gate, and would possess the power of totally
defeating their purpose. The leaders therefore hastened to the
Netherbow Port, which they secured in the same manner, and
with as little trouble, as the other gates, leaving a party to
watch it, strong in proportion to the importance of the post.

  The next object of these hardy insurgents was at once to disarm
the City Guard, and to procure arms for themselves; for
scarce any weapons but staves and bludgeons had been yet seen
among them. The Guard-house was a long, low, ugly building
(removed in 1787), which to a fanciful imagination might have
suggested the idea of a long black snail crawling up the middle
of the High Street, and deforming its beautiful esplanade.
This formidable insurrection had been so unexpected, that there
were no more than the ordinary sergeant's guard of the city-corps
upon duty; even these were without any supply of powder
and ball; and sensible enough what had raised the storm, and
which way it was rolling, could hardly be supposed very desirous
to expose themselves by a valiant defence to the animosity of so
numerous and desperate a mob, to whom they were on the
present occasion much more than usually obnoxious.

  There was a sentinel upon guard, who (that one town-guard
soldier might do his duty on that eventful evening) presented
his piece, and desired the foremost of the rioters to stand off.
The young Amazon, whom Butler had observed particularly
active, sprung upon the soldier, seized his musket, and after a
struggle succeeded in wrenching it from him, and throwing
him down on the causeway. One or two soldiers, who endeavoured
to turn out to the support of their sentinel, were in
the same manner seized and disarmed, and the mob without
difficulty possessed themselves of the Guard-house, disarming
and turning out of doors the rest of the men on duty. It was
remarked, that, notwithstanding the city soldiers had been the
instruments of the slaughter which this riot was designed to
revenge, no ill usage or even insult was offered to them. It
seemed as if the vengeance of the people disdained to stoop at
any head meaner than that which they considered as the source
and origin of their injuries.

  On possessing themselves of the guard, the first act of the
multitude was to destroy the drums, by which they supposed
an alarm might be conveyed to the garrison in the castle; for
the same reason they now silenced their own, which was beaten
by a young fellow, son to the drummer of Portsburgh, whom
they had forced upon that service. Their next business was to
distribute among the boldest of the rioters the guns, bayonets,
partisans, halberts, and battle or Lochaber axes. Until this
period the principal rioters had preserved silence on the ultimate
object of their rising, as being that which all knew, but
none expressed. Now, however, having accomplished all the
preliminary parts of their design, they raised a tremendous
shout of ``Porteous! Porteous! To the Tolbooth! To the
Tolbooth!''

  They proceeded with the same prudence when the object
seemed to be nearly in their grasp, as they had done hitherto
when success was more dubious. A strong party of the rioters,
drawn up in front of the Luckenbooths, and facing down the
street, prevented all access from the eastward, and the west end
of the defile formed by the Luckenbooths was secured in the
same manner; so that the Tolbooth was completely surrounded,
and those who undertook the task of breaking it open effectually
secured against the risk of interruption.

  The magistrates, in the meanwhile, had taken the alarm, and
assembled in a tavern, with the purpose of raising some strength
to subdue the rioters. The deacons, or presidents of the trades,
were applied to, but declared there was little chance of their
authority being respected by the craftsmen, where it was the
object to save a man so obnoxious. Mr. Lindsay, member of
parliament for the city, volunteered the perilous task of carrying
a verbal message, from the Lord Provost to Colonel Moyle, the
commander of the regiment lying in the Canongate, requesting
him to force the Netherbow Port, and enter the city to put
down the tumult. But Mr. Lindsay declined to charge himself
with any written order, which, if found on his person by an enraged
mob, might have cost him his life; and the issue, of the
application was, that Colonel Moyle having no written requisition
from the civil authorities, and having the fate of Porteous
before his eyes as an example of the severe construction put by
a jury on the proceedings of military men acting on their own
responsibility, declined to encounter the risk to which the
Provost's verbal communication invited him.

  More than one messenger was despatched by different ways
to the Castle, to require the commanding officer to march down
his troops, to fire a few cannon-shot, or even to throw a shell
among the mob, for the purpose of clearing the streets. But so
strict and watchful were the various patrols whom the rioters
had established in different parts of the streets, that none of
the emissaries of the magistrates could reach the gate of the
Castle. They were, however, turned back without either
injury or insult, and with nothing more of menace than was
necessary to deter them from again attempting to accomplish
their errand.

  The same vigilance was used to prevent everybody of the
higher, and those which, in this case, might be deemed the more
suspicious orders of society, from appearing in the street, and
observing the movements, or distinguishing the persons, of the
rioters. Every person in the garb of a gentleman was stopped
by small parties of two or three of the mob, who partly exhorted,
partly required of them, that they should return to the place
from whence they came. Many a quadrille table was spoilt
that memorable evening; for the sedan chairs of ladies; even of
the highest rank, were interrupted in their passage from one
point to another, in spite of the laced footmen and blazing
flambeaux. This was uniformly done with a deference and
attention to the feelings of the terrified females, which could
hardly have been expected from the videttes of a mob so desperate.
Those who stopped the chair usually made the excuse,
that there was much disturbance on the streets, and that it
was absolutely necessary for the lady's safety that the chair
should turn back. They offered themselves to escort the
vehicles which they had thus interrupted in their progress, from
the apprehension, probably, that some of those who had casually
united themselves to the riot might disgrace their systematic
and determined plan of vengeance, by those acts of general
insult and license which are common on similar occasions.

  Persons are yet living who remember to have heard from the
mouths of ladies thus interrupted on their journey in the
manner we have described, that they were escorted to their
lodgings by the young men who stopped them, and even handed
out of their chairs, with a polite attention far beyond what was
consistent with their dress, which was apparently that of
journeymen mechanics.<*> It seemed as if the conspirators, like

*   A near relation of the author's used to tell of having been stopped by
* the rioters, and escorted home in the manner described. On reaching her
* own home one of her attendants, in the appearance a _baxter, i.e._ a baker's 
* lad, handed her out of her chair, and took leave with a bow, which, in the
* lady's opinion, argued breeding that could hardly be learned at the oven's
* mouth.

those who assassinated Cardinal Beatoun in former days, had
entertained the opinion, that the work about which they went
was a judgment of Heaven, which, though unsanctioned by the
usual authorities, ought to be proceeded in with order and
gravity.

  While their outposts continued thus vigilant, and suffered
themselves neither from fear nor curiosity to neglect that part
of the duty assigned to them, and while the main guards to the
east and west secured them against interruption, a select body of
the rioters thundered at the door of the jail, and demanded instant
admission. No one answered, for the outer keeper had prudently
made his escape with the keys at the commencement of
the riot, and was nowhere to be found. The door was instantly
assailed with sledge-hammers, iron crows, and the coulters of
ploughs, ready provided for the purpose, with which they prized,
heaved, and battered for some time with little effect; for the
door, besides being of double oak planks, clenched, both endlong
and athwart, with broad-headed nails, was so hung and secured
as to yield to no means of forcing, without the expenditure of
much time. The rioters, however, appeared determined to
gain admittance. Gang after gang relieved each other at the
exercise, for, of course, only a few could work at once; but gang
after gang retired, exhausted with their violent exertions, without
making much progress in forcing the prison door. Butler
had been led up near to this the principal scene of action; so near,
indeed, that he was almost deafened by the unceasing clang of
the heavy fore-hammers against the iron-bound portal of the
prison. He began to entertain hopes, as the task seemed protracted,
that the populace might give it over in despair, or that
some rescue might arrive to disperse them. There was a moment
at which the latter seemed probable.

  The magistrates, having assembled their officers, and some of
the citizens who were willing to hazard themselves for the public
tranquillity, now sallied forth from the tavern where they held
their sitting, and approached the point of danger. Their officers
went before them with links and torches, with a herald to read
the riot-act, if necessary. They easily drove before them the outposts
and videttes of the rioters; but when they approached the
line of guard which the mob, or rather, we should say, the conspirators,
had drawn across the street in the front of the Luckenbooths,
they were received with an unintermitted volley of stones,
and, on their nearer approach, the pikes, bayonets, and Lochaber-axes,
of which the populace had possessed themselves, were presented
against them. One of their ordinary officers, a strong
resolute fellow, went forward, seized a rioter, and took from him
a musket; but, being unsupported, he was instantly thrown on
his back in the street, and disarmed in his turn. The officer was
too happy to be permitted to rise and run away without receiving
any farther injury; which afforded another remarkable instance
of the mode in which these men had united a sort of moderation
towards all others, with the most inflexible inveteracy against
the object of their resentment. The magistrates, after vain
attempts to make themselves heard and obeyed, possessing no
means of enforcing their authority, were constrained to abandon
the field to the rioters, and retreat in all speed from the showers
of missiles that whistled around their ears.

  The passive resistance of the Tolbooth gate promised to do
more to baffle the purpose of the mob than the active interference
of the magistrates. The heavy sledge-hammers continued
to din against it without intermission, and with a noise which,
echoed from the lofty buildings around the spot, seemed enough
to have alarmed the garrison in the Castle. It was circulated
among the rioters, that the troops would march down to disperse
them, unless they could execute their purpose without loss of
time; or that, even without quitting the fortress, the garrison
might obtain the same end by throwing a bomb or two upon
the street.

  Urged by such motives for apprehension, they eagerly relieved
each other at the labour of assailing the Tolbooth door: yet
such was its strength, that it still defied their efforts. At length,
a voice was heard to pronounce the words, ``Try it with fire.''
The rioters, with an unanimous shout, called for combustibles,
and as all their wishes seemed to be instantly supplied, they
were soon in possession of two or three empty tar-barrels. A
huge red glaring bonfire speedily arose close to the door of the
prison, sending up a tall column of smoke and flame against its
antique turrets and strongly-grated windows, and illuminating
the ferocious and wild gestures of the rioters, who surrounded
the place, as well as the pale and anxious groups of those, who,
from windows in the vicinage, watched the progress of this alarming
scene. The mob fed the fire with whatever they could
find fit for the purpose. The flames roared and crackled among
the heaps of nourishment piled on the fire, and a terrible shout
soon announced that the door had kindled, and was in the
act of being destroyed. The fire was suffered to decay, but,
long ere it was quite extinguished, the most forward of the rioters
rushed, in their impatience, one after another, over its yet
smouldering remains. Thick showers of sparkles rose high in
the air, as man after man bounded over the glowing embers, and
disturbed them in their passage. It was now obvious to Butler,
and all others who were present, that the rioters would be instantly
in possession of their victim, and have it in their power
to work their pleasure upon him, whatever that might be.<*>

* Note C. The Old Tolbooth.
