




		CHAPTER FORTY-SIXTH.

	Lord! who would live turmoiled in a court,
	And may enjoy such quiet walks as these?
					Shakespeare.

  Within a reasonable time after Butler was safely and comfortably
settled in his living, and Jeanie had taken up her abode
at Auchingower with her father,---the precise extent of which
interval we request each reader to settle according to his own
sense of what is decent and proper upon the occasion,---and after
due proclamation of banns, and all other formalities, the long
wooing of this worthy pair was ended by their union in the holy
bands of matrimony. On this occasion, David Deans stoutly
withstood the iniquities of pipes, fiddles, and promiscuous
dancing, to the great wrath of the Captain of Knockdunder,
who said, if he ``had guessed it was to be sic a tamn'd Quakers'
meeting, he wad hae seen them peyont the cairn before he wad
hae darkened their doors.''

  And so much rancour remained on the spirits of the gracious
Duncan upon this occasion, that various ``picqueerings,'' as
David called them, took place upon the same and similar topics
and it was only in consequence of an accidental visit of the
Duke to his Lodge at Roseneath, that they were put a stop to.
But upon that occasion his Grace showed such particular respect
to Mr. and Mrs. Butler, and such favour even to old David, that
Knockdunder held it prudent to change his course towards the
latter. He, in future, used to express himself among friends,
concerning the minister and his wife, as ``very worthy decent
folk, just a little over strict in their notions; put it was pest
for thae plack cattle to err on the safe side.'' And respecting
David, he allowed that ``he was an excellent judge of nowte
and sheep, and a sensible eneugh carle, an it werena for his
tamn'd Cameronian nonsense, whilk it is not worth while of a
shentleman to knock out of an auld silly head, either by force of
reason or otherwise.'' So that, by avoiding topics of dispute, the
personages of our tale lived in great good habits with the gracious
Duncan, only that he still grieved David's soul, and set a
perilous example to the congregation, by sometimes bringing his
pipe to the church during a cold winter day, and almost always
sleeping during sermon in the summer time.

  Mrs. Butler, whom we must no longer, if we can help it,
term by the familiar name of Jeanie, brought into the married
state the same firm mind and affectionate disposition---the same
natural and homely good sense, and spirit of useful exertion---in
a word, all the domestic good qualities of which she had given
proof during her maiden life. She did not indeed rival Butler
in learning; but then no woman more devoutly venerated the
extent of her husband's erudition. She did not pretend to
understand his expositions of divinity; but no minister of the
Presbytery had his humble dinner so well arranged, his clothes
and linen in equal good order, his fireside so neatly swept, his
parlour so clean, and his books so well dusted.

  If he talked to Jeanie of what she did not understand---and
(for the man was mortal, and had been a schoolmaster) he sometimes
did harangue more scholarly and wisely than was necessary
---she listened in placid silence; and whenever the point referred
to common life, and was such as came under the grasp of a strong
natural understanding, her views were more forcible, and her
observations more acute, than his own. In acquired politeness
of manners, when it happened that she mingled a little in society,
Mrs. Butler was, of course, judged deficient. But then she had
that obvious wish to oblige, and that real and natural good-breeding
depending on, good sense and good humour, which,
joined to a considerable degree of archness and liveliness of
manner, rendered her behaviour acceptable to all with whom
she was called upon to associate. Notwithstanding her strict
attention to all domestic affairs, she always appeared the clean
well-dressed mistress of the house, never the sordid household
drudge. When complimented on this occasion by Duncan
Knock, who swore ``that he thought the fairies must help her,
since her house was always clean, and nobody ever saw anybody
sweeping it,'' she modestly replied, ``That much might be dune
by timing ane's turns.''

  Duncan replied, ``He heartily wished she could teach that art
to the huzzies at the Lodge, for he could never discover that the
house was washed at a', except now and then by breaking his
shins over the pail---Cot tamn the jauds!''

  Of lesser matters there is not occasion to speak much. It
may easily be believed that the Duke's cheese was carefully made,
and so graciously accepted, that the offering became annual.
Remembrances and acknowledgments of past favours were sent
to Mrs. Bickerton and Mrs. Glass, and an amicable intercourse
maintained from time to time with these two respectable and
benevolent persons.

  It is especially necessary to mention that, in the course of five
years, Mrs. Butler had three children, two boys and a girl, all
stout healthy babes of grace, fair-haired, blue-eyed, and strong-limbed.
The boys were named David and Reuben, an order of
nomenclature which was much to the satisfaction of the old hero
of the Covenant, and the girl, by her mother's special desire,
was christened Euphemia, rather contrary to the wish both of
her father and husband, who nevertheless loved Mrs. Butler too
well, and were too much indebted to her for their hours of
happiness, to withstand any request which she made with
earnestness, and as a gratification to herself. But from some
feeling, I know not of what kind, the child was never distinguished
by the name of Effie, but by the abbreviation of Femie,
which in Scotland is equally commonly applied to persons called
Euphemia.

  In this state of quiet and unostentatious enjoyment, there
were, besides the ordinary rubs and ruffles which disturb even
the most uniform life, two things which particularly chequered
Mrs. Butler's happiness. ``Without these,'' she said to our informer,
``her life would have been but too happy; and perhaps,''
she added, ``she had need of some crosses in this world to remind
her that there was a better to come behind it.''

  The first of these related to certain polemical skirmishes
betwixt her father and her husband, which, notwithstanding
the mutual respect and affection they entertained for each other,
and their great love for her---notwithstanding, also, their general
agreement in strictness, and even severity, of Presbyterian
principle---often threatened unpleasant weather between them.
David Deans, as our readers must be aware, was sufficiently
opinionative and intractable, and having prevailed on himself
to become a member of a kirk-session under the Established
Church, he felt doubly obliged to evince that, in so doing, he
had not compromised any whit of his former professions, either
in practice or principle. Now Mr. Butler, doing all credit to
his father-in-law's motives, was frequently of opinion that it
were better to drop out of memory points of division and separation,
and to act in the manner most likely to attract and unite
all parties who were serious in religion. Moreover, he was not
pleased, as a man and a scholar, to be always dictated to by his
unlettered father-in-law; and as a clergyman, he did not think
it fit to seem for ever under the thumb of an elder of his own
kirk-session. A proud but honest thought carried his opposition
now and then a little farther than it would otherwise have
gone. ``My brethren,'' he said, ``will suppose I am flattering
and conciliating the old man for the sake of his succession, if I
defer and give way to him on every occasion; and, besides,
there are many on which I neither can nor will conscientiously
yield to his notions. I cannot be persecuting old women for
witches, or ferreting out matter of scandal among the young
ones, which might otherwise have remained concealed.''

  From this difference of opinion it happened that, in many
cases of nicety, such as in owning certain defections, and failing
to testify against certain backslidings of the time, in not always
severely tracing forth little matters of scandal and _fama clamosa,_
which David called a loosening of the reins of discipline, and in
failing to demand clear testimonies in other points of controversy
which had, as it were, drifted to leeward with the change
of times, Butler incurred the censure of his father-in-law; and
sometimes the disputes betwixt them became eager and almost
unfriendly. In all such cases Mrs Butler was a mediating
spirit, who endeavoured, by the alkaline smoothness of her own
disposition, to neutralise the acidity of theological controversy.
To the complaints of both she lent an unprejudiced and attentive
ear, and sought always rather to excuse than absolutely to
defend the other party.

  She reminded her father that Butler had not ``his experience
of the auld and wrastling times, when folk were gifted wi' a far
look into eternity, to make up for the oppressions whilk they
suffered here below in time. She freely allowed that many devout
ministers and professors in times past had enjoyed downright
revelation, like the blessed Peden, and Lundie, and Cameron,
and Renwick, and John Caird the tinkler, wha entered into the
secrets, and Elizabeth Melvil, Lady Culross, wha prayed in her
bed, surrounded by a great many Christians in a large room, in
whilk it was placed on purpose, and that for three hours' time,
with wonderful assistance; and Lady Robertland, whilk got six
sure outgates of grace, and mony other in times past; and of a
specially, Mr. John Scrimgeour, minister of Kinghorn, who,
having a beloved child sick to death of the crewels, was free to
expostulate with his Maker with such impatience of displeasure,
and complaining so bitterly, that at length it was said unto him,
that he was heard for this time, but that he was requested to
use no such boldness in time coming; so that when he returned
he found the child sitting up in the bed hale and fair, with all
its wounds closed, and supping its parritch, whilk babe he had
left at the time of death. But though these things might be
true in these needful times, she contended that those ministers
who had not seen such vouchsafed and especial mercies, were to
seek their rule in the records of ancient times; and therefore
Reuben was carefu' both to search the Scriptures and the books
written by wise and good men of old; and sometimes in this
way it wad happen that twa precious saints might pu' sundry
wise, like twa cows riving at the same hayband.''

  To this David used to reply, with a sigh, ``Ah, hinny, thou
kenn`st little o't; but that saam John Scrimgeour, that blew
open the gates of heaven as an it had been wi' a sax-pund
cannonball, used devoutly to wish that most part of books were
burnt, except the Bible. Reuben's a gude lad and a kind---I
have aye allowed that; but as to his not allowing inquiry anent
the scandal of Marjory Kittlesides and Rory MacRand, under
pretence that they have southered sin wi' marriage, it's clear
agane the Christian discipline o' the kirk. And then there's
Aily MacClure of Deepheugh, that practises her abominations,
spacing folks' fortunes wi' egg-shells, and mutton-banes, and
dreams and divinations, whilk is a scandal to ony Christian
land to suffer sic a wretch to live; and I'll uphaud that, in a'
judicatures, civil or ecclesiastical.''

  ``I daresay ye are very right, father,'' was the general style
of Jeanie's answer; ``but ye maun come down to the Manse to
your dinner the day. The bits o' bairns, puir things, are wearying
to see their luckie dad; and Reuben never sleeps weel, nor
I neither, when you and he hae had ony bit outcast.''

  ``Nae outcast, Jeanie; God forbid I suld cast out wi' thee,
or aught that is dear to thee!'' And he put on his Sundays
coat, and came to the Manse accordingly.

  With her husband, Mrs. Butler had a more direct conciliatory
process. Reuben had the utmost respect for the old man's
motives, and affection for his person, as well as gratitude for
his early friendship. So that, upon any such occasion of accidental
irritation, it was only necessary to remind him with
delicacy of his father-in-law's age, of his scanty education, strong
prejudices, and family distresses. The least of these considerations
always inclined Butler to measures of conciliation, in so far
as he could accede to them without compromising principle; and
thus our simple and unpretending heroine had the merit of those
peacemakers, to whom it is pronounced as a benediction, that
they shall inherit the earth.

  The second crook in Mrs. Butler's lot, to use the language of
her father, was the distressing circumstance, that she had never
heard of her sister's safety, or of the circumstances in which she
found herself, though betwixt four and five years had elapsed
since they had parted on the beach of the island of Roseneath.
Frequent intercourse was not to be expected---not to be desired,
perhaps, in their relative situations; but Effie had promised,
that, if she lived and prospered, her sister should hear from her.
She must then be no more, or sunk into some abyss of misery,
since she had never redeemed her pledge. Her silence seemed
strange and portentous, and wrung from Jeanie, who could
never forget the early years of their intimacy, the most painful
anticipation concerning her fate. At length, however, the veil
was drawn aside.

  One day, as the Captain of Knockdunder had called in at
the Manse, on his return from some business in the Highland
part of the parish, and had been accommodated, according to
his special request, with a mixture of milk, brandy, honey, and
water, which he said Mrs. Butler compounded ``potter than
ever a woman in Scotland,''---for, in all innocent matters, she
studied the taste of every one around her,---he said to Butler,
``Py the py, minister, I have a letter here either for your
canny pody of a wife or you, which I got when I was last
at Glasco; the postage comes to fourpence, which you may
either pay me forthwith, or give me tooble or quits in a hit at
packcammon.''

  The playing at backgammon and draughts had been a
frequent amusement of Mr. Whackbairn, Butler's principal,
when at Liberton school. The minister, therefore, still piqued
himself on his skill at both games, and occasionally practised
them, as strictly canonical, although David Deans, whose
notions of every kind were more rigorous, used to shake his
head, and groan grievously, when he espied the tables lying in
the parlour, or the children playing with the dice boxes or
backgammon men. Indeed, Mrs. Butler was sometimes chidden
for removing these implements of pastime into some closet or
corner out of sight. ``Let them be where they are, Jeanie,''
would Butler say upon such occasions; ``I am not conscious of
following this, or any other trifling relaxation, to the interruption
of my more serious studies, and still more serious duties.
I will not, therefore, have it supposed that I am indulging by
stealth, and against my conscience, in an amusement which,
using it so little as I do, I may well practise openly, and without
any check of mind---_Nil conscire sibi,_ Jeanie, that is my
motto; which signifies, my love, the honest and open confidence
which a man ought to entertain when he is acting openly, and
without any sense of doing wrong.''

  Such being Butler's humour, he accepted the Captain's
defiance to a twopenny hit at backgammon, and handed the
letter to his wife, observing the post-mark was York, but,
if it came from her friend Mrs. Bickerton, she had considerably
improved her handwriting, which was uncommon at
her years.

  Leaving the gentlemen to their game, Mrs. Butler went to
order something for supper, for Captain Duncan had proposed
kindly to stay the night with them, and then carelessly broke
open her letter. It was not from Mrs. Bickerton; and, after
glancing over the first few lines, she soon found it necessary to
retire to her own bedroom, to read the document at leisure.

