




		CHAPTER FIRST.



	Whoe'er's been at Paris must needs know the Gr<e`>ve,
	The fatal retreat of the unfortunate brave,
	Where honour and justice most oddly contribute,
	To ease heroes' pains by an halter and gibbet.

	There death breaks the shackles which force had put on,
	And the hangman completes what the judge but began;
	There the squire of the poet, and knight of the post,
	Find their pains no more baulked, and their hopes no more crossed.
							Prior.




  In former times, England had her Tyburn, to which the devoted
victims of justice were conducted in solemn procession up what
is now called Oxford Street. In Edinburgh, a large open street,
or rather oblong square, surrounded by high houses, called the
Grassmarket, was used for the same melancholy purpose. It
was not ill chosen for such a scene, being of considerable extent,
and therefore fit to accommodate a great number of spectators,
such as are usually assembled by this melancholy spectacle. On
the other hand, few of the houses which surround it were, even
in early times, inhabited by persons of fashion; so that those
likely to be offended or over deeply affected by such unpleasant
exhibitions were not in the way of having their quiet disturbed
by them. The houses in the Grassmarket are, generally speaking,
of a mean description; yet the place is not without some
features of grandeur, being overhung by the southern side of the
huge rock on which the Castle stands, and by the moss-grown
battlements and turreted walls of that ancient fortress.

  It was the custom, until within these thirty years or thereabouts,
to use this esplanade for the scene of public executions.
The fatal day was announced to the public by the appearance
of a huge black gallows-tree towards the eastern end of the Grassmarket.
This ill-omened apparition was of great height, with
a scaffold surrounding it, and a double ladder placed against it,
for the ascent of the unhappy criminal and executioner. As
this apparatus was always arranged before dawn, it seemed as if
the gallows had grown out of the earth in the course of one
night, like the production of some foul demon; and I well
remember the fright with which the schoolboys, when I was
one of their number, used to regard these ominous signs of
deadly preparation. On the night after the execution the
gallows again disappeared, and was conveyed in silence and
darkness to the place where it was usually deposited, which was
one of the vaults under the Parliament House, or courts of justice.
This mode of execution is now exchanged for one similar to that
in front of Newgate,---with what beneficial effect is uncertain.
The mental sufferings of the convict are indeed shortened. He
no longer stalks between the attendant clergymen, dressed in his
grave-clothes, through a considerable part of the city, looking
like a moving and walking corpse, while yet an inhabitant of
this world; but, as the ultimate purpose of punishment has in
view the prevention of crimes, it may at least be doubted,
whether, in abridging the melancholy ceremony, we have not in
part diminished that appalling effect upon the spectators which
is the useful end of all such inflictions, and in consideration of
which alone, unless in very particular cases, capital sentences can
be altogether justified.

  On the 7th day of September 1736, these ominous preparations
for execution were descried in the place we have described,
and at an early hour the space around began to be occupied by
several groups, who gazed on the scaffold and gibbet with a stern
and vindictive show of satisfaction very seldom testified by the
populace, whose good nature, in most cases, forgets the crime of
the condemned person, and dwells only on his misery. But the
act of which the expected culprit had been convicted was of a
description calculated nearly and closely to awaken and irritate
the resentful feelings of the multitude. The tale is well known;
yet it is necessary to recapitulate its leading circumstances, for the
better understanding what is to follow; and the narrative may
prove long, but I trust not uninteresting even to those who have
heard its general issue. At any rate, some detail is necessary,
in order to render intelligible the subsequent events of our
narrative.

  Contraband trade, though it strikes at the root of legitimate
government, by encroaching on its revenues,---though it injures
the fair trader, and debauches the mind of those engaged in it,
---is not usually looked upon, either by the vulgar or by their
betters, in a very heinous point of view. On the contrary, in
those countries where it prevails, the cleverest, boldest, and most
intelligent of the peasantry, are uniformly engaged in illicit
transactions, and very often with the sanction of the farmers
and inferior gentry. Smuggling was almost universal in Scotland
in the reigns of George I. and II.; for the people, unaccustomed
to imposts, and regarding them as an unjust
aggression upon their ancient liberties, made no scruple to elude
them whenever it was possible to do so.

  The county of Fife, bounded by two firths on the south and
north, and by the sea on the east, and having a number of small
seaports, was long famed for maintaining successfully a contraband
trade; and, as there were many seafaring men residing
there, who had been pirates and buccaneers in their youth,
there were not wanting a sufficient number of daring men
to carry it on. Among these, a fellow called Andrew Wilson,
originally a baker in the village of Pathhead, was particularly
obnoxious to the revenue officers. He was possessed of great
personal strength, courage, and cunning,---was perfectly acquainted
with the coast, and capable of conducting the most
desperate enterprises. On several occasions he succeeded in
baffling the pursuit and researches of the king's officers; but he
became so much the object of their suspicions and watchful
attention, that at length he was totally ruined by repeated
seizures. The man became desperate. He considered himself
as robbed and plundered; and took it into his head that he had
a right to make reprisals, as he could find opportunity. Where
the heart is prepared for evil, opportunity is seldom long wanting.
This Wilson learned that the Collector of the Customs at
Kirkcaldy had come to Pittenweem, in the course of his official
round of duty, with a considerable sum of public money in his
custody. As the amount was greatly within the value of the
goods which had been seized from him, Wilson felt no scruple of
conscience in resolving to reimburse himself for his losses, at
the expense of the Collector and the revenue. He associated
with himself one Robertson, and two other idle young men,
whom, having been concerned in the same illicit trade, he persuaded
to view the transaction in the same justifiable light in
which he himself considered it. They watched the motions of
the Collector; they broke forcibly into the house where he
lodged,---Wilson, with two of his associates, entering the
Collector's apartment, while Robertson, the fourth, kept watch
at the door with a drawn cutlass in his hand. The officer of
the customs, conceiving his life in danger, escaped out of his
bedroom window, and fled in his shirt, so that the plunderers,
with much ease, possessed themselves of about two hundred
pounds of public money. The robbery was committed in a very
audacious manner, for several persons were passing in the street
at the time. But Robertson, representing the noise they heard
as a dispute or fray betwixt the Collector and the people of the
house, the worthy citizens of Pittenweem felt themselves no way
called on to interfere in behalf of the obnoxious revenue officer;
so, satisfying themselves with this very superficial account of
the matter, like the Levite in the parable, they passed on the
opposite side of the way. An alarm was at length given,
military were called in, the depredators were pursued, the booty
recovered, and Wilson and Robertson tried and condemned to
death, chiefly on the evidence of an accomplice.

  Many thought that, in consideration of the men's erroneous
opinion of the nature of the action they had committed, justice
might have been satisfied with a less forfeiture than that of two
lives. On the other hand, from the audacity of the fact, a
severe example was judged necessary; and such was the opinion
of the Government. When it became apparent that the sentence
of death was to be executed, files, and other implements necessary
for their escape, were transmitted secretly to the culprits by a
friend from without. By these means they sawed a bar out of
one of the prison-windows, and might have made their escape, but
for the obstinacy of Wilson, who, as he was daringly resolute, was
doggedly pertinacious of his opinion. His comrade, Robertson,
a young and slender man, proposed to make the experiment of
passing the foremost through the gap they had made, and enlarging
it from the outside, if necessary, to allow Wilson free
passage. Wilson, however, insisted on making the first experiment,
and being a robust and lusty man, he not only found it
impossible to get through betwixt the bars, but, by his struggles,
he jammed himself so fast, that he was unable to draw his body
back again. In these circumstances discovery became unavoidable,
and sufficient precautions were taken by the jailor to prevent
any repetition of the same attempt. Robertson uttered
not a word of reflection on his companion for the consequences
of his obstinacy; but it appeared from the sequel, that Wilson's
mind was deeply impressed with the recollection that, but for
him, his comrade, over whose mind he exercised considerable influence,
would not have engaged in the criminal enterprise which
had terminated thus fatally; and that now he had become his
destroyer a second time, since, but for his obstinacy, Robertson
might have effected his escape. Minds like Wilson's, even when
exercised in evil practices, sometimes retain the power of thinking
and resolving with enthusiastic generosity. His whole
thoughts were now bent on the possibility of saving Robertson's
life, without the least respect to his own. The resolution which
he adopted, and the manner in which he carried it into effect,
were striking and unusual.

  Adjacent to the tolbooth or city jail of Edinburgh, is one of
three churches into which the cathedral of St. Giles is now
divided, called, from its vicinity, the Tolbooth Church. It was
the custom that criminals under sentence of death were brought
to this church, with a sufficient guard, to hear and join in public
worship on the Sabbath before execution. It was supposed
that the hearts of these unfortunate persons, however hardened
before against feelings of devotion, could not but be accessible to
them upon uniting their thoughts and voices, for the last time,
along with their fellow-mortals, in addressing their Creator.
And to the rest of the congregation, it was thought it could not
but be impressive and affecting, to find their devotions mingling
with those, who, sent by the doom of an earthly tribunal to appear
where the whole earth is judged, might be considered as
beings trembling on the verge of eternity. The practice, however
edifying, has been discontinued, in consequence of the
incident we are about to detail.

  The clergyman, whose duty it was to officiate in the Tolbooth
Church, had concluded an affecting discourse, part of which was
particularly directed to the unfortunate men, Wilson and Robertson,
who were in the pew set apart for the persons in their unhappy
situation, each secured betwixt two soldiers of the city
guard. The clergyman had reminded them, that the next congregation
they must join would be that of the just, or of the
unjust; that the psalms they now heard must be exchanged, in
the space of two brief days, for eternal hallelujahs, or eternal
lamentations; and that this fearful alternative must depend upon
the state to which they might be able to bring their minds
before the moment of awful preparation: that they should not
despair on account of the suddenness of the summons, but rather
to feel this comfort in their misery, that, though all who now
lifted the voice, or bent the knee in conjunction with them, lay
under the same sentence of certain death, _they_ only had the advantage
of knowing the precise moment at which it should be
executed upon them. ``Therefore,'' urged the good man, his
voice trembling with emotion, ``redeem the time, my unhappy
brethren, which is yet left; and remember, that, with the grace
of Him to whom space and time are but as nothing, salvation
may yet be assured, even in the pittance of delay which the
laws of your country afford you.''

  Robertson was observed to weep at these words; but Wilson
seemed as one whose brain had not entirely received their meaning,
or whose thoughts were deeply impressed with some different
subject;---an expression so natural to a person in his situation,
that it excited neither suspicion nor surprise.

  The benediction was pronounced as usual, and the congregation
was dismissed, many lingering to indulge their curiosity
with a more fixed look at the two criminals, who now, as well
as their guards, rose up, as if to depart when the crowd should
permit them. A murmur of compassion was heard to pervade
the spectators, the more general, perhaps, on account of the
alleviating circumstances of the case; when all at once, Wilson,
who, as we have already noticed, was a very strong man, seized
two of the soldiers, one with each hand, and calling at the same
time to his companion, ``Run, Geordie, run!'' threw himself on
a third, and fastened his teeth on the collar of his coat.
Robertson stood for a second as if thunderstruck, and unable to
avail himself of the opportunity of escape; but the cry of ``Run,
run!'' being echoed from many around, whose feelings surprised
them into a very natural interest in his behalf, he shook off the
grasp of the remaining soldier, threw himself over the pew,
mixed with the dispersing congregation, none of whom felt inclined
to stop a poor wretch taking his last chance for his life,
gained the door of the church, and was lost to all pursuit.

  The generous intrepidity which Wilson had displayed on this
occasion augmented the feeling of compassion which attended his
fate. The public, where their own prejudices are not concerned,
are easily engaged on the side of disinterestedness and humanity,
admired Wilson's behaviour, and rejoiced in Robertson's escape.
This general feeling was so great, that it excited a vague report
that Wilson would be rescued at the place of execution, either by
the mob or by some of his old associates, or by some second extraordinary
and unexpected exertion of strength and courage on
his own part. The magistrates thought it their duty to provide
against the possibility of disturbance. They ordered out, for
protection of the execution of the sentence, the greater part of
their own City Guard, under the command of Captain Porteous,
a man whose name became too memorable from the melancholy
circumstances of the day, and subsequent events. It may be
necessary to say a word about this person, and the corps which
he commanded. But the subject is of importance sufficient to
deserve another chapter.
