




		CHAPTER EIGHTH.

	Reuben and Rachel, though as fond as doves,
	Were yet discreet and cautious in their loves,
	Nor would attend to Cupid's wild commands,
	Till cool reflection bade them join their hands;
	When both were poor, they thought it argued ill
	Of hasty love to make them poorer still.
				Crabbe's _Parish Register._

  While widow Butler and widower Deans struggled with poverty,
and the hard and sterile soil of ``those parts and portions'' of
the lands of Dumbiedikes which it was their lot to occupy, it
became gradually apparent that Deans was to gain the strife,
and his ally in the conflict was to lose it. The former was a
Man, and not much past the prime of life---Mrs. Butler a
woman, and declined into the vale of years, This, indeed, ought
in time to have been balanced by the circumstance, that Reuben
was growing up to assist his grandmothers labours, and that
Jeanie Deans, as a girl, could be only supposed to add to her
father's burdens. But Douce Davie Deans know better things,
and so schooled and trained the young minion, as he called her,
that from the time she could walk, upwards, she was daily
employed in some task or other, suitable to her age and capacity;
a circumstance which, added to her father's daily instructions
and lectures, tended to give her mind, even when a child, a
grave, serious, firm, and reflecting cast. An uncommonly
strong and healthy temperament, free from all nervous affection
and every other irregularity, which, attacking the body in its
more noble functions, so often influences the mind, tended
greatly to establish this fortitude, simplicity, and decision of
character.

  On the other hand, Reuben was weak in constitution, and,
though not timid in temper might be safely pronounced anxious,
doubtful, and apprehensive. He partook of the temperament of
his mother, who had died of a consumption in early age. He
was a pale, thin, feeble, sickly boy, and somewhat lame, from
an accident in early youth. He was, besides, the child of a
doting grandmother, whose too solicitous attention to him soon
taught him a sort of diffidence in himself, with a disposition to
overrate his own importance, which is one of the very worst
consequences that children deduce from over-indulgence.

  Still, however, the two children clung to each other's society,
not more from habit than from taste. They herded together
the handful of sheep, with the two or three cows, which their
parents turned out rather to seek food than actually to feed upon
the unenclosed common of Dumbiedikes. It was there that the
two urchins might be seen seated beneath a blooming bush of
whin, their little faces laid close together under the shadow of
the same plaid drawn over both their heads, while the landscape
around was embrowned by an overshadowing cloud, big with the
shower which had driven the children to shelter. On other
occasions they went together to school, the boy receiving that
encouragement and example from his companion, in crossing the
little brooks which intersected their path, and encountering
cattle, dogs, and other perils, upon their journey, which the male
sex in such cases usually consider it as their prerogative to extend
to the weaker. But when, seated on the benches of the
school-house, they began to con their lessons together, Reuben,
who was as much superior to Jeanie Deans in acuteness of intellect,
as inferior to her in firmness of constitution, and in that
insensibility to fatigue and danger which depends on the conformation
of the nerves, was able fully to requite the kindness
and countenance with which, in other circumstances, she used to
regard him. He was decidedly the best scholar at the little
parish school; and so gentle was his temper and disposition, that
he was rather admired than envied by the little mob who
occupied the noisy mansion, although he was the declared
favourite of the master. Several girls, in particular (for in
Scotland they are taught with the boys), longed to be kind to
and comfort the sickly lad, who was so much cleverer than his
companions. The character of Reuben Butler was so calculated
as to offer scope both for their sympathy and their admiration,
the feelings, perhaps, through which the female sex (the more
deserving part of them at least) is more easily attached.

  But Reuben, naturally reserved and distant, improved none of
these advantages; and only became more attached to Jeanie
Deans, as the enthusiastic approbation of his master assured him
of fair prospects in future life, and awakened his ambition. In
the meantime, every advance that Reuben made in learning (and,
considering his opportunities, they were uncommonly great)
rendered him less capable of attending to the domestic duties of
his grandmother's farm. While studying the _pons asinorum_ in
Euclid, he suffered every _cuddie_ upon the common to trespass
upon a large field of peas belonging to the Laird, and nothing
but the active exertions of Jeanie Deans, with her little dog
Dustiefoot, could have saved great loss and consequent punishment.
Similar miscarriages marked his progress in his classical
studies. He read Virgil's Georgics till he did not know bere
from barley; and had nearly destroyed the crofts of Beersheba
while attempting to cultivate them according to the practice of
Columella and Cato the Censor.

  These blunders occasioned grief to his grand-dame, and disconcerted
the good opinion which her neighbour, Davie Deans,
had for some time entertained of Reuben.

  ``I see naething ye can make of that silly callant, neighbour
Butler,'' said he to the old lady, ``unless ye train him to the
wark o' the ministry. And ne'er was there mair need of poorfu'
preachers than e'en now in these cauld Gallio days, when men's
hearts are hardened like the nether mill-stone, till they come to
regard none of these things. It's evident this puir callant of
yours will never be able to do an usefu' day's wark, unless it be
as an ambassador from our Master; and I will make it my
business to procure a license when he is fit for the same, trusting
he will be a shaft cleanly polished, and meet to be used in the
body of the kirk; and that he shall not turn again, like the sow,
to wallow in the mire of heretical extremes and defections, but
shall have the wings of a dove, though he hath lain among the
pots.''

  The poor widow gulped down the affront to her husband's
principles, implied in this caution, and hastened to take Butler
from the High School, and encourage him in the pursuit of
mathematics and divinity, the only physics and ethics that
chanced to be in fashion at the time.

  Jeanie Deans was now compelled to part from the companion
of her labour, her study, and her pastime, and it was with more
than childish feeling that both children regarded the separation.
But they were young, and hope was high, and they separated
like those who hope to meet again at a more auspicious hour.
While Reuben Butler was acquiring at the University of St.
Andrews the knowledge necessary for a clergyman, and macerating
his body with the privations which were necessary in seeking
food for his mind, his grand-dame became daily less able to
struggle with her little farm, and was at length obliged to throw
it up to the new Laird of Dumbiedikes. That great personage
was no absolute Jew, and did not cheat her in making the
bargain more than was tolerable. He even gave her permission
to tenant the house in which she had lived with her husband,
as long as it should be ``tenantable;'' only he protested against
paying for a farthing of repairs, any benevolence which he
possessed being of the passive, but by no means of the active
mood.

  In the meanwhile, from superior shrewdness, skill, and other
circumstances, some of them purely accidental, Davie Deans
gained a footing in the world, the possession of some wealth, the
reputation of more, and a growing disposition to preserve and
increase his store; for which, when he thought upon it seriously,
he was inclined to blame himself. From his knowledge in
agriculture, as it was then practised, he became a sort of favourite
with the Laird, who had no great pleasure either in active sports
or in society, and was wont to end his daily saunter by calling
at the cottage of Woodend.

  Being himself a man of slow ideas and confused utterance,
Dumbiedikes used to sit or stand for half-an-hour with an old
laced hat of his father's upon his head, and an empty tobacco-pipe
in his mouth, with his eyes following Jeanie Deans, or ``the
lassie'' as he called her, through the course of her daily domestic
labour; while her father, after exhausting the subject of bestial,
of ploughs, and of harrows, often took an opportunity of going
full-sail into controversial subjects, to which discussions the
dignitary listened with much seeming patience, but without
making any reply, or, indeed, as most people thought, without
understanding a single word of what the orator was saying.
Deans, indeed, denied this stoutly, as an insult at once to his
own talents for expounding hidden truths, of which he was a
little vain, and to the Laird's capacity of understanding them.
He said, ``Dumbiedikes was nane of these flashy gentles, wi' lace
on their skirts and swords at their tails, that were rather for
riding on horseback to hell than gauging barefooted to heaven.
He wasna like his father---nae profane company-keeper---nae
swearer---nae drinker---nae frequenter of play-house, or music-house,
or dancing-house---nae Sabbath-breaker---nae imposer of
aiths, or bonds, or denier of liberty to the flock.---He clave to
the warld, and the warld's gear, a wee ower muckle, but then
there was some breathing of a gale upon his spirit,'' etc. etc.
All this honest Davie said and believed.

  It is not to be supposed, that, by a father and a man of sense
and observation, the constant direction of the Laird's eyes
towards Jeanie was altogether unnoticed. This circumstance,
however, made a much greater impression upon another member
of his family, a second helpmate, to wit, whom he had chosen to
take to his bosom ten years after the death of his first. Some
people were of opinion, that Douce Davie had been rather surprised
into this step, for, in general, he was no friend to
marriages or giving in marriage, and seemed rather to regard
that state of society as a necessary evil,---a thing lawful, and to
be tolerated in the imperfect state of our nature, but which
clipped the wings with which we ought to soar upwards, and
tethered the soul to its mansion of clay, and the creature-comforts
of wife and bairns. His own practice, however, had in this
material point varied from his principles, since, as we have seen,
he twice knitted for himself this dangerous and ensnaring entanglement.

  Rebecca, his spouse, had by no means the same horror of
matrimony, and as she made marriages in imagination for every
neighbour round, she failed not to indicate a match betwixt
Dumbiedikes and her step-daughter Jeanie. The goodman used
regularly to frown and pshaw whenever this topic was touched
upon, but usually ended by taking his bonnet and walking out
of the house, to conceal a certain gleam of satisfaction, which, at
such a suggestion, involuntarily diffused itself over his austere
features.

  The more youthful part of my readers may naturally ask,
whether Jeanie Deans was deserving of this mute attention of
the Laird of Dumbiedikes; and the historian, with due regard
to veracity, is compelled to answer, that her personal attractions
were of no uncommon description. She was short, and rather
too stoutly made for her size, had grey eyes, light coloured hair,
a round good-humoured face, much tanned with the sun, and her
only peculiar charm was an air of inexpressible serenity, which
a good conscience, kind feelings, contented temper, and the
regular discharge of all her duties, spread over her features.
There was nothing, it may be supposed, very appalling in the
form or manners of this rustic heroine; yet, whether from
sheepish bashfulness, or from want of decision and imperfect
knowledge of his own mind on the subject, the Laird of Dumbiedikes,
with his old laced hat and empty tobacco-pipe, came and
enjoyed the beatific vision of Jeanie Deans day after day, week
after week, year after year, without proposing to accomplish any
of the prophecies of the stepmother.

  This good lady began to grow doubly impatient on the subject,
when, after having been some years married, she herself
presented Douce Davie with another daughter, who was named
Euphemia, by corruption, Effie. It was then that Rebecca began
to turn impatient with the slow pace at which the Laird's wooing
proceeded, judiciously arguing, that, as Lady Dumbiedikes
would have but little occasion for tocher, the principal part of
her gudeman's substance would naturally descend to the child
by the second marriage. Other step-dames have tried less
laudable means for clearing the way to the succession of their
own children; but Rebecca, to do her justice, only sought little
Effie's advantage through the promotion, or which must have
generally been accounted such, of her elder sister. She therefore
tried every female art within the compass of her simple
skill, to bring the Laird to a point; but had the mortification to
perceive that her efforts, like those of an unskilful angler, only
scared the trout she meant to catch. Upon one occasion, in
particular, when she joked with the Laird on the propriety of
giving a mistress to the house of Dumbiedikes, he was so effectually
startled, that neither laced hat, tobacco-pipe, nor the
intelligent proprietor of these movables, visited Woodend for a
fortnight. Rebecca was therefore compelled to leave the Laird
to proceed at his own snail's pace, convinced, by experience, of
the grave-digger's aphorism, that your dull ass will not mend
his pace for beating.

  Reuben, in the meantime, pursued his studies at the university,
supplying his wants by teaching the younger lads the knowledge
he himself acquired, and thus at once gaining the means of
maintaining himself at the seat of learning, and fixing in his
mind the elements of what he had already obtained. In this
manner, as is usual among the poorer students of divinity at
Scottish universities, he contrived not only to maintain himself
according to his simple wants, but even to send considerable
assistance to his sole remaining parent, a sacred duty, of which
the Scotch are seldom negligent. His progress in knowledge of
a general kind, as well as in the studies proper to his profession,
was very considerable, but was little remarked, owing to the
retired modesty of his disposition, which in no respect qualified
him to set off his learning to the best advantage. And thus,
had Butler been a man given to make complaints, he had his
tale to tell, like others, of unjust preferences, bad luck, and
hard usage. On these subjects, however, he was habitually
silent, perhaps from modesty, perhaps from a touch of pride, or
perhaps from a conjunction of both.

  He obtained his license as a preacher of the gospel, with some
compliments from the Presbytery by whom it was bestowed;
but this did not lead to any preferment, and he found it necessary
to make the cottage at Beersheba his residence for some
months, with no other income than was afforded by the precarious
occupation of teaching in one or other of the neighbouring
families. After having greeted his aged grandmother, his first
visit was to Woodend, where he was received by Jeanie with
warm cordiality, arising from recollections which had never been
dismissed from her mind, by Rebecca with good-humoured
hospitality, and by old Deans in a mode peculiar to himself.

  Highly as Douce Davie honoured the clergy, it was not upon
each individual of the cloth that he bestowed his approbation;
and, a little jealous, perhaps, at seeing his youthful acquaintance
erected into the dignity of a teacher and preacher, he instantly
attacked him upon various points of controversy, in order to discover
whether he might not have fallen into some of the snares,
defections, and desertions of the time. Butler was not only a
man of stanch Presbyterian principles, but was also willing to
avoid giving pain to his old friend by disputing upon points of
little importance; and therefore he might have hoped to have
come like fine gold out of the furnace of Davie's interrogatories.
But the result on the mind of that strict investigator was not
altogether so favourable as might have been hoped and anticipated.
Old Judith Butler, who had hobbled that evening as
far as Woodend, in order to enjoy the congratulations of her
neighbours upon Reuben's return, and upon his high attainments,
of which she was herself not a little proud, was somewhat
mortified to find that her old friend Deans did not enter into
the subject with the warmth she expected. At first, in
he seemed rather silent than dissatisfied; and it was not till
Judith had essayed the subject more than once that it led to
the following dialogue.

  ``Aweel, neibor Deans, I thought ye wad hae been glad to
see Reuben amang us again, poor fellow.''

  ``I _am_ glad, Mrs. Butler,'' was the neighbour's concise
answer.

  ``Since he has lost his grandfather and his father (praised be
Him that giveth and taketh!), I ken nae friend he has in the
world that's been sae like a father to him as the sell o'ye, neibor
Deans.''

  ``God is the only father of the fatherless,'' said Deans, touching
his bonnet and looking upwards. ``Give honour where it
is due, gudewife, and not to an unworthy instrument.''

  ``Aweel, that's your way o' turning it, and nae doubt ye ken
best; but I hae ken'd ye, Davie, send a forpit o' meal to Beersheba
when there wasna a bow left in the meal-ark at Woodend;
ay, and I hae ken'd ye''------

  ``Gudewife,'' said Davie, interrupting her, ``these are but
idle tales to tell me; fit for naething but to puff up our inward
man wi' our ain vain acts. I stude beside blessed Alexander
Peden, when I heard him call the death and testimony of our
happy martyrs but draps of blude and scarts of ink in respect
of fitting discharge of our duty; and what suld I think of ony
thing the like of me can do?''

  ``Weel, neibor Deans, ye ken best; but I maun say that, I
am sure you are glad to see my bairn again---the halt's gane
now, unless he has to walk ower mony miles at a stretch; and
he has a wee bit colour in his cheek, that glads my auld een to
see it; and he has as decent a black coat as the minister;
and''------

  ``I am very heartily glad he is weel and thriving,'' said Mr.
Deans, with a gravity that seemed intended to cut short the
subject; but a woman who is bent upon a point is not easily
pushed aside from it.

  ``And,'' continued Mrs. Butler, ``he can wag his head in a
pulpit now, neibor Deans, think but of that---my ain oe---and
a'body maun sit still and listen to him, as if he were the Paip
of Rome.''

  ``The what?---the who?---woman!'' said Deans, with a sternness
far beyond his usual gravity, as soon as these offensive
words had struck upon the tympanum of his ear.

  ``Eh, guide us!'' said the poor woman; ``I had forgot what
an ill will ye had aye at the Paip, and sae had my puir gudeman,
Stephen Butler. Mony an afternoon he wad sit and take up his
testimony again the Paip, and again baptizing of bairns, and
the like.''

  ``Woman!'' reiterated Deans, ``either speak about what ye
ken something o', or be silent; I say that independency is a foul
heresy, and anabaptism a damnable and deceiving error, whilk
suld be rooted out of the land wi' the fire o' the spiritual, and
the sword o' the civil magistrate.''

  ``Weel, weel, neibor, I'll no say that ye mayna be right,''
answered the submissive Judith. ``I am sure ye are right about
the sawing and the mawing, the shearing and the leading, and
what for suld ye no be right about kirkwark, too?---But concerning
my oe, Reuben Butler''------

  ``Reuben Butler, gudewife,'' said David, with solemnity, ``is
a lad I wish heartily weel to, even as if he were mine ain son
---but I doubt there will be outs and ins in the track of his
walk. I muckle fear his gifts will get the heels of his grace.
He has ower muckle human wit and learning, and thinks as
muckle about the form of the bicker as he does about the healsomeness
of the food---he maun broider the marriage-garment
with lace and passments, or it's no gude eneugh for him. And
it's like he's something proud o' his human gifts and learning,
whilk enables him to dress up his doctrine in that fine airy dress.
But,'' added he, at seeing the old woman's uneasiness at his discourse,
``affliction may gie him a jagg, and let the wind out o'
him, as out o' a cow that's eaten wet clover, and the lad may do
weel, and be a burning and a shining light; and I trust it will
be yours to see, and his to feel it, and that soon.''

  Widow Butler was obliged to retire, unable to make anything
more of her neighbour, whose discourse, though she did not comprehend
it, filled her with undefined apprehensions on her
grandson's account, and greatly depressed the joy with which
she had welcomed him on his return. And it must not be concealed,
in justice to Mr. Deans's discernment, that Butler, in
their conference, had made a greater display of his learning than
the occasion called for, or than was likely to be acceptable to the
old man, who, accustomed to consider himself as a person preeminently
entitled to dictate upon theological subjects of controversy,
felt rather humbled and mortified when learned authorities
were placed in array against him. In fact, Butler had not escaped
the tinge of pedantry which naturally flowed from his education,
and was apt, on many occasions, to make parade of his knowledge,
when there was no need of such vanity.

  Jeanie Deans, however, found no fault with this display of
learning, but, on the contrary, admired it; perhaps on the same
score that her sex are said to admire men of courage, on account
of their own deficiency in that qualification. The circumstances
of their families threw the young people constantly together;
their old intimacy was renewed, though upon a footing better
adapted to their age; and it became at length understood betwixt
them, that their union should be deferred no longer than
until Butler should obtain some steady means of support, however
humble. This, however, was not a matter speedily to be
accomplished. Plan after plan was formed, and plan after plan
failed. The good-humoured cheek of Jeanie lost the first flush
of juvenile freshness; Reuben's brow assumed the gravity of
manhood, yet the means of obtaining a settlement seemed remote
as ever. Fortunately for the lovers, their passion was of
no ardent or enthusiastic cast; and a sense of duty on both sides
induced them to bear, with patient fortitude, the protracted interval
which divided them from each other.

  In the meanwhile, time did not roll on without effecting his
usual changes. The widow of Stephen Butler, so long the prop
of the family of Beersheba, was gathered to her fathers; and
Rebecca, the careful spouse of our friend Davie Deans, wa's also
summoned from her plans of matrimonial and domestic economy.
The morning after her death, Reuben Butler went to offer his
mite of consolation to his old friend and benefactor. He witnessed,
on this occasion, a remarkable struggle betwixt the force
of natural affection and the religious stoicism which the sufferer
thought it was incumbent upon him to maintain under each
earthly dispensation, whether of weal or woe.

  On his arrival at the cottage, Jeanie, with her eyes overflowing
with tears, pointed to the little orchard, ``in which,'' she
whispered with broken accents, ``my poor father has been since
his misfortune.'' Somewhat alarmed at this account, Butler
entered the orchard, and advanced slowly towards his old friend,
who, seated in a small rude arbour, appeared to be sunk in the
extremity of his affliction. He lifted his eyes somewhat sternly
as Butler approached, as if offended at the interruption; but as
the young man hesitated whether he ought to retreat or advance,
he arose, and came forward to meet him with a self-possessed,
and even dignified air.

  ``Young man,'' said the sufferer, ``lay it not to heart, though
the righteous perish, and the merciful are removed, seeing, it
may well be said, that they are taken away from the evils to
come. Woe to me were I to shed a tear for the wife of my
bosom, when I might weep rivers of water for this afflicted
Church, cursed as it is with carnal seekers, and with the dead
of heart.''

  ``I am happy,'' said Butler, ``that you can forget your private
affliction in your regard for public duty.''

  ``Forget, Reuben?'' said poor Deans, putting his handkerchief
to his eyes---``She's not to be forgotten on this side of time;
but He that gives the wound can send the ointment. I declare
there have been times during this night when my meditation hae
been so rapt, that I knew not of my heavy loss. It has been
with me as with the worthy John Semple, called Carspharn
John,<*> upon a like trial---I have been this night on the banks

* Note E. Carspharn John.

of Ulai, plucking an apple here and there!''

  Notwithstanding the assumed fortitude of Deans, which he
conceived to be the discharge of a great Christian duty, he had
too good a heart not to suffer deeply under this heavy loss.
Woodend became altogether distasteful to him; and as he had
obtained both substance and experience by his management of
that little farm, he resolved to employ them as a dairy-farmer,
or cowfeeder, as they are called in Scotland. The situation he
chose for his new settlement was at a place called Saint Leonard's
Crags, lying betwixt Edinburgh and the mountain called
Arthur's Seat, and adjoining to the extensive sheep pasture still
named the King's Park, from its having been formerly dedicated
to the preservation of the royal game. Here he rented a small
lonely house, about half-a-mile distant from the nearest point of
the city, but the site of which, with all the adjacent ground, is
now occupied by the buildings which form the southeastern
suburb. An extensive pasture-ground adjoining, which Deans
rented from the keeper of the Royal Park, enabled him to feed
his milk-cows; and the unceasing industry and activity of
Jeanie, his oldest daughter, were exerted in making the most of
their produce.

  She had now less frequent opportunities of seeing Reuben,
who had been obliged, after various disappointments, to accept
the subordinate situation of assistant in a parochial school of
some eminence, at three or four miles' distance from the city.
Here he distinguished himself, and became acquainted with
several respectable burgesses, who, on account of health, or other
reasons, chose that their children should commence their education
in this little village. His prospects were thus gradually
brightening, and upon each visit which he paid at Saint Leonard's
he had an opportunity of gliding a hint to this purpose into
Jeanie's ear. These visits were necessarily very rare, on account
of the demands which the duties of the school made upon Butler's
time. Nor did he dare to make them even altogether so frequent
as these avocations would permit. Deans received him
with civility indeed, and even with kindness; but Reuben, as is
usual in such cases, imagined that he read his purpose in his
eyes, and was afraid too premature an explanation on the subject
would draw down his positive disapproval. Upon the
whole, therefore, he judged it prudent to call at Saint Leonard's
just so frequently as old acquaintance and neighbourhood seemed
to authorise, and no oftener. There was another person who
was more regular in his visits.

  When Davie Deans intimated to the Laird of Dumbiedikes
his purpose of ``quitting wi' the land and house at Woodend,''
the Laird stared and said nothing. He made his usual visits
at the usual hour without remark, until the day before the term,
when, observing the bustle of moving furniture already commenced,
the great east-country _awmrie_ dragged out of its nook,
and standing with its shoulder to the company, like an awkward
booby about to leave the room, the Laird again stared mightily,
and was heard to ejaculate,---``Hegh, sirs!'' Even after the day
of departure was past and gone, the Laird of Dumbiedikes, at
his usual hour, which was that at which David Deans was wont
to ``loose the pleugh,'' presented himself before the closed door
of the cottage at Woodend, and seemed as much astonished at
finding it shut against his approach as if it was not exactly
what he had to expect. On this occasion he was heard to
ejaculate, ``Gude guide us!'' which, by those who knew him,
was considered as a very unusual mark of emotion. From that
moment forward Dumbiedikes became an altered man, and the
regularity of his movements, hitherto so exemplary, was as
totally disconcerted as those of a boy's watch when he has
broken the main-spring. Like the index of the said watch did
Dumbiedikes spin round the whole bounds of his little property,
which may be likened unto the dial of the timepiece, with unwonted
velocity. There was not a cottage into which he did
not enter, nor scarce a maiden on whom he did not stare. But
so it was, that although there were better farm-houses on the
land than Woodend, and certainly much prettier girls than
Jeanie Deans, yet it did somehow befall that the blank in the
Laird's time was not so pleasantly filled up as it had been.
There was no seat accommodated him so well as the ``bunker''
at Woodend, and no face he loved so much to gaze on as Jeanie
Deans's. So, after spinning round and round his little orbit,
and then remaining stationary for a week, it seems to have
occurred to him that he was not pinned down to circulate on a
pivot, like the hands of the watch, but possessed the power of
shifting his central point, and extending his circle if he thought
proper. To realise which privilege of change of place, he bought
a pony from a Highland drover, and with its assistance and
company stepped, or rather stumbled, as far as Saint Leonard's
Crags.

  Jeanie Deans, though so much accustomed to the Laird's
staring that she was sometimes scarce conscious of his presence,
had nevertheless some occasional fears lest he should call in the
organ of speech to back those expressions of admiration which
he bestowed on her through his eyes. Should this happen,
farewell, she thought, to all chance of a union with Butler.
For her father, however stouthearted and independent in civil
and religious principles, was not without that respect for the
laird of the land, so deeply imprinted on the Scottish tenantry
of the period. Moreover, if he did not positively dislike Butler,
yet his fund of carnal learning was often the object of sarcasms
on David's part, which were perhaps founded in jealousy, and
which certainly indicated no partiality for the party against
whom they were launched. And lastly, the match with Dumbiedikes
would have presented irresistible charms to one who used
to complain that he felt himself apt to take ``ower grit an armfu'
o' the warld.'' So that, upon the whole, the Laird's diurnal
visits were disagreeable to Jeanie from apprehension of future
consequences, and it served much to console her, upon removing
from the spot where she was bred and born, that she had seen
the last of Dumbiedikes, his laced hat, and tobacco-pipe. The
poor girl no more expected he could muster courage to follow
her to Saint Leonard's Crags than that any of her apple-trees or
cabbages which she had left rooted in the ``yard'' at Woodend,
would spontaneously, and unaided, have undertaken the same
journey. It was therefore with much more surprise than pleasure
that, on the sixth day after their removal to Saint Leonard's,
she beheld Dumbiedikes arrive, laced hat, tobacco-pipe, and all,
and, with the self-same greeting of ``How's a' wi' ye, Jeanie?---
Whare's the gudeman?'' assume as nearly as he could the same
position in the cottage at Saint Leonard's which he had so long
and so regularly occupied at Woodend. He was no sooner,
however, seated, than with an unusual exertion of his powers of
conversation, he added, ``Jeanie---I say, Jeanie, woman''---here
he extended his hand towards her shoulder with all the fingers
spread out as if to clutch it, but in so bashful and awkward a
manner, that when she whisked herself beyond its reach, the
paw remained suspended in the air with the palm open, like the
claw of a heraldic griffin---``Jeanie,'' continued the swain in
this moment of inspiration---``I say, Jeanie, it's a braw day
out-by, and the roads are no that ill for boot-hose.''

  ``The deil's in the daidling body,'' muttered Jeanie between
her teeth; ``wha wad hae thought o' his daikering out this
length?'' And she afterwards confessed that she threw a little
of this ungracious sentiment into her accent and manner; for
her father being abroad, and the ``body,'' as she irreverently
termed the landed proprietor, ``looking unco gleg and canty, she
didna ken what he might be coming out wi' next.''

  Her frowns, however, acted as a complete sedative, and the
Laird relapsed from that day into his former taciturn habits,
visiting the cowfeeder's cottage three or four times every week,
when the weather permitted, with apparently no other purpose
than to stare at Jeanie Deans, while Douce Davie poured forth his
eloquence upon the controversies and testimonies of the day.
