




		CHAPTER FORTY-FIRST.

	    Did Fortune guide,
	Or rather Destiny, our bark, to which
	We could appoint no port, to this best place?
					Fletcher.


  The islands in the Firth of Clyde, which the daily passage of
so many smoke-pennoned steamboats now renders so easily
accessible, were in our fathers' times secluded spots, frequented
by no travellers, and few visitants of any kind. They are of
exquisite, yet varied beauty. Arran, a mountainous region, or
Alpine island, abounds with the grandest and most romantic
scenery. Bute is of a softer and more woodland character.
The Cumbrays, as if to exhibit a contrast to both, are green,
level, and bare, forming the links of a sort of natural bar which
is drawn along the mouth of the firth, leaving large intervals,
however, of ocean. Roseneath, a smaller isle, lies much higher
up the firth, and towards its western shore, near the opening
of the lake called the Gare Loch, and not far from Loch Long
and Loch Scant, or the Holy Loch, which wind from the mountains
of the Western Highlands to join the estuary of the Clyde.

  In these isles the severe frost winds which tyrannise over the
vegetable creation during a Scottish spring, are comparatively
little felt; nor, excepting the gigantic strength of Arran, are
they much exposed to the Atlantic storms, lying landlocked and
protected to the westward by the shores of Ayrshire. Accordingly,
the weeping-willow, the weeping-birch, and other trees of
early and pendulous shoots, flourish in these favoured recesses
in a degree unknown in our eastern districts; and the air is also
said to possess that mildness which is favourable to consumptive
cases.

  The picturesque beauty of the island of Roseneath, in particular,
had such recommendations, that the Earls and Dukes of
Argyle, from an early period, made it their occasional residence,
and had their temporary accommodation in a fishing or hunting-lodge,
which succeeding improvements have since transformed
into a palace. It was in its original simplicity when the little
bark which we left traversing the firth at the end of last chapter
approached the shores of the isle.

  When they touched the landing-place, which was partly
shrouded by some old low but wide-spreading oak-trees, intermixed
with hazel-bushes, two or three figures were seen as if
awaiting their arrival. To these Jeanie paid little attention, so
that it was with a shock of surprise almost electrical, that, upon
being carried by the rowers out of the boat to the shore, she was
received in the arms of her father!

  It was too wonderful to be believed---too much like a happy
dream to have the stable feeling of reality---She extricated herself
from his close and affectionate embrace, and held him at
arm's length, to satisfy her mind that it was no illusion. But
the form was indisputable---Douce David Deans himself, in his
best light-blue Sunday's coat, with broad metal buttons, and
waistcoat and breeches of the same, his strong gramashes or
leggins of thick grey cloth---the very copper buckles---the broad
Lowland blue bonnet, thrown back as he lifted his eyes to
Heaven in speechless gratitude---the grey locks that straggled
from beneath it down his weather-beaten ``haffets''---the bald
and furrowed forehead---the clear blue eye, that, undimmed by
years, gleamed bright and pale from under its shaggy grey
pent-house---the features, usually so stern and stoical, now
melted into the unwonted expression of rapturous joy, affection,
and gratitude---were all those of David Deans; and so happily
did they assort together, that, should I ever again see my friends
Wilkie or Allan, I will try to borrow or steal from them a sketch
of this very scene.

  ``Jeanie---my ain Jeanie---my best---my maist dutiful bairn
---the Lord of Israel be thy father, for I am hardly worthy of
thee! Thou hast redeemed our captivity---brought back the
honour of our house---Bless thee, my bairn, with mercies promised
and purchased! But He _has_ blessed thee, in the good of
which He has made thee the instrument.''

  These words broke from him not without tears, though David
was of no melting mood. Archibald had, with delicate attention,
withdrawn the spectators from the interview, so that the
wood and setting sun alone were witnesses of the expansion of
their feelings.

  ``And Effie?---and Effie, dear father?'' was an eager interjectional
question which Jeanie repeatedly threw in among her
expressions of joyful thankfulness.

  ``Ye will hear---Ye will hear,'' said David hastily, and over
and anon renewed his grateful acknowledgments to Heaven for
sending Jeanie safe down from the land of prelatic deadness
and schismatic heresy; and had delivered her from the dangers
of the way, and the lions that were in the path.

  ``And Effie?'' repeated her affectionate sister again and again.
``And---and'' (fain would she have said Butler, but she modified
the direct inquiry)---``and Mr. and Mrs. Saddletree--and
Dumbiedikes---and a' friends?''

  ``A' weel---a' weel, praise to His name!''

  ``And---Mr. Butler---he wasna weel when I gaed awa?''

  ``He is quite mended---quite weel,'' replied her father.

  ``Thank God---but O, dear father, Effie?---Effie?''

  ``You will never see her mair, my bairn,'' answered Deans in
a solemn tone---``You are the ae and only leaf left now on the
auld tree---hale be your portion!''

  ``She is dead!---She is slain!---It has come ower late!'' exclaimed
Jeanie, wringing her hands.

  ``No, Jeanie,'' returned Deans, in the same grave melancholy
tone. ``She lives in the flesh, and is at freedom from earthly
restraint, if she were as much alive in faith, and as free from
the bonds of Satan.''

  ``The Lord protect us!'' said Jeanie.---``Can the unhappy
bairn hae left you for that villain?''

  ``It is ower truly spoken,'' said Deans---``She has left her
auld father, that has wept and prayed for her---She has left her
sister, that travailed and toiled for her like a mother---She has
left the bones of her mother, and the land of her people, and she
is ower the march wi' that son of Belial---She has made a moonlight
flitting of it.'' He paused, for a feeling betwixt sorrow
and strong resentment choked his utterance.

  ``And wi' that man?---that fearfu' man?'' said Jeanie.
``And she has left us to gang aff wi' him?---O Effie, Effie,
wha could hae thought it, after sic a deliverance as you had
been gifted wi'!''

  ``She went out from us, my bairn, because she was not of
us,'' replied David. ``She is a withered branch will never bear
fruit of grace---a scapegoat gone forth into the wilderness of the
world, to carry wi' her, as I trust, the sins of our little congregation.
The peace of the warld gang wi' her, and a better
peace when she has the grace to turn to it! If she is of His
elected, His ain hour will come. What would her mother
have said, that famous and memorable matron, Rebecca MacNaught,
whose memory is like a flower of sweet savour in
Newbattle, and a pot of frankincense in Lugton? But be it
sae---let her part---let her gang her gate---let her bite on her
ain bridle---The Lord kens his time---She was the bairn of
prayers, and may not prove an utter castaway. But never,
Jeanie, never more let her name be spoken between you and
me---She hath passed from us like the brook which vanisheth
when the summer waxeth warm, as patient Job saith---let her
pass, and be forgotten.''

  There was a melancholy pause which followed these expressions.
Jeanie would fain have asked more circumstances
relating to her sister's departure, but the tone of her father's
prohibition was positive. She was about to mention her interview
with Staunton at his father's rectory; but, on hastily
running over the particulars in her memory, she thought that,
on the whole, they were more likely to aggravate than diminish
his distress of mind. She turned, therefore, the discourse from
this painful subject, resolving to suspend farther inquiry until
she should see Butler, from whom she expected to learn the
particulars of her sister's elopement.

  But when was she to see Butler? was a question she could
not forbear asking herself, especially while her father, as if
eager to escape from the subject of his youngest daughter,
pointed to the opposite shore of Dumbartonshire, and asking
Jeanie ``if it werena a pleasant abode?'' declared to her his
intention of removing his earthly tabernacle to that country,
``in respect he was solicited by his Grace the Duke of Argyle,
as one well skilled in country labour, and a' that appertained to
flocks and herds, to superintend a store-farm, whilk his Grace
had taen into his ain hand for the improvement of stock.''

  Jeanie's heart sunk within her at this declaration. ``She
allowed it was a goodly and pleasant land, and sloped bonnily
to the western sun; and she doubtedna that the pasture might
be very gude, for the grass looked green, for as drouthy as the
weather had been. But it was far frae hame, and she thought
she wad be often thinking on the bonny spots of turf, sae fu'
of gowans and yellow king-cups, amang the Crags at St.
Leonard's.''

  ``Dinna speak on't, Jeanie,'' said her father; ``I wish never
to hear it named mair---that is, after the rouping is ower, and
the bills paid. But I brought a' the beasts owerby that I
thought ye wad like best. There is Gowans, and there's your
ain brockit cow, and the wee hawkit ane, that ye ca'd---I
needna tell ye how ye ca'd it---but I couldna bid them sell
the petted creature, though the sight o' it may sometimes gie
us a sair heart---it's no the poor dumb creature's fault---And
ane or twa beasts mair I hae reserved, and I caused them to be
driven before the other beasts, that men might say, as when
the son of Jesse returned from battle, `This is David's spoil.' ''

  Upon more particular inquiry, Jeanie found new occasion to
admire the active beneficence of her friend the Duke of Argyle.
While establishing a sort of experimental farm on the skirts of
his immense Highland estates, he had been somewhat at a loss
to find a proper person in whom to vest the charge of it. The
conversation his Grace had upon country matters with Jeanie
Deans during their return from Richmond, had impressed him
with a belief that the father, whose experience and success she
so frequently quoted, must be exactly the sort of person whom
he wanted. When the condition annexed to Effie's pardon
rendered it highly probable that David Deans would choose to
change his place of residence, this idea again occurred to the
Duke more strongly, and as he was an enthusiast equally in
agriculture and in benevolence, he imagined he was serving the
purposes of both, when he wrote to the gentleman in Edinburgh
entrusted with his affairs, to inquire into the character of David
Deans, cowfeeder, and so forth, at St. Leonard's Crags; and if
he found him such as he had been represented, to engage him
without delay, and on the most liberal terms, to superintend his
fancy-farm in Dumbartonshire.

  The proposal was made to old David by the gentleman so
commissioned, on the second day after his daughter's pardon
had reached Edinburgh. His resolution to leave St. Leonard's
had been already formed; the honour of an express invitation
from the Duke of Argyle to superintend a department where so
much skill and diligence was required, was in itself extremely
flattering; and the more so, because honest David, who was
not without an exeellent opinion of his own talents, persuaded
himself that, by accepting this charge, he would in some sort
repay the great favour he had received at the hands of the
Argyle family. The appointments, including the right of sufficient
grazing for a small stock of his own, were amply liberal;
and David's keen eye saw that the situation was convenient for
trafficking to advantage in Highland cattle. There was risk of
``her'ship''<*> from the neighbouring mountains, indeed, but the

* Her'ship, a Scottish word which may be said to be now obsolete; because,
* fortunately, the practice of ``plundering by armed force,'' which is
* its meaning, does not require to be commonly spoken of.

awful name of the Duke of Argyle would be a great security,
and a trifle of _black-mail_ would, David was aware, assure his
safety.

  Still however, there were two points on which he haggled.
The first was the character of the clergyman with whose worship
he was to join; and on this delicate point he received, as we
will presently show the reader, perfect satisfaction. The next
obstacle was the condition of his youngest daughter, obliged as
she was to leave Scotland for so many years.

  The gentleman of the law smiled, and said, ``There was no
occasion to interpret that clause very strictly---that if the young
woman left Scotland for a few months, or even weeks, and came
to her father's new residence by sea from the western side of
England, nobody would know of her arrival, or at least nobody
who had either the right or inclination to give her disturbance.
The extensive heritable jurisdictions of his Grace excluded the
interference of other magistrates with those living on his estates,
and they who were in immediate dependence on him would
receive orders to give the young woman no disturbance. Living
on the verge of the Highlands, she might, indeed, be said to be
out of Scotland, that is, beyond the bounds of ordinary law and
civilisation.''

  Old Deans was not quite satisfied with this reasoning; but
the elopement of Effie, which took place on the third night
after her liberation, rendered his residence at St. Leonard's so
detestable to him, that he closed at once with the proposal
which had been made him, and entered with pleasure into the
idea of surprising Jeanie, as had been proposed by the Duke,
to render the change of residence more striking to her. The
Duke had apprised Archibald of these circumstances, with
orders to act according to the instructions he should receive
from Edinburgh, and by which accordingly he was directed to
bring Jeanie to Roseneath.

  The father and daughter communicated these matters to
each other, now stopping, now walking slowly towards the
Lodge, which showed itself among the trees, at about half-a-mile's
distance from the little bay in which they had landed.
As they approached the house, David Deans informed his
daughter, with somewhat like a grim smile, which was the
utmost advance he ever made towards a mirthful expression of
visage, that ``there was baith a worshipful gentleman, and ane
reverend gentleman, residing therein. The worshipful gentleman
was his honour the Laird of Knocktarlitie, who was bailie
of the lordship under the Duke of Argyle, ane Highland gentleman,
tarr'd wi' the same stick,'' David doubted, ``as mony of
them, namely, a hasty and choleric temper, and a neglect of
the higher things that belong to salvation, and also a gripping
unto the things of this world, without muckle distinction of
property; but, however, ane gude hospitable gentleman, with
whom it would be a part of wisdom to live on a gude understanding
(for Hielandmen were hasty, ower hasty). As for
the reverend person of whom he had spoken, he was candidate
by favour of the Duke of Argyle (for David would not for the
universe have called him presentee) for the kirk of the parish in
which their farm was situated, and he was likely to be highly
acceptable unto the Christian souls of the parish, who were
hungering for spiritual manna, having been fed but upon sour
Hieland sowens by Mr. Duncan MacDonought, the last minister,
who began the morning duly, Sunday and Saturday, with
a mutchkin of usquebaugh. But I need say the less about
the present lad,'' said David, again grimly grimacing, ``as I
think ye may hae seen him afore; and here he is come to meet
us.''

  She had indeed seen him before, for it was no other than
Reuben Butler himself.
