




		CHAPTER FORTY-FOURTH.

	Now turn the Psalms of David ower,
	    And lilt wi' holy clangor;
	Of double verse come gie us four,
	    And skirl up the Bangor.
				Burns.

  The next was the important day, when, according to the forms
and ritual of the Scottish Kirk, Reuben Butler was to be
ordained minister of Knocktarlitie, by the Presbytery of ------.
And so eager were the whole party, that all, excepting Mrs.
Dutton, the destined Cowslip of Inverary, were stirring at an
early hour.

  Their host, whose appetite was as quick and keen as his
temper, was not long in summoning them to a substantial
breakfast, where there were at least a dozen of different preparations
of milk, plenty of cold meat, scores boiled and roasted
eggs, a huge cag of butter, half-a-firkin herrings boiled and
broiled, fresh and salt, and tea and coffee for them that liked
it, which, as their landlord assured them, with a nod and a
wink, pointing, at the same time, to a little cutter which seemed
dodging under the lee of the island, cost them little beside the
fetching ashore.

  ``Is the contraband trade permitted here so openly?'' said
Butler. ``I should think it very unfavourable to the people's
morals.''

  ``The Duke, Mr. Putler, has gien nae orders concerning the
putting of it down,'' said the magistrate, and seemed to think
that he had said all that was necessary to justify his connivance.
Butler was a man of prudence, and aware that real good
can only be obtained by remonstrance when remonstrance is
well-timed; so for the present he said nothing more on the
subject.

  When breakfast was half over, in flounced Mrs. Dolly, as fine
as a blue sacque and cherry-coloured ribands could make her.

  ``Good morrow to you, madam,'' said the master of ceremonies;
``I trust your early rising will not skaith ye.''

  The dame apologised to Captain Knockunder, as she was
pleased to term their entertainer; ``but, as we say in Cheshire,''
she added, ``I was like the Mayor of Altringham, who lies in
bed while his breeches are mending, for the girl did not bring
up the right bundle to my room, till she had brought up all the
others by mistake one after t'other---Well, I suppose we are all
for church to-day, as I understand---Pray may I be so bold as
to ask, if it is the fashion for your North country gentlemen to
go to church in your petticoats, Captain Knockunder?''

  ``Captain of Knockdunder, madam, if you please, for I knock
under to no man; and in respect of my garb, I shall go to
church as I am, at your service, madam; for if I were to lie
in bed like your Major What-d'ye-callum, till my preeches were
mended, I might be there all my life, seeing I never had a pair
of them on my person but twice in my life, which I am pound
to remember, it peing when the Duke brought his Duchess here,
when her Grace pehoved to be pleasured; so I e'en porrowed
the minister's trews for the twa days his Grace was pleased to
stay---but I will put myself under sic confinement again
for no man on earth, or woman either, but her Grace being
always excepted, as in duty pound.''

  The mistress of the milking-pail stared but, making no
answer to this round declaration, immediately proceeded to
show, that the alarm of the preceding evening had in no
degree injured her appetite.

  When the meal was finished, the Captain proposed to them
to take boat, in order that Mrs. Jeanie might see her new place
of residence, and that he himself might inquire whether the
necessary preparations had been made there, and at the Manse,
for receiving the future inmates of these mansions.

  The morning was delightful, and the huge mountain-shadows
slept upon the mirrored wave of the firth, almost as little disturbed
as if it had been an inland lake. Even Mrs. Dutton's
fears no longer annoyed her. She had been informed by Archibald,
that there was to be some sort of junketting after the
sermon, and that was what she loved dearly; and as for the
water, it was so still that it would look quite like a pleasuring
on the Thames.

  The whole party being embarked, therefore, in a large boat,
which the captain called his coach and six, and attended by a
smaller one termed his gig, the gallant Duncan steered straight
upon the little tower of the old-fashioned church of Knocktarlitie,
and the exertions of six stout rowers sped them rapidly on their
voyage. As they neared the land, the hills appeared to recede
from them, and a little valley, formed by the descent of a small
river from the mountains, evolved itself as it were upon their
approach. The style of the country on each side was simply
pastoral, and resembled, in appearance and character, the
description of a forgotten Scottish poet, which runs nearly
thus:---

	The water gently down a level slid,
	With little din, but couthy what it made;
	On ilka side the trees grew thick and lang,
	And wi' the wild birds' notes were a' in sang;
	On either side, a full bow-shot and mair,
	The green was even, gowany, and fair;
	With easy slope on every hand the braes
	To the hills' feet with scatter'd bushes raise;
	With goats and sheep aboon, and kye below,
	The bonny banks all in a swarm did go.<*>

* Ross's _Fortunate Shepherdess._ Edit. 1778, p. 23.


  They landed in this Highland Arcadia, at the mouth of the
small stream which watered the delightful and peaceable valley.
Inhabitants of several descriptions came to pay their respects to
the Captain of Knockdunder, a homage which he was very
peremptory in exacting, and to see the new settlers. Some
of these were men after David Deans's own heart, elders of
the kirk-session, zealous professors, from the Lennox, Lanarkshire,
and Ayrshire, to whom the preceding Duke of Argyle
had given _rooms_ in this corner of his estate, because they had
suffered for joining his father, the unfortunate Earl, during his
ill-fated attempt in 1686. These were cakes of the right leaven
for David regaling himself with; and, had it not been for this
circumstance, he has been heard to say, ``that the Captain of
Knockdunder would have swore him out of the country in
twenty-four hours, sae awsome it was to ony thinking soul to
hear his imprecations, upon the slightest temptation that crossed
his humour.''

  Besides these, there were a wilder set of parishioners, mountaineers
from the upper glen and adjacent hill, who spoke
Gaelic, went about armed, and wore the Highland dress. But
the strict commands of the Duke had established such good
order in this part of his territories, that the Gael and Saxons
lived upon the best possible terms of good neighbourhood.
They first visited the Manse, as the parsonage is termed in
Scotland. It was old, but in good repair, and stood snugly
embosomed in a grove of sycamore, with a well-stocked garden
in front, bounded by the small river, which was partly visible
from the windows, partly concealed by the bushes, trees, and
bounding hedge. Within, the house looked less comfortable
than it might have been, for it had been neglected by the late
incumbent; but workmen had been labouring, under the directions
of the Captain of Knockdunder, and at the expense of the
Duke of Argyle, to put it into some order. The old ``plenishing''
had been removed, and neat, but plain household furniture
had been sent down by the Duke in a brig of his own called
the Caroline, and was now ready to be placed in order in the
apartments.

  The gracious Duncan, finding matters were at a stand among
the workmen, summoned before him the delinquents, and impressed
all who heard him with a sense of his authority, by
the penalties with which he threatened them for their delay.
Mulcting them in half their charge, he assured them, would be
the least of it; for, if they were to neglect his pleasure and the
Duke's, ``he would be tamn'd if he paid them the t'other half
either, and they might seek law for it where they could get it.''
The work-people humbled themselves before the offended dignitary,
and spake him soft and fair; and at length, upon Mr.
Butler recalling to his mind that it was the ordination-day, and
that the workmen were probably thinking of going to church,
Knockdunder agreed to forgive them, out of respect to their
new minister.

  ``But an I catch them neglecking my duty again, Mr. Putler,
the teil pe in me if the kirk shall be an excuse; for what has
the like o' them rapparees to do at the kirk ony day put Sundays,
or then either, if the Duke and I has the necessitous uses
for them?''

  It may be guessed with what feelings of quiet satisfaction and
delight Butler looked forward to spending his days, honoured
and useful as he trusted to be, in this sequestered valley, and
how often an intelligent glance was exchanged betwixt him and
Jeanie, whose good-humoured face looked positively handsome,
from the expression of modesty, and, at the same time, of satisfaction,
which she wore when visiting the apartments of which
she was soon to call herself mistress. She was left at liberty to
give more open indulgence to her feelings of delight and admiration,
when, leaving the Manse, the company proceeded to examine
the destined habitation of David Deans.

  Jeanie found with pleasure that it was not above a musket-shot
from the Manse; for it had been a bar to her happiness to
think she might be obliged to reside at a distance from her
father, and she was aware that there were strong objections to
his actually living in the same house with Butler. But this
brief distance was the very thing which she could have wished.

  The farmhouse was on the plan of an improved cottage, and
contrived with great regard to convenience; an excellent little
garden, an orchard, and a set of offices complete, according to
the best ideas of the time, combined to render it a most desirable
habitation for the practical farmer, and far superior to the hovel
at Woodend, and the small house at Saint Leonard's Crags.
The situation was considerably higher than that of the Manse,
and fronted to the west. The windows commanded an enchanting
view of the little vale over which the mansion seemed to
preside, the windings of the stream, and the firth, with its
associated lakes and romantic islands. The hills of Dumbartonshire,
once possessed by the fierce clan of MacFarlanes, formed
a crescent behind the valley, and far to the right were seen the
dusky and more gigantic mountains of Argyleshire, with a
seaward view of the shattered and thunder-splitten peaks of
Arran.

  But to Jeanie, whose taste for the picturesque, if she had any
by nature, had never been awakened or cultivated, the sight of
the faithful old May Hettly, as she opened the door to receive
them in her clean toy, Sunday's russet-gown, and blue apron,
nicely smoothed down before her, was worth the whole varied
landscape. The raptures of the faithful old creature at seeing
Jeanie were equal to her own, as she hastened to assure her,
``that baith the gudeman and the beasts had been as weel seen
after as she possibly could contrive.'' Separating her from the
rest of the company, May then hurried her young mistress to
the offices, that she might receive the compliments she expected
for her care of the cows. Jeanie rejoiced, in the simplicity of
her heart, to see her charge once more; and the mute favourites
of our heroine, Gowans, and the others, acknowledged her presence
by lowing, turning round their broad and decent brows
when they heard her well-known ``Pruh, my leddy---pruh, my
woman,'' and, by various indications, known only to those who
have studied the habits of the milky mothers, showing sensible
pleasure as she approached to caress them in their turn.

  ``The very brute beasts are glad to see ye again,'' said May;
``but nae wonder, Jeanie, for ye were aye kind to beast and
body. And I maun learn to ca' ye _mistress_ now, Jeanie, since ye
hae been up to Lunnon, and seen the Duke, and the King, and
a' the braw folk. But wha kens,'' added the old dame slily,
``what I'll hae to ca' ye forby mistress, for I am thinking it
wunna lang be Deans.''

  ``Ca' me your ain Jeanie, May, and then ye can never gang
wrang.''

  In the cow-house which they examined, there was one animal
which Jeanie looked at till the tears gushed from her eyes.
May, who had watched her with a sympathising expression,
immediately observed, in an under-tone, ``The gudeman aye
sorts that beast himself, and is kinder to it than ony beast in
the byre; and I noticed he was that way e'en when he was
angriest, and had maist cause to be angry.---Eh, sirs! a parent's
heart's a queer thing!---Mony a warsle he has had for that puir
lassie---I am thinking he petitions mair for her than for yoursell,
hinny; for what can he plead for you but just to wish you
the blessing ye deserve? And when I sleepit ayont the hallan,
when we came first here, he was often earnest a' night, and I
could hear him come ower and ower again wi', `Effie---puir
blinded misguided thing!' it was aye `Effie! Effie!'---If that
puir wandering lamb comena into the sheepfauld in the Shepherd's
ain time, it will be an unco wonder, for I wot she has
been a child of prayers. Oh, if the puir prodigal wad return,
sae blithely as the goodman wad kill the fatted calf!---though
Brockie's calf will no be fit for killing this three weeks yet.''

  And then, with the discursive talent of persons of her description,
she got once more afloat in her account of domestic
affairs, and left this delicate and affecting topic.

  Having looked at every thing in the offices and the dairy,
and expressed her satisfaction with the manner in which matters
had been managed in her absence, Jeanie rejoined the rest
of the party, who were surveying the interior of the house, all
excepting David Deans and Butler, who had gone down to the
church to meet the kirk-session and the clergymen of the Presbytery,
and arrange matters for the duty of the day.

  In the interior of the cottage all was clean, neat, and suitable
to the exterior. It had been originally built and furnished by
the Duke, as a retreat for a favourite domestic of the higher
class, who did not long enjoy it, and had been dead only a few
months, so that every thing was in excellent taste and good
order. But in Jeanie's bedroom was a neat trunk, which had
greatly excited Mrs. Dutton's curiosity, for she was sure that
the direction, ``For Mrs. Jean Deans, at Auchingower, parish
of Knocktarlitie,'' was the writing of Mrs. Semple, the Duchess's
own woman. May Hettly produced the key in a sealed parcel,
which bore the same address, and attached to the key was a
label, intimating that the trunk and its contents were ``a token
of remembrance to Jeanie Deans, from her friends the Duchess
of Argyle and the young ladies.'' The trunk, hastily opened,
as the reader will not doubt, was found to be full of wearing
apparel of the best quality, suited to Jeanie's rank in life; and
to most of the articles the names of the particular donors were
attached, as if to make Jeanie sensible not only of the general,
but of the individual interest she had excited in the noble
family. To name the various articles by their appropriate
names, would be to attempt things unattempted yet in prose
or rhyme; besides that the old-fashioned terms of manteaus,
sacques, kissing-strings, and so forth, would convey but little
information even to the milliners of the present day. I shall
deposit, however, an accurate inventory of the contents of the
trunk with my kind friend, Miss Martha Buskbody, who has
promised, should the public curiosity seem interested in the
subject, to supply me with a professional glossary and commentary.
Suffice it to say, that the gift was such as became
the donors, and was suited to the situation of the receiver;
that every thing was handsome and appropriate, and nothing
forgotten which belonged to the wardrobe of a young person in
Jeanie's situation in life, the destined bride of a respectable
clergyman.

  Article after article was displayed, commented upon, and
admired, to the wonder of May, who declared, ``she didna
think the queen had mair or better claise,'' and somewhat to
the envy of the northern Cowslip. This unamiable, but not
very unnatural, disposition of mind, broke forth in sundry
unfounded criticisms to the disparagement of the articles, as
they were severally exhibited. But it assumed a more direct
character, when, at the bottom of all, was found a dress of
white silk, very plainly made, but still of white silk, and French
silk to boot, with a paper pinned to it, bearing that it was a
present from the Duke of Argyle to his travelling companion,
to be worn on the day when she should change her name.

  Mrs. Dutton could forbear no longer, but whispered into Mr.
Archibald's ear, that it was a clever thing to be a Scotchwoman:
``She supposed all _her_ sisters, and she had half-a-dozen, might
have been hanged, without any one sending her a present of a
pocket handkerchief.''

  ``Or without your making any exertion to save them, Mrs.
Dolly,'' answered Archibald drily.---``But I am surprised we do
not hear the bell yet,'' said he, looking at his watch.

  ``Fat ta deil, Mr. Archibald,'' answered the Captain of Knockdunder,
``wad ye hae them ring the bell before I am ready to
gang to kirk?---I wad gar the bedral eat the bell-rope, if he
took ony sic freedom. But if ye want to hear the bell, I will
just show mysell on the knowe-head, and it will begin jowing
forthwith.''

  Accordingly, so soon as they sallied out, and that the gold-laced
hat of the Captain was seen rising like Hesper above the
dewy verge of the rising ground, the clash (for it was rather a
clash than a clang) of the bell was heard from the old moss-grown
tower, and the clapper continued to thump its cracked
sides all the while they advanced towards the kirk, Duncan
exhorting them to take their own time, ``for teil ony sport wad
be till he came.''<*>

* Note T. Tolling to service in Scotland.


  Accordingly, the bell only changed to the final and impatient
chime when they crossed the stile; and ``rang in,'' that is,
concluded its mistuned summons, when they had entered the
Duke's seat, in the little kirk, where the whole party arranged
themselves, with Duncan at their head, excepting David Deans,
who already occupied a seat among the elders.

  The business of the day, with a particular detail of which it
is unnecessary to trouble the reader, was gone through according
to the established form, and the sermon pronounced upon
the occasion had the good fortune to please even the critical
David Deans, though it was only an hour and a quarter long,
which David termed a short allowance of spiritual provender.

  The preacher, who was a divine that held many of David's
opinions, privately apologised for his brevity by saying, ``That
he observed the Captain was gaunting grievously, and that if
he had detained him longer, there was no knowing how long
he might be in paying the next term's victual stipend.''

  David groaned to find that such carnal motives could have
influence upon the mind of a powerful preacher. He had,
indeed, been scandalised by another circumstance during the
service.

  So soon as the congregation were seated after prayers, and
the clergyman had read his text, the gracious Duncan, after
rummaging the leathern purse which hung in front of his
petticoat, produced a short tobacco-pipe made of iron, and observed,
almost aloud, ``I hae forgotten my spleuchan---Lachlan,
gang down to the clachan, and bring me up a pennyworth of
twist.'' Six arms, the nearest within reach, presented, with an
obedient start, as many tobacco-pouches to the man of office.
He made choice of one with an nod of acknowledgment, filled his
pipe, lighted it with the assistance of his pistol-flint, and smoked
with infinite composure during the whole time of the sermon.
When the discourse was finished, he knocked the ashes out of
his pipe, replaced it in his sporran, returned the tobacco-pouch
or spleuchan to its owner, and joined in the prayer with decency
and attention.

  At the end of the service, when Butler had been admitted
minister of the kirk of Knocktarlitie, with all its spiritual
immunities and privileges, David, who had frowned, groaned,
and murmured at Knockdunder's irreverent demeanour, communicated
his plain thoughts of the matter to Isaac Meiklehose,
one of the elders, with whom a reverential aspect and huge
grizzle wig had especially disposed him to seek fraternisation.
``It didna become a wild Indian,'' David said, ``much less a
Christian, and a gentleman, to sit in the kirk puffing tobacco-reek,
as if he were in a change-house.''

  Meiklehose shook his head, and allowed it was ``far frae
beseeming---But what will ye say? The Captain's a queer
hand, and to speak to him about that or onything else that
crosses the maggot, wad be to set the kiln a-low. He keeps a
high hand ower the country, and we couldna deal wi' the
Hielandmen without his protection, sin' a' the keys o' the
kintray hings at his belt; and he's no an ill body in the main,
and maistry, ye ken, maws the meadows doun.''

  ``That may be very true, neighbour,'' said David; ``but
Reuben Butler isna the man I take him to be, if he disna learn
the Captain to fuff his pipe some other gate than in God's house,
or the quarter be ower.''

  ``Fair and softly gangs far,'' said MeikIehose; ``and if a fule
may gie a wise man a counsel, I wad hae him think twice or
he mells with Knockdunder---He auld hae a lang-shankit spune
that wad sup kail wi' the deil. But they are a' away to their
dinner to the change-house, and if we dinna mend our pace,
we'll come short at meal-time.''

  David accompanied his friend without answer; but began to
feel from experience, that the glen of Knocktarlitie, like the
rest of the world, was haunted by its own special subjects of
regret and discontent. His mind was, so much occupied by
considering the best means of converting Duncan of Knock to a
sense of reverend decency during public worship, that he altogether
forgot to inquire whether Butler was called upon to
subscribe the oaths to Government.

  Some have insinuated, that his neglect on this head was, in
some degree, intentional; but I think this explanation inconsistent
with the simplicity of my friend David's character.
Neither have I ever been able, by the most minute inquiries, to
know whether the _formula,_ at which he so much scrupled, had
been exacted from Butler, ay or no. The books of the kirk-session
might have thrown some light on this matter; but
unfortunately they were destroyed in the year 1746, by one
Donacha Dhu na Dunaigh, at the instance, it was said, or at
least by the connivance, of the gracious Duncan of Knock, who
had a desire to obliterate the recorded foibles of a certain Kate
Finlayson.
