




		CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVENTH.

	So soon as I can win the offended king,
	I will be known your advocate.
					Cymbeline.

  The Duke of Argyle led the way in silence to the small postern
by which they had been admitted into Richmond Park, so long
the favourite residence of Queen Caroline. It was opened by
the same half-seen janitor, and they found themselves beyond
the precincts of the royal demesne. Still not a word was spoken
on either side. The Duke probably wished to allow his rustic
prot<e'>g<e'>e time to recruit her faculties, dazzled and sunk with
colloquy sublime; and betwixt what she had guessed, had
heard, and had seen, Jeanie Deans's mind was too much agitated
to permit her to ask any questions.

  They found the carriage of the Duke in the place where they
had left it; and when they resumed their places, soon began to
advance rapidly on their return to town.

  ``I think, Jeanie,'' said the Duke, breaking silence, ``you
have every reason to congratulate yourself on the issue of your
interview with her Majesty.''

  ``And that leddy was the Queen herself?'' said Jeanie; ``I
misdoubted it when I saw that your honour didna put on your
hat---And yet I can hardly believe it, even when I heard her
speak it herself.''

  ``It was certainly Queen Caroline,'' replied the Duke. ``Have
you no curiosity to see what is in the little pocket-book?''

  ``Do you think the pardon will be in it, sir?'' said Jeanie,
with the eager animation of hope.

  ``Why, no,'' replied the Duke; ``that is unlikely. They
seldom carry these things about them, unless they were likely
to be wanted; and, besides, her Majesty told you it was the
King, not she, who was to grant it.''

  ``That is true, too,'' said Jeanie; ``but I am so confused in
my mind---But does your honour think there is a certainty of
Effie's pardon then?'' continued she, still holding in her hand
the unopened pocket-book.

  ``Why, kings are kittle cattle to shoe behind, as we say in the
north,'' replied the Duke; ``but his wife knows his trim, and I
have not the least doubt that the matter is quite certain.''

  ``Oh, God be praised! God be praised!'' ejaculated Jeanie;
``and may the gude leddy never want the heart's ease she has
gien me at this moment!---And God bless you too, my Lord!---
without your help I wad ne'er hae won near her.''

  The Duke let her dwell upon this subject for a considerable
time, curious, perhaps, to see how long the feelings of gratitude
would continue to supersede those of curiosity. But so feeble
was the latter feeling in Jeanie's mind, that his Grace, with
whom, perhaps, it was for the time a little stronger, was obliged
once more to bring forward the subject of the Queen's present.
It was opened accordingly. In the inside of the case was the
usual assortment of silk and needles, with scissors, tweezers,
etc.; and in the pocket was a bank-bill for fifty pounds.

  The Duke had no sooner informed Jeanie of the value of this
last document, for she was unaccustomed to see notes for such
sums, than she expressed her regret at the mistake which had
taken place. ``For the hussy itsell,'' she said, ``was a very
valuable thing for a keepsake, with the Queen's name written
in the inside with her ain hand doubtless---_Caroline_---as plain
as could be, and a crown drawn aboon it.''

  She therefore tendered the bill to the Duke, requesting him
to find some mode of returning it to the royal owner.

  ``No, no, Jeanie,'' said the Duke, ``there is no mistake in
the case. Her Majesty knows you have been put to great
expense, and she wishes to make it up to you.''

  ``I am sure she is even ower gude,'' said Jeanie, ``and it
glads me muckle that I can pay back Dumbiedikes his siller,
without distressing my father, honest man.''

  ``Dumbiedikes! What, a freeholder of Mid-Lothian, is he
not?'' said his Grace, whose occasional residence in that county
made him acquainted with most of the heritors, as landed
persons are termed in Scotland.---``He has a house not far from
Dalkeith, wears a black wig and a laced hat?''

  ``Yes sir,'' answered Jeanie, who had her reasons for being
brief in her answers upon this topic.

  ``Ah, my old friend Dumbie!'' said the Duke; ``I have
thrice seen him fou, and only once heard the sound of his voice
---Is he a cousin of yours, Jeanie?''

  ``No, sir,---my Lord.''

  ``Then he must be a well-wisher, I suspect?''

  ``Ye---yes,---my Lord, sir,'' answered Jeanie, blushing, and
with hesitation.

  ``Aha! then, if the Laird starts, I suppose my friend Butler
must be in some danger?''

  ``O no, sir,'' answered Jeanie, much more readily, but at the
same time blushing much more deeply.

  ``Well, Jeanie,'' said the Duke, ``you are a girl may be safely
trusted with your own matters, and I shall inquire no farther
about them. But as to this same pardon, I must see to get it
passed through the proper forms; and I have a friend in office
who will for auld lang syne, do me so much favour. And then,
Jeanie, as I shall have occasion to send an express down to
Scotland, who will travel with it safer and more swiftly than
you can do, I will take care to have it put into the proper
channel; meanwhile you may write to your friends by post of
your good success.''

  ``And does your Honour think,'' said Jeanie, ``that will do
as weel as if I were to take my tap in my lap, and slip my ways
hame again on my ain errand?''

  ``Much better, certainly,'' said the Duke. ``You know the
roads are not very safe for a single woman to travel.''

  Jeanie internally acquiesced in this observation.

  ``And I have a plan for you besides. One of the Duchess's
attendants, and one of mine---your acquaintance Archibald---
are going down to Inverary in a light calash, with four horses I
have bought, and there is room enough in the carriage for you
to go with them as far as Glasgow, where Archibald will find
means of sending you safely to Edinburgh.---And in the way I
beg you will teach the woman as much as you can of the mystery
of cheese-making, for she is to have a charge in the dairy, and
I dare swear you are as tidy about your milk-pail as about your
dress.''

  ``Does your Honour like cheese?'' said Jeanie, with a gleam
of conscious delight as she asked the question.

  ``Like it?'' said the Duke, whose good-nature anticipated
what was to follow,---``cakes and cheese are a dinner for an
emperor, let alone a Highlandman.''

  ``Because,'' said Jeanie, with modest confidence, and great and
evident self-gratulation, ``we have been thought so particular in
making cheese, that some folk think it as gude as the real
Dunlop; and if your honour's Grace wad but accept a stane or
twa, blithe, and fain, and proud it wad make us? But maybe
ye may like the ewe-milk, that is, the Buckholmside<*> cheese

* The hilly pastures of Buckholm, which the Author now surveys,---
* ``Not in the frenzy of a dreamer's eye,''---are famed for producing the best
* ewe-milk cheese in the south of Scotland.

better; or maybe the gait-milk, as ye come frae the Highlands
---and I canna pretend just to the same skeel o' them; but my
cousin Jean, that lives at Lockermachus in Lammermuir, I could
speak to her, and''------

  ``Quite unnecessary,'' said the Duke; ``the Dunlop is the
very cheese of which I am so fond, and I will take it as the
greatest favour you can do me to send one to Caroline Park.
But remember, be on honour with it, Jeanie, and make it all
yourself, for I am a real good judge.''

  ``I am not feared,'' said Jeanie, confidently, ``that I may
please your Honour; for I am sure you look as if you could
hardly find fault wi' onybody that did their best; and weel is
it my part, I trow, to do mine.''

  This discourse introduced a topic upon which the two travellers,
though so different in rank and education, found each
a good deal to say. The Duke, besides his other patriotic
qualities, was a distinguished agriculturist, and proud of his
knowledge in that department. He entertained Jeanie with
his observations on the different breeds of cattle in Scotland,
and their capacity for the dairy, and received so much information
from her practical experience in return, that he promised
her a couple of Devonshire cows in reward for the lesson. In
short his mind was so transported back to his rural employments
and amusements, that he sighed when his carriage stopped
opposite to the old hackney-coach, which Archibald had kept in
attendance at the place where they had left it. While the
coachman again bridled his lean cattle, which had been indulged
with a bite of musty hay, the Duke cautioned Jeanie not to be
too communicative to her landlady concerning what had passed.
``There is,'' he said, ``no use of speaking of matters till they
are actually settled; and you may refer the good lady to Archibald,
if she presses you hard with questions. She is his old
acquaintance, and he knows how to manage with her.''

  He then took a cordial farewell of Jeanie, and told her to be
ready in the ensuing week to return to Scotland---saw her safely
established in her hackney-coach, and rolled of in his own
carriage, humming a stanza of the ballad which he is said to
have composed:---

	``At the sight of Dumbarton once again,
	I'll cock up my bonnet and march amain,
	With my claymore hanging down to my heel,
	To whang at the bannocks of barley meal.''

  Perhaps one ought to be actually a Scotsman to conceive how
ardently, under all distinctions of rank and situation, they feel
their mutual connection with each other as natives of the same
country. There are, I believe, more associations common to
the inhabitants of a rude and wild, than of a well-cultivated
and fertile country; their ancestors have more seldom changed
their place of residence; their mutual recollection of remarkable
objects is more accurate; the high and the low are more interested
in each other's welfare; the feelings of kindred and
relationship are more widely extended, and in a word, the
bonds of patriotic affection, always honourable even when a
little too exclusively strained, have more influence on men's
feelings and actions.

  The rumbling hackney-coach, which tumbled over the (then)
execrable London pavement, at a rate very different from that
which had conveyed the ducal carriage to Richmond, at length
deposited Jeanie Deans and her attendant at the national sign
of the Thistle. Mrs. Glass, who had been in long and anxious
expectation, now rushed, full of eager curiosity and open-mouthed
interrogation, upon our heroine, who was positively
unable to sustain the overwhelming cataract of her questions,
which burst forth with the sublimity of a grand gardyloo:-

  ``Had she seen the Duke, God bless him---the Duchess---the
young ladies?---Had she seen the King, God bless him---the
Queen---the Prince of Wales---the Princess---or any of the rest
of the royal family?---Had she got her sister's pardon?---Was
it out and out---or was it only a commutation of punishment?
---How far had she gone---where had she driven to---whom had
she seen---what had been said---what had kept her so long?''

  Such were the various questions huddled upon each other by
a curiosity so eager, that it could hardly wait for its own gratification.
Jeanie would have been more than sufficiently embarrassed
by this overbearing tide of interrogations, had not
Archibald, who had probably received from his master a hint
to that purpose, advanced to her rescue. ``Mrs. Glass,'' said
Archibald, ``his Grace desired me particularly to say, that he
would take it as a great favour if you would ask the young
woman no questions, as he wishes to explain to you more
distinctly than she can do how her affairs stand, and consult you
on some matters which she cannot altogether so well explain.
The Duke will call at the Thistle to-morrow or next day for that
purpose.''

  ``His Grace is very condescending,'' said Mrs. Glass, her zeal
for inquiry slaked for the present by the dexterous administration
of this sugar plum---``his Grace is sensible that I am in a
manner accountable for the conduct of my young kinswoman, and
no doubt his Grace is the best judge how far he should intrust
her or me with the management of her affairs.''

  ``His Grace is quite sensible of that,'' answered Archibald,
with national gravity, ``and will certainly trust what he has to
say to the most discreet of the two; and therefore, Mrs. Glass,
his Grace relies you will speak nothing to Mrs. Jean Deans,
either of her own affairs or her sister's, until he sees you
himself. He desired me to assure you, in the meanwhile, that
all was going on as well as your kindness could wish, Mrs.
Glass.''

  ``His Grace is very kind---very considerate, certainly, Mr.
Archibald---his Grace's commands shall be obeyed, and---But
you have had a far drive, Mr. Archibald, as I guess by the
time of your absence, and I guess'' (with an engaging smile)
``you winna be the waur o' a glass of the right Rosa Solis.''

  ``I thank you, Mrs. Glass,'' said the great man's great man,
``but I am under the necessity of returning to my Lord directly.''
And, making his adieus civilly to both cousins, he left the shop
of the Lady of the Thistle.

  ``I am glad your affairs have prospered so well, Jeanie, my
love,'' said Mrs. Glass; ``though, indeed, there was little fear
of them so soon as the Duke of Argyle was so condescending as
to take them into hand. I will ask you no questions about them,
because his Grace, who is most considerate and prudent in such
matters, intends to tell me all that you ken yourself, dear, and
doubtless a great deal more; so that anything that may lie
heavily on your mind may be imparted to me in the meantime,
as you see it is his Grace's pleasure that I should be made
acquainted with the whole matter forthwith, and whether you
or he tells it, will make no difference in the world, ye ken. If
I ken what he is going to say beforehand, I will be much more
ready to give my advice, and whether you or he tell me about
it, cannot much signify after all, my dear. So you may just
say whatever you like, only mind I ask you no questions
about it.''

  Jeanie was a little embarrassed. She thought that the communication
she had to make was perhaps the only means she
might have in her power to gratify her friendly and hospitable
kinswoman. But her prudence instantly suggested that her
secret interview with Queen Caroline, which seemed to pass
under a certain sort of mystery, was not a proper subject for the
gossip of a woman like Mrs. Glass, of whose heart she had a
much better opinion than of her prudence. She, therefore,
answered in general, that the Duke had had the extraordinary
kindness to make very particular inquiries into her sister's bad
affair, and that he thought he had found the means of putting
it a' straight again, but that he proposed to tell all that he
thought about the matter to Mrs. Glass herself.

  This did not quite satisfy the penetrating mistress of the
Thistle. Searching as her own small rappee, she, in spite of
her promise, urged Jeanie with still farther questions. ``Had
she been a' that time at Argyle House? Was the Duke with
her the whole time? and had she seen the Duchess? and had
she seen the young ladies---and specially Lady Caroline Campbell?''
---To these questions Jeanie gave the general reply, that
she knew so little of the town that she could not tell exactly
where she had been; that she had not seen the Duchess to her
knowledge; that she had seen two ladies, one of whom, she
understood, bore the name of Caroline; and more, she said, she
could not tell about the matter.

  ``It would be the Duke's eldest daughter, Lady Caroline
Campbell, there is no doubt of that,'' said Mrs. Glass; ``but
doubtless, I shall know more particularly through his Grace.---
And so, as the cloth is laid in the little parlour above stairs, and
it is past three o'clock, for I have been waiting this hour for
you, and I have had a snack myself; and, as they used to say
in Scotland in my time---I do not ken if the word be used now
---there is ill talking between a full body and a fasting.''
