




		CHAPTER EIGHTEENTH.

	To man, in this his trial state,
	    The privilege is given,
	When tost by tides of human fate,
	    To anchor fast on heaven.
				Watts's _Hymns._

  It was with a firm step that Deans sought his daughter's
apartment, determined to leave her to the light of her own
conscience in the dubious point of casuistry in which he supposed
her to be placed.

  The little room had been the sleeping apartment of both
sisters, and there still stood there a small occasional bed which
had been made for Effie's accommodation, when, complaining
of illness, she had declined to share, as in happier times, her
sister's pillow. The eyes of Deans rested involuntarily, on
entering the room, upon this little couch, with its dark-green
coarse curtains, and the ideas connected with it rose so thick
upon his soul as almost to incapacitate him from opening his
errand to his daughter. Her occupation broke the ice. He
found her gazing on a slip of paper, which contained a citation
to her to appear as a witness upon her sister's trial in behalf of
the accused. For the worthy magistrate, determined to omit
no chance of doing Effie justice, and to leave her sister no
apology for not giving the evidence which she was supposed to
possess, had caused the ordinary citation, or _subp<oe>na,_ of the
Scottish criminal court, to be served upon her by an officer
during his conference with David.

  This precaution was so far favourable to Deans, that it saved
him the pain of entering upon a formal explanation with his
daughter; he only said, with a hollow and tremulous voice, ``I
perceive ye are aware of the matter.''

  ``O father, we are cruelly sted between God's laws and man's
laws---What shall we do?---What can we do?''

  Jeanie, it must be observed, had no hesitation whatever about
the mere act of appearing in a court of justice. She might have
heard the point discussed by her father more than once; but
we have already noticed that she was accustomed to listen with
reverence to much which she was incapable of understanding,
and that subtle argunents of casuistry found her a patient, but
unedified hearer. Upon receiving the citation, therefore, her
thoughts did not turn upon the chimerical scruples which
alarmed her father's mind, but to the language which had been
held to her by the stranger at Muschat's Cairn. In a word,
she never doubted but she was to be dragged forward into the
court of justice, in order to place her in the cruel position of
either sacrificing her sister by telling the truth, or committing
perjury in order to save her life. And so strongly did her
thoughts run in this channel, that she applied her father's
words, ``Ye are aware of the matter,'' to his acquaintance with
the advice that had been so fearfully enforced upon her. She
looked up with anxious surprise, not unmingled with a cast of
horror, which his next words, as she interpreted and applied
them, were not qualified to remove.

  ``Daughter,'' said David, ``it has ever been my mind, that in
things of ane doubtful and controversial nature, ilk Christian's
conscience suld be his ain guide---Wherefore descend into
yourself, try your ain mind with sufficiency of soul exercise,
and as you sall finally find yourself clear to do in this matter
---even so be it.''

  ``But, father,'' said Jeanie, whose mind revolted at the
construction which she naturally put upon his language, ``can
this-=this= be a doubtful or controversial matter?---Mind, father,
the ninth command---`Thou shalt not bear false witness against
thy neighbour.' ''

  David Deans paused; for, still applying her speech to his
preconceived difficulties, it seemed to him as if _she,_ a woman, and
a sister, was scarce entitled to be scrupulous upon this occasion,
where he, a man, exercised in the testimonies of that testifying
period, had given indirect countenance to her following what
must have been the natural dictates of her own feelings. But
he kept firm his purpose, until his eyes involuntarily rested
upon the little settle-bed, and recalled the form of the child of
his old age, as she sate upon it, pale, emaciated, and broken-hearted.
His mind, as the picture arose before him, involuntarily
conceived, and his tongue involuntarily uttered---but in a
tone how different from his usual dogmatical precision!---arguments
for the course of conduct likely to ensure his child's
safety.

  ``Daughter,'' he said, ``I did not say that your path was free
from stumbling---and, questionless, this act may be in the
opinion of some a transgression, since he who beareth witness
unlawfully, and against his conscience, doth in some sort bear
false witness against his neighbour. Yet in matters of compliance,
the guilt lieth not in the compliance sae muckle, as in
the mind and conscience of him that doth comply; and, therefore,
although my testimony hath not been spared upon public
defections, I haena felt freedom to separate mysell from the
communion of many who have been clear to hear those ministers
who have taken the fatal indulgence because they might
get good of them, though I could not.''

  When David had proceeded thus far, his conscience reproved
him, that he might be indirectly undermining the purity of his
daughter's faith, and smoothing the way for her falling off from
strictness of principle. He, therefore, suddenly stopped, and
changed his tone:---``Jeanie, I perceive that our vile affections,
---so I call them in respect of doing the will of our Father,---
cling too heavily to me in this hour of trying sorrow, to permit
me to keep sight of my ain duty, or to airt you to yours. I
will speak nae mair anent this overtrying matter---Jeanie, if
ye can, wi' God and gude conscience, speak in favour of this
puir unhappy''---(here his voice faltered)---``She is your sister
in the flesh---worthless and castaway as she is, she is the
daughter of a saint in heaven, that was a mother to you, Jeanie,
in place of your ain---but if ye arena free in conscience to speak
for her in the court of judicature, follow your conscience, Jeanie,
and let God's will be done.'' After this adjuration he left the
apartment, and his daughter remained in a state of great
distress and perplexity.

  It would have been no small addition to the sorrows of David
Deans, even in this extremity of suffering, had he known that
his daughter was applying the casuistical arguments which he
had been using, not in the sense of a permission to follow her
own opinion on a dubious and disputed point of controversy,
but rather as an encouragement to transgress one of those
divine commandments which Christians of all sects and denominations
unite in holding most sacred.

  ``Can this be?'' said Jeanie, as the door closed on her father
---``Can these be his words that I have heard, or has the
Enemy taken his voice and features to give weight unto the
counsel which causeth to perish?---a sister's life, and a father
pointing out how to save it!---O God, deliver me!---this is a
fearfu' temptation.''

  Roaming from thought to thought, she at one time imagined
her father understood the ninth commandment literally, as
prohibiting false witness _against_ our neighbour, without extending
the denunciation against falsehood uttered _in favour_ of
the criminal. But her clear and unsophisticated power of
discriminating between good and evil, instantly rejected an
interpretation so limited, and so unworthy of the Author of the
law. She remained in a state of the most agitating terror and
uncertainty---afraid to communicate her thoughts freely to her
father, lest she should draw forth an opinion with which she
could not comply,---wrung with distress on her sister's account,
rendered the more acute by reflecting that the means of saving
her were in her power, but were such as her conscience prohibited
her from using,---tossed, in short, like a vessel in an
open roadstead during a storm, and, like that vessel, resting on
one only sure cable and anchor,---faith in Providence, and a
resolution to discharge her duty.

  Butler's affection and strong sense of religion would have
been her principal support in these distressing circumstances,
but he was still under restraint, which did not permit him to
come to St. Leonard's Crags; and her distresses were of a
nature, which, with her indifferent habits of scholarship, she
found it impossible to express in writing. She was therefore
compelled to trust for guidance to her own unassisted sense of
what was right or wrong. It was not the least of Jeanie's
distresses, that, although she hoped and believed her sister to
be innocent, she had not the means of receiving that assurance
from her own mouth.

  The double-dealing of Ratcliffe in the matter of Robertson
had not prevented his being rewarded, as double-dealers frequently
have been, with favour and preferment. Sharpitlaw,
who found in him something of a kindred genius, had been
intercessor in his behalf with the magistrates, and the circumstance
of his having voluntarily remained in the prison, when
the doors were forced by the mob, would have made it a hard
measure to take the life which he had such easy means of
saving. He received a full pardon; and soon afterwards, James
Ratcliffe, the greatest thief and housebreaker in Scotland, was,
upon the faith, perhaps, of an ancient proverb, selected as a
person to be entrusted with the custody of other delinquents.

  When Ratcliffe was thus placed in a confidential situation, he
was repeatedly applied to by the sapient Saddletree and others,
who took some interest in the Deans family, to procure an
interview between the sisters; but the magistrates, who were
extremely anxious for the apprehension of Robertson, had given
strict orders to the contrary, hoping that, by keeping them
separate, they might, from the one or the other, extract some
information respecting that fugitive. On this subject Jeanie
had nothing to tell them. She informed Mr. Middleburgh,
that she knew nothing of Robertson, except having met him
that night by appointment to give her some advice respecting
her sister's concern, the purport of which, she said, was betwixt
God and her conscience. Of his motions, purposes, or plans,
past, present, or future, she knew nothing, and so had nothing
to communicate.

  Effie was equally silent, though from a different cause. It
was in vain that they offered a commutation and alleviation of
her punishment, and even a free pardon, if she would confess
what she knew of her lover. She answered only with tears;
unless, when at times driven into pettish sulkiness by the
persecution of the interrogators, she made them abrupt and
disrespectful answers.

  At length, after her trial had been delayed for many weeks,
in hopes she might be induced to speak out on a subject
infinitely more interesting to the magistracy than her own guilt
or innocence, their patience was worn out, and even Mr.
Middleburgh finding no ear lent to farther intercession in her
behalf, the day was fixed for the trial to proceed.

  It was now, and not sooner, that Sharpitlaw, recollecting his
promise to Effie Deans, or rather being dinned into compliance
by the unceasing remonstrances of Mrs. Saddletree, who was his
next-door neighbour, and who declared it was heathen cruelty
to keep the twa brokenhearted creatures separate, issued the
important mandate, permitting them to see each other.

  On the evening which preceded the eventful day of trial,
Jeanie was permitted to see her sister---an awful interview, and
occurring at a most distressing crisis. This, however, formed a
part of the bitter cup which she was doomed to drink, to atone
for crimes and follies to which she had no accession; and at
twelve o'clock noon, being the time appointed for admission to
the jail, she went to meet, for the first time for several months,
her guilty, erring, and most miserable sister, in that abode of
guilt, error, and utter misery.
