




		CHAPTER THIRTY-FIRST.

	There governed in that year
	A stern, stout churl---an angry overseer.
					Crabbe.


  While Mr. Staunton, for such was this worthy clergyman's
name, was laying aside his gown in the vestry, Jeanie was in
the act of coming to an open rupture with Madge.

  ``We must return to Mummer's barn directly,'' said Madge;
``we'll be ower late, and my mother will be angry.''

  ``I am not going back with you, Madge,'' said Jeanie, taking
out a guinea, and offering it to her; ``I am much obliged to
you, but I maun gang my ain road.''

  ``And me coming a' this way out o' my gate to pleasure you,
ye ungratefu' cutty,'' answered Madge; ``and me to be brained
by my mother when I gang hame, and a' for your sake!---But
I will gar ye as good''------

  ``For God's sake,'' said Jeanie to a man who stood beside
them, ``keep her off!---she is mad.''

  ``Ey, ey,'' answered the boor; ``I hae some guess of that,
and I trow thou be'st a bird of the same feather.---Howsomever,
Madge, I redd thee keep hand off her, or I'se lend thee a
whisterpoop.''

  Several of the lower class of the parishioners now gathered
round the strangers, and the cry arose among the boys that
``there was a-going to be a fite between mad Madge Murdockson
and another Bess of Bedlam.'' But while the fry assembled with
the humane hope of seeing as much of the fun as possible, the
laced cocked-hat of the beadle was discerned among the multitude,
and all made way for that person of awful authority. His
first address was to Madge.

  ``What's brought thee back again, thou silly donnot, to plague
this parish? Hast thou brought ony more bastards wi' thee to
lay to honest men's doors? or does thou think to burden us with
this goose, that's as hare-brained as thysell, as if rates were no
up enow? Away wi' thee to thy thief of a mother; she's fast
in the stocks at Barkston town-end---Away wi' ye out o' the
parish, or I'se be at ye with the ratan.''

  Madge stood sulky for a minute; but she had been too often
taught submission to the beadle's authority by ungentle means
to feel courage enough to dispute it.

  ``And my mother---my puir auld mother, is in the stocks at
Barkston!---This is a' your wyte, Miss Jeanie Deans; but I'll
be upsides wi' you, as sure as my name's Madge Wildfire---I
mean Murdockson---God help me, I forget my very name in this
confused waste!''

  So saying, she turned upon her heel, and went off, followed
by all the mischievous imps of the village, some crying, ``Madge,
canst thou tell thy name yet?'' some pulling the skirts of her
dress, and all, to the best of their strength and ingenuity, exercising
some new device or other to exasperate her into frenzy.

  Jeanie saw her departure with infinite delight, though she
wished that, in some way or other, she could have requited the
service Madge had conferred upon her.

  In the meantime, she applied to the beadle to know whether
``there was any house in the village where she could be civilly
entertained for her money, and whether she could be permitted
to speak to the clergyman?''

  ``Ay, ay, we'se ha' reverend care on thee; and I think,''
answered the man of constituted authority, ``that, unless thou
answer the Rector all the better, we'se spare thy money, and gie
thee lodging at the parish charge, young woman.''

  ``Where am I to go then?'' said Jeanie, in some alarm.

  ``Why, I am to take thee to his Reverence, in the first place,
to gie an account o' thysell, and to see thou comena to be a
burden upon the parish.''

  ``I do not wish to burden anyone,'' replied Jeanie; ``I have
enough for my own wants, and only wish to get on my journey
safely.''

  ``Why, that's another matter,'' replied the beadle, ``and if it
be true---and I think thou dost not look so polrumptious as thy
playfellow yonder---Thou wouldst be a mettle lass enow, an
thou wert snog and snod a bid better. Come thou away, then
---the Rector is a good man.''

  ``Is that the minister,'' said Jeanie, ``who preached''------

  ``The minister? Lord help thee! What kind o' Presbyterian
art thou?---Why, 'tis the Rector---the Rector's sell, woman, and
there isna the like o' him in the county, nor the four next to it.
Come away---away with thee---we maunna bide here.''

  ``I am sure I am very willing to go to see the minister,''
said Jeanie; ``for though he read his discourse, and wore that
surplice, as they call it here, I canna but think he must be a
very worthy God-fearing man, to preach the root of the matter
in the way he did.''

  The disappointed rabble, finding that there was like to be no
farther sport, had by this time dispersed, and Jeanie, with her
usual patience, followed her consequential and surly, but not
brutal, conductor towards the rectory.

  This clerical mansion was large and commodious, for the
living was an excellent one, and the advowson belonged to a
very wealthy family in the neighbourhood, who had usually
bred up a son or nephew to the church for the sake of inducting
him, as opportunity offered, into this very comfortable provision.
In this manner the rectory of Willingham had always been
considered as a direct and immediate appanage of Willingham
Hall; and as the rich baronets to whom the latter belonged had
usually a son, or brother, or nephew, settled in the living, the
utmost care had been taken to render their habitation not merely
respectable and commodious, but even dignified and imposing.

  It was situated about four hundred yards from the village,
and on a rising ground which sloped gently upward, covered
with small enclosures, or closes, laid out irregularly, so that the
old oaks and elms, which were planted in hedge-rows, fell into
perspective, and were blended together in beautiful irregularity.
When they approached nearer to the house, a handsome gateway
admitted them into a lawn, of narrow dimensions indeed,
but which was interspersed with large sweet chestnut trees and
beeches, and kept in handsome order. The front of the house
was irregular. Part of it seemed very old, and had, in fact, been
the residence of the incumbent in Romish times. Successive
occupants had made considerable additions and improvements,
each in the taste of his own age, and without much regard to
symmetry. But these incongruities of architecture were so
graduated and happily mingled, that the eye, far from being
displeased with the combinations of various styles, saw nothing
but what was interesting in the varied and intricate pile which
they displayed. Fruit-trees displayed on the southern wall,
outer staircases, various places of entrance, a combination of
roofs and chimneys of different ages, united to render the front,
not indeed beautiful or grand, but intricate, perplexed, or, to use
Mr. Price's appropriate phrase, picturesque. The most considerable
addition was that of the present Rector, who, ``being a
bookish man,'' as the beadle was at the pains to inform Jeanie,
to augment, perhaps, her reverence for the person before whom
she was to appear, had built a handsome library and parlour,
and no less than two additional bedrooms.

  ``Mony men would hae scrupled such expense,'' continued the
parochial officer, ``seeing as the living mun go as it pleases Sir
Edmund to will it; but his Reverence has a canny bit land of
his own, and need not look on two sides of a penny.''

  Jeanie could not help comparing the irregular yet extensive
and commodious pile of building before her to the ``Manses'' in
her own country, where a set of penurious heritors, professing
all the while the devotion of their lives and fortunes to the
Presbyterian establishment, strain their inventions to discover
what may be nipped, and clipped, and pared from a building
which forms but a poor accommodation even for the present incumbent,
and, despite the superior advantage of stone-masonry,
must, in the course of forty or fifty years, again burden their
descendants with an expense, which, once liberally and handsomely
employed, ought to have freed their estates from a recurrence
of it for more than a century at least.

  Behind the Rector's house the ground sloped down to a small
river, which, without possessing the romantic vivacity and
rapidity of a northern stream, was, nevertheless, by its occasional
appearance through the ranges of willows and poplars
that crowned its banks, a very pleasing accompaniment to the
landscape. ``It was the best trouting stream,'' said the beadle,
whom the patience of Jeanie, and especially the assurance that
she was not about to become a burden to the parish, had rendered
rather communicative, ``the best trouting stream in all
Lincolnshire; for when you got lower, there was nought to be
done wi' fly-fishing.''

  Turning aside from the principal entrance, he conducted
Jeanie towards a sort of portal connected with the older part
of the building, which was chiefly occupied by servants, and
knocking at the door, it was opened by a servant in grave
purple livery, such as befitted a wealthy and dignified clergyman.

  ``How dost do, Tummas?'' said the beadle---``and how's
young Measter Staunton?''

  ``Why, but poorly---but poorly, Measter Stubbs.---Are you
wanting to see his Reverence?''

  ``Ay, ay, Tummas; please to say I ha' brought up the young
woman as came to service to-day with mad Madge Murdockson
seems to be a decentish koind o' body; but I ha' asked
her never a question. Only I can tell his Reverence that she
is a Scotchwoman, I judge, and as flat as the fens of Holland.''

  Tummas honoured Jeanie Deans with such a stare, as the
pampered domestics of the rich, whether spiritual or temporal,
usually esteem it part of their privilege to bestow upon the
poor, and then desired Mr. Stubbs and his charge to step in till
he informed his master of their presence.

  The room into which he showed them was a sort of steward's
parlour, hung with a county map or two, and three or four
prints of eminent persons connected with the county, as Sir
William Monson, James York the blacksmith of Lincoln,<*> and

* [Author of the _Union of Honour,_ a treatise on English Heraldry.
* London, 1641.]

the famous Peregrine, Lord Willoughby, in complete armour,
looking as when he said in the words of the legend below the
engraving,---

	``Stand to it, noble pikemen,
	    And face ye well about;
	And shoot ye sharp, bold bowmen,
	    And we will keep them out.

	``Ye musquet and calliver-men,
	    Do you prove true to me,
	I'll be the foremost man in fight,
	    Said brave Lord Willoughbee.''

  When they had entered this apartment, Tummas as a matter
of course offered, and as a matter of course Mr. Stubbs accepted,
a ``summat'' to eat and drink, being the respectable relies of a
gammon of bacon, and a _whole whiskin,_ or black pot of sufficient
double ale. To these eatables Mr. Beadle seriously inclined
himself, and (for we must do him justice) not without
an invitation to Jeanie, in which Tummas joined, that his
prisoner or charge would follow his good example. But although
she might have stood in need of refreshment, considering she
had tasted no food that day, the anxiety of the moment, her
own sparing and abstemious habits, and a bashful aversion to
eat in company of the two strangers, induced her to decline
their courtesy. So she sate in a chair apart, while Mr. Stubbs
and Mr. Tummas, who had chosen to join his friend in consideration
that dinner was to be put back till after the afternoon
service, made a hearty luncheon, which lasted for half-an-hour,
and might not then have concluded, had not his Reverence
rung his bell, so that Tummas was obliged to attend his master.
Then, and no sooner, to save himself the labour of a second
journey to the other end of the house, he announced to his
master the arrival of Mr. Stubbs, with the other madwoman,
as he chose to designate Jeanie, as an event which had just
taken place. He returned with an order that Mr. Stubbs and
the young woman should be instantly ushered up to the library.
The beadle bolted in haste his last mouthful of fat bacon,
washed down the greasy morsel with the last rinsings of the
pot of ale, and immediately marshalled Jeanie through one or
two intricate passages which led from the ancient to the more
modern buildings, into a handsome little hall, or anteroom,
adjoining to the library, and out of which a glass door opened
to the lawn.

  ``Stay here,'' said Stubbs, ``till I tell his Reverence you are
come.''

  So saying, he opened a door and entered the library.
Without wishing to hear their conversation, Jeanie, as she
was circumstanced, could not avoid it; for as Stubbs stood by
the door, and his Reverence was at the upper end of a large
room, their conversation was necessarily audible in the anteroom.

  ``So you have brought the young woman here at last, Mr.
Stubbs. I expected you some time since. You know I do not
wish such persons to remain in custody a moment without some
inquiry into their situation.''

  ``Very true, your Reverence,'' replied the beadle; ``but the
young woman had eat nought to-day, and so Measter Tummas
did set down a drap of drink and a morsel, to be sure.''

  ``Thomas was very right, Mr. Stubbs; and what has, become
of the other most unfortunate being?''

  ``Why,'' replied Mr. Stubbs, ``I did think the sight on her
would but vex your Reverence, and soa I did let her go her
ways back to her mother, who is in trouble in the next parish.''

  ``In trouble!---that signifies in prison, I suppose?'' said Mr.
Staunton.

  ``Ay, truly; something like it, an it like your Reverence.''

  ``Wretched, unhappy, incorrigible woman!'' said the clergyman.
``And what sort of person is this companion of hers?''

  ``Why, decent enow, an it like your Reverence,'' said Stubbs;
``for aught I sees of her, there's no harm of her, and she says
she has cash enow to carry her out of the county.''

  ``Cash! that is always what you think of, Stubbs---But, has
she sense?---has she her wits?---has she the capacity of taking
care of herself?''

  ``Why, your Reverence,'' replied Stubbs, ``I cannot just say
---I will be sworn she was not born at Witt-ham;<*> for Gaffer

* A proverbial and punning expression in that county, to intimate that
* a person is not very clever.

Gibbs looked at her all the time of service, and he says, she
could not turn up a single lesson like a Christian, even though
she had Madge Murdockson to help her---but then, as to fending
for herself, why, she's a bit of a Scotchwoman, your Reverence,
and they say the worst donnot of them can look out for their
own turn---and she is decently put on enow, and not bechounched
like t'other.''

  ``Send her in here, then, and do you remain below, Mr.
Stubbs.''

  This colloquy had engaged Jeanie's attention so deeply, that
it was not until it was over that she observed that the sashed
door, which, we have said, led from the anteroom into the
garden, was opened, and that there entered, or rather was
borne in by two assistants, a young man, of a very pale and
sickly appearance, whom they lifted to the nearest couch, and
placed there, as if to recover from the fatigue of an unusual
exertion. Just as they were making this arrangement, Stubbs
came out of the library, and summoned Jeanie to enter it. She
obeyed him, not without tremor; for, besides the novelty of
the situation, to a girl of her secluded habits, she felt also as if
the successful prosecution of her journey was to depend upon
the impression she should be able to make on Mr. Staunton.

  It is true, it was difficult to suppose on what pretext a person
travelling on her own business, and at her own charge, could be
interrupted upon her route. But the violent detention she had
already undergone, was sufficient to show that there existed
persons at no great distance who had the interest, the inclination,
and the audacity, forcibly to stop her journey, and she felt
the necessity of having some countenance and protection, at
least till she should get beyond their reach. While these things
passed through her mind, much faster than our pen and ink
can record, or even the reader's eye collect the meaning of its
traces, Jeanie found herself in a handsome library, and in
presence of the Rector of Willingham. The well-furnished
presses and shelves which surrounded the large and handsome
apartment, contained more books than Jeanie imagined existed
in the world, being accustomed to consider as an extensive collection
two fir shelves, each about three feet long, which contained
her father's treasured volumes, the whole pith and marrow,
as he used sometimes to boast, of modern divinity. An orrery,
globes, a telescope, and some other scientific implements, conveyed
to Jeanie an impression of admiration and wonder, not
unmixed with fear; for, in her ignorant apprehension, they
seemed rather adapted for magical purposes than any other;
and a few stuffed animals (as the Rector was fond of natural
history) added to the impressive character of the apartment.

  Mr. Staunton spoke to her with great mildness. He observed,
that, although her appearance at church had been uncommon,
and in strange, and he must add, discreditable society, and
calculated, upon the whole, to disturb the congregation during
divine worship, he wished, nevertheless, to hear her own account
of herself before taking any steps which his duty might seem
to demand. He was a justice of peace, he informed her, as well
as a clergyman.

  ``His Honour'' (for she would not say his Reverence) ``was
very civil and kind,'' was all that poor Jeanie could at first
bring out.

  ``Who are you, young woman?'' said the clergyman, more
peremptorily---``and what do you do in this country, and in
such company?---We allow no strollers or vagrants here.''

  ``I am not a vagrant or a stroller, sir,'' said Jeanie, a little
roused by the supposition. ``I am a decent Scots lass, travelling
through the land on my own business and my own expenses
and I was so unhappy as to fall in with bad company, and was
stopped a' night on my journey. And this puir creature, who
is something light-headed, let me out in the morning.''

  ``Bad company!'' said the clergyman. ``I am afraid, young
woman, you have not been sufficiently anxious to avoid them.''

  ``Indeed, sir,'' returned Jeanie, ``I have been brought up to
shun evil communication. But these wicked people were thieves,
and stopped me by violence and mastery.''

  ``Thieves!'' said Mr. Staunton; ``then you charge them with
robbery, I suppose?''

  ``No, sir; they did not take so much as a boddle from me,''
answered Jeanie; ``nor did they use me ill, otherwise than by
confining me.''

  The clergyman inquired into the particulars of her adventure,
which she told him from point to point.

  ``This is an extraordinary, and not a very probable tale,
young woman,'' resumed Mr. Staunton. ``Here has been,
according to your account, a great violence committed without
any adequate motive. Are you aware of the law of this country
---that if you lodge this charge, you will be bound over to prosecute
this gang?''

  Jeanie did not understand him, and he explained, that the
English law, in addition to the inconvenience sustained by
persons who have been robbed or injured, has the goodness to
intrust to them the care and the expense of appearing as prosecutors.

  Jeanie said, ``that her business at London was express; all
she wanted was, that any gentleman would, out of Christian
charity, protect her to some town where she could hire horses
and a guide; and finally,'' she thought, ``it would be her father's
mind that she was not free to give testimony in an English
court of justice, as the land was not under a direct gospel dispensation.''

  Mr. Staunton stared a little, and asked if her father was a
Quaker.

  ``God forbid, sir,'' said Jeanie---``He is nae schismatic nor
sectary, nor ever treated for sic black commodities as theirs,
and that's weel kend o' him.''

  ``And what is his name, pray?'' said Mr. Staunton.

  ``David Deans, sir, the cowfeeder at Saint Leonard's Crags,
near Edinburgh.''

  A deep groan from the anteroom prevented the Rector from
replying, and, exclaiming, ``Good God! that unhappy boy!''
he left Jeanie alone, and hastened into the outer apartment.

  Some noise and bustle was heard, but no one entered the
library for the best part of an hour.
