




		CHAPTER FORTY-THIRD.

	``I come,'' he said, ``my love, my life,
	And---nature's dearest name---my wife:
	Thy father's house and friends resign,
	My home, my friends, my sire, are thine.''
						Logan.

  The meeting of Jeanie and Butler, under circumstances promising
to crown an affection so long delayed, was rather affecting,
from its simple sincerity than from its uncommon vehemence
of feeling. David Deans, whose practice was sometimes a little
different from his theory, appalled them at first, by giving them
the opinion of sundry of the suffering preachers and champions
of his younger days, that marriage, though honourable by the
laws of Scripture, was yet a state over-rashly coveted by professors,
and specially by young ministers, whose desire, he said,
was at whiles too inordinate for kirks, stipends, and wives,
which had frequently occasioned over-ready compliance with
the general defections of the times. He endeavoured to make
them aware also, that hasty wedlock had been the bane of many
a savoury professor---that the unbelieving wife had too often
reversed the text and perverted the believing husband---that
when the famous Donald Cargill, being then hiding in Lee-Wood,
in Lanarkshire, it being killing-time, did, upon importunity,
marry Robert Marshal of Starry Shaw, he had thus expressed
himself: ``What hath induced Robert to marry this
woman? her ill will overcome his good---he will not keep the
way long---his thriving days are done.'' To the sad accomplishment
of which prophecy David said he was himself a living
witness, for Robert Marshal, having fallen into foul compliances
with the enemy, went home, and heard the curates, declined
into other steps of defection, and became lightly esteemed.
Indeed, he observed, that the great upholders of the standard,
Cargill, Peden, Cameron, and Renwick, had less delight in tying
the bonds of matrimony than in any other piece of their ministerial
work; and although they would neither dissuade the
parties, nor refuse their office, they considered the being called
to it as an evidence of indifference, on the part of those between
whom it was solemnised, to the many grievous things of the
day. Notwithstanding, however, that marriage was a snare
unto many, David was of opinion (as, indeed, he had showed in
his practice) that it was in itself honourable, especially if times
were such that honest men could be secure against being shot,
hanged, or banished, and had ane competent livelihood to maintain
themselves, and those that might come after them. ``And,
therefore,'' as he concluded something abruptly, addressing
Jeanie and Butler, who, with faces as high-coloured as crimson,
had been listening to his lengthened argument for and against
the holy state of matrimony, ``I will leave you to your ain
cracks.''

  As their private conversation, however interesting to themselves,
might probably be very little so to the reader, so far as it
respected their present feelings and future prospects, we shall
pass it over, and only mention the information which Jeanie
received from Butler concerning her sister's elopement, which
contained many particulars that she had been unable to extract
from her father.

  Jeanie learned, therefore, that, for three days after her pardon
had arrived, Effie had been the inmate of her father's house at
St. Leonard's---that the interviews betwixt David and his erring
child, which had taken place before she was liberated from
prison, had been touching in the extreme; but Butler could not
suppress his opinion, that, when he was freed from the apprehension
of losing her in a manner so horrible, her father had
tightened the bands of discipline, so as, in some degree, to gall
the feelings, and aggravate the irritability of a spirit naturally
impatient and petulant, and now doubly so from the sense of
merited disgrace.

  On the third night, Effie disappeared from St. Leonard's,
leaving no intimation whatever of the route she had taken.
Butler, however, set out in pursuit of her, and with much
trouble traced her towards a little landing-place, formed by a
small brook which enters the sea betwixt Musselburgh and
Edinburgh. This place, which has been since made into a small
harbour, surrounded by many villas and lodging-houses, is now
termed Portobello. At this time it was surrounded by a waste
common, covered with furze, and unfrequented, save by fishing-boats,
and now and then a smuggling lugger. A vessel of this
description had been hovering in the firth at the time of Effie's
elopement, and, as Butler ascertained, a boat had come ashore
in the evening on which the fugitive had disappeared, and had
carried on board a female. As the vessel made sail immediately,
and landed no part of their cargo, there seemed little doubt that
they were accomplices of the notorious Robertson, and that
the vessel had only come into the firth to carry off his paramour.

  This was made clear by a letter which Butler himself soon
afterwards received by post, signed E. D., but without bearing
any date of place or time. It was miserably ill written and
spelt; sea-sickness having apparently aided the derangement of
Effie's very irregular orthography and mode of expression. In
this epistle, however, as in all that unfortunate girl said or did,
there was something to praise as well as to blame. She said in
her letter, ``That she could not endure that her father and her
sister should go into banishment, or be partakers of her shame,
---that if her burden was a heavy one, it was of her own binding,
and she had the more right to bear it alone,---that in
future they could not be a comfort to her, or she to them, since
every look and word of her father put her in mind of her transgression,
and was like to drive her mad,---that she had nearly
lost her judgment during the three days she was at St. Leonard's
---her father meant weel by her, and all men, but he did not
know the dreadful pain he gave her in casting up her sins. If
Jeanie had been at hame, it might hae dune better---Jeanie was
ane, like the angels in heaven, that rather weep for sinners, than
reckon their transgressions. But she should never see Jeanie
ony mair, and that was the thought that gave her the sairest
heart of a' that had come and gane yet. On her bended knees
would she pray for Jeanie night and day, baith for what she
had done, and what she had scorned to do, in her behalf; for
what a thought would it have been to her at that moment o'
time, if that upright creature had made a fault to save her!
She desired her father would give Jeanie a' the gear---her ain
(_i.e._ Effie's) mother's and a'---She had made a deed, giving up
her right, and it was in Mr. Novit's hand---Warld's gear was
henceforward the least of her care, nor was it likely to be muckle
her mister---She hoped this would make it easy for her sister to
settle;'' and immediately after this expression, she wished Butler
himself all good things, in return for his kindness to her.
``For herself,'' she said, ``she kend her lot would be a waesome
ane, but it was of her own framing, sae she desired the less pity.
But, for her friends' satisfaction, she wished them to know that
she was gaun nae ill gate---that they who had done her maist
wrong were now willing to do her what justice was in their
power; and she would, in some warldly respects, be far better
off than she deserved. But she desired her family to remain
satisfied with this assurance, and give themselves no trouble in
making farther inquiries after her.''

  To David Deans and to Butler this letter gave very little
comfort; for what was to be expected from this unfortunate
girl's uniting her fate to that of a character so notorious as
Robertson, who they readily guessed was alluded to in the last
sentence, excepting that she should become the partner and
victim of his future crimes? Jeanie, who knew George Staunton's
character and real rank, saw her sister's situation under a
ray of better hope. She augured well of the haste he had
shown to reclaim his interest in Effie, and she trusted he had
made her his wife. If so, it seemed improbable that, with his
expected fortune, and high connections, he should again resume
the life of criminal adventure which he had led, especially since,
as matters stood, his life depended upon his keeping his own
secret, which could only be done by an entire change of his
habits, and particularly by avoiding all those who had known
the heir of Willingham under the character of the audacious,
criminal, and condemned Robertson.

  She thought it most likely that the couple would go abroad
for a few years, and not return to England until the affair of
Porteous was totally forgotten. Jeanie, therefore, saw more
hopes for her sister than Butler or her father had been able to
perceive; but she was not at liberty to impart the comfort which
she felt in believing that she would be secure from the pressure
of poverty, and in little risk of being seduced into the paths of
guilt. She could not have explained this without making
public what it was essentially necessary for Effie's chance of
comfort to conceal, the identity, namely, of George Staunton
and George Robertson. After all, it was dreadful to think that
Effie had united herself to a man condemned for felony, and
liable to trial for murder, whatever might be his rank in life,
and the degree of his repentance. Besides, it was melancholy
to reflect, that, she herself being in possession of the whole
dreadful secret, it was most probable he would, out of regard
to his own feelings, and fear for his safety, never again permit
her to see poor Effie. After perusing and re-perusing her sister's
valedictory letter, she gave ease to her feelings in a flood of
tears, which Butler in vain endeavoured to check by every
soothing attention in his power. She was obliged, however, at
length to look up and wipe her eyes, for her father, thinking he
had allowed the lovers time enough for conference, was now
advancing towards them from the Lodge, accompanied by the
Captain of Knockdunder, or, as his friends called him for
brevity's sake, Duncan Knock, a title which some youthful exploits
had rendered peculiarly appropriate.

  This Duncan of Knockdunder was a person of first-rate importance
in the island of Roseneath,<*> and the continental

* [This is, more correctly speaking, a peninsula.]

parishes of Knocktarlitie, Kilmun, and so forth; nay, his
influence extended as far as Cowal, where, however, it was
obscured by that of another factor. The Tower of Knockdunder
still occupies, with its remains, a cliff overhanging the
Holy Loch. Duncan swore it had been a royal castle; if so, it
was one of the smallest, the space within only forming a square
of sixteen feet, and bearing therefore a ridiculous proportion to
the thickness of the walls, which was ten feet at least. Such
as it was, however, it had long given the title of Captain,
equivalent to that of Chatellain, to the ancestors of Duncan,
who were retainers of the house of Argyle, and held a hereditary
jurisdiction under them, of little extent indeed, but which had
great consequence in their own eyes, and was usually administered
with a vigour somewhat beyond the law.

  The present representative of that ancient family was a stout
short man about fifty, whose pleasure it was to unite in his
own person the dress of the Highlands and Lowlands, wearing
on his head a black tie-wig, surmounted by a fierce cocked-hat,
deeply guarded with gold lace, while the rest of his dress consisted
of the plaid and philabeg. Duncan superintended a
district which was partly Highland, partly Lowland, and therefore
might be supposed to combine their national habits, in
order to show his impartiality to Trojan or Tyrian. The incongruity,
however, had a whimsical and ludicrous effect, as it
made his head and body look as if belonging to different individuals;
or, as some one said who had seen the executions of
the insurgent prisoners in 1715, it seemed as if some Jacobite
enchanter, having recalled the sufferers to life, had clapped, in
his haste, an Englishman's head on a Highlander's body. To
finish the portrait, the bearing of the gracious Duncan was
brief, bluff, and consequential, and the upward turn of his short
copper-coloured nose indicated that he was somewhat addicted
to wrath and usquebaugh.

  When this dignitary had advanced up to Butler and to Jeanie,
``I take the freedom, Mr. Deans,'' he said in a very consequential
manner, ``to salute your daughter, whilk I presume this young
lass to be---I kiss every pretty girl that comes to Roseneath, in
virtue of my office.'' Having made this gallant speech, he took
out his quid, saluted Jeanie with a hearty smack, and bade her
welcome to Argyle's country. Then addressing Butler, he said,
``Ye maun gang ower and meet the carle ministers yonder the
Morn, for they will want to do your job, and synd it down with
usquebaugh doubtless---they seldom make dry wark in this
kintra.''

  ``And the Laird''---said David Deans, addressing Butler in
farther explanation

  ``The Captain, man,'' interrupted Duncan; ``folk winna ken
wha ye are speaking aboot, unless ye gie shentlemens their
proper title.''

  ``The Captain, then,'' said David, ``assures me that the call
is unanimous on the part of the parishioners---a real harmonious
call, Reuben.''

 ``I pelieve,'' said Duncan, ``it was as harmonious as could
pe expected, when the tae half o' the bodies were clavering
Sassenach, and the t'other skirting Gaelic, like sea-maws and
clackgeese before a storm. Ane wad hae needed the gift of
tongues to ken preceesely what they said---but I pelieve the
best end of it was, `Long live MacCallummore and Knockdunder!'
---And as to its being an unanimous call, I wad be glad
to ken fat business the carles have to call ony thing or ony body
but what the Duke and mysell likes!''

  ``Nevertheless,'' said Mr. Butler, ``if any of the parishioners
have any scruples, which sometimes happen in the mind of
sincere professors, I should be happy of an opportunity of trying
to remove''------

  ``Never fash your peard about it, man,'' interrupted Duncan
Knock---``Leave it a' to me.---Scruple! deil ane o' them has
been bred up to scruple onything that they're bidden to do.
And if sic a thing suld happen as ye speak o', ye sall see the
sincere professor, as ye ca' him, towed at the stern of my boat
for a few furlongs. I'll try if the water of the Haly Loch winna
wash off scruples as weel as fleas---Cot tam!''

  The rest of Duncan's threat was lost in a growling gargling
sort of sound, which he made in his throat, and which menaced
recusants with no gentle means of conversion. David Deans
would certainly have given battle in defence of the right of the
Christian congregation to be consulted in the choice of their own
pastor, which, in his estimation, was one of the choicest and most
inalienable of their privileges; but he had again engaged in close
conversation with Jeanie, and, with more interest than he was
in use to take in affairs foreign alike to his occupation and to
his religious tenets, was inquiring into the particulars of her
London journey. This was, perhaps, fortunate for the newformed
friendship betwixt him and the Captain of Knockdunder,
which rested, in David's estimation, upon the proofs he had
given of his skill in managing stock; but, in reality, upon the
special charge transmitted to Duncan from the Duke and his
agent, to behave with the utmost attention to Deans and his
family.

  ``And now, sirs,'' said Duncan, in a commanding tone, ``I
am to pray ye a' to come in to your supper, for yonder is Mr.
Archibald half famished, and a Saxon woman, that looks as if
her een were fleeing out o' her head wi' fear and wonder, as if
she had never seen a shentleman in a philabeg pefore.''

  ``And Reuben Butler,'' said David, ``will doubtless desire
instantly to retire, that he may prepare his mind for the exercise
of to-morrow, that his work may suit the day, and be an offering
of a sweet savour in the nostrils of the reverend Presbytery!''

  ``Hout tout, man, it's but little ye ken about them,'' interrupted
the Captain. ``Teil a ane o' them wad gie the savour
of the hot venison pasty which I smell'' (turning his squab nose
up in the air) ``a' the way frae the Lodge, for a' that Mr. Putler,
or you either, can say to them.''

  David groaned; but judging he had to do with a Gallio, as
he said, did not think it worth his while to give battle. They
followed the Captain to the house, and arranged themselves
with great ceremony round a well-loaded supper-table. The
only other circumstance of the evening worthy to be recorded
is, that Butler pronounced the blessing; that Knockdunder
found it too long, and David Deans censured it as too short,
from which the charitable reader may conclude it was exactly
the proper length.
