




		CHAPTER FORTY-EIGHTH.

	Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown,
	And put a barren sceptre in my gripe,
	Thence to be wrench'd by an unlineal hand,
	No son of mine succeeding.
					Macbeth.

  After this period, but under the most strict precautions against
discovery, the sisters corresponded occasionally, exchanging
letters about twice every year. Those of Lady Staunton spoke
of her husband's health and spirits as being deplorably uncertain;
her own seemed also to be sinking, and one of the topics on
which she most frequently dwelt was their want of family. Sir
George Staunton, always violent, had taken some aversion at the
next heir, whom he suspected of having irritated his friends
against him during his absence; and he declared, be would
bequeath Willingham and all its lands to an hospital, ere that
fetch-and-carry tell-tale should inherit an acre of it.

  ``Had he but a child,'' said the unfortunate wife, ``or had
that luckless infant survived, it would be some motive for living
and for exertion. But Heaven has denied us a blessing which
we have not deserved.''

  Such complaints, in varied form, but turning frequently on
the same topic, filled the letters which passed from the spacious
but melancholy halls of Willingham, to the quiet and happy
parsonage at Knocktarlitie. Years meanwhile rolled on amid
these fruitless repinings. John, Duke of Argyle and Greenwich,
died in the year 1743, universally lamented, but by none more
than by the Butlers, to whom his benevolence had been so
distinguished. He was succeeded by his brother Duke Archibald,
with whom they had not the same intimacy; but who continued
the protection which his brother had extended towards them.
This, indeed, became more necessary than ever; for, after the
breaking out and suppression of the rebellion in 1745, the peace
of the country, adjacent to the Highlands, was considerably
disturbed. Marauders, or men that had been driven to that
desperate mode of life, quartered themselves in the fastnesses
nearest to the Lowlands, which were their scene of plunder;
and there is scarce a glen in the romantic and now peaceable
Highlands of Perth, Stirling, and Dumbartonshire, where one
or more did not take up their residence.

  The prime pest of the parish of Knocktarlitie was a certain
Donacha dhu na Dunaigh, or Black Duncan the Mischievous,
whom we have already casually mentioned. This fellow had
been originally a tinkler, or _caird,_ many of whom stroll about
these districts; but when all police was disorganised by the
civil war, he threw up his profession, and from half thief became
whole robber; and being generally at the head of three or four
active young fellows, and he himself artful, bold, and well
acquainted with the passes, he plied his new profession with
emolument to himself, and infinite plague to the country.

  All were convinced that Duncan of Knock could have put
down his namesake Donacha any morning he had a mind; for
there were in the parish a set of stout young men, who had
joined Argyle's banner in the war under his old friend, and
behaved very well on several occasions. And as for their
leader, as no one doubted his courage, it was generally supposed
that Donacha had found out the mode of conciliating his
favour, a thing not very uncommon in that age and country.
This was the more readily believed, as David Deans's cattle
(being the property of the Duke) were left untouched, when
the minister's cows were carried off by the thieves. Another
attempt was made to renew the same act of rapine, and the
cattle were in the act of being driven off, when Butler, laying
his profession aside in a case of such necessity, put himself at
the head of some of his neighbours, and rescued the creagh,
an exploit at which Deans attended in person, notwithstanding
his extreme old age, mounted on a Highland pony, and girded
with an old broadsword, likening himself (for he failed not to
arrogate the whole merit of the expedition) to David, the son
of Jesse, when he recovered the spoil of Ziklag from the
Amalekites. This spirited behaviour had so far a good effect,
that Donacha dhu na Dunaigh kept his distance for some time
to come; and, though his distant exploits were frequently
spoken of, he did not exercise any depredations in that part of
the country. He continued to flourish, and to be heard of
occasionally, until the year 1751, when, if the fear of the second
David had kept him in check, fate released him from that
restraint, for the venerable patriarch of St. Leonard's was that
year gathered to his fathers.

  David Deans died full of years and of honour. He is believed,
for the exact time of his birth is not known, to have lived upwards
of ninety years; for he used to speak of events as falling
under his own knowledge, which happened about the time of
the battle of Bothwell Bridge. It was said that he even bore
arms there; for once, when a drunken Jacobite laird wished for
a Bothwell Brigg whig, that ``he might stow the lugs out of
his head,'' David informed him with a peculiar austerity of
countenance, that, if he liked to try such a prank, there was
one at his elbow; and it required the interference of Butler to
preserve the peace.

  He expired in the arms of his beloved daughter, thankful for
all the blessings which Providence had vouchsafed to him while
in this valley of strife and toil---and thankful also for the trials
he had been visited with; having found them, he said, needful
to mortify that spiritual pride and confidence in his own gifts,
which was the side on which the wily Enemy did most sorely
beset him. He prayed in the most affecting manner for Jeanie,
her husband, and her family, and that her affectionate duty to
the puir auld man might purchase her length of days here, and
happiness hereafter; then, in a pathetic petition, too well understood
by those who knew his family circumstances, he besought
the Shepherd of souls, while gathering his flock, not to forget
the little one that had strayed from the fold, and even then
might be in the hands of the ravening wolf.---He prayed for
the national Jerusalem, that peace might be in her land, and
prosperity in her palaces---for the welfare of the honourable
House of Argyle, and for the conversion of Duncan of Knockdunder.
After this he was silent, being exhausted, nor did he
again utter anything distinctly. He was heard, indeed, to
mutter something about national defections, right-hand extremes,
and left-hand failings off; but, as May Hettly observed,
his head was carried at the time; and it is probable that these
expressions occurred to him merely out of general habit, and
that he died in the full spirit of charity with all men. About
an hour afterwards he slept in the Lord.

  Notwithstanding her father's advanced age, his death was a
severe shock to Mrs. Butler. Much of her time had been
dedicated to attending to his health and his wishes, and she
felt as if part of her business in the world was ended, when the
good old man was no more. His wealth, which came nearly to
fifteen hundred pounds, in disposable capital, served to raise the
fortunes of the family at the Manse. How to dispose of this
sum for the best advantage of his family, was matter of anxious
consideration to Butler. ``If we put it on heritable bond, we
shall maybe lose the interest; for there's that bond over Lounsbeck's
land, your father could neither get principal nor interest
for it---If we bring it into the funds, we shall maybe lose the
principal and all, as many did in the South Sea scheme. The
little estate of Craigsture is in the market---it lies within two
miles of the Manse, and Knock says his Grace has no thought
to buy it. But they ask œ2500, and they may, for it is worth
the money; and were I to borrow the balance, the creditor
might call it up suddenly, or in case of my death my family
might be distressed.''

  ``And so if we had mair siller, we might buy that bonny
pasture-ground, where the grass comes so early?'' asked Jeanie.

  ``Certainly, my dear; and Knockdunder, who is a good judge,
is strongly advising me to it. To be sure it is his nephew that
is selling it.''

  ``Aweel, Reuben,'' said Jeanie, ``ye maun just look up a text
in Scripture, as ye did when ye wanted siller before---just look
up a text in the Bible.''

  ``Ah, Jeanie,'' said Butler, laughing and pressing her hand at
the same time, ``the best people in these times can only work
miracles once.''

  ``We will see,'' said Jeanie composedly; and going to the
closet in which she kept her honey, her sugar, her pots of jelly,
her vials of the more ordinary medicines, and which served
her, in short, as a sort of store-room, she jangled vials and
gallipots, till, from out the darkest nook, well flanked by a
triple row of bottles and jars, which she was under the necessity
of displacing, she brought a cracked brown cann, with a
piece of leather tied over the top. Its contents seemed to be
written papers, thrust in disorder into this uncommon _secr<e'>taire._
But from among these Jeanie brought an old clasped
Bible, which had been David Deans's companion in his earlier
wanderings, and which he had given to his daughter when the
failure of his eyes had compelled him to use one of a larger
print. This she gave to Butler, who had been looking at her
motions with some surprise, and desired him to see what that
book could do for him. He opened the clasps, and to his astonishment
a parcel of <L>50 bank-notes dropped out from betwixt
the leaves, where they had been separately lodged, and fluttered
upon the floor. ``I didna think to hae tauld you o' my wealth,
Reuben,'' said his wife, smiling at his surprise, ``till on my
deathbed, or maybe on some family pinch; but it wad be better
laid out on yon bonny grass-holms, than lying useless here in
this auld pigg.''

  ``How on earth came ye by that siller, Jeanie?---Why, here
is more than a thousand pounds,'' said Butler, lifting up and
counting the notes.

  ``If it were ten thousand, it's a' honestly come by,'' said
Jeanie; ``and troth I kenna how muckle there is o't, but it's a'
there that ever I got.---And as for how I came by it, Reuben---
it's weel come by, and honestly, as I said before---And it's mair
folk's secret than mine, or ye wad hae kend about it lang syne;
and as for onything else, I am not free to answer mair questions
about it, and ye maun just ask me nane.''

  ``Answer me but one,'' said Butler. ``Is it all freely and
indisputably your own property, to dispose of it as you think
fit?---Is it possible no one has a claim in so large a sum except
you?''

  ``It _was_ mine, free to dispose of it as I like,'' answered
Jeanie; ``and I have disposed of it already, for now it is yours,
Reuben---You are Bible Butler now, as well as your forbear,
that my puir father had sic an ill will at. Only, if ye like, I wad
wish Femie to get a gude share o't when we are gane.''

  ``Certainly, it shall be as you choose---But who on earth ever
pitched on such a hiding-place for temporal treasures?''

  ``That is just ane o' my auld-fashioned gates, as you ca' them,
Reuben. I thought if Donacha Dhu was to make an outbreak
upon us, the Bible was the last thing in the house he wad
meddle wi'---but an ony mair siller should drap in, as it is not
unlikely, I shall e'en pay it ower to you, and ye may lay it out
your ain way.''

  ``And I positively must not ask you how you have come by
all this money?'' said the clergyman.

  ``Indeed, Reuben, you must not; for if you were asking me
very sair I wad maybe tell you, and then I am sure I would do
wrong.''

  ``But tell me,'' said Butler, ``is it anything that distresses
your own mind?''

  ``There is baith weal and woe come aye wi' world's gear,
Reuben; but ye maun ask me naething mair---This siller binds
me to naething, and can never be speered back again.''

  ``Surely,'' said Mr. Butler, when he had again counted over
the money, as if to assure himself that the notes were real, ``there
was never man in the world had a wife like mine---a blessing
seems to follow her.''

  ``Never,'' said Jeanie, ``since the enchanted princess in the
bairn's fairy tale, that kamed gold nobles out o' the tae side of
her haffit locks, and Dutch dollars out o' the tother. But gang
away now, minister, and put by the siller, and dinna keep the
notes wampishing in your hand that gate, or I shall wish them
in the brown pigg again, for fear we get a black cast about
them---we're ower near the hills in these times to be thought to
hae siller in the house. And, besides, ye maun gree wi' Knockdunder,
that has the selling o' the lands; and dinna you be
simple and let him ken o' this windfa', but keep him to the very
lowest penny, as if ye had to borrow siller to make the price up.''

  In the last admonition, Jeanie showed distinctly, that,
although she did not understand how to secure the money
which came into her hands otherwise than by saving and hoarding
it, yet she had some part of her father David's shrewdness,
even upon worldly subjects. And Reuben Butler was a prudent
man, and went and did even as his wife had advised him.
The news quickly went abroad into the parish that the
minister had bought Craigsture; and some wished him joy, and
some ``were sorry it had gane out of the auld name.'' However,
his clerical brethren, understanding that he was under the
necessity of going to Edinburgh about the ensuing Whitsunday,
to get together David Deans's cash to make up the purchase-money
of his new acquisition, took the opportunity to name him
their delegate to the General Assembly, or Convocation of the
Scottish Church, which takes place usually in the latter end of
the month of May.
