




	INTRODUCTION

	TO THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN---(1830).




  The author has stated, in the preface to the Chronicles of the
Canongate, 1827, that he received from an anonymous correspondent
an account of the incident upon which the following story is founded.
He is now at liberty to say, that the information was conveyed to
him by a late amiable and ingenious lady, whose wit and power of
remarking and judging of character still survive in the memory of
her friends. Her maiden name was Miss Helen Lawson, of Girthhead,
and she was wife of Thomas Goldie, Esq. of Craigmuie, Commissary
of Dumfries.

  Her communication was in these words:---

  ``I had taken for summer lodgings a cottage near the old Abbey
of Lincluden. It had formerly been inhabited by a lady who had
pleasure in embellishing cottages, which she found perhaps homely
and even poor enough; mine, therefore, possessed many marks of
taste and elegance unusual in this species of habitation in Scotland,
where a cottage is literally what its name declares.

  ``From my cottage door I had a partial view of the old Abbey
before mentioned; some of the highest arches were seen over, and some
through, the trees scattered along a lane which led down to the ruin,
and the strange fantastic shapes of almost all those old ashes accorded
wonderfully well with the building they at once shaded and ornamented.

  ``The Abbey itself from my door was almost on a level with the
cottage; but on coming to the end of the lane, it was discovered to be
situated on a high perpendicular bank, at the foot of which run the
clear waters of the Cluden, where they hasten to join the sweeping
Nith,

	`Whose distant roaring swells and fa's.'

As my kitchen and parlour were not very far distant, I one day went
in to purchase some chickens from a person I heard offering them for
sale. It was a little, rather stout-looking woman, who seemed to be
between seventy and eighty years of age; she was almost covered with
a tartan plaid, and her cap had over it a black silk hood, tied under
the chin, a piece of dress still much in use among elderly women of
that rank of life in Scotland; her eyes were dark, and remarkably
lively and intelligent; I entered into conversation with her, and began
by asking how she maintained herself, etc.

  ``She said that in winter she footed stockings, that is, knit feet to
country-people's stockings, which bears about the same relation to
stocking-knitting that cobbling does to shoe-making, and is of course
both less profitable and less dignified; she likewise taught a few
children to read, and in summer she whiles reared a few chickens.

  ``I said I could venture to guess from her face she had never been
married. She laughed heartily at this, and said, `I maun hae the
queerest face that ever was seen, that ye could guess that. Now, do
tell me, madam, how ye cam to think sae?' I told her it was from
her cheerful disengaged countenance. She said, `Mem, have ye na
far mair reason to be happy than me, wi' a gude husband and a fine
family o' bairns, and plenty o' everything? for me, I'm the puirest
o' a' puir bodies, and can hardly contrive to keep mysell alive in a'
the wee bits o' ways I hae tell't ye.' After some more conversation,
during which I was more and more pleased with the old womans
sensible conversation, and the _na<i:>vet<e'>_ of her remarks, she rose to go
away, when I asked her name. Her countenance suddenly clouded,
and she said gravely, rather colouring, `My name is Helen Walker;
but your husband kens weel about me.'

  ``In the evening I related how much I had been pleased, and inquired
what was extraordinary in the history of the poor woman.
Mr. ------ said, there were perhaps few more remarkable people than
Helen Walker. She had been left an orphan, with the charge of a
sister considerably younger than herself, and who was educated and
maintained by her exertions. Attached to herby so many ties, therefore,
it will not be easy to conceive her feelings, when she found that
this only sister must be tried by the laws of her country for child-murder,
and upon being called as principal witness against her.
The counsel for the prisoner told Helen, that if she could declare that
her sister had made any preparations, however slight, or had given
her any intimation on the subject, that such a statement would save
her sister's life, as she was the principal witness against her. Helen
said, `It is impossible for me to swear to a falsehood; and, whatever
may be the consequence, I will give my oath according to my conscience.'

  ``The trial came on, and the sister was found guilty and condemned;
but in Scotland six weeks must elapse between the sentence
and the execution, and Helen Walker availed herself of it. The
very day of her sister's condemnation she got a petition drawn, stating
the peculiar circumstances of the case, and that very night set out on
foot to London.

  ``Without introduction or recommendation, with her simple (perhaps
ill-expressed) petition, drawn up by some inferior clerk of the
court, she presented herself, in her tartan plaid and country attire,
to the late Duke of Argyle, who immediately procured the pardon she
petitioned for, and Helen returned with it on foot just in time to
save her sister.

  ``I was so strongly interested by this narrative, that I determined
immediately to prosecute my acquaintance with Helen Walker; but
as I was to leave the country next day, I was obliged to defer it till
my return in spring, when the first walk I took was to Helen
Walker's cottage.

  ``She had died a short time before. My regret was extreme, and
I endeavoured to obtain some account of Helen from an old woman
who inhabited the other end of her cottage. I inquired if Helen ever
spoke of her past history---her journey to London, etc., `Na,' the old
woman said, `Helen was a wily body, and whene'er ony o' the neebors
asked anything about it, she aye turned the conversation.'

  ``In short, every answer I received only tended to increase my regret,
and raise my opinion of Helen Walker, who could unite so
much prudence with so much heroic virtue.''

  This narrative was inclosed in the following letter to the author,
without date or signature ---

  ``Sir,---The occurrence just related happened to me twenty-six
years ago. Helen Walker lies buried in the churchyard of Irongray,
about six miles from Dumfries. I once proposed that a small monument
should have been erected to commemorate so remarkable a character,
but I now prefer leaving it to you to perpetuate her memory
in a more durable manner.''

  The reader is now able to judge how far the author has improved
upon, or fallen short of, the pleasing and interesting sketch of high
principle and steady affection displayed by Helen Walker, the prototype
of the fictitious Jeanie Deans. Mrs. Goldie was unfortunately
dead before the author had given his name to these volumes, so he lost
all opportunity of thanking that lady for her highly valuable communication.
But her daughter, Miss Goldie, obliged him with the
following additional information:---

  ``Mrs. Goldie endeavoured to collect further particulars of Helen
Walker, particularly concerning her journey to London, but found
this nearly impossible; as the natural dignity of her character, and
a high sense of family respectability, made her so indissolubly connect
her sister's disgrace with her own exertions, that none of her neighbours
durst ever question her upon the subject. One old woman, a
distant relation of Helen's, and who is still living, says she worked
an harvest with her, but that she never ventured to ask her about her
sister's trial, or her journey to London; `Helen,' she added, `was a
lofty body, and used a high style o' language.' The same old woman
says, that every year Helen received a cheese from her sister, who lived
at Whitehaven, and that she always sent a liberal portion of it to
herself, or to her father's family. This fact, though trivial in itself,
strongly marks the affection subsisting between the two sisters, and
the complete conviction on the mind of the criminal that her sister
had acted solely from high principle, not from any want of feeling,
which another small but characteristic trait will further illustrate.
A gentleman, a relation of Mrs. Goldie's, who happened to be travelling
in the North of England, on coming to a small inn, was shown
into the parlour by a female servant, who, after cautiously shutting
the door, said, `Sir, I'm Nelly Walker's sister.' Thus practically
showing that she considered her sister as better known by her high
conduct than even herself by a different kind of celebrity.

  ``Mrs. Goldie was extremely anxious to have a tombstone and an
inscription upon it erected in Irongray Churchyard; and if Sir
Walter Scott will condescend to write the last, a little subscription
could be easily raised in the immediate neighbourhood, and Mrs.
Goldie's wish be thus fulfilled.''

  It is scarcely necessary to add that the request of Miss Goldie will
be most willingly complied with, and without the necessity of any tax
on the public.<*> Nor is there much occasion to repeat how much the

* [Note B. Tombstone to Helen Walker.]

author conceives himself obliged to his unknown correspondent, who
thus supplied him with a theme affording such a pleasing view of the
moral dignity of virtue, though unaided by birth, beauty, or talent.
If the picture has suffered in the execution, it is from the failure of
the author's powers to present in detail the same simple and striking
portrait exhibited in Mrs. Goldie's letter.

	Abbotsford, April 1, 1830.
