




	POSTSCRIPT.



  Although it would be impossible to add much to Mrs. Goldie's
picturesque and most interesting account of Helen Walker, the prototype
of the imaginary Jeanie Deans, the Editor may be pardoned for
introducing two or three anecdotes respecting that excellent person,
which he has collected from a volume entitled, _Sketches from Nature,_
by John M`Diarmid, a gentleman who conducts an able provincial
paper in the town of Dumfries.

  Helen was the daughter of a small farmer in a place called Dalwhairn,
in the parish of Irongray; where, after the death of her
father, she continued, with the unassuming piety of a Scottish peasant,
to support her mother by her own unremitted labour and privations;
a case so common, that even yet, I am proud to say, few of
my countrywomen would shrink from the duty.

  Helen Walker was held among her equals _pensy,_ that is, proud or
conceited; but the facts brought to prove this accusation seem only to
evince a strength of character superior to those around her. Thus it
was remarked, that when it thundered, she went with her work and
her Bible to the front of the cottage, alleging that the Almighty could
smite in the city as well as in the field.

  Mr. M`Diarmid mentions more particularly the misfortune of her
sister, which he supposes to have taken place previous to 1736.
Helen Walker, declining every proposal of saving her relation's life
at the expense of truth, borrowed a sum of money sufficient for her
journey, walked the whole distance to London barefoot, and made
her way to John Duke of Argyle. She was heard to say, that, by
the Almighty strength, she had been enabled to meet the Duke at the
most critical moment, which, if lost, would have caused the inevitable
forfeiture of her sister's life.

  Isabella, or Tibby Walker, saved from the fate which impended
over her, was married by the person who had wronged her (named
Waugh), and lived happily for great part of a century, uniformly
acknowledging the extraordinary affection to which she owed her
preservation.

  Helen Walker died about the end of the year 1791, and her remains
are interred in the churchyard of her native parish of Irongray,
in a romantic cemetery on the banks of the Cairn. That a
character so distinguished for her undaunted love of virtue, lived and
died in poverty, if not want, serves only to show us how insignificant,
in the sight of Heaven, are our principal objects of ambition
upon earth.
