




		PRELIMINARY CHAPTER.<*>



* [Note---This Preliminary Chapter originally formed the first of the Novel, but
* has now been printed in italics on account of its introductory character.]


	So down thy hill, romantic Ashbourn, glides
	The Derby dilly, carrying six insides.
					Frere.


  The times have changed in nothing more (we follow as we were
wont the manuscript of Peter Pattieson) than in the rapid conveyance
of intelligence and communication betwixt one part of Scotland
and another. It is not above twenty or thirty years, according to
the evidence of many credible witnesses now alive, since a little
miserable horse-cart, performing with difficulty a journey of thirty
miles _per diem,_ carried our mails from the capital of Scotland to
its extremity. Nor was Scotland much more deficient in these
accommodations than our rich sister had been about eighty years
before. Fielding, in his Tom Jones, and Farquhar, in a little
farce called the Stage-Coach, have ridiculed the slowness of these
vehicles of public accommodation. According to the latter authority,
the highest bribe could only induce the coachman to promise to
anticipate by half-an-hour the usual time of his arrival at the
Bull and Mouth.

  But in both countries these ancient, slow, and sure modes of
conveyance are now alike unknown; mail-coach races against mail-coach,
and high-flyer against high-flyer, through the most remote
districts of Britain. And in our village alone, three post-coaches,
and four coaches with men armed, and in scarlet cassocks, thunder
through the streets each day, and rival in brilliancy and noise the
invention of the celebrated tyrant:---

	Demens, qui nimbos et non imitabile fulmen,
	<AE>re et cornipedum pulsu, simularat, equorum.

  Now and then, to complete the resemblance, and to correct the
presumption of the venturous charioteers, it does happen that the
career of these dashing rivals of Salmoneus meets with as undesirable
and violent a termination as that of their prototype. It is on such
occasions that the Insides and Outsides, to use the appropriate
vehicular phrases, have reason to rue the exchange of the slow and
safe motion of the ancient Fly-coaches, which, compared with the
chariots of Mr. Palmer, so ill deserve the name. The ancient
vehicle used to settle quietly down, like a ship scuttled and left to
sink by the gradual influx of the waters, while the modern is
smashed to pieces with the velocity of the same vessel hurled against
breakers, or rather with the fury of a bomb bursting at the conclusion
of its career through the air. The late ingenious Mr. Pennant,
whose humour it was to set his face in stern opposition to these
speedy conveyances, had collected, I have heard, a formidable list of
such casualties, which, joined to the imposition of innkeepers, whose
charges the passengers had no time to dispute, the sauciness of the
coachman, and the uncontrolled and despotic authority of the tyrant
called the guard, held forth a picture of horror, to which murder,
theft, fraud, and peculation, lent all their dark colouring. But
that which gratifies the impatience of the human disposition will be
practised in the teeth of danger, and in defiance of admonition; and,
in despite of the Cambrian antiquary, mail-coaches not only roll
their thunders round the base of Penman-Maur and Cader-Idris, but

	Frighted Skiddaw hears afar
	The rattling of the unscythed car.

And perhaps the echoes of Ben Nevis may soon be awakened by the
bugle, not of a warlike chieftain, but of the guard of a mail-coach.

  It was a fine summer day, and our little school had obtained a
half-holiday, by the intercession of a good-humoured visitor.<*> I

* His honour Gilbert Goslinn of Gandercleugh; for I love to be precise in
* matters of importance.---J. C.

expected by the coach a new number of an interesting periodical
publication, and walked forward on the highway to meet it, with the
impatience which Cowper has described as actuating the resident in
the country when longing for intelligence from the mart of news.---

		--------- The grand debate,
	The popular harangue,---the tart reply,---
	The logic, and the wisdom, and the wit,
	And the loud laugh,---I long to know them all;---
	I burn to set the imprisoned wranglers free,
	And give them voice and utterance again.

  It was with such feelings that I eyed the approach of the new
coach, lately established on our road, and known by the name of the
Somerset, which, to say truth, possesses some interest for me, even
when it conveys no such important information. The distant
tremulous sound of its wheels was heard just as I gained the summit
of the gentle ascent, called the Goslin-brae, from which you command
an extensive view down the valley of the river Gander. The public
road, which comes up the side of that stream, and crosses it at a
bridge about a quarter of a mile from the place where I was standing,
runs partly through enclosures and plantations, and partly through
open pasture land. It is a childish amusement perhaps,---but my
life has been spent with children, and why should not my pleasures
be like theirs?---childish as it is then, I must own I have had great
pleasure in watching the approach of the carriage, where the openings
of the road permit it to be seen. The gay glancing of the equipage,
its diminished and toy-like appearance at a distance, contrasted with
the rapidity of its motion, its appearance and disappearance at
intervals, and the progressively increasing sounds that announce its
nearer approach, have all to the idle and listless spectator, who has
nothing more important to attend to, something of awakening interest.
The ridicule may attach to me, which is flung upon many an honest
citizen, who watches from the window of his villa the passage of the
stage-coach; but it is a very natural source of amusement notwithstanding,
and many of those who join in the laugh are perhaps not
unused to resort to it in secret.

  On the present occasion, however, fate had decreed that I should
not enjoy the consummation of the amusement by seeing the coach
rattle past me as I sat on the turf, and hearing the hoarse grating
voice of the guard as he skimmed forth for my grasp the expected
packet, without the carriage checking its course for an instant. I
had seen the vehicle thunder down the hill that leads to the bridge
with more than its usual impetuosity, glittering all the while by
flashes from a cloudy tabernacle of the dust which it had raised, and
leaving a train behind it on the road resembling a wreath of summer
mist. But it did not appear on the top of the nearer bank within
the usual space of three minutes, which frequent observation had
enabled me to ascertain was the medium time for crossing the bridge
and mounting the ascent. When double that space had elapsed, I
became alarmed, and walked hastily forward. As I came in sight
of the bridge, the cause of delay was too manifest, for the Somerset
had made a summerset in good earnest, and overturned so completely,
that it was literally resting upon the ground, with the roof undermost,
and the four wheels in the air. The ``exertions of the guard
and coachman,'' both of whom were gratefully commemorated in the
newspapers, having succeeded in disentangling the horses by cutting
the harness, were now proceeding to extricate the insides by a sort of
summary and C<ae>sarean process of delivery, forcing the hinges from
one of the doors which they could not open otherwise. In this manner
were two disconsolate damsels set at liberty from the womb of the
leathern conveniency. As they immediately began to settle their
clothes, which were a little deranged, as may be presumed, I concluded
they had received no injury, and did not venture to obtrude my services
at their toilette, for which, I understand, I have since been reflected
upon by the fair sufferers. The _outsides,_ who must have been discharged
from their elevated situation by a shock resembling the
springing of a mine, escaped, nevertheless, with the usual allowance
of scratches and bruises, excepting three, who, having been pitched
into the river Gander, were dimly seen contending with the tide like
the relics of <AE>neas's shipwreck,---

	Rari apparent mantes in gurgite vasto.

  I applied my poor exertions where they seemed to be most needed,
and with the assistance of one or two of the company who had escaped
unhurt, easily succeeded in fishing out two of the unfortunate
passengers, who were stout active young fellows; and, but for the
preposterous length of their greatcoats, and the equally fashionable
latitude and longitude of their Wellington trousers, would have required
little assistance from any one. The third was sickly and
elderly, and might have perished but for the efforts used to preserve
him.

  When the two greatcoated gentlemen had extricated themselves from
the river, and shaken their ears like huge water-dogs, a violent altercation
ensued betwixt them and the coachman and guard, concerning
the cause of their overthrow. In the course of the squabble, I observed
that both my new acquaintances belonged to the law, and that their
professional sharpness was likely to prove an overmatch for the surly
and official tone of the guardians of the vehicle. The dispute ended
in the guard assuring the passengers that they should have seats in a
heavy coach which would pass that spot in less than half-an-hour,
provided it were not full. Chance seemed to favour this arrangement,
for when the expected vehicle, arrived, there were only two places
occupied in a carriage which professed to carry six. The two ladies
who had been disinterred out of the fallen vehicle were readily admitted,
but positive objections were stated by those previously in
possession to the admittance of the two lawyers, whose wetted garments
being much of the nature of well-soaked sponges, there was every
reason to believe they would refund a considerable part of the water
they had collected, to the inconvenience of their fellow-passengers. On
the other hand, the lawyers rejected a seat on the roof, alleging that
they had only taken that station for pleasure for one stage, but were
entitled in all respects to free egress and regress from the interior, to
which their contract positively referred. After some altercation, in
which something was said upon the edict _Naut<ae> caupones stabularii,_
the coach went off, leaving the learned gentlemen to abide by their
action of damages.

  They immediately applied to me to guide them to the next village
and the best inn; and from the account I gave them of the Wallace
Head, declared they were much better pleased to stop there than to go
forward upon the terms of that impudent scoundrel the guard of the
Somerset. All that they now wanted was a lad to carry their
travelling bags, who was easily procured from an adjoining cottage;
and they prepared to walk forward, when they found there was
another passenger in the same deserted situation with themselves.
This was the elderly and sickly-looking person, who had been precipitated
into the river along with the two young lawyers. He, it
seems, had been too modest to push his own plea against the coachman
when he saw that of his betters rejected, and now remained
behind with a look of timid anxiety, plainly intimating that he was
deficient in those means of recommendation which are necessary passports
to the hospitality of an inn.

  I ventured to call the attention of the two dashing young blades,
for such they seemed, to the desolate condition of their fellow-traveller.
They took the hint with ready good-nature.

  ``O, true, Mr. Dunover,'' said one of the youngsters, ``you must
not remain on the pav<e'> here; you must go and have some dinner
with us---Halkit and I must have a post-chaise to go on, at all events,
and we will set you down wherever suits you best.''

  The poor man, for such his dress, as well as his diffidence, bespoke
him, made the sort of acknowledging bow by which says a Scotsman,
``It's too much honour for the like of me;'' and followed humbly
behind his gay patrons, all three besprinkling the dusty road as they
walked along with the moisture of their drenched garments, and exhibiting
the singular and somewhat ridiculous appearance of three
persons suffering from the opposite extreme of humidity, while the
summer sun was at its height, and everything else around them had
the expression of heat and drought. The ridicule did not escape the
young gentlemen themselves, and they had made what might be
received as one or two tolerable jests on the subject before they had
advanced far on their peregrination.

  ``We cannot complain, like Cowley,'' said one of them, ``that
Gideon's fleece remains dry, while all around is moist; this is the
reverse of the miracle.''

  ``We ought to be received with gratitude in this good town; we
bring a supply of what they seem to need most,'' said Halkit.

  ``And distribute it with unparalleled generosity,'' replied his companion;
``performing the part of three water-carts for the benefit of
their dusty roads.''

  ``We come before them, too,'' said Halkit, ``in full professional
force---counsel and agent''---

  ``And client,'' said the young advocate, looking behind him; and
then added, lowering his voice, ``that looks as if he had kept such
dangerous company too long.''

  It was, indeed, too true, that the humble follower of the gay young
men had the threadbare appearance of a worn-out litigant, and I
could not but smile at the conceit, though anxious to conceal my mirth
from the object of it.

  When we arrived at the Wallace Inn, the elder of the Edinburgh
gentlemen, and whom I understood to be a barrister, insisted that I
should remain and take part of their dinner; and their inquiries
and demands speedily put my landlord and his whole family in
motion to produce the best cheer which the larder and cellar afforded,
and proceed to cook it to the best advantage, a science in which our
entertainers seemed to be admirably skilled. In other respects they
were lively young men, in the hey-day of youth and good spirits,
playing the part which is common to the higher classes of the law at
Edinburgh, and which nearly resembles that of the young Templars
in the days of Steele and Addison. An air of giddy gaiety mingled
with the good sense, taste, and information which their conversation
exhibited; and it seemed to be their object to unite the character of
men of fashion and lovers of the polite arts. A fine gentleman, bred
up in the thorough idleness and inanity of pursuit, which I understand
is absolutely necessary to the character in perfection, might in
all probability have traced a tinge of professional pedantry which
marked the barrister in spite of his efforts, and something of active
bustle in his companion, and would certainly have detected more than
a fashionable mixture of information and animated interest in the
language of both. But to me, who had no pretensions to be so
critical, my companions seemed to form a very happy mixture of
good-breeding and liberal information, with a disposition to lively
rattle, pun, and jest, amusing to a grave man, because it is what he
himself can least easily command.

  The thin pale-faced man, whom their good-nature had brought into
their society, looked out of place as well as out of spirits; sate on the
edge of his seat, and kept the chair at two feet distance from the table;
thus incommoding himself considerably in conveying the victuals to
his mouth, as if by way of penance for partaking of them in the
company of his superiors. A short time after dinner, declining all
entreaty to partake of the wine, which circulated freely round, he
informed himself of the hour when the chaise had been ordered to
attend; and saying he would be in readiness, modestly withdrew from
the apartment.

  ``Jack,'' said the barrister to his companion, ``I remember that
poor fellow's face; you spoke more truly than you were aware of; he
really is one of my clients, poor man.''

  ``Poor man!'' echoed Halkit---``I suppose you mean he is your
one and only client?''

  ``That's not my fault, Jack,'' replied the other, whose name I discovered
was Hardie. ``You are to give me all your business, you
know; and if you have none, the learned gentleman here knows
nothing can come of nothing.''

  ``You seem to have brought something to nothing though, in the
case of that honest man. He looks as if he were just about to honour
with his residence the =Heart of Mid-Lothian.=''

  ``You are mistaken---he is just delivered from it.---Our friend
here looks for an explanation. Pray, Mr. Pattieson, have you been
in Edinburgh?''

  I answered in the affirmative.

  ``Then you must have passed, occasionally at least, though probably
not so faithfully as I am doomed to do, through a narrow intricate
passage, leading out of the north-west corner of the Parliament Square,
and passing by a high and antique building with turrets and iron
grates,

	Making good the saying odd,
	``Near the church and far from God''---

  Mr. Halkit broke in upon his learned counsel, to contribute his
moiety to the riddle---``Having at the door the sign of the Red
man''------

  ``And being on the whole,'' resumed the counsellor interrupting
his friend in his turn, ``a sort of place where misfortune is happily
confounded with guilt, where all who are in wish to get out''------

  ``And where none who have the good luck to be out, wish to get in,''
added his companion.

  ``I conceive you, gentlemen,'' replied I; ``you mean the prison.''

  ``The prison,'' added the young lawyer---``You have hit it---the
very reverend Tolbooth itself; and let me tell you, you are obliged to
us for describing it with so much modesty and brevity; for with
whatever amplifications we might have chosen to decorate the subject,
you lay entirely at our mercy, since the Fathers Conscript of our city
have decreed that the venerable edifice itself shall not remain in
existence to confirm or to confute its.''

  ``Then the Tolbooth of Edinburgh is called the Heart of Mid-Lothian?''
said I.

  ``So termed and reputed, I assure you.''

  ``I think,'' said I, with the bashful diffidence with which a man
lets slip a pun in presence of his superiors, ``the metropolitan county
may, in that case, be said to have a sad heart.''

  ``Right as my glove, Mr. Pattieson,'' added Mr. Hardie; ``and
a close heart, and a hard heart---Keep it up, Jack.''

  ``And a wicked heart, and a poor heart,'' answered Halkit, doing
his best.

  ``And yet it may be called in some sort a strong heart, and a high
heart,'' rejoined the advocate. ``You see I can put you both out of
heart.''

  ``I have played all my hearts,'' said the younger gentleman.

  ``Then we'll have another lead,'' answered his companion.---``And
as to the old and condemned Tolbooth, what pity the same honour
cannot be done to it as has been done to many of its inmates. Why
should not the Tolbooth have its `Last Speech, Confession, and Dying
Words?' The old stones would be just as conscious of the honour as
many a poor devil who has dangled like a tassel at the west end of it,
while the hawkers were shouting a confession the culprit had never
heard of.''

  ``I am afraid,'' said I, ``if I might presume to give my opinion,
it would be a tale of unvaried sorrow and guilt.''

  ``Not entirely, my friend,'' said Hardie; ``a prison is a world
within itself, and has its own business, griefs, and joys, peculiar to
its circle. Its inmates are sometimes short-lived, but so are soldiers
on service; they are poor relatively to the world without, but there are
degrees of wealth and poverty among them, and so some are relatively
rich also. They cannot stir abroad, but neither can the garrison of
a besieged fort, or the crew of a ship at sea; and they are not under
a dispensation quite so desperate as either, for they may have as much
food as they have money to buy, and are not obliged to work, whether
they have food or not.''

  ``But what variety of incident,'' said I (not without a secret view
to my present task), ``could possibly be derived from such a work as
you are pleased to talk of?''

  ``Infinite,'' replied the young advocate. ``Whatever of guilt,
crime, imposture, folly, unheard-of misfortunes, and unlooked-for
change of fortune, can be found to chequer life, my Last Speech of
the Tolbooth should illustrate with examples sufficient to gorge even
the public's all-devouring appetite for the wonderful and horrible.
The inventor of fictitious narratives has to rack his brains for means
to diversify his tale, and after all can hardly hit upon characters or
incidents which have not been used again and again, until they are
familiar to the eye of the reader, so that the development, _enl<e`>vement,_
the desperate wound of which the hero never dies, the burning fever
from which the heroine is sure to recover, become a mere matter of
course. I join with my honest friend Crabbe, and have an unlucky
propensity to hope, when hope is lost, and to rely upon the cork-jacket,
which carries the heroes of romance safe through all the billows of
affliction.'' He then declaimed the following passage, rather with too
much than too little emphasis:---

	Much have I feared, but am no more afraid,
	When some chaste beauty by some wretch betrayed,
	Is drawn away with such distracted speed,
	That she anticipates a dreadful deed.
	Not so do I---Let solid walls impound
	The captive fair, and dig a moat around;
	Let there be brazen locks and bars of steel,
	And keepers cruel, such as never feel;
	With not a single note the purse supply,
	And when she begs, let men and maids deny;
	Be windows there from which she dare not fall,
	And help so distant, 'tis in vain to call;
	Still means of freedom will some Power devise,
	And from the baffled ruffian snatch his prize.

  ``The end of uncertainty,'' he concluded, ``is the death of interest;
and hence it happens that no one now reads novels.''

  ``Hear him, ye gods!'' returned his companion. ``I assure you,
Mr. Pattieson, you will hardly visit this learned gentleman, but you
are likely to find the new novel most in repute lying on his table,---
snugly intrenched, however, beneath Stair's Institutes, or an open
volume of Morrison's Decisions.''

  ``Do I deny it?'' said the hopeful jurisconsult, ``or wherefore
should I, since it is well known these Delilahs seduce my wisers and
my betters? May they not be found lurking amidst the multiplied
memorials of our most distinguished counsel, and even peeping from
under the cushion of a judge's arm-chair? Our seniors at the bar,
within the bar, and even on the bench, read novels; and, if not belied,
some of them have written novels into the bargain. I only say, that
I read from habit and from indolence, not from real interest; that,
like ancient Pistol devouring his leek, I read and swear till I get to
the end of the narrative. But not so in the real records of human
vagaries---not so in the State Trials, or in the Books of Adjournal,
where every now and then you read new pages of the human heart,
and turns of fortune far beyond what the boldest novelist ever attempted
to produce from the coinage of his brain.''

  ``And for such narratives,'' I asked, ``you suppose the History of
the Prison of Edinburgh might afford appropriate materials?''

  ``In a degree unusually ample, my dear sir,'' said Hardie---
``Fill your glass, however, in the meanwhile. Was it not for many
years the place in which the Scottish parliament met? Was it not
James's place of refuge, when the mob, inflamed by a seditious
preacher, broke, forth, on him with the cries of `The sword of the Lord
and of Gideon---bring forth the wicked Haman?' Since that time
how many hearts have throbbed within these walls, as the tolling of
the neighbouring bell announced to them how fast the sands of their
life were ebbing; how many must have sunk at the sound---how many
were supported by stubborn pride and dogged resolution---how many
by the consolations of religion? Have there not been some, who,
looking back on the motives of their crimes, were scarce able to understand
how they should have had such temptation as to seduce them
from virtue; and have there not, perhaps, been others, who, sensible
of their innocence, were divided between indignation at the undeserved
doom which they were to undergo, consciousness that they had not
deserved it, and racking anxiety to discover some way in which they
might yet vindicate themselves? Do you suppose any of these deep,
powerful, and agitating feelings, can be recorded and perused without
exciting a corresponding depth of deep, powerful, and agitating
interest?---Oh! do but wait till I publish the _Causes C<e'>l<e`>bres_ of
Caledonia, and you will find no want of a novel or a tragedy for
some time to come. The true thing will triumph over the brightest
inventions of the most ardent imagination. _Magna est veritas, et
pr<ae>valebit._''

  ``I have understood,'' said I, encouraged by the affability of my
rattling entertainer, ``that less of this interest must attach to Scottish
jurisprudence than to that of any other country. The general
morality of our people, their sober and prudent habits''------

  ``Secure them,'' said the barrister, ``against any great increase of
professional thieves and depredators, but not against wild and wayward
starts of fancy and passion, producing crimes of an extraordinary
description, which are precisely those to the detail of which
we listen with thrilling interest. England has been much longer a
highly civilised country; her subjects have been very strictly amenable
to laws administered without fear or favour, a complete division of
labour has taken place among her subjects, and the very thieves and
robbers form a distinct class in society, subdivided among themselves
according to the subject of the depredations, and the mode in which
they carry them on, acting upon regular habits and principles, which
can be calculated and anticipated at Bow Street, Hatton Garden, or
the Old Bailey. Our sister kingdom is like a cultivated field,---the
farmer expects that, in spite of all his care, a certain number of
weeds will rise with the corn, and can tell you beforehand their
names and appearance. But Scotland is like one of her own Highland
glens, and the moralist who reads the records of her criminal
jurisprudence, will find as many curious anomalous facts in the
history of mind, as the botanist will detect rare specimens among her
dingles and cliffs.''

  ``And that's all the good you have obtained from three perusals of
the Commentaries on Scottish Criminal Jurisprudence?'' said his
companion. ``I suppose the learned author very little thinks that
the facts which his erudition and acuteness have accumulated for the
illustration of legal doctrines, might be so arranged as to form a sort
of appendix to the half-bound and slip-shod volumes of the circulating
library.''

  ``I'll bet you a pint of claret,'' said the elder lawyer, ``that he
will not feel sore at the comparison. But as we say at the bar, `I
beg I may not be interrupted;' I have much more to say, upon my
Scottish collection of _Causes C<e'>l<e`>bres._ You will please recollect the
scope and motive given for the contrivance and execution of many
extraordinary and daring crimes, by the long civil dissensions of
Scotland---by the hereditary jurisdictions, which, until 1748, rested
the investigation of crises in judges, ignorant, partial, or interested
---by the habits of the gentry, shut up in their distant and solitary
mansion-houses, nursing their revengeful Passions just to keep their
blood from stagnating---not to mention that amiable national qualification,
called the _perfervidum ingenium Scotorum,_ which our
lawyers join in alleging as a reason for the severity of some of our
enactments. When I come to treat of matters so mysterious, deep,
and dangerous, as these circumstances have given rise to, the blood of
each reader shall be curdled, and his epidermis crisped into goose
skin.---But, hist!---here comes the landlord, with tidings, I suppose,
that the chaise is ready.''

  It was no such thing---the tidings bore, that no chaise could be
had that evening, for Sir Peter Plyem had carried forward my landlord's
two pairs of horses that morning to the ancient royal borough
of Bubbleburgh, to look after his interest there. But as Bubbleburgh
is only one of a set of five boroughs which club their shares for a
member of parliament, Sir Peter's adversary had judiciously watched
his departure, in order to commence a canvass in the no less royal
borough of Bitem, which, as all the world knows, lies at the very
termination of Sir Peter's avenue, and has been held in leading-strings
by him and his ancestors for time immemorial. Now Sir
Peter was thus placed in the situation of an ambitious monarch, who,
after having commenced a daring inroad into his enemy's territories,
is suddenly recalled by an invasion of his own hereditary dominions.
He was obliged in consequence to return from the half-won borough
of Bubbleburgh, to look after the half-lost borough of Bitem, and the
two pairs of horses which had carried him that morning to Bubbleburgh
were now forcibly detained to transport him, his agent, his
valet, his jester, and his hard-drinker, across the country to Bitem.
The cause of this detention, which to me was of as little consequence
as it may be to the reader, was important enough to my companions
to reconcile them to the delay. Like eagles, they smelled the battle
afar off, ordered a magnum of claret and beds at the Wallace, and
entered at full career into the Bubbleburgh and Bitem politics, with
all the probable ``Petitions and complaints'' to which they were likely
to give rise.

  In the midst of an anxious, animated, and, to me, most unintelligible
discussion, concerning provosts, bailies, deacons, sets of
boroughs, leets, town-clerks, burgesses resident and non-resident, all of
a sudden the lawyer recollected himself. ``Poor Dunover, we must
not forget him;'' and the landlord was despatched in quest of the
_pauvre honteux,_ with an earnestly civil invitation to him for the
rest of the evening. I could not help asking the young gentlemen if
they knew the history of this poor man; and the counsellor applied
himself to his pocket to recover the memorial or brief from which he
had stated his cause.

  ``He has been a candidate for our _remedium miserabile,_'' said
Mr. Hardie, ``commonly called a _cessio bonorum._ As there are
divines who have doubted the eternity of future punishments, so the
Scotch lawyers seem to have thought that the crime of poverty might
be atoned for by something short of perpetual imprisonment. After
a month's confinement, you must know, a prisoner for debt is entitled,
on a sufficient statement to our Supreme Court, setting forth the
amount of his funds, and the nature of his misfortunes, and surrendering
all his effects to his creditors, to claim to be discharged
from prison.''

  ``I had heard,'' I replied, ``of such a humane regulation.''

  ``Yes,'' said Halkit, ``and the beauty of it is, as the foreign fellow
said, you may get the _cessio,_ when the _bonorums_ are all spent---
But what, are you puzzling in your pockets to seek your only
memorial among old play-bills, letters requesting a meeting of the
Faculty, rules of the Speculative Society,<*> syllabus' of lectures---all

* [A well-known debating club in Edinburgh.]

the miscellaneous contents of a young advocate's pocket, which contains
everything but briefs and bank-notes? Can you not state a case of
_cessio_ without your memorial? Why, it is done every Saturday.
The events follow each other as regularly as clock-work, and one form
of condescendence might suit every one of them.''

  ``This is very unlike the variety of distress which this gentleman
stated to fall under the consideration of your judges,'' said I.

  ``True,'' replied Halkit; ``but Hardie spoke of criminal jurisprudence,
and this business is purely civil. I could plead a _cessio_
myself without the inspiring honours of a gown and three-tailed
periwig---Listen.---My client was bred a journeyman weaver---made
some little money---took a farm---(for conducting a farm, like driving
a gig, comes by nature)---late severe times---induced to sign bills with
a friend, for which he received no value---landlord sequestrates---
creditors accept a composition---pursuer sets up a public-house---fails
a second time---is incarcerated for a debt of ten pounds seven shillings
and sixpence---his debts amount to blank---his losses to blank---his
funds to blank---leaving a balance of blank in his favour. There is
no opposition; your lordships will please grant commission to take
his oath.''

  Hardie now renounced this ineffectual search, in which there was
perhaps a little affectation, and told us the tale of poor Dunover's
distresses, with a tone in which a degree of feeling, which he seemed
ashamed of as unprofessional, mingled with his attempts at wit, and
did him more honour. It was one of those tales which seem to argue
a sort of ill-luck or fatality attached to the hero. A well-informed,
industrious, and blameless, but poor and bashful man, had in vain
essayed all the usual means by which others acquire independence,
yet had never succeeded beyond the attainment of bare subsistence.
During a brief gleam of hope, rather than of actual prosperity, he
had added a wife and family to his cares, but the dawn was speedily
overcast. Everything retrograded with him towards the verge of the
miry Slough of Despond, which yawns for insolvent debtors; and
after catching at each twig, and experiencing the protracted agony of
feeling them one by one elude his grasp, he actually sunk into the
miry pit whence he had been extricated by the professional exertions
of Hardie.

  ``And, I suppose, now you have dragged this poor devil ashore,
you will leave him half naked on the beach to provide for himself?''
said Halkit. ``Hark ye,''---and he whispered something in his ear,
of which the penetrating and insinuating words, ``Interest with my
Lord,'' alone reached mine.

  ``It is _pessimi exempli,_'' said Hardie, laughing, ``to provide for
a ruined client; but I was thinking of what you mention, provided
it can be managed---But hush! here he comes.''

  The recent relation of the poor man's misfortunes had given him,
I was pleased to observe, a claim to the attention and respect of the
young men, who treated him with great civility, and gradually engaged
him in a conversation, which, much to my satisfaction, again
turned upon the _Causes C<e'>l<e`>bres_ of Scotland. Imboldened by the
kindness with which he was treated, Mr. Dunover began to contribute
his share to the amusement of the evening. Jails, like other places,
have their ancient traditions, known only to the inhabitants, and
handed down from one set of the melancholy lodgers to the next who
occupy their cells. Some of these, which Dunover mentioned, were
interesting, and served to illustrate the narratives of remarkable trials,
which Hardie had at his finger-ends, and which his companion was
also well skilled in. This sort of conversation passed away the
evening till the early hour when Mr. Dunover chose to retire to rest,
and I also retreated to take down memorandums of what I had
learned, in order to add another narrative to those which it had been
my chief amusement to collect, and to write out in detail. The two
young men ordered a broiled bone, Madeira negus, and a pack of
cards, and commenced a game at picquet.

  Next morning the travellers left Gandercleugh. I afterwards
learned from the papers that both have been since engaged in the great
political cause of Bubbleburgh and Bitem, a summary case, and
entitled to particular despatch; but which, it is thought, nevertheless,
may outlast the duration of the parliament to which the contest refers.
Mr. Halkit, as the newspapers informed me, acts as agent or solicitor;
and Mr. Hardie opened for Sir Peter Plyem with singular ability,
and to such good purpose, that I understand he has since had fewer
play-bills and more briefs in his pocket. And both the young gentlemen
deserve their good fortune; for I learned from Dunover, who
called on me some weeks afterwards, and communicated the intelligence
with tears in his eyes, that their interest had availed to obtain
him a small office for the decent maintenance of his family; and
that, after a train of constant and uninterrupted misfortune, he could
trace a dawn of prosperity to his having the good fortune to be flung
from the top of a mail-coach into the river Gander, in company
with an advocate and a writer to the Signet. The reader will not
perhaps deem himself equally obliged to the accident, since it brings
upon him the following narrative, founded upon the conversation of
the evening.
