




			    
		   THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN



		 BY SIR WALTER SCOTT, BART.

 
		    TALES OF MY LANDLORD



		   COLLECTED AND ARRANGED
		 BY JEDEDIAH CLEISHBOTHAM,
       SCHOOLMASTER AND PARISH CLERK OF GANDERCLEUGH.



	Hear, Land o' Cakes and brither Scots,
	Frae Maidenkirk to Johnny Groat's,
	If there's a hole in a' your coats,
		I rede ye tent it;
	A chiel's amang you takin' notes,
		An' faith he'll prent it!---=Burns.=


  Ahora bien, dijo el Cura: traedme, senor hu<e'>sped, aquesos libros, que
los quiero ver. Que me place, respondi<o'> el; y entrando en su aposento, saco
d<e'>l una maletilla vieja cerrada con una cadenilla, y abri<e'>ndola, hall<o'> en
ella tres libros grandes y unos papeles de muy buena letra escritos de
mano.---=Don Quixote.= Parte I. Capitulo 32.


		  TO THE BEST OF PATRONS,
	       A PLEASED AND INDULGENT READER

		   JEDEDIAH CLEISHBOTHAM

       WISHES HEALTH, AND INCREASE, AND CONTENTMENT.


  Courteous Reader,

  If ingratitude comprehendeth every vice, surely so foul a stain worst
of all beseemeth him whose life has been devoted to instructing youth
in virtue and in humane letters. Therefore have I chosen, in this
prolegomenon, to unload my burden of thanks at thy feet, for the
favour with which thou last kindly entertained the Tales of my
Landlord. Certes, if thou hast chuckled over their factious and
festivous descriptions, or hadst thy mind filled with pleasure at the
strange and pleasant turns of fortune which they record, verily, I
have also simpered when I beheld a second storey with attics, that has
arisen on the basis of my small domicile at Gandercleugh, the walls
having been aforehand pronounced by Deacon Barrow to be capable of
enduring such an elevation. Nor has it been without delectation
that I have endued a new coat (snuff-brown, and with metal buttons),
having all nether garments corresponding thereto. We do therefore
lie, in respect of each other, under a reciprocation of benefits, whereof
those received by me being the most solid (in respect that a new house
and a new coat are better than a new tale and an old song), it is
meet that my gratitude should be expressed with the louder voice and
more preponderating vehemence. And how should it be so expressed?
---Certainly not in words only, but in act and deed. It is with this
sole purpose, and disclaiming all intention of purchasing that pendicle
or poffle of land called the Carlinescroft, lying adjacent to my garden,
and measuring seven acres, three roods, and four perches, that I have
committed to the eyes of those who thought well of the former tomes,
these four additional volumes<*> of the Tales of my Landlord. Not

* [The Heart of Mid-Lothian was originally published in 4 vols.]

the less, if Peter Prayfort be minded to sell the said poffle, it is at
his own choice to say so; and, peradventure, he may meet with a
purchaser: unless (gentle reader) the pleasing pourtraictures of Peter
Pattieson, now given unto thee in particular, and unto the public in
general, shall have lost their favour in thine eyes, whereof I am no
way distrustful. And so much confidence do I repose in thy continued
favour, that, should thy lawful occasions call thee to the town
of Gandercleugh, a place frequented by most at one time or other in
their lives, I will enrich thine eyes with a sight of those precious
manuscripts whence thou hast derived so much delectation, thy nose
with a snuff from my mull, and thy palate with a dram from my
bottle of strong waters, called by the learned of Gandercleugh, the
Dominie's Dribble o' Drink.

  It is there, O highly esteemed and beloved reader, thou wilt be able
to bear testimony, through the medium of thine own senses, against
the children of vanity, who have sought to identify thy friend and
servant with I know not what inditer of vain fables; who hath
cumbered the world with his devices, but shrunken from the responsibility
thereof. Truly, this hath been well termed a generation hard
of faith; since what can a man do to assert his property in a printed
tome, saving to put his name in the title-page thereof, with his description,
or designation, as the lawyers term it, and place of abode?
Of a surety I would have such sceptics consider how they themselves
would brook to have their works ascribed to others, their names and
professions imputed as forgeries, and their very existence brought into
question; even although, peradventure, it may be it is of little consequence
to any but themselves, not only whether they are living or dead,
but even whether they ever lived or no. Yet have my maligners carried
their uncharitable censures still farther.

  These cavillers have not only doubted mine identity, although thus
plainly proved, but they have impeached my veracity and the authenticity
of my historical narratives! Verily, I can only say in answer,
that I have been cautelous in quoting mine authorities. It is true,
indeed, that if I had hearkened with only one ear, I might have rehearsed
my tale with more acceptation from those who love to hear but
half the truth. It is, it may hap, not altogether to the discredit of
our kindly nation of Scotland, that we are apt to take an interest,
warm, yea partial, in the deeds and sentiments of our forefathers.
He whom his adversaries describe as a perjured Prelatist, is desirous
that his predecessors should be held moderate in their power, and just
in their execution of its privileges, when truly, the unimpassioned
peruser of the annals of those times shall deem them sanguinary,
violent, and tyrannical. Again, the representatives of the suffering
Nonconformists desire that their ancestors, the Cameronians, shall be
represented not simply as honest enthusiasts, oppressed for conscience'
sake, but persons of fine breeding, and valiant heroes. Truly, the
historian cannot gratify these predilections. He must needs describe 
the cavaliers as proud and high-spirited, cruel, remorseless, and
vindictive; the suffering party as honourably tenacious of their
opinions under persecution; their own tempers being, however, sullen,
fierce, and rude; their opinions absurd and extravagant; and their
whole course of conduct that of persons whom hellebore would better
have suited than prosecutions unto death for high-treason. Natheless,
while such and so preposterous were the opinions on either side,
there were, it cannot be doubted, men of virtue and worth on both,
to entitle either party to claim merit from its martyrs. It has been
demanded of me, Jedediah Cleishbotham, by what right I am entitled
to constitute myself an impartial judge of their discrepancies of
opinions, seeing (as it is stated) that I must necessarily have descended
from one or other of the contending parties, and be, of course, wedded
for better or for worse, according to the reasonable practice of Scotland,
to its dogmata, or opinions, and bound, as it were, by the tie matrimonial,
or, to speak without metaphor, _ex jure sanguinis,_ to maintain
them in preference to all others.

  But, nothing denying the rationality of the rule, which calls on all
now living to rule their political and religious opinions by those of
their great-grandfathers, and inevitable as seems the one or the other
horn of the dilemma betwixt which my adversaries conceive they have
pinned me to the wall, I yet spy some means of refuge, and claim a
privilege to write and speak of both parties with impartiality. For,
O ye powers of logic! when the Prelatists and Presbyterians of old
times went together by the ears in this unlucky country, my ancestor
(venerated be his memory!) was one of the people called Quakers, and
suffered severe handling from either side, even to the extenuation of
his purse and the incarceration of his person.

  Craving thy pardon, gentle Reader, for these few words concerning
me and mine, I rest, as above expressed, thy sure and obligated
friend,<*>

* Note A. Author's connection with Quakerism.

							J. C.

	GANDERCLEUGH,
	this 1st of April, 1818.
