




CHAPTER V. Christina



The brilliant Roman winter came round again, and Rowland enjoyed it,

in a certain way, more deeply than before.  He grew at last to feel

that sense of equal possession, of intellectual nearness, which it

belongs to the peculiar magic of the ancient city to infuse into minds

of a cast that she never would have produced.  He became passionately,

unreasoningly fond of all Roman sights and sensations, and to breathe

the Roman atmosphere began to seem a needful condition of being.

He could not have defined and explained the nature of his great love,

nor have made up the sum of it by the addition of his calculable pleasures.

It was a large, vague, idle, half-profitless emotion, of which perhaps

the most pertinent thing that may be said is that it enforced a sort

of oppressive reconciliation to the present, the actual, the sensuous--

to life on the terms that there offered themselves.  It was perhaps

for this very reason that, in spite of the charm which Rome flings

over one's mood, there ran through Rowland's meditations an undertone

of melancholy, natural enough in a mind which finds its horizon

insidiously limited to the finite, even in very picturesque forms.

Whether it is one that tacitly concedes to the Roman Church the monopoly

of a guarantee of immortality, so that if one is indisposed to bargain

with her for the precious gift, one must do without it altogether;

or whether in an atmosphere so heavily weighted with echoes and memories

one grows to believe that there is nothing in one's consciousness that

is not foredoomed to moulder and crumble and become dust for the feet,

and possible malaria for the lungs, of future generations--the fact

at least remains that one parts half-willingly with one's hopes in Rome,

and misses them only under some very exceptional stress of circumstance.

For this reason one may perhaps say that there is no other place

in which one's daily temper has such a mellow serenity, and none,

at the same time, in which acute attacks of depression are more intolerable.

Rowland found, in fact, a perfect response to his prevision that to

live in Rome was an education to one's senses and one's imagination,

but he sometimes wondered whether this was not a questionable

gain in case of one's not being prepared to live wholly by one's

imagination and one's senses.  The tranquil profundity of his daily

satisfaction seemed sometimes to turn, by a mysterious inward impulse,

and face itself with questioning, admonishing, threatening eyes.

"But afterwards.... ?" it seemed to ask, with a long reverberation;

and he could give no answer but a shy affirmation that there was no

such thing as afterwards, and a hope, divided against itself, that his

actual way of life would last forever.  He often felt heavy-hearted;

he was sombre without knowing why; there were no visible clouds in

his heaven, but there were cloud-shadows on his mood.  Shadows projected,

they often were, without his knowing it, by an undue apprehension

that things after all might not go so ideally well with Roderick.

When he understood his anxiety it vexed him, and he rebuked himself for

taking things unmanfully hard.  If Roderick chose to follow a crooked path,

it was no fault of his; he had given him, he would continue to give him,

all that he had offered him--friendship, sympathy, advice.  He had

not undertaken to provide him with unflagging strength of purpose,

nor to stand bondsman for unqualified success.



If Rowland felt his roots striking and spreading in the Roman soil,

Roderick also surrendered himself with renewed abandon to the

local influence.  More than once he declared to his companion

that he meant to live and die within the shadow of Saint Peter's,

and that he cared little if he never again drew breath in American air.

"For a man of my temperament, Rome is the only possible place,"

he said; "it 's better to recognize the fact early than late.

So I shall never go home unless I am absolutely forced."



"What is your idea of 'force'?" asked Rowland, smiling.

"It seems to me you have an excellent reason for going home

some day or other."



"Ah, you mean my engagement?"  Roderick answered with unaverted eyes.

"Yes, I am distinctly engaged, in Northampton, and impatiently waited for!"

And he gave a little sympathetic sigh.  "To reconcile Northampton

and Rome is rather a problem.  Mary had better come out here.

Even at the worst I have no intention of giving up Rome within six or

eight years, and an engagement of that duration would be rather absurd."



"Miss Garland could hardly leave your mother," Rowland observed.



"Oh, of course my mother should come.  I think I will suggest it

in my next letter.  It will take her a year or two to make up

her mind to it, but if she consents it will brighten her up.

It 's too small a life, over there, even for a timid old lady.

It is hard to imagine," he added, "any change in Mary being

a change for the better; but I should like her to take a look

at the world and have her notions stretched a little.

One is never so good, I suppose, but that one can improve a little."



"If you wish your mother and Miss Garland to come," Rowland suggested,

"you had better go home and bring them."



"Oh, I can't think of leaving Europe, for many a day," Roderick answered.

"At present it would quite break the charm.  I am just beginning

to profit, to get used to things and take them naturally.

I am sure the sight of Northampton Main Street would permanently

upset me.  "



It was reassuring to hear that Roderick, in his own view,

was but "just beginning" to spread his wings, and Rowland,

if he had had any forebodings, might have suffered them to be

modified by this declaration.  This was the first time since their

meeting at Geneva that Roderick had mentioned Miss Garland's name,

but the ice being broken, he indulged for some time afterward

in frequent allusions to his betrothed, which always had

an accent of scrupulous, of almost studied, consideration.

An uninitiated observer, hearing him, would have imagined her to be

a person of a certain age--possibly an affectionate maiden aunt--

who had once done him a kindness which he highly appreciated:

perhaps presented him with a check for a thousand dollars.

Rowland noted the difference between his present frankness

and his reticence during the first six months of his engagement,

and sometimes wondered whether it was not rather an anomaly

that he should expatiate more largely as the happy event receded.

He had wondered over the whole matter, first and last,

in a great many different ways, and looked at it in all

possible lights.  There was something terribly hard to explain

in the fact of his having fallen in love with his cousin.

She was not, as Rowland conceived her, the sort of girl he would

have been likely to fancy, and the operation of sentiment,

in all cases so mysterious, was particularly so in this one.

Just why it was that Roderick should not logically have fancied

Miss Garland, his companion would have been at loss to say,

but I think the conviction had its roots in an unformulated

comparison between himself and the accepted suitor.

Roderick and he were as different as two men could be,

and yet Roderick had taken it into his head to fall

in love with a woman for whom he himself had been keeping

in reserve, for years, a profoundly characteristic passion.

That if he chose to conceive a great notion of the merits

of Roderick's mistress, the irregularity here was hardly

Roderick's, was a view of the case to which poor Rowland

did scanty justice.  There were women, he said to himself,

whom it was every one's business to fall in love with a little--

women beautiful, brilliant, artful, easily fascinating.

Miss Light, for instance, was one of these; every man who

spoke to her did so, if not in the language, at least with

something of the agitation, the divine tremor, of a lover.

There were other women--they might have great beauty, they might

have small; perhaps they were generally to be classified as plain--

whose triumphs in this line were rare, but immutably permanent.

Such a one pre; aueminently, was Mary Garland.

Upon the doctrine of probabilities, it was unlikely that

she had had an equal charm for each of them, and was it

not possible, therefore, that the charm for Roderick had

been simply the charm imagined, unquestioningly accepted:

the general charm of youth, sympathy, kindness--of the

present feminine, in short--enhanced indeed by several fine

facial traits?  The charm in this case for Rowland was--

the charm!--the mysterious, individual, essential woman.

There was an element in the charm, as his companion saw it,

which Rowland was obliged to recognize, but which he forbore

to ponder; the rather important attraction, namely, of reciprocity.

As to Miss Garland being in love with Roderick and becoming

charming thereby, this was a point with which his imagination

ventured to take no liberties; partly because it would have

been indelicate, and partly because it would have been vain.

He contented himself with feeling that the young girl was

still as vivid an image in his memory as she had been five

days after he left her, and with drifting nearer and nearer

to the impression that at just that crisis any other girl

would have answered Roderick's sentimental needs as well.

Any other girl indeed would do so still!  Roderick had confessed

as much to him at Geneva, in saying that he had been taking

at Baden the measure of his susceptibility to female beauty.



His extraordinary success in modeling the bust of the beautiful

Miss Light was pertinent evidence of this amiable quality.

She sat to him, repeatedly, for a fortnight, and the work was

rapidly finished.  On one of the last days Roderick asked Rowland

to come and give his opinion as to what was still wanting;

for the sittings had continued to take place in Mrs. Light's apartment,

the studio being pronounced too damp for the fair model.

When Rowland presented himself, Christina, still in her white dress,

with her shoulders bare, was standing before a mirror,

readjusting her hair, the arrangement of which, on this occasion,

had apparently not met the young sculptor's approval.

He stood beside her, directing the operation with a peremptoriness

of tone which seemed to Rowland to denote a considerable advance

in intimacy.  As Rowland entered, Christina was losing patience.

"Do it yourself, then!" she cried, and with a rapid movement

unloosed the great coil of her tresses and let them fall

over her shoulders.



They were magnificent, and with her perfect face dividing their

rippling flow she looked like some immaculate saint of legend

being led to martyrdom.  Rowland's eyes presumably betrayed

his admiration, but her own manifested no consciousness of it.

If Christina was a coquette, as the remarkable timeliness of this

incident might have suggested, she was not a superficial one.



"Hudson 's a sculptor," said Rowland, with warmth.

"But if I were only a painter!"



"Thank Heaven you are not!" said Christina.  "I am having quite

enough of this minute inspection of my charms."



"My dear young man, hands off!" cried Mrs. Light, coming forward and seizing

her daughter's hair.  "Christina, love, I am surprised."



"Is it indelicate?"  Christina asked.  "I beg Mr. Mallet's pardon."

Mrs. Light gathered up the dusky locks and let them fall through

her fingers, glancing at her visitor with a significant smile.

Rowland had never been in the East, but if he had attempted

to make a sketch of an old slave-merchant, calling attention

to the "points" of a Circassian beauty, he would have depicted

such a smile as Mrs. Light's. "Mamma 's not really shocked,"

added Christina in a moment, as if she had guessed her mother's

by-play. "She is only afraid that Mr. Hudson might have injured

my hair, and that, per consequenza, I should sell for less."



"You unnatural child!" cried mamma.  "You deserve that I should make

a fright of you!"  And with half a dozen skillful passes she twisted

the tresses into a single picturesque braid, placed high on the head,

as a kind of coronal.



"What does your mother do when she wants to do you justice?"

Rowland asked, observing the admirable line of the young girl's neck.



"I do her justice when I say she says very improper things.

What is one to do with such a thorn in the flesh?"

Mrs. Light demanded.



"Think of it at your leisure, Mr. Mallet," said Christina,

"and when you 've discovered something, let us hear.

But I must tell you that I shall not willingly believe in any

remedy of yours, for you have something in your physiognomy

that particularly provokes me to make the remarks that my mother

so sincerely deplores.  I noticed it the first time I saw you.

I think it 's because your face is so broad.  For some reason or other,

broad faces exasperate me; they fill me with a kind of rabbia.

Last summer, at Carlsbad, there was an Austrian count,

with enormous estates and some great office at court.

He was very attentive--seriously so; he was really very far gone.

Cela ne tenait qu' a moi!  But I could n't; he was impossible!

He must have measured, from ear to ear, at least a yard and a half.

And he was blond, too, which made it worse--as blond as Stenterello;

pure fleece!  So I said to him frankly, 'Many thanks, Herr Graf;

your uniform is magnificent, but your face is too fat.'  "



"I am afraid that mine also," said Rowland, with a smile,

"seems just now to have assumed an unpardonable latitude."



"Oh, I take it you know very well that we are looking for a husband,

and that none but tremendous swells need apply.  Surely, before

these gentlemen, mamma, I may speak freely; they are disinterested.

Mr. Mallet won't do, because, though he 's rich, he 's not rich enough.

Mamma made that discovery the day after we went to see you, moved to it

by the promising look of your furniture.  I hope she was right, eh?

Unless you have millions, you know, you have no chance."



"I feel like a beggar," said Rowland.



"Oh, some better girl than I will decide some day, after mature reflection,

that on the whole you have enough.  Mr. Hudson, of course, is nowhere;

he has nothing but his genius and his beaux yeux."



Roderick had stood looking at Christina intently while she delivered herself,

softly and slowly, of this surprising nonsense.  When she had finished,

she turned and looked at him; their eyes met, and he blushed a little.

"Let me model you, and he who can may marry you!" he said, abruptly.



Mrs. Light, while her daughter talked, had been adding a few touches

to her coiffure.  "She is not so silly as you might suppose,"

she said to Rowland, with dignity.  "If you will give me your arm,

we will go and look at the bust."



"Does that represent a silly girl?"  Christina demanded,

when they stood before it.



Rowland transferred his glance several times from the portrait

to the original.  "It represents a young lady," he said,

"whom I should not pretend to judge off-hand."



"She may be a fool, but you are not sure.  Many thanks!

You have seen me half a dozen times.  You are either very slow

or I am very deep."



"I am certainly slow," said Rowland.  "I don't expect to make

up my mind about you within six months."



"I give you six months if you will promise then a perfectly frank opinion.

Mind, I shall not forget; I shall insist upon it."



"Well, though I am slow, I am tolerably brave," said Rowland.

"We shall see."



Christina looked at the bust with a sigh.  "I am afraid, after all,"

she said, "that there 's very little wisdom in it save what the artist

has put there.  Mr. Hudson looked particularly wise while he was working;

he scowled and growled, but he never opened his mouth.  It is very kind

of him not to have represented me gaping."



"If I had talked a lot of stuff to you," said Roderick, roundly, "the thing

would not have been a tenth so good."



"Is it good, after all?  Mr. Mallet is a famous connoisseur;

has he not come here to pronounce?"



The bust was in fact a very happy performance, and Roderick had risen

to the level of his subject.  It was thoroughly a portrait, and not a vague

fantasy executed on a graceful theme, as the busts of pretty women,

in modern sculpture, are apt to be.  The resemblance was deep and vivid;

there was extreme fidelity of detail and yet a noble simplicity.

One could say of the head that, without idealization, it was a

representation of ideal beauty.  Rowland, however, as we know, was not

fond of exploding into superlatives, and, after examining the piece,

contented himself with suggesting two or three alterations of detail.



"Nay, how can you be so cruel?" demanded Mrs. Light,

with soft reproachfulness.  "It is surely a wonderful thing!"



"Rowland knows it 's a wonderful thing," said Roderick, smiling.

"I can tell that by his face.  The other day I finished something

he thought bad, and he looked very differently from this."



"How did Mr. Mallet look?" asked Christina.



"My dear Rowland," said Roderick, "I am speaking of my seated woman.

You looked as if you had on a pair of tight boots."



"Ah, my child, you 'll not understand that!" cried Mrs. Light.

"You never yet had a pair that were small enough."



"It 's a pity, Mr. Hudson," said Christina, gravely,

"that you could not have introduced my feet into the bust.

But we can hang a pair of slippers round the neck!"



"I nevertheless like your statues, Roderick," Rowland rejoined,

"better than your jokes.  This is admirable.  Miss Light,

you may be proud!"



"Thank you, Mr. Mallet, for the permission," rejoined the young girl.



"I am dying to see it in the marble, with a red velvet screen behind it,"

said Mrs. Light.



"Placed there under the Sassoferrato!"  Christina went on.

"I hope you keep well in mind, Mr. Hudson, that you have not

a grain of property in your work, and that if mamma chooses,

she may have it photographed and the copies sold in the Piazza

di Spagna, at five francs apiece, without your having a sou

of the profits."



"Amen!" said Roderick.  "It was so nominated in the bond.

My profits are here!" and he tapped his forehead.



"It would be prettier if you said here!"  And Christina touched her heart.



"My precious child, how you do run on!" murmured Mrs. Light.



"It is Mr. Mallet," the young girl answered.

"I can't talk a word of sense so long as he is in the room.

I don't say that to make you go," she added, "I say it simply

to justify myself."



Rowland bowed in silence.  Roderick declared that he must get at work

and requested Christina to take her usual position, and Mrs. Light

proposed to her visitor that they should adjourn to her boudoir.

This was a small room, hardly more spacious than an alcove,

opening out of the drawing-room and having no other issue.

Here, as they entered, on a divan near the door, Rowland perceived

the Cavaliere Giacosa, with his arms folded, his head dropped upon

his breast, and his eyes closed.



"Sleeping at his post!" said Rowland with a kindly laugh.



"That 's a punishable offense," rejoined Mrs. Light, sharply.

She was on the point of calling him, in the same tone,

when he suddenly opened his eyes, stared a moment, and then

rose with a smile and a bow.



"Excuse me, dear lady," he said, "I was overcome by the--

the great heat."



"Nonsense, Cavaliere!" cried the lady, "you know we are perishing

here with the cold!  You had better go and cool yourself in one

of the other rooms."



"I obey, dear lady," said the Cavaliere; and with another smile

and bow to Rowland he departed, walking very discreetly on his toes.

Rowland out-stayed him but a short time, for he was not fond of

Mrs. Light, and he found nothing very inspiring in her frank intimation

that if he chose, he might become a favorite.  He was disgusted

with himself for pleasing her; he confounded his fatal urbanity.

In the court-yard of the palace he overtook the Cavaliere, who had

stopped at the porter's lodge to say a word to his little girl.

She was a young lady of very tender years and she wore a very dirty pinafore.

He had taken her up in his arms and was singing an infantine rhyme

to her, and she was staring at him with big, soft Roman eyes.

On seeing Rowland he put her down with a kiss, and stepped forward

with a conscious grin, an unresentful admission that he was sensitive

both to chubbiness and ridicule.  Rowland began to pity him again;

he had taken his dismissal from the drawing-room so meekly.



"You don't keep your promise," said Rowland, "to come and see me.

Don't forget it.  I want you to tell me about Rome thirty years ago."



"Thirty years ago?  Ah, dear sir, Rome is Rome still; a place

where strange things happen!  But happy things too, since I

have your renewed permission to call.  You do me too much honor.

Is it in the morning or in the evening that I should least intrude?"



"Take your own time, Cavaliere; only come, sometime.

I depend upon you," said Rowland.



The Cavaliere thanked him with an humble obeisance.

To the Cavaliere, too, he felt that he was, in Roman phrase,

sympathetic, but the idea of pleasing this extremely reduced

gentleman was not disagreeable to him.



Miss Light's bust stood for a while on exhibition in

Roderick's studio, and half the foreign colony came to see it.

With the completion of his work, however, Roderick's visits

at the Palazzo F---- by no means came to an end.

He spent half his time in Mrs. Light's drawing-room,

and began to be talked about as "attentive" to Christina.

The success of the bust restored his equanimity, and in

the garrulity of his good-humor he suffered Rowland to see

that she was just now the object uppermost in his thoughts.

Rowland, when they talked of her, was rather listener than speaker;

partly because Roderick's own tone was so resonant and exultant,

and partly because, when his companion laughed at him for having

called her unsafe, he was too perplexed to defend himself.

The impression remained that she was unsafe; that she was

a complex, willful, passionate creature, who might easily engulf

a too confiding spirit in the eddies of her capricious temper.

And yet he strongly felt her charm; the eddies had a

strange fascination!  Roderick, in the glow of that renewed

admiration provoked by the fixed attention of portrayal,

was never weary of descanting on the extraordinary perfection

of her beauty.



"I had no idea of it," he said, "till I began to look at her

with an eye to reproducing line for line and curve for curve.

Her face is the most exquisite piece of modeling that ever came

from creative hands.  Not a line without meaning, not a hair's

breadth that is not admirably finished.  And then her mouth!

It 's as if a pair of lips had been shaped to utter pure truth without

doing it dishonor!"  Later, after he had been working for a week,

he declared if Miss Light were inordinately plain, she would still

be the most fascinating of women.  "I 've quite forgotten her beauty,"

he said, "or rather I have ceased to perceive it as something

distinct and defined, something independent of the rest of her.

She is all one, and all consummately interesting!"



"What does she do--what does she say, that is so remarkable?"

Rowland had asked.



"Say?  Sometimes nothing--sometimes everything.  She is never the same.

Sometimes she walks in and takes her place without a word,

without a smile, gravely, stiffly, as if it were an awful bore.

She hardly looks at me, and she walks away without even glancing at my work.

On other days she laughs and chatters and asks endless questions,

and pours out the most irresistible nonsense.  She is a creature of moods;

you can't count upon her; she keeps observation on the stretch.

And then, bless you, she has seen such a lot!  Her talk is full

of the oddest allusions!"



"It is altogether a very singular type of young lady,"

said Rowland, after the visit which I have related at length.

"It may be a charm, but it is certainly not the orthodox charm

of marriageable maidenhood, the charm of shrinking innocence

and soft docility.  Our American girls are accused of being more

knowing than any others, and Miss Light is nominally an American.

But it has taken twenty years of Europe to make her what she is.

The first time we saw her, I remember you called her a product

of the old world, and certainly you were not far wrong."



"Ah, she has an atmosphere," said Roderick, in the tone of high appreciation.



"Young unmarried women," Rowland answered, "should be careful

not to have too much!"



"Ah, you don't forgive her," cried his companion, "for hitting you so hard!

A man ought to be flattered at such a girl as that taking so much

notice of him."



"A man is never flattered at a woman's not liking him."



"Are you sure she does n't like you?  That 's to the credit of your humility.

A fellow of more vanity might, on the evidence, persuade himself that

he was in favor."



"He would have also," said Rowland, laughing, "to be a fellow

of remarkable ingenuity!"  He asked himself privately how the deuce

Roderick reconciled it to his conscience to think so much more

of the girl he was not engaged to than of the girl he was.

But it amounted almost to arrogance, you may say, in poor Rowland

to pretend to know how often Roderick thought of Miss Garland.

He wondered gloomily, at any rate, whether for men of his

companion's large, easy power, there was not a larger moral law

than for narrow mediocrities like himself, who, yielding Nature

a meagre interest on her investment (such as it was), had no reason

to expect from her this affectionate laxity as to their accounts.

Was it not a part of the eternal fitness of things that Roderick,

while rhapsodizing about Miss Light, should have it at his command

to look at you with eyes of the most guileless and unclouded blue,

and to shake off your musty imputations by a toss of his picturesque

brown locks?  Or had he, in fact, no conscience to speak of?

Happy fellow, either way!



Our friend Gloriani came, among others, to congratulate Roderick

on his model and what he had made of her.  "Devilish pretty,

through and through!" he said as he looked at the bust.

"Capital handling of the neck and throat; lovely work

on the nose.  You 're a detestably lucky fellow, my boy!

But you ought not to have squandered such material on a

simple bust; you should have made a great imaginative figure.

If I could only have got hold of her, I would have put her

into a statue in spite of herself.  What a pity she is not

a ragged Trasteverine, whom we might have for a franc an hour!

I have been carrying about in my head for years a delicious

design for a fantastic figure, but it has always stayed there

for want of a tolerable model.  I have seen intimations

of the type, but Miss Light is the perfection of it.

As soon as I saw her I said to myself, 'By Jove, there 's

my statue in the flesh!' "



"What is your subject?" asked Roderick.



"Don't take it ill," said Gloriani.  "You know I 'm the very deuce

for observation.  She would make a magnificent Herodias!"



If Roderick had taken it ill (which was unlikely, for we know

he thought Gloriani an ass, and expected little of his wisdom),

he might have been soothed by the candid incense of Sam Singleton,

who came and sat for an hour in a sort of mental prostration before

both bust and artist.  But Roderick's attitude before his patient

little devotee was one of undisguised though friendly amusement;

and, indeed, judged from a strictly plastic point of view,

the poor fellow's diminutive stature, his enormous mouth,

his pimples and his yellow hair were sufficiently ridiculous.

"Nay, don't envy our friend," Rowland said to Singleton afterwards,

on his expressing, with a little groan of depreciation of his own

paltry performances, his sense of the brilliancy of Roderick's talent.

"You sail nearer the shore, but you sail in smoother waters.

Be contented with what you are and paint me another picture."



"Oh, I don't envy Hudson anything he possesses," Singleton said,

"because to take anything away would spoil his beautiful completeness.

'Complete,' that 's what he is; while we little clevernesses

are like half-ripened plums, only good eating on the side

that has had a glimpse of the sun.  Nature has made him so,

and fortune confesses to it!  He is the handsomest fellow in Rome,

he has the most genius, and, as a matter of course, the most

beautiful girl in the world comes and offers to be his model.

If that is not completeness, where shall we find it?"



One morning, going into Roderick's studio, Rowland found the young

sculptor entertaining Miss Blanchard--if this is not too flattering

a description of his gracefully passive tolerance of her presence.

He had never liked her and never climbed into her sky-studio to

observe her wonderful manipulation of petals.  He had once quoted

Tennyson against her:--



"And is there any moral shut



Within the bosom of the rose?"



"In all Miss Blanchard's roses you may be sure there is a moral,"

he had said.  "You can see it sticking out its head, and,

if you go to smell the flower, it scratches your nose."

But on this occasion she had come with a propitiatory gift--

introducing her friend Mr. Leavenworth.  Mr. Leavenworth

was a tall, expansive, bland gentleman, with a carefully

brushed whisker and a spacious, fair, well-favored face,

which seemed, somehow, to have more room in it than was occupied

by a smile of superior benevolence, so that (with his smooth,

white forehead) it bore a certain resemblance to a large parlor

with a very florid carpet, but no pictures on the walls.

He held his head high, talked sonorously, and told Roderick,

within five minutes, that he was a widower, traveling to

distract his mind, and that he had lately retired from

the proprietorship of large mines of borax in Pennsylvania.

Roderick supposed at first that, in his character

of depressed widower, he had come to order a tombstone;

but observing then the extreme blandness of his address

to Miss Blanchard, he credited him with a judicious prevision

that by the time the tombstone was completed, a monument

of his inconsolability might have become an anachronism.

But Mr. Leavenworth was disposed to order something.



"You will find me eager to patronize our indigenous talent,"

he said.  "I am putting up a little shanty in my native town,

and I propose to make a rather nice thing of it.

It has been the will of Heaven to plunge me into mourning;

but art has consolations!  In a tasteful home, surrounded by the

memorials of my wanderings, I hope to take more cheerful views.

I ordered in Paris the complete appurtenances of a dining-room.

Do you think you could do something for my library?

It is to be filled with well-selected authors, and I think a pure

white image in this style,"--pointing to one of Roderick's

statues,--"standing out against the morocco and gilt, would have

a noble effect.  The subject I have already fixed upon.

I desire an allegorical representation of Culture.

Do you think, now," asked Mr. Leavenworth, encouragingly,

"you could rise to the conception?"



"A most interesting subject for a truly serious mind,"

remarked Miss Blanchard.



Roderick looked at her a moment, and then--"The simplest thing I could do,"

he said, "would be to make a full-length portrait of Miss Blanchard.

I could give her a scroll in her hand, and that would do for the allegory."



Miss Blanchard colored; the compliment might be ironical;

and there was ever afterwards a reflection of her uncertainty

in her opinion of Roderick's genius.  Mr. Leavenworth

responded that with all deference to Miss Blanchard's beauty,

he desired something colder, more monumental, more impersonal.

"If I were to be the happy possessor of a likeness of Miss Blanchard,"

he added, "I should prefer to have it in no factitious disguise!"



Roderick consented to entertain the proposal, and while they were

discussing it, Rowland had a little talk with the fair artist.

"Who is your friend?" he asked.



"A very worthy man.  The architect of his own fortune--which is magnificent.

One of nature's gentlemen!"



This was a trifle sententious, and Rowland turned to the bust

of Miss Light.  Like every one else in Rome, by this time,

Miss Blanchard had an opinion on the young girl's beauty,

and, in her own fashion, she expressed it epigrammatically.

"She looks half like a Madonna and half like a ballerina," she said.



Mr. Leavenworth and Roderick came to an understanding, and the young sculptor

good-naturedly promised to do his best to rise to his patron's conception.

"His conception be hanged!"  Roderick exclaimed, after he had departed.

"His conception is sitting on a globe with a pen in her ear and a photographic

album in her hand.  I shall have to conceive, myself.  For the money,

I ought to be able to!"



Mrs. Light, meanwhile, had fairly established herself in Roman society.

"Heaven knows how!"  Madame Grandoni said to Rowland, who had

mentioned to her several evidences of the lady's prosperity.

"In such a case there is nothing like audacity.  A month ago

she knew no one but her washerwoman, and now I am told that

the cards of Roman princesses are to be seen on her table.

She is evidently determined to play a great part, and she has

the wit to perceive that, to make remunerative acquaintances,

you must seem yourself to be worth knowing.  You must have

striking rooms and a confusing variety of dresses, and give

good dinners, and so forth.  She is spending a lot of money,

and you 'll see that in two or three weeks she will take upon

herself to open the season by giving a magnificent ball.

Of course it is Christina's beauty that floats her.

People go to see her because they are curious."



"And they go again because they are charmed," said Rowland.

"Miss Christina is a very remarkable young lady."



"Oh, I know it well; I had occasion to say so to myself the other day.

She came to see me, of her own free will, and for an hour she was

deeply interesting.  I think she 's an actress, but she believes in her part

while she is playing it.  She took it into her head the other day to believe

that she was very unhappy, and she sat there, where you are sitting,

and told me a tale of her miseries which brought tears into my eyes.

She cried, herself, profusely, and as naturally as possible.

She said she was weary of life and that she knew no one but me she

could speak frankly to.  She must speak, or she would go mad.

She sobbed as if her heart would break.  I assure you it 's well

for you susceptible young men that you don't see her when she sobs.

She said, in so many words, that her mother was an immoral woman.

Heaven knows what she meant.  She meant, I suppose, that she makes debts

that she knows she can't pay.  She said the life they led was horrible;

that it was monstrous a poor girl should be dragged about the world

to be sold to the highest bidder.  She was meant for better things;

she could be perfectly happy in poverty.  It was not money she wanted.

I might not believe her, but she really cared for serious things.

Sometimes she thought of taking poison!"



"What did you say to that?"



"I recommended her," said Madame Grandoni, "to come and see me instead.

I would help her about as much, and I was, on the whole, less unpleasant.

Of course I could help her only by letting her talk herself out and kissing

her and patting her beautiful hands and telling her to be patient and she

would be happy yet.  About once in two months I expect her to reappear,

on the same errand, and meanwhile to quite forget my existence.

I believe I melted down to the point of telling her that I would find

some good, quiet, affectionate husband for her; but she declared,

almost with fury, that she was sick unto death of husbands, and begged I

would never again mention the word.  And, in fact, it was a rash offer;

for I am sure that there is not a man of the kind that might really

make a woman happy but would be afraid to marry mademoiselle.

Looked at in that way she is certainly very much to be pitied,

and indeed, altogether, though I don't think she either means

all she says or, by a great deal, says all that she means.

I feel very sorry for her."



Rowland met the two ladies, about this time, at several entertainments,

and looked at Christina with a kind of distant attendrissement.

He imagined more than once that there had been a passionate

scene between them about coming out, and wondered what arguments

Mrs. Light had found effective.  But Christina's face told no tales,

and she moved about, beautiful and silent, looking absently over

people's heads, barely heeding the men who pressed about her,

and suggesting somehow that the soul of a world-wearied mortal

had found its way into the blooming body of a goddess.

"Where in the world has Miss Light been before she is twenty,"

observers asked, "to have left all her illusions behind?"

And the general verdict was, that though she was incomparably beautiful,

she was intolerably proud.  Young ladies to whom the former

distinction was not conceded were free to reflect that she was

"not at all liked."



It would have been difficult to guess, however, how they reconciled

this conviction with a variety of conflicting evidence, and,

in especial, with the spectacle of Roderick's inveterate devotion.

All Rome might behold that he, at least, "liked" Christina Light.

Wherever she appeared he was either awaiting her or immediately

followed her.  He was perpetually at her side, trying, apparently,

to preserve the thread of a disconnected talk, the fate of which was,

to judge by her face, profoundly immaterial to the young lady.

People in general smiled at the radiant good faith of the handsome

young sculptor, and asked each other whether he really supposed

that beauties of that quality were meant to wed with poor artists.

But although Christina's deportment, as I have said, was one of

superb inexpressiveness, Rowland had derived from Roderick no suspicion

that he suffered from snubbing, and he was therefore surprised

at an incident which befell one evening at a large musical party.

Roderick, as usual, was in the field, and, on the ladies taking the chairs

which had been arranged for them, he immediately placed himself

beside Christina.  As most of the gentlemen were standing, his position

made him as conspicuous as Hamlet at Ophelia's feet, at the play.

Rowland was leaning, somewhat apart, against the chimney-piece. There

was a long, solemn pause before the music began, and in the midst

of it Christina rose, left her place, came the whole length of the

immense room, with every one looking at her, and stopped before him.

She was neither pale nor flushed; she had a soft smile.



"Will you do me a favor?" she asked.



"A thousand!"



"Not now, but at your earliest convenience.  Please remind Mr. Hudson

that he is not in a New England village--that it is not the custom

in Rome to address one's conversation exclusively, night after night,

to the same poor girl, and that"....



The music broke out with a great blare and covered her voice.

She made a gesture of impatience, and Rowland offered her his arm

and led her back to her seat.



The next day he repeated her words to Roderick, who burst into

joyous laughter.  "She 's a delightfully strange girl!" he cried.

"She must do everything that comes into her head!"



"Had she never asked you before not to talk to her so much?"



"On the contrary, she has often said to me, 'Mind you now, I forbid

you to leave me.  Here comes that tiresome So-and-so.' She cares

as little about the custom as I do.  What could be a better proof

than her walking up to you, with five hundred people looking at her?

Is that the custom for young girls in Rome?"



"Why, then, should she take such a step?"



"Because, as she sat there, it came into her head.  That 's reason

enough for her.  I have imagined she wishes me well, as they say here--

though she has never distinguished me in such a way as that!"



Madame Grandoni had foretold the truth; Mrs. Light, a couple

of weeks later, convoked all Roman society to a brilliant ball.

Rowland went late, and found the staircase so encumbered with

flower-pots and servants that he was a long time making his way

into the presence of the hostess.  At last he approached her, as she

stood making courtesies at the door, with her daughter by her side.

Some of Mrs. Light's courtesies were very low, for she had the happiness

of receiving a number of the social potentates of the Roman world.

She was rosy with triumph, to say nothing of a less metaphysical cause,

and was evidently vastly contented with herself, with her company,

and with the general promise of destiny.  Her daughter was less

overtly jubilant, and distributed her greetings with impartial frigidity.

She had never been so beautiful.  Dressed simply in vaporous white,

relieved with half a dozen white roses, the perfection of her

features and of her person and the mysterious depth of her

expression seemed to glow with the white light of a splendid pearl.

She recognized no one individually, and made her courtesy slowly,

gravely, with her eyes on the ground.  Rowland fancied that,

as he stood before her, her obeisance was slightly exaggerated,

as with an intention of irony; but he smiled philosophically to himself,

and reflected, as he passed into the room, that, if she disliked him,

he had nothing to reproach himself with.  He walked about,

had a few words with Miss Blanchard, who, with a fillet of cameos

in her hair, was leaning on the arm of Mr. Leavenworth, and at last

came upon the Cavaliere Giacosa, modestly stationed in a corner.

The little gentleman's coat-lappet was decorated with an enormous

bouquet and his neck encased in a voluminous white handkerchief

of the fashion of thirty years ago.  His arms were folded,

and he was surveying the scene with contracted eyelids, through which

you saw the glitter of his intensely dark, vivacious pupil.

He immediately embarked on an elaborate apology for not having

yet manifested, as he felt it, his sense of the honor Rowland

had done him.



"I am always on service with these ladies, you see," he explained,

"and that is a duty to which one would not willingly be faithless

for an instant."



"Evidently," said Rowland, "you are a very devoted friend.

Mrs. Light, in her situation, is very happy in having you."



"We are old friends," said the Cavaliere, gravely.  "Old friends.

I knew the signora many years ago, when she was the prettiest

woman in Rome--or rather in Ancona, which is even better.

The beautiful Christina, now, is perhaps the most beautiful

young girl in Europe!"



"Very likely," said Rowland.



"Very well, sir, I taught her to read; I guided her little

hands to touch the piano keys."  And at these faded memories,

the Cavaliere's eyes glittered more brightly.  Rowland half expected

him to proceed, with a little flash of long-repressed passion,

"And now--and now, sir, they treat me as you observed the other day!"

But the Cavaliere only looked out at him keenly from among his wrinkles,

and seemed to say, with all the vividness of the Italian glance,

"Oh, I say nothing more.  I am not so shallow as to complain!"



Evidently the Cavaliere was not shallow, and Rowland repeated respectfully,

"You are a devoted friend."



"That 's very true.  I am a devoted friend.  A man may do himself justice,

after twenty years!"



Rowland, after a pause, made some remark about the beauty of the ball.

It was very brilliant.



"Stupendous!" said the Cavaliere, solemnly.  "It is a great day.

We have four Roman princes, to say nothing of others."  And he counted

them over on his fingers and held up his hand triumphantly.

"And there she stands, the girl to whom I--I, Giuseppe Giacosa--

taught her alphabet and her piano-scales; there she stands in her

incomparable beauty, and Roman princes come and bow to her.

Here, in his corner, her old master permits himself to be proud."



"It is very friendly of him," said Rowland, smiling.



The Cavaliere contracted his lids a little more and gave another

keen glance.  "It is very natural, signore.  The Christina is

a good girl; she remembers my little services.  But here comes,"

he added in a moment, "the young Prince of the Fine Arts.

I am sure he has bowed lowest of all."



Rowland looked round and saw Roderick moving slowly across the room

and casting about him his usual luminous, unshrinking looks.

He presently joined them, nodded familiarly to the Cavaliere,

and immediately demanded of Rowland, "Have you seen her?"



"I have seen Miss Light," said Rowland.  "She 's magnificent."



"I 'm half crazy!" cried Roderick; so loud that several persons turned round.



Rowland saw that he was flushed, and laid his hand on his arm.

Roderick was trembling.  "If you will go away," Rowland said instantly,

"I will go with you."



"Go away?" cried Roderick, almost angrily.  "I intend to dance with her!"



The Cavaliere had been watching him attentively; he gently laid his

hand on his other arm.  "Softly, softly, dear young man," he said.

"Let me speak to you as a friend."



"Oh, speak even as an enemy and I shall not mind it,"

Roderick answered, frowning.



"Be very reasonable, then, and go away."



"Why the deuce should I go away?"



"Because you are in love," said the Cavaliere.



"I might as well be in love here as in the streets."



"Carry your love as far as possible from Christina.

She will not listen to you--she can't."



"She 'can't'?" demanded Roderick.  "She is not a person of whom you

may say that.  She can if she will; she does as she chooses."



"Up to a certain point.  It would take too long to explain; I only beg you

to believe that if you continue to love Miss Light you will be very unhappy.

Have you a princely title? have you a princely fortune?  Otherwise you can

never have her."



And the Cavaliere folded his arms again, like a man who has done his duty.

Roderick wiped his forehead and looked askance at Rowland; he seemed

to be guessing his thoughts and they made him blush a little.

But he smiled blandly, and addressing the Cavaliere, "I 'm much obliged

to you for the information," he said.  "Now that I have obtained it,

let me tell you that I am no more in love with Miss Light than you are.

Mr. Mallet knows that.  I admire her--yes, profoundly.  But that 's no one's

business but my own, and though I have, as you say, neither a princely

title nor a princely fortune, I mean to suffer neither those advantages

nor those who possess them to diminish my right."



"If you are not in love, my dear young man," said the Cavaliere,

with his hand on his heart and an apologetic smile, "so much the better.

But let me entreat you, as an affectionate friend, to keep a watch on

your emotions.  You are young, you are handsome, you have a brilliant

genius and a generous heart, but--I may say it almost with authority--

Christina is not for you!"



Whether Roderick was in love or not, he was nettled by what apparently

seemed to him an obtrusive negation of an inspiring possibility.

"You speak as if she had made her choice!" he cried.

"Without pretending to confidential information on the subject,

I am sure she has not."



"No, but she must make it soon," said the Cavaliere.

And raising his forefinger, he laid it against his under lip.

"She must choose a name and a fortune--and she will!"



"She will do exactly as her inclination prompts!

She will marry the man who pleases her, if he has n't a dollar!

I know her better than you.  "



The Cavaliere turned a little paler than usual, and smiled more urbanely.

"No, no, my dear young man, you do not know her better than I. You have

not watched her, day by day, for twenty years.  I too have admired her.

She is a good girl; she has never said an unkind word to me; the blessed

Virgin be thanked!  But she must have a brilliant destiny; it has been

marked out for her, and she will submit.  You had better believe me;

it may save you much suffering."



"We shall see!" said Roderick, with an excited laugh.



"Certainly we shall see.  But I retire from the discussion,"

the Cavaliere added.  "I have no wish to provoke you to attempt

to prove to me that I am wrong.  You are already excited."



"No more than is natural to a man who in an hour or so is to dance

the cotillon with Miss Light."



"The cotillon? has she promised?"



Roderick patted the air with a grand confidence.  "You 'll see!"

His gesture might almost have been taken to mean that the state

of his relations with Miss Light was such that they quite dispensed

with vain formalities.



The Cavaliere gave an exaggerated shrug.  "You make a great many mourners!"



"He has made one already!"  Rowland murmured to himself.

This was evidently not the first time that reference had been made

between Roderick and the Cavaliere to the young man's possible passion,

and Roderick had failed to consider it the simplest and most natural

course to say in three words to the vigilant little gentleman

that there was no cause for alarm--his affections were preoccupied.

Rowland hoped, silently, with some dryness, that his motives

were of a finer kind than they seemed to be.  He turned away;

it was irritating to look at Roderick's radiant, unscrupulous eagerness.

The tide was setting toward the supper-room and he drifted with it

to the door.  The crowd at this point was dense, and he was

obliged to wait for some minutes before he could advance.

At last he felt his neighbors dividing behind him,

and turning he saw Christina pressing her way forward alone.

She was looking at no one, and, save for the fact of her being alone,

you would not have supposed she was in her mother's house.

As she recognized Rowland she beckoned to him, took his arm,

and motioned him to lead her into the supper-room. She said nothing

until he had forced a passage and they stood somewhat isolated.



"Take me into the most out-of-the-way corner you can find,"

she then said, "and then go and get me a piece of bread."



"Nothing more?  There seems to be everything conceivable."



"A simple roll.  Nothing more, on your peril.  Only bring

something for yourself."



It seemed to Rowland that the embrasure of a window

(embrasures in Roman palaces are deep) was a retreat

sufficiently obscure for Miss Light to execute whatever

design she might have contrived against his equanimity.

A roll, after he had found her a seat, was easily procured.

As he presented it, he remarked that, frankly speaking,

he was at loss to understand why she should have selected

for the honor of a tete-a-tete an individual for whom she

had so little taste.



"Ah yes, I dislike you," said Christina.  "To tell the truth,

I had forgotten it.  There are so many people here whom I dislike more,

that when I espied you just now, you seemed like an intimate friend.

But I have not come into this corner to talk nonsense," she went on.

"You must not think I always do, eh?"



"I have never heard you do anything else," said Rowland, deliberately,

having decided that he owed her no compliments.



"Very good.  I like your frankness.  It 's quite true.  You see,

I am a strange girl.  To begin with, I am frightfully egotistical.

Don't flatter yourself you have said anything very clever

if you ever take it into your head to tell me so.

I know it much better than you.  So it is, I can't help it.

I am tired to death of myself; I would give all I possess to get

out of myself; but somehow, at the end, I find myself so vastly

more interesting than nine tenths of the people I meet.

If a person wished to do me a favor I would say to him,

'I beg you, with tears in my eyes, to interest me.  Be strong,

be positive, be imperious, if you will; only be something,--

something that, in looking at, I can forget my detestable self!'

Perhaps that is nonsense too.  If it is, I can't help it.

I can only apologize for the nonsense I know to be such

and that I talk--oh, for more reasons than I can tell you!

I wonder whether, if I were to try, you would understand me."



"I am afraid I should never understand," said Rowland,

"why a person should willingly talk nonsense."



"That proves how little you know about women.  But I like your frankness.

When I told you the other day that you displeased me, I had an idea you

were more formal,--how do you say it?--more guinde.  I am very capricious.

To-night I like you better."



"Oh, I am not guinde," said Rowland, gravely.



"I beg your pardon, then, for thinking so.  Now I have an idea

that you would make a useful friend--an intimate friend--

a friend to whom one could tell everything.  For such a friend,

what would n't I give!"



Rowland looked at her in some perplexity.  Was this touching sincerity,

or unfathomable coquetry?  Her beautiful eyes looked divinely candid;

but then, if candor was beautiful, beauty was apt to be subtle.

"I hesitate to recommend myself out and out for the office," he said,

"but I believe that if you were to depend upon me for anything

that a friend may do, I should not be found wanting."



"Very good.  One of the first things one asks of a friend is

to judge one not by isolated acts, but by one's whole conduct.

I care for your opinion--I don't know why."



"Nor do I, I confess," said Rowland with a laugh.



"What do you think of this affair?" she continued, without heeding his laugh.



"Of your ball?  Why, it 's a very grand affair."



"It 's horrible--that 's what it is!  It 's a mere rabble!

There are people here whom I never saw before, people who were never asked.

Mamma went about inviting every one, asking other people to invite any

one they knew, doing anything to have a crowd.  I hope she is satisfied!

It is not my doing.  I feel weary, I feel angry, I feel like crying.

I have twenty minds to escape into my room and lock the door and let

mamma go through with it as she can.  By the way," she added in a moment,

without a visible reason for the transition, "can you tell me

something to read?"



Rowland stared, at the disconnectedness of the question.



"Can you recommend me some books?" she repeated.

"I know you are a great reader.  I have no one else to ask.

We can buy no books.  We can make debts for jewelry and bonnets

and five-button gloves, but we can't spend a sou for ideas.

And yet, though you may not believe it, I like ideas

quite as well."



"I shall be most happy to lend you some books," Rowland said.

"I will pick some out to-morrow and send them to you."



"No novels, please!  I am tired of novels.  I can imagine

better stories for myself than any I read.  Some good poetry,

if there is such a thing nowadays, and some memoirs and histories

and books of facts."



"You shall be served.  Your taste agrees with my own."



She was silent a moment, looking at him.  Then suddenly--"Tell me something

about Mr. Hudson," she demanded.  "You are great friends!"



"Oh yes," said Rowland; "we are great friends."



"Tell me about him.  Come, begin!"



"Where shall I begin?  You know him for yourself."



"No, I don't know him; I don't find him so easy to know.

Since he has finished my bust and begun to come here disinterestedly,

he has become a great talker.  He says very fine things;

but does he mean all he says?"



"Few of us do that."



"You do, I imagine.  You ought to know, for he tells me you

discovered him."  Rowland was silent, and Christina continued,

"Do you consider him very clever?"



"Unquestionably."



"His talent is really something out of the common way?"



"So it seems to me."



"In short, he 's a man of genius?"



"Yes, call it genius."



"And you found him vegetating in a little village and took him

by the hand and set him on his feet in Rome?"



"Is that the popular legend?" asked Rowland.



"Oh, you need n't be modest.  There was no great merit in it;

there would have been none at least on my part in the same circumstances.

Real geniuses are not so common, and if I had discovered one in

the wilderness, I would have brought him out into the market-place

to see how he would behave.  It would be excessively amusing.

You must find it so to watch Mr. Hudson, eh?  Tell me this:

do you think he is going to be a great man--become famous,

have his life written, and all that?"



"I don't prophesy, but I have good hopes."



Christina was silent.  She stretched out her bare arm

and looked at it a moment absently, turning it so as to see--

or almost to see--the dimple in her elbow.  This was apparently

a frequent gesture with her; Rowland had already observed it.

It was as coolly and naturally done as if she had been in her

room alone.  "So he 's a man of genius," she suddenly resumed.

"Don't you think I ought to be extremely flattered to have

a man of genius perpetually hanging about?  He is the first I

ever saw, but I should have known he was not a common mortal.

There is something strange about him.  To begin with, he has

no manners.  You may say that it 's not for me to blame him,

for I have none myself.  That 's very true, but the difference

is that I can have them when I wish to (and very charming ones too;

I 'll show you some day); whereas Mr. Hudson will never

have them.  And yet, somehow, one sees he 's a gentleman.

He seems to have something urging, driving, pushing him,

making him restless and defiant.  You see it in his eyes.

They are the finest, by the way, I ever saw.  When a person

has such eyes as that you can forgive him his bad manners.

I suppose that is what they call the sacred fire."



Rowland made no answer except to ask her in a moment if she would

have another roll.  She merely shook her head and went on:--



"Tell me how you found him.  Where was he--how was he?"



"He was in a place called Northampton.  Did you ever hear of it?

He was studying law--but not learning it."



"It appears it was something horrible, eh?"



"Something horrible?"



"This little village.  No society, no pleasures, no beauty, no life."



"You have received a false impression.  Northampton is not as gay as Rome,

but Roderick had some charming friends."



"Tell me about them.  Who were they?"



"Well, there was my cousin, through whom I made his acquaintance:

a delightful woman."



"Young--pretty?"



"Yes, a good deal of both.  And very clever."



"Did he make love to her?"



"Not in the least."



"Well, who else?"



"He lived with his mother.  She is the best of women."



"Ah yes, I know all that one's mother is.  But she does not count as society.

And who else?"



Rowland hesitated.  He wondered whether Christina's

insistance was the result of a general interest in Roderick's

antecedents or of a particular suspicion.  He looked at her;

she was looking at him a little askance, waiting for his answer.

As Roderick had said nothing about his engagement to the Cavaliere,

it was probable that with this beautiful girl he had not

been more explicit.  And yet the thing was announced,

it was public; that other girl was happy in it, proud of it.

Rowland felt a kind of dumb anger rising in his heart.

He deliberated a moment intently.



"What are you frowning at?"  Christina asked.



"There was another person," he answered, "the most important of all:

the young girl to whom he is engaged."



Christina stared a moment, raising her eyebrows.

"Ah, Mr. Hudson is engaged?" she said, very simply.

"Is she pretty?"



"She is not called a beauty," said Rowland.  He meant to practice

great brevity, but in a moment he added, "I have seen beauties,

however, who pleased me less."



"Ah, she pleases you, too?  Why don't they marry?"



"Roderick is waiting till he can afford to marry."



Christina slowly put out her arm again and looked at the dimple

in her elbow.  "Ah, he 's engaged?" she repeated in the same tone.

"He never told me."



Rowland perceived at this moment that the people about them

were beginning to return to the dancing-room, and immediately

afterwards he saw Roderick making his way toward themselves.

Roderick presented himself before Miss Light.



"I don't claim that you have promised me the cotillon," he said,

"but I consider that you have given me hopes which warrant

the confidence that you will dance with me."



Christina looked at him a moment.  "Certainly I have made no promises,"

she said.  "It seemed to me that, as the daughter of the house,

I should keep myself free and let it depend on circumstances."



"I beseech you to dance with me!" said Roderick, with vehemence.



Christina rose and began to laugh.  "You say that very well,

but the Italians do it better."



This assertion seemed likely to be put to the proof.

Mrs. Light hastily approached, leading, rather than led by,

a tall, slim young man, of an unmistakably Southern physiognomy.

"My precious love," she cried, "what a place to hide in!

We have been looking for you for twenty minutes; I have chosen

a cavalier for you, and chosen well!"



The young man disengaged himself, made a ceremonious bow,

joined his two hands, and murmured with an ecstatic smile,

"May I venture to hope, dear signorina, for the honor

of your hand?"



"Of course you may!" said Mrs. Light.  "The honor is for us."



Christina hesitated but for a moment, then swept the young man a courtesy

as profound as his own bow.  "You are very kind, but you are too late.

I have just accepted!"



"Ah, my own darling!" murmured--almost moaned--Mrs. Light.



Christina and Roderick exchanged a single glance--a glance

brilliant on both sides.  She passed her hand into his arm;

he tossed his clustering locks and led her away.



A short time afterwards Rowland saw the young man whom she

had rejected leaning against a doorway.  He was ugly, but what

is called distinguished-looking. He had a heavy black eye,

a sallow complexion, a long, thin neck; his hair was cropped

en brosse.  He looked very young, yet extremely bored.

He was staring at the ceiling and stroking an imperceptible moustache.

Rowland espied the Cavaliere Giacosa hard by, and, having joined him,

asked him the young man's name.



"Oh," said the Cavaliere, "he 's a pezzo grosso!

A Neapolitan.  Prince Casamassima."

