






The Valley of the Moon



by Jack London









BOOK I



CHAPTER 1



"You hear me, Saxon? Come on along. What if it is the

Bricklayers? I'll have gentlemen friends there, and so'll you.

The Al Vista band'll be along, an' you know it plays heavenly.

An' you just love dancin'---"



Twenty feet away, a stout, elderly woman interrupted the girl's

persuasions. The elderly woman's back was turned, and the

back-loose, bulging, and misshapen--began a convulsive heaving.



"Gawd!" she cried out. "O Gawd!"



She flung wild glances, like those of an entrapped animal, up and

down the big whitewashed room that panted with heat and that was

thickly humid with the steam that sizzled from the damp cloth

under the irons of the many ironers. From the girls and women

near her, all swinging irons steadily but at high pace, came

quick glances, and labor efficiency suffered to the extent of a

score of suspended or inadequate movements. The elderly woman's

cry had caused a tremor of money-loss to pass among the

piece-work ironers of fancy starch.



She gripped herself and her iron with a visible effort, and

dabbed futilely at the frail, frilled garment on the board under

her hand.



"I thought she'd got'em again--didn't you?" the girl said.



"It's a shame, a women of her age, and . . . condition," Saxon

answered, as she frilled a lace ruffle with a hot fluting-iron.

Her movements were delicate, safe, and swift, and though her face

was wan with fatigue and exhausting heat, there was no slackening

in her pace.



"An' her with seven, an' two of 'em in reform school," the girl

at the next board sniffed sympathetic agreement. "But you just

got to come to Weasel Park to-morrow, Saxon. The Bricklayers' is

always lively--tugs-of-war, fat-man races, real Irish jiggin',

an' . . . an' everything. An' The floor of the pavilion's swell."



But the elderly woman brought another interruption. She dropped

her iron on the shirtwaist, clutched at the board, fumbled it,

caved in at the knees and hips, and like a half-empty sack

collapsed on the floor, her long shriek rising in the pent room

to the acrid smell of scorching cloth. The women at the boards

near to her scrambled, first, to the hot iron to save the cloth,

and then to her, while the forewoman hurried belligerently down

the aisle. The women farther away continued unsteadily at their

work, losing movements to the extent of a minute's set-back to

the totality of the efficiency of the fancy-starch room.



"Enough to kill a dog," the girl muttered, thumping her iron down

on its rest with reckless determination. "Workin' girls' life

ain't what it's cracked up. Me to quit--that's what I'm comin'

to."



"Mary!" Saxon uttered the other's name with a reproach so

profound that she was compelled to rest her own iron for emphasis

and so lose a dozen movements.



Mary flashed a half-frightened look across.



"I didn't mean it, Saxon," she whimpered. "Honest, I didn't. I

wouldn't never go that way. But I leave it to you, if a day like

this don't get on anybody's nerves. Listen to that!"



The stricken woman, on her back, drumming her heels on the floor,

was shrieking persistently and monotonously, like a mechanical

siren. Two women, clutching her under the arms, were dragging her

down the aisle. She drummed and shrieked the length of it. The

door opened, and a vast, muffled roar of machinery burst in; and

in the roar of it the drumming and the shrieking were drowned ere

the door swung shut. Remained of the episode only the scorch of

cloth drifting ominously through the air.



"It's sickenin'," said Mary.



And thereafter, for a long time, the many irons rose and fell,

the pace of the room in no wise diminished; while the forewoman

strode the aisles with a threatening eye for incipient breakdown

and hysteria. Occasionally an ironer lost the stride for an

instant, gasped or sighed, then caught it up again with weary

determination. The long summer day waned, hut not the heat, and

under the raw flare of electric light the work went on.



By nine o'clock the first women began to go home. The mountain of

fancy starch had been demolished--all save the few remnants, here

and there, on the boards, where the ironers still labored.



Saxon finished ahead of Mary, at whose board she paused on the

way out.



"Saturday night an' another week gone," Mary said mournfully, her

young cheeks pallid and hollowed, her black eyes blue-shadowed

and tired. "What d'you think you've made, Saxon?"



"Twelve and a quarter," was the answer, just touched with pride

"And I'd a-made more if it wasn't for that fake bunch of

starchers."



"My! I got to pass it to you," Mary congratulated. "You're a sure

fierce hustler--just eat it up. Me--I've only ten an' a half, an'

for a hard week ... See you on the nine-forty. Sure now. We can

just fool around until the dancin' begins. A lot of my gentlemen

friends'll be there in the afternoon."



Two blocks from the laundry, where an arc-light showed a gang of

toughs on the corner, Saxon quickened her pace. Unconsciously her

face set and hardened as she passed. She did not catch the words

of the muttered comment, but the rough laughter it raised made

her guess and warmed her checks with resentful blood. Three

blocks more, turning once to left and once to right, she walked

on through the night that was already growing cool. On either

side were workingmen's houses, of weathered wood, the ancient

paint grimed with the dust of years, conspicuous only for

cheapness and ugliness.



Dark it was, but she made no mistake, the familiar sag and

screeching reproach of the front gate welcome under her hand. She

went along the narrow walk to the rear, avoided the missing step

without thinking about it, and entered the kitchen, where a

solitary gas-jet flickered. She turned it up to the best of its

flame. It was a small room, not disorderly, because of lack of

furnishings to disorder it. The plaster, discolored by the steam

of many wash-days, was crisscrossed with cracks from the big

earthquake of the previous spring. The floor was ridged,

wide-cracked, and uneven, and in front of the stove it was worn

through and repaired with a five-gallon oil-can hammered flat and

double. A sink, a dirty roller-towel, several chairs, and a

wooden table completed the picture.



An apple-core crunched under her foot as she drew a chair to the

table. On the frayed oilcloth, a supper waited. She attempted the

cold beans, thick with grease, but gave them up, and buttered a

slice of bread.



The rickety house shook to a heavy, prideless tread, and through

the inner door came Sarah, middle-aged, lop-breasted,

hair-tousled, her face lined with care and fat petulance.



"Huh, it's you," she grunted a greeting. "I just couldn't keep

things warm. Such a day! I near died of the heat. An' little

Henry cut his lip awful. The doctor had to put four stitches in

it."



Sarah came over and stood mountainously by the table.



"What's the matter with them beans?" she challenged.



"Nothing, only ..." Saxon caught her breath and avoided the

threatened outburst. "Only I'm not hungry. It's been so hot all

day. It was terrible in the laundry."



Recklessly she took a mouthful of the cold tea that had been

steeped so long that it was like acid in her mouth, and

recklessly, under the eye of her sister-in-law, she swallowed it

and the rest of the cupful. She wiped her mouth on her

handkerchief and got up.



"I guess I'll go to bed."



"Wonder you ain't out to a dance," Sarah sniffed. "Funny, ain't

it, you come home so dead tired every night, an' yet any night in

the week you can get out an' dance unearthly hours."



Saxon started to speak, suppressed herself with tightened lips,

then lost control and blazed out. "Wasn't you ever young?"



Without waiting for reply, she turned to her bedroom, which

opened directly off the kitchen. It was a small room, eight by

twelve, and the earthquake had left its marks upon the plaster. A

bed and chair of cheap pine and a very ancient chest of drawers

constituted the furniture. Saxon had known this chest of drawers

all her life. The vision of it was woven into her earliest

recollections. She knew it had crossed the plains with her people

in a prairie schooner. It was of solid mahogany. One end was

cracked and dented from the capsize of the wagon in Rock Canyon.

A bullet-hole, plugged, in the face of the top drawer, told of

the fight with the Indians at Little Meadow. Of these happenings

her mother had told her; also had she told that the chest had

come with the family originally from England in a day even

earlier than the day on which George Washington was born.



Above the chest of drawers, on the wall, hung a small

looking-glass. Thrust under the molding were photographs of young

men and women, and of picnic groups wherein the young men, with

hats rakishly on the backs of their heads, encircled the girls

with their arms. Farther along on the wall were a colored

calendar and numerous colored advertisements and sketches torn

out of magazines. Most of these sketches were of horses. From the

gas-fixture hung a tangled bunch of well-scribbled dance

programs.



Saxon started to take off her hat, but suddenly sat down on the

bed. She sobbed softly, with considered repression, but the

weak-latched door swung noiselessly open, and she was startled by

her sister-in-law's voice.



"NOW what's the matter with you? If you didn't like them beans--"



"No, no," Saxon explained hurriedly. "I'm just tired, that's all,

and my feet hurt. I wasn't hungry, Sarah. I'm just beat out."



"If you took care of this house," came the retort, "an' cooked

an' baked, an' washed, an' put up with what I put up, you'd have

something to be beat out about. You've got a snap, you have. But

just wait." Sarah broke off to cackle gloatingly. "Just wait,

that's all, an' you'll be fool enough to get married some day,

like me, an' then you'll get yours--an' it'll be brats, an'

brats, an' brats, an' no more dancin', an' silk stockin's, an'

three pairs of shoes at one time. You've got a cinch-nobody to

think of but your own precious self--an' a lot of young hoodlums

makin' eyes at you an' tellin' you how beautiful your eyes are.

Huh! Some fine day you'll tie up to one of 'em, an' then, mebbe,

on occasion, you'll wear black eyes for a change."



"Don't say that, Sarah," Saxon protested. "My brother never laid

hands on you. You know that."



"No more he didn't. He never had the gumption. Just the same,

he's better stock than that tough crowd you run with, if he can't

make a livin' an' keep his wife in three pairs of shoes. Just the

same he's oodles better'n your bunch of hoodlums that no decent

woman'd wipe her one pair of shoes on. How you've missed trouble

this long is beyond me. Mebbe the younger generation is wiser in

such thins--I don't know. But I do know that a young woman that

has three pairs of shoes ain't thinkin' of anything but her own

enjoyment, an' she's goin' to get hers, I can tell her that much.

When I was a girl there wasn't such doin's. My mother'd taken the

hide off me if I done the things you do. An' she was right, just

as everything in the world is wrong now. Look at your brother,

a-runnin' around to socialist meetin's, an' chewin' hot air, an'

diggin' up extra strike dues to the union that means so much

bread out of the mouths of his children, instead of makin' good

with his bosses. Why, the dues he pays would keep me in seventeen

pairs of shoes if I was nannygoat enough to want 'em. Some day,

mark my words, he'll get his time, an' then what'll we do?

What'll I do, with five mouths to feed an' nothin' comin' in?"



She stopped, out of breath but seething with the tirade yet to

come.



"Oh, Sarah, please won't you shut the door?" Saxon pleaded.



The door slammed violently, and Saxon, ere she fell to crying

again, could hear her sister-in-law lumbering about the kitchen

and talking loudly to herself.







CHAPTER II



Each bought her own ticket at the entrance to Weasel Park. And

each, as she laid her half-dollar down, was distinctly aware of

how many pieces of fancy starch were represented by the coin. It

was too early for the crowd, but bricklayers and their families,

laden with huge lunch-baskets and armfuls of babies, were already

going in--a healthy, husky race of workmen, well-paid and

robustly fed. And with them, here and there, undisguised by their

decent American clothing, smaller in bulk and stature, weazened

not alone by age but by the pinch of lean years and early

hardship, were grandfathers and mothers who had patently first

seen the light of day on old Irish soil. Their faces showed

content and pride as they limped along with this lusty progeny of

theirs that had fed on better food.



Not with these did Mary and Saxon belong. They knew them not, had

no acquaintances among them. It did not matter whether the

festival were Irish, German, or Slavonian; whether the picnic was

the Bricklayers', the Brewers', or the Butchers'. They, the

girls, were of the dancing crowd that swelled by a certain

constant percentage the gate receipts of all the picnics.



They strolled about among the booths where peanuts were grinding

and popcorn was roasting in preparation for the day, and went on

and inspected the dance floor of the pavilion. Saxon, clinging to

an imaginary partner, essayed a few steps of the dip-waltz. Mary

clapped her hands.



"My!" she cried. "You're just swell! An' them stockin's is

peaches."



Saxon smiled with appreciation, pointed out her foot,

velvet-slippered with high Cuban heels, and slightly lifted the

tight black skirt, exposing a trim ankle and delicate swell of

calf, the white flesh gleaming through the thinnest and flimsiest

of fifty-cent black silk stockings. She was slender, not tall,

yet the due round lines of womanhood were hers. On her white

shirtwaist was a pleated jabot of cheap lace, caught with a large

novelty pin of imitation coral. Over the shirtwaist was a natty

jacket, elbow-sleeved, and to the elbows she wore gloves of

imitation suede. The one essentially natural touch about her

appearance was the few curls, strangers to curling-irons, that

escaped from under the little naughty hat of black velvet pulled

low over the eyes.



Mary's dark eyes flashed with joy at the sight, and with a swift

little run she caught the other girl in her arms and kissed her

in a breast-crushing embrace. She released her, blushing at her

own extravagance.



"You look good to me," she cried, in extenuation. "If I was a man

I couldn't keep my hands off you. I'd eat you, I sure would."



They went out of the pavilion hand in hand, and on through the

sunshine they strolled, swinging hands gaily, reacting

exuberantly from the week of deadening toil. They hung over the

railing of the bear-pit, shivering at the huge and lonely

denizen, and passed quickly on to ten minutes of laughter at the

monkey cage. Crossing the grounds, they looked down into the

little race track on the bed of a natural amphitheater where the

early afternoon games were to take place. After that they

explored the woods, threaded by countless paths, ever opening out

in new surprises of green-painted rustic tables and benches in

leafy nooks, many of which were already pre-empted by family

parties. On a grassy slope, tree-surrounded, they spread a

newspaper and sat down on the short grass already tawny-dry under

the California sun. Half were they minded to do this because of

the grateful indolence after six days of insistent motion, half

in conservation for the hours of dancing to come.



"Bert Wanhope'll be sure to come," Mary chattered. "An' he said

he was going to bring Billy Roberts--'Big Bill,' all the fellows

call him. He's just a big boy, but he's awfully tough. He's a

prizefighter, an' all the girls run after him. I'm afraid of him.

He ain't quick in talkin'. He's more like that big bear we saw.

Brr-rf! Brr-rf!--bite your head off, just like that. He ain't

really a prize-fighter. He's a teamster--belongs to the union.

Drives for Coberly and Morrison. But sometimes he fights in the

clubs. Most of the fellows are scared of him. He's got a bad

temper, an' he'd just as soon hit a fellow as eat, just like

that. You won't like him, but he's a swell dancer. He's heavy,

you know, an' he just slides and glides around. You wanta have a

dance with'm anyway. He's a good spender, too. Never pinches. But

my!--he's got one temper."



The talk wandered on, a monologue on Mary's part, that centered

always on Bert Wanhope.



"You and he are pretty thick," Saxon ventured.



"I'd marry'm to-morrow," Mary flashed out impulsively. Then her

face went bleakly forlorn, hard almost in its helpless pathos.

"Only, he never asks me. He's ..." Her pause was broken by sudden

passion. "You watch out for him, Saxon, if he ever comes foolin'

around you. He's no good. Just the same, I'd marry him to-morrow.

He'll never get me any other way." Her mouth opened, but instead

of speaking she drew a long sigh. "It's a funny world, ain't it?"

she added. "More like a scream. And all the stars are worlds,

too. I wonder where God hides. Bert Wanhope says there ain't no

God. But he's just terrible. He says the most terrible things. I

believe in God. Don't you? What do you think about God, Saxon?"



Saxon shrugged her shoulders and laughed.



"But if we do wrong we get ours, don't we?" Mary persisted.

"That's what they all say, except Bert. He says he don't care

what he does, he'll never get his, because when he dies he's

dead, an' when he's dead he'd like to see any one put anything

across on him that'd wake him up. Ain't he terrible, though? But

it's all so funny. Sometimes I get scared when I think God's

keepin' an eye on me all the time. Do you think he knows what I'm

sayin' now? What do you think he looks like, anyway?"



"I don't know," Saxon answered. "He's just a funny proposition."



"Oh!" the other gasped.



"He IS, just the same, from what all people say of him," Saxon

went on stoutly. "My brother thinks he looks like Abraham

Lincoln. Sarah thinks he has whiskers."



"An' I never think of him with his hair parted," Mary confessed,

daring the thought and shivering with apprehension. "He just

couldn't have his hair parted. THAT'D be funny."



"You know that little, wrinkly Mexican that sells wire puzzles?"

Saxon queried. "Well, God somehow always reminds me of him."



Mary laughed outright.



"Now that IS funny. I never thought of him like that How do you

make it out?"



"Well, just like the little Mexican, he seems to spend his time

peddling puzzles. He passes a puzzle out to everybody, and they

spend all their lives tryin' to work it out They all get stuck. I

can't work mine out. I don't know where to start. And look at the

puzzle he passed Sarah. And she's part of Tom's puzzle, and she

only makes his worse. And they all, an' everybody I know--you,

too--are part of my puzzle."



"Mebbe the puzzles is all right," Mary considered. "But God don't

look like that yellow little Greaser. THAT I won't fall for. God

don't look like anybody. Don't you remember on the wall at the

Salvation Army it says 'God is a spirit'?"



"That's another one of his puzzles, I guess, because nobody knows

what a spirit looks like."



"That's right, too." Mary shuddered with reminiscent fear.

"Whenever I try to think of God as a spirit, I can see Hen Miller

all wrapped up in a sheet an' runnin' us girls. We didn't know,

an' it scared the life out of us. Little Maggie Murphy fainted

dead away, and Beatrice Peralta fell an' scratched her face

horrible. When I think of a spirit all I can see is a white sheet

runnin' in the dark. Just the same, God don't look like a

Mexican, an' he don't wear his hair parted."



A strain of music from the dancing pavilion brought both girls

scrambling to their feet.



"We can get a couple of dances in before we eat," Mary proposed.

"An' then it'll be afternoon an' all the fellows 'll be here.

Most of them are pinchers--that's why they don't come early, so

as to get out of taking the girls to dinner. But Bert's free with

his money, an' so is Billy. If we can beat the other girls to it,

they'll take us to the restaurant. Come on, hurry, Saxon."



There were few couples on the floor when they arrived at the

pavilion, and the two girls essayed the first waltz together.



"There's Bert now," Saxon whispered, as they came around the

second time.



"Don't take any notice of them," Mary whispered back. "We'll just

keep on goin'. They needn't think we're chasin' after them."



But Saxon noted the heightened color in the other's cheek, and

felt her quicker breathing.



"Did you see that other one?" Mary asked, as she backed Saxon in

a long slide across the far end of the pavilion. "That was Billy

Roberts. Bert said he'd come. He'll take you to dinner, and

Bert'll take me. It's goin' to be a swell day, you'll see. My! I

only wish the music'll hold out till we can get back to the other

end."



Down the floor they danced, on man-trapping and dinner-getting

intent, two fresh young things that undeniably danced well and

that were delightfully surprised when the music stranded them

perilously near to their desire.



Bert and Mary addressed each other by their given names, but to

Saxon Bert was "Mr. Wanhope," though he called her by her first

name. The only introduction was of Saxon and Billy Roberts. Mary

carried it off with a flurry of nervous carelessness.



"Mr. Robert--Miss Brown. She's my best friend. Her first name's

Saxon. Ain't it a scream of a name?"



"Sounds good to me," Billy retorted, hat off and hand extended.

"Pleased to meet you, Miss Brown."



As their hands clasped and she felt the teamster callouses on his

palm, her quick eyes saw a score of things. About all that he saw

was her eyes, and then it was with a vague impression that they

were blue. Not till later in the day did he realize that they

were gray. She, on the contrary, saw his eyes as they really

were--deep blue, wide, and handsome in a sullen-boyish way. She

saw that they were straight-looking, and she liked them, as she

had liked the glimpse she had caught of his hand, and as she

liked the contact of his hand itself. Then, too, but not sharply,

she had perceived the short, square-set nose, the rosiness of

cheek, and the firm, short upper lip, ere delight centered her

flash of gaze on the well-modeled, large clean mouth where red

lips smiled clear of the white, enviable teeth. A BOY, A GREAT

BIG MAN-BOY, was her thought; and, as they smiled at each other

and their hands slipped apart, she was startled by a glimpse of

his hair--short and crisp and sandy, hinting almost of palest

gold save that it was too flaxen to hint of gold at all.



So blond was he that she was reminded of stage-types she had

seen, such as Ole Olson and Yon Yonson; but there resemblance

ceased. It was a matter of color only, for the eyes were

dark-lashed and -browed, and were cloudy with temperament rather

than staring a child-gaze of wonder, and the suit of smooth brown

cloth had been made by a tailor. Saxon appraised the suit on the

instant, and her secret judgment was NOT A CENT LESS THAN FIFTY

DOLLARS. Further, he had none of the awkwardness of the

Scandinavian immigrant. On the contrary, he was one of those rare

individuals that radiate muscular grace through the ungraceful

man-garments of civilization. Every movement was supple, slow,

and apparently considered. This she did not see nor analyze. She

saw only a clothed man with grace of carriage and movement. She

felt, rather than perceived, the calm and certitude of all the

muscular play of him, and she felt, too, the promise of easement

and rest that was especially grateful and craved-for by one who

had incessantly, for six days and at top-speed, ironed fancy

starch. As the touch of his hand had been good, so, to her, this

subtler feel of all of him, body and mind, was good.



As he took her program and skirmished and joked after the way of

young men, she realized the immediacy of delight she had taken in

him. Never in her life had she been so affected by any man. She

wondered to herself: IS THIS THE MAN?



He danced beautifully. The joy was hers that good dancers take

when they have found a good dancer for a partner. The grace of

those slow-moving, certain muscles of his accorded perfectly with

the rhythm of the music. There was never doubt, never a betrayal

of indecision. She glanced at Bert, dancing "tough" with Mary,

caroming down the long floor with more than one collision with

the increasing couples. Graceful himself in his slender, tall,

lean-stomached way, Bert was accounted a good dancer; yet Saxon

did not remember ever having danced with him with keen pleasure.

Just a hit of a jerk spoiled his dancing--a jerk that did not

occur, usually, but that always impended. There was something

spasmodic in his mind. He was too quick, or he continually

threatened to be too quick. He always seemed just on the verge of

overrunning the time. It was disquieting. He made for unrest.



"You're a dream of a dancer," Billy Roberts was saying. "I've

heard lots of the fellows talk about your dancing."



"I love it," she answered.



But from the way she said it he sensed her reluctance to speak,

and danced on in silence, while she warmed with the appreciation

of a woman for gentle consideration. Gentle consideration was a

thing rarely encountered in the life she lived. IS THIS THE MAN?

She remembered Mary's "I'd marry him to-morrow," and caught

herself speculating on marrying Billy Roberts by the next day--if

he asked her.



With eyes that dreamily desired to close, she moved on in the

arms of this masterful, guiding pressure. A PRIZE-FIGHTER! She

experienced a thrill of wickedness as she thought of what Sarah

would say could she see her now, Only he wasn't a prizefighter,

but a teamster.



Came an abrupt lengthening of step, the guiding pressure grew

more compelling, and she was caught up and carried along, though

her velvet-shod feet never left the floor. Then came the sudden

control down to the shorter step again, and she felt herself

being held slightly from him so that he might look into her face

and laugh with her in joy at the exploit. At the end, as the band

slowed in the last bars, they, too, slowed, their dance fading

with the music in a lengthening glide that ceased with the last

lingering tone.



"We're sure cut out for each other when it comes to dancin'," he

said, as they made their way to rejoin the other couple.



"It was a dream," she replied.



So low was her voice that he bent to hear, and saw the flush in

her cheeks that seemed communicated to her eyes, which were

softly warm and sensuous. He took the program from her and

gravely and gigantically wrote his name across all the length of

it.



"An' now it's no good," he dared. "Ain't no need for it."



He tore it across and tossed it aside.



"Me for you, Saxon, for the next," was Bert's greeting, as they

came up. "You take Mary for the next whirl, Bill."



"Nothin' doin', Bo," was the retort. "Me an' Saxon's framed up to

last the day."



"Watch out for him, Saxon," Mary warned facetiously. "He's liable

to get a crush ou you."



"I guess I know a good thing when I see it," Billy responded

gallantly.



"And so do I," Saxon aided and abetted.



"I'd 'a' known you if I'd seen you in the dark," Billy added.



Mary regarded them with mock alarm, and Bert said good-naturedly:



"All I got to say is you ain't wastin' any time gettin' together.

Just the same, if' you can spare a few minutes from each other

after a couple more whirls, Mary an' me'd be complimented to have

your presence at dinner."



"Just like that," chimed Mary.



"Quit your kiddin'," Billy laughed back, turning his head to look

into Saxon's eyes. "Don't listen to 'em. They're grouched because

they got to dance together. Bert's a rotten dancer, and Mary

ain't so much. Come on, there she goes. See you after two more

dances."







CHAPTER III



They had dinner in the open-air, tree-walled dining-room, and

Saxon noted that it was Billy who paid the reckoning for the

four. They knew many of the young men and women at the other

tables, and greetings and fun flew back and forth. Bert was very

possessive with Mary, almost roughly so, resting his hand on

hers, catching and holding it, and, once, forcibly slipping off

her two rings and refusing to return them for a long while. At

times, when he put his arm around her waist, Mary promptly

disengaged it; and at other times, with elaborate obliviousness

that deceived no one, she allowed it to remain.



And Saxon, talking little but studying Billy Roberts very

intently, was satisfied that there would be an utter difference

in the way he would do such things . . . if ever he would do

them. Anyway, he'd never paw a girl as Bert and lots of the other

fellows did. She measured the breadth of Billy's heavy shoulders.



"Why do they call you 'Big' Bill?" she asked. "You're not so very

tall."



"Nope," he agreed. "I'm only five feet eight an' three-quarters.

I guess it must be my weight."



"He fights at a hundred an' eighty," Bert interjected.



"Oh, out it," Billy said quickly, a cloud-rift of displeasure

showing in his eyes. "I ain't a fighter. I ain't fought in six

months. I've quit it. It don't pay."



"Yon got two hundred the night you put the Frisco Slasher to the

bad," Bert urged proudly.



"Cut it. Cut it now.--Say, Saxon, you ain't so big yourself, are

you? But you're built just right if anybody should ask you.

You're round an' slender at the same time. I bet I can guess your

weight."



"Everybody gnesses over it," she warned, while inwardly she was

puzzled that she should at the same time be glad and regretful

that he did not fight any more.



"Not me," he was saying. "I'm a wooz at weight-guessin'. Just you

watch me." He regarded her critically, and it was patent that

warm approval played its little rivalry with the judgment of his

gaze. "Wait a minute."



He reached over to her and felt her arm at the biceps. The

pressure of the encircling fingers was firm and honest, and Saxon

thrilled to it. There was magic in this man-boy. She would have

known only irritation had Bert or any other man felt her arm. But

this man! IS HE THE MAN? she was questioning, when he voiced his

conclusion.



"Your clothes don't weigh more'n seven pounds. And seven

from--hum--say one hundred an' twenty-three--one hundred an'

sixteen is your stripped weight."



But at the penultimate word, Mary cried out with sharp reproof:



"Why, Billy Roberts, people don't talk about such things."



He looked at her with slow-growing, uncomprehending surprise.



"What things?" he demanded finally.



"There you go again! You ought to be ashamed of yourself. Look!

You've got Saxon blushing!"



"I am not," Saxon denied indignantly.



"An' if you keep on, Mary, you'll have me blushing," Billy

growled. "I guess I know what's right an' what ain't. It ain't

what a guy says, but what he thinks. An' I'm thinkin' right, an'

Saxon knows it. An' she an' I ain't thinkin' what you're thinkin'

at all."



"Oh! Oh!" Mary cried. "You're gettin' worse an' worse. I never

think such things."



"Whoa, Mary! Backup!" Bert checked her peremptorily. "You're in

the wrong stall. Billy never makes mistakes like that."



"But he needn't be so raw," she persisted.



"Come on, Mary, an' be good, an' cut that stuff," was Billy's

dismissal of her, as he turned to Saxon. "How near did I come to

it?"



"One hundred and twenty-two," she answered, looking deliberately

at Mary. "One twenty two with my clothes."



Billy burst into hearty laughter, in which Bert joined.



"I don't care," Mary protested, "You're terrible, both of

you--an' you, too, Saxon. I'd never a-thought it of you."



"Listen to me, kid," Bert began soothingly, as his arm slipped

around her waist.



But in the false excitement she had worked herself into, Mary

rudely repulsed the arm, and then, fearing that she had wounded

her lover's feelings, she took advantage of the teasing and

banter to recover her good humor. His arm was permitted to

return, and with heads bent together, they talked in whispers.



Billy discreetly began to make conversation with Saxon.



"Say, you know, your name is a funny one. I never heard it tagged

on anybody before. But it's all right. I like it."



"My mother gave it to me. She was educated, and knew all kinds of

words. She was always reading books, almost until she died. And

she wrote lots and lots. I've got some of her poetry published in

a San Jose newspaper long ago. The Saxons were a race of

people--she told me all about them when I was a little girl. They

were wild, like Indians, only they were white. And they had blue

eyes, and yellow hair, and they were awful fighters."



As she talked, Billy followed her solemnly, his eyes steadily

turned on hers.



"Never heard of them," he confessed. "Did they live anywhere

around here?"



She laughed.



"No, They lived in England. They were the first English, and you

know the Americans came from the English. We're Saxons, you an'

me, an' Mary, an' Bert, and all the Americans that are real

Americans, you know, and not Dagoes and Japs and such."



"My folks lived in America a long time," Billy said slowly,

digesting the information she had given and relating himself to

it. "Anyway, my mother's folks did. They crossed to Maine

hundreds of years ago."



"My father was 'State of Maine," she broke in, with a little

gurgle of joy. "And my mother was horn in Ohio, or where Ohio is

now. She used to call it the Great Western Reserve. What was your

father?"



"Don't know." Billy shrugged his shoulders. "He didn't know

himself. Nobody ever knew, though he was American, all right, all

right."



"His name's regular old American," Saxon suggested. "There's a

big English general right now whose name is Roberts. I've read it

in the papers."



"But Roberts wasn't my father's name. He never knew what his name

was. Roberts was the name of a gold-miner who adopted him. You

see, it was this way. When they was Indian-fightin' up there with

the Modoc Indians, a lot of the miners an' settlers took a hand.

Roberts was captain of one outfit, and once, after a fight, they

took a lot of prisoners--squaws, an' kids an' babies. An' one of

the kids was my father. They figured he was about five years old.

He didn't know nothin' but Indian."



Saxon clapped her hands, and her eyes sparkled: "He'd been

captured on an Indian raid!"



"That's the way they figured it," Billy nodded. "They recollected

a wagon-train of Oregon settlers that'd been killed by the Modocs

four years before. Roberts adopted him, and that's why I don't

know his real name. But you can bank on it, he crossed the plains

just the same."



"So did my father," Saxon said proudly.



"An' my mother, too," Billy added, pride touching his own voice.

"Anyway, she came pretty close to crossin' the plains, because

she was born in a wagon on the River Platte on the way out."



"My mother, too," said Saxon. "She was eight years old, an' she

walked most of the way after the oxen began to give out."



Billy thrust out his hand.



"Put her there, kid," he said. "We're just like old friends, what

with the same kind of folks behind us."



With shining eyes, Saxon extended her hand to his, and gravely

they shook.



"Isn't it wonderful?" she murmured. "We're both old American

stock. And if you aren't a Saxon there never was one--your hair,

your eyes, your skin, everything. And you're a fighter, too."



"I guess all our old folks was fighters when it comes to that. It

come natural to 'em, an' dog-gone it, they just had to fight or

they'd never come through."



"What are you two talkin' about?" Mary broke in upon them.



"They're thicker'n mush in no time," Bert girded. "You'd think

they'd known each other a week already."



"Oh, we knew each other longer than that," Saxon returned.

"Before ever we were born our folks were walkin' across the

plains together."



"When your folks was waitin' for the railroad to be built an' all

the Indians killed off before they dasted to start for

California," was Billy's way of proclaiming the new alliance.

"We're the real goods,Saxon an'n me, if anybody should ride up on

a buzz-wagon an' ask you."



"Oh, I don't know," Mary boasted with quiet petulance. "My father

stayed behind to fight in the Civil War. He was a drummer-boy.

That's why he didn't come to California until afterward."



"And my father went back to fight in the Civil War," Saxon said.



"And mine, too," said Billy.



They looked at each other gleefully. Again they had found a new

contact



"Well, they're all dead, ain't they?" was Bert's saturnine

comment. "There ain't no difference dyin' in battle or in the

poorhouse. The thing is they're deado. I wouldn't care a rap if

my father'd been hanged. It's all the same in a thousand years.

This braggin' about folks makes me tired. Besides, my father

couldn't a-fought. He wasn't born till two years after the war.

Just the same, two of my uncles were killed at Gettysburg. Guess

we done our share."



"Just like that," Mary applauded.



Bert's arm went around her waist again.



"We're here, ain't we?" he said. "An' that's what counts. The

dead are dead, an' you can bet your sweet life they just keep on

stayin' dead."



Mary put her hand over his mouth and began to chide him for his

awfulness, whereupon he kissed the palm of her hand and put his

head closer to hers.



The merry clatter of dishes was increasing as the dining-room

filled up. Here and there voices were raised in snatches of song.

There were shrill squeals and screams and bursts of heavier male

laughter as the everlasting skirmishing between the young men and

girls played on. Among some of the men the signs of drink were

already manifest. At a near table girls were calling out to

Billy. And Saxon, the sense of temporary possession already

strong on her, noted with jealous eyes that he was a favorite and

desired object to them.



"Ain't they awful?" Mary voiced her disapproval. "They got a

nerve. I know who they are. No respectable girl 'd have a thing

to do with them. Listen to that!"



"Oh, you Bill, you," one of them, a buxom young brunette, was

calling. "Hope you ain't forgotten me, Bill."



"Oh, you chicken," he called back gallantly.



Saxon flattered herself that he showed vexation, and she

conceived an immense dislike for the brunette.



"Goin' to dance?" the latter called.



"Mebbe," he answered, and turned abruptly to Saxon. "Say, we old

Americans oughta stick together, don't you think? They ain't many

of us left. The country's fillin' up with all kinds of

foreigners."



He talked on steadily, in a low, confidential voice, head close

to hers, as advertisement to the other girl that he was occupied.



From the next table on the opposite side, a young man had singled

out Saxon. His dress was tough. His companions, male and female,

were tough. His face was inflamed, his eyes touched with

wildness.



"Hey, you!" he called. "You with the velvet slippers. Me for

you."



The girl beside him put her arm around his neck and tried to hush

him, and through the mufflement of her embrace they could hear

him gurgling:



"I tell you she's some goods. Watch me go across an' win her from

them cheap skates."



"Butchertown hoodlums," Mary sniffed.



Saxon's eyes encountered the eyes of the girl, who glared hatred

across at her. And in Billy's eyes she saw moody anger

smouldering. The eyes were more sullen, more handsome than ever,

and clouds and veils and lights and shadowe shifted and deepened

in the blue of them until they gave her a sense of unfathomable

depth. He had stopped talking, and he made no effort to talk.



"Don't start a rough house, Bill," Bert cautioned. "They're from

across the hay an' they don't know you, that's all."



Bert stood up suddenly, stepped over to the other table,

whispered briefly, and came back. Every face at the table was

turned on Billy. The offendor arose brokenly, shook off the

detaining hand of his girl, and came over. He was a large man,

with a hard, malignant face and bitter eyes. Also, he was a

subdued man.



"You're Big Bill Roberts," he said thickly, clinging to the table

as he reeled. "I take my hat off to you. I apologire. I admire

your taste in skirts, an' take it from me that's a compliment;

but I did'nt know who you was. If I'd knowed you was Bill Roberts

there wouldn't been a peep from my fly-trap. D'ye get me? I

apologize. Will you shake hands?"



Gruffly, Billy said, "It's all right--forget it, sport;" and

sullenly he shook hands and with a slow, massive movement thrust

the other back toward his own table.



Saxon was glowing. Here was a man, a protector, something to lean

against, of whom even the Butchertown toughs were afraid as soon

as his name was mentioned.







CHAPTER IV



After dinner there were two dances in the pavilion, and then the

band led the way to the race track for the games. The dancers

followed, and all through the grounds the picnic parties left

their tables to join in. Five thousand packed the grassy slopes

of the amphitheater and swarmed inside the race track. Here,

first of the events, the men were lining up for a tug of war. The

contest was between the Oakland Bricklayers and the San Francisco

Bricklayers, and the picked braves, huge and heavy, were taking

their positions along the rope. They kicked heel-holds in the

soft earth, rubbed their hands with the soil from underfoot, and

laughed and joked with the crowd that surged about them.



The judges and watchers struggled vainly to keep back this crowd

of relatives and friends. The Celtic blood was up, and the Celtic

faction spirit ran high. The air was filled with cries of cheer,

advice, warning, and threat. Many elected to leave the side of

their own team and go to the side of the other team with the

intention of circumventing foul play. There were as many women as

men among the jostling supporters. The dust from the trampling,

scuffling feet rose in the air, and Mary gasped and coughed and

begged Bert to take her away. But he, the imp in him elated with

the prospect of trouble, insisted on urging in closer. Saxon

clung to Billy, who slowly and methodically elbowed and

shouldered a way for her.



"No place for a girl," he grumbled, looking down at her with a

masked expression of absent-mindedness, while his elbow

powerfully crushed on the ribs of a big Irishman who gave room.

"Things'll break loose when they start pullin'. They's been too

much drink, an' you know what the Micks are for a rough house."



Saxon was very much out of place among these large-bodied men and

women. She seemed very small and childlike, delicate and fragile,

a creature from another race. Only Billy's skilled bulk and

muscle saved her. He was continually glancing from face to face

of the women and always returning to study her face, nor was she

unaware of the contrast he was making.



Some excitement occurred a score of feet away from them, and to

the sound of exclamations and blows a surge ran through the

crowd. A large man, wedged sidewise in the jam, was shoved

against Saxon, crushing her closely against Billy, who reached

across to the man's shoulder with a massive thrust that was not

so slow as usual. An involuntary grunt came from the victim, who

turned his head, showing sun-reddened blond skin and unmistakable

angry Irish eyes.



"What's eatin' yeh?" he snarled.



"Get off your foot; you're standin' on it," was Billy's

contemptuous reply, emphasized by an increase of thrust.



The Irishman grunted again and made a frantic struggle to twist

his body around, but the wedging bodies on either side held him

in a vise.



"I'll break yer ugly face for yeh in a minute," he announced in

wrath-thick tones.



Then his own face underwent transformation. The snarl left the

lips, and the angry eyes grew genial.



"An' sure an' it's yerself," he said. "I didn't know it was yeh

a-shovin'. I seen yeh lick the Terrible Swede, if yeh WAS robbed

on the decision."



"No, you didn't, Bo," Billy answered pleasantly. "You saw me take

a good beatin' that night. The decision was all right."



The Irishman was now beaming. He had endeavored to pay a

compliment with a lie, and the prompt repudiation of the lie

served only to increase his hero-worship.



"Sure, an' a bad beatin' it was," he acknowledged, "but yeh

showed the grit of a bunch of wildcats. Soon as I can get me arm

free I'm goin' to shake yeh by the hand an' help yeh aise yer

young lady."



Frustrated in the struggle to get the crowd back, the referee

fired his revolver in the air, and the tug-of-war was on.

Pandemonium broke loose. Saxon, protected by the two big men, was

near enough to the front to see much that ensued. The men on the

rope pulled and strained till their faces were red with effort

and their joints crackled. The rope was new, and, as their hands

slipped, their wives and daughters sprang in, scooping up the

earth in double handfuls and pouring it on the rope and the hands

of their men to give them better grip.



A stout, middle-aged woman, carried beyond herself by the passion

of the contest, seized the rope and pulled beside her husband,

encouraged him with loud cries. A watcher from the opposing team

dragged her screaming away and was dropped like a steer by an

ear-blow from a partisan from the woman's team. He, in turn, went

down, and brawny women joined with their men in the battle.

Vainly the judges and watchers begged, pleaded, yelled, and swung

with their fists. Men, as well as women, were springing in to thc

rope and pulling. No longer was it team against team, but all

Oakland against all San Francisco, festooned with a free-for-all

fight. Hands overlaid hands two and three deep in the struggle to

grasp the rope. And hands that found no holds, doubled into

bunches of knuckles that impacted on the jaws of the watchers who

strove to tear hand-holds from the rope.



Bert yelped with joy, while Mary clung to him, mad with fear.

Close to the rope the fighters were going down and being

trampled. The dust arose in clouds, while from beyond, all

around, unable to get into the battle, could be heard the shrill

and impotent rage-screams and rage-yells of women and men.



"Dirty work, dirty work," Billy muttered over and over; and,

though he saw much that occurred, assisted by the friendly

Irishman he was coolly and safely working Saxon back out of the

melee.



At last the break came. The losing team, accompanied by its host

of volunteers, was dragged in a rush over the ground and

disappeared under the avalanche of battling forms of the

onlookers.



Leaving Saxon under the protection of the Irishman in an outer

eddy of calm, Billy plunged back into the mix-up. Several minutes

later he emerged with the missing couple--Bert bleeding from a

blow on the ear, but hilarious, and Mary rumpled and hysterical.



"This ain't sport," she kept repeating. "It's a shame, a dirty

shame."



"We got to get outa this," Billy said. "The fun's only

commenced."



"Aw, wait," Bert begged. "It's worth eight dollars. It's cheap at

any price. I ain't seen so many black eyes and bloody noses in a

month of Sundays."



"Well, go on back an' enjoy yourself," Billy commended. "I'll

take the girls up there on the side hill where we can look on.

But I won't give much for your good looks if some of them Micks

lands on you."



The trouble was over in an amazingly short time, for from the

judges' stand beside the track the announcer was bellowing the

start of the boys' foot-race; and Bert, disappointed, joined

Billy and the two girls on the hillside looking down upon the

track.



There were boys' races and girls' races, races of young women and

old women, of fat men and fat women, sack races and three-legged

races, and the contestants strove around the small track through

a Bedlam of cheering supporters. The tug-of-war was already

forgotten, and good nature reigned again.



Five young men toed the mark, crouching with fingertips to the

ground and waiting the starter's revolver-shot. Three were in

their stocking-feet, and the remaining two wore spiked

running-shoes.



"Young men's race," Bert read from the program. "An' only one

prize--twenty-five dollars. See the red-head with the spikes--the

one next to the outside. San Francisco's set on him winning. He's

their crack, an' there's a lot of bets up."



"Who's goin' to win?" Mary deferred to Billy's superior athletic

knowledge.



"How can I tell!" he answered. "I never saw any of 'em before.

But they all look good to me. May the best one win, that's all."



The revolver was fired, and the five runners were off and away.

Three were outdistanced at the start. Redhead led, with a

black-haired young man at his shoulder, and it was plain that the

race lay between these two. Halfway around, the black-haired one

took the lead in a spurt that was intended to last to the finish.

Ten feet he gained, nor could Red-head cut it down an inch.



"The boy's a streak," Billy commented. "He ain't tryin' his

hardest, an' Red-head's just bustin' himself."



Still ten feet in the lead, the black-haired one breasted the

tape in a hubbub of cheers. Yet yells of disapproval could be

distinguished. Bert hugged himself with joy.



"Mm-mm," he gloated. "Ain't Frisco sore? Watch out for fireworks

now. See! He's bein' challenged. The judges ain't payin' him the

money. An' he's got a gang behind him. Oh! Oh! Oh! Ain't had so

much fun since my old woman broke her leg!"



"Why don't they pay him, Billy?" Saxon asked. "He won."



"The Frisco bunch is challengin' him for a professional," Billy

elucidated. "That's what they're all beefin' about. But it ain't

right. They all ran for that money, so they're all professional."



The crowd surged and argued and roared in front of the judges'

stand. The stand was a rickety, two-story affair, the second

story open at the front, and here the judges could be seen

debating as heatedly as the crowd beneath them.



"There she starts!" Bert cried. "Oh, you rough-house!"



The black-haired racer, backed by a dozen supporters, was

climbing the outside stairs to the judges.



"The purse-holder's his friend," Billy said. "See, he's paid him,

an' some of the judges is willin' an' some are beefin'. An' now

that other gang's going up--they're Redhead's." He turned to

Saxon with a reassuring smile. "We're well out of it this time.

There's goin' to be rough stuff down there in a minute."



"The judges are tryin' to make him give the money back," Bert

explained. "An' if he don't the other gang'll take it away from

him. See! They're reachin' for it now."



High above his head, the winner held the roll of paper containing

the twenty-five silver dollars. His gang, around him, was

shouldering back those who tried to seize the money. No blows had

been struck yet, but the struggle increased until the frail

structure shook and swayed. From the crowd beneath the winner was

variously addressed: "Give it baok, you dog!" "Hang on to it,

Tim!" "You won fair, Timmy!" "Give it back, you dirty robber!"

Abuse unprintable as well as friendly advice was hurled at him.



The struggle grew more violent. Tim's supporters strove to hold

him off the floor so that his hand would still be above the

grasping hands that shot up. Once, for an instant, his arm was

jerked down. Again it went up. But evidently the paper had

broken, and with a last desperate effort, before he went down,

Tim flung the coin out in a silvery shower upon the heads of the

crowd beneath. Then ensued a weary period of arguing and

quarreling.



"I wish they'd finish, so as we could get back to the dancin',"

Mary complained. "This ain't no fun."



Slowly and painfully the judges' stand was cleared, and an

announcer, stepping to the front of the stand, spread his arms

appealing for silence. The angiy clamor died down.



 "The judges have decided," he shouted, "that this day of good

fellowship an' brotherhood--"



"Hear! Hear!" Many of the cooler heads applauded. "That's the

stuff!" "No fightin'!" "No hard feelin's!"



"An' therefore," the announcer became audible again, "the judges

have decided to put up another purse of twenty-five dollars an'

run the race over again!"



"An' Tim?" bellowed scores of throats. "What about Tim?" "He's

been robbed!" "The judges is rotten!"



Again the announcer stilled the tumult with his arm appeal.



"The judges have decided, for the sake of good feelin', that

Timothy McManus will also run. If he wins, the money's his."



"Now wouldn't that jar you?" Billy grumbled disgustedly. "If

Tim's eligible now, he was eligible the first time. An' if he was

eligible the first time, then the money was his."



"Red-head'll bust himself wide open this time," Bert jubilated.



"An' so will Tim," Billy rejoined. "You can bet he's mad clean

through, and he'll let out the links he was holdin' in last

time."



Another quarter of an hour was spent in clearing the track of the

excited crowd, and this time only Tim and Red-head toed the mark.

The other three young men had abandoned the contest.



The leap of Tim, at the report of the revolver, put him a clean

yard in the lead.



"I guess he's professional, all right, all right," Billy

remarked. "An' just look at him go!"



Half-way around, Tim led by fifty feet, and, running swiftly,

maintaining the same lead, he came down the homestretch an easy

winner. When directly beneath the group on the hillside, the

incredible and unthinkable happened. Standing close to the inside

edge of the track was a dapper young man with a light switch

cane. He was distinctly out of place in such a gathering, for

upon him was no ear-mark of the working class. Afterward, Bert

was of the opinion that he looked like a swell dancing master,

while Billy called him "the dude."



So far as Timothy McManus was concerned, the dapper young man was

destiny; for as Tim passed him, the young man, with utmost

deliberation, thrust his cane between Tim's flying legs. Tim

sailed through the air in a headlong pitch, struck spread-eagled

on his face, and plowed along in a cloud of dust.



There was an instant of vast and gasping silence. The young man,

too, seemed petrified by the ghastliness of his deed. It took an

approciable interval of time for him, as well as for the

onlookers, to realize what he had done. They recovered first, and

from a thousand throats the wild Irish yell went up. Red-head won

the race without a cheer. The storm center had shifted to the

young man with the cane. After the yell, he had one moment of

indecision; then he turned and darted up the track.



"Go it, sport!" Bert cheered, waving his hat in the air. "You're

the goods for me! Who'd a-thought it? Who'd a-thought it?

Say!--wouldn't it, now? Just wouldn't it?"



"Phew! He's a streak himself," Billy admired. "But what did he do

it for? He's no bricklayer."



Like a frightened rabbit, the mad roar at his heels, the young

man tore up the track to an open space on the hillside, up which

he clawed and disappeared among the trees. Behind him toiled a

hundred vengeful runners.



"It's too bad he's missing the rest of it," Billy said. "Look at

'em goin' to it."



Bert was beside himself. He leaped up and down and cried

continuously.



"Look at 'em! Look at 'em! Look at 'em!"



The Oakland faction was outraged. Twice had its favorite runner

been jobbed out of the race. This last was only another vile

trick of the Frisco faction. So Oakland doubled its brawny fists

and swung into San Francisco for blood. And San Francisco,

consciously innocent, was no less willing to join issues. To be

charged with such a crime was no less monstrous than the crime

itself. Besides, for too many tedious hours had the Irish

heroically suppressed themselves. Five thousands of them exploded

into joyous battle. The women joined with them. The whole

amphitheater was filled with the conflict. There were rallies,

retreats, charges, and counter-charges. Weaker groups were forced

fighting up the hillsides. Other groups, bested, fled among the

trees to carry on guerrilla warfare, emerging in sudden dashes to

overwhelm isolated enemies. Half a dozen special policemen, hired

by the Weasel Park management, received an impartial trouncing

from both sides.



"Nohody's the friend of a policeman," Bert chortled, dabbing his

handkerchief to his injured ear, which still bled.



The bushes crackled behind him, and he sprang aside to let the

locked forms of two men go by, rolling over and over down the

hill, each striking when uppermost, and followed by a screaming

woman who rained blows on the one who was patently not of her

clan.



The judges, in the second story of the stand, valiantly withstood

a fierce assault until the frail structure toppled to the ground

in splinters.



"What's that woman doing?" Saxon asked, calling attention to an

elderly woman beneath them on the track, who had sat down and was

pulling from her foot an elastic-sided shoe of generous

dimensions.



"Goin' swimming," Bert chuckled, as the stocking followed.



They watched, fascinated. The shoe was pulled on again over the

bare foot. Then the woman slipped a rock the size of her fist

into the stocking, and, brandishing this ancient and horrible

weapon, lumbered into the nearest fray.



"Oh!--Oh!--Oh!" Bert screamed, with every blow she struck "Hey,

old flannel-mouth! Watch out! You'll get yours in a second. Oh!

Oh! A peach! Did you see it? Hurray for the old lady! Look at her

tearin' into 'em! Watch out, old girl! ... Ah-h-h."



His voice died away regretfully, as the one with the stocking,

whose hair had been clutched from behind by another Amazon, was

whirled about in a dizzy semicircle.



Vainly Mary clung to his arm, shaking him back and forth and

remonstrating.



"Can't you be sensible?" she cried. "It's awful! I tell you it's

awful!"



But Bert was irrepressible.



"Go it, old girl!" he encouraged. "You win! Me for you every

time! Now's your chance! Swat! Oh! My! A peach! A peach!"



"It's the biggest rough-house I ever saw," Billy confided to

Saxon. "It sure takes the Micks to mix it. But what did that dude

wanta do it for? That's what gets me. He wasn't a bricklayer--not

even a workingman--just a regular sissy dude that didn't know a

livin' soul in the grounds. But if he wanted to raise a

rough-house he certainly done it. Look at 'em. They're fightin'

everywhere."



He broke into sudden laughter, so hearty that the tears came into

his eyes.



"What is it?" Saxon asked, anxious not to miss anything.



"It's that dude," Billy explained between gusts. "What did he

wanta do it for? That's what gets my goat. What'd he wanta do it

for?"



There was more crashing in the brush, and two women erupted upon

the scene, one in flight, the other pursuing. Almost ere they

could realize it, the little group found itself merged in the

astounding conflict that covered, if not the face of creation, at

least all the visible landscape of Weasel Park.



The fleeing woman stumbled in rounding the end of a picnic bench,

and would have been caught had she not seized Mary's arm to

recover balance, and then flung Mary full into the arms of the

woman who pursued. This woman, largely built, middle-aged, and

too irate to comprehend, clutched Mary's hair by one hand and

lifted the other to smack her. Before the blow could fall, Billy

had seized both the woman's wrists.



"Come on, old girl, cut it out," he said appeasingly. "You're in

wrong. She ain't done nothin'."



Then the woman did a strange thing. Making no resistance, but

maintaining her hold on the girl's hair, she stood still and

calmly began to scream. The scream was hideously compounded of

fright and fear. Yet in her face was neither fright nor fear. She

regarded Billy coolly and appraisingly, as if to see how he took

it--her scream merely the cry to the clan for help.



"Aw, shut up, you battleax!" Bert vociferated, trying to drag her

off by the shoulders.



The result was that The four rocked back and forth, while the

woman calmly went on screaming. The scream became touched with

triumph as more crashing was heard in the brush.



Saxon saw Billy's slow eyes glint suddenly to the hardness of

steel, and at the same time she saw him put pressure on his

wrist-holds. The woman released her grip on Mary and was shoved

back and free. Then the first man of the rescue was upon them. He

did not pause to inquire into the merits of the affair. It was

sufficient that he saw the woman reeling away from Billy and

screaming with pain that was largely feigned.



"It's all a mistake," Billy cried hurriedly. "We apologize,

sport--"



The Irishman swung ponderously. Billy ducked, cutting his apology

short, and as the sledge-like fist passed over his head, he drove

his left to the other's jaw. The big Irishman toppled over

sidewise and sprawled on the edge of the slope. Half-scrambled

back to his feet and out of balance, he was caught by Bert's

fist, and this time went clawing down the slope that was slippery

with short, dry grass.   Bert was redoubtable. "That for you, old

girl--my compliments," was his cry, as he shoved the woman over

the edge on to the treacherous slope. Three more men were

emerging from the brush.



In the meantime, Billy had put Saxon in behind the protection of

the picnic table. Mary, who was hysterical, had evinced a desire

to cling to him, and he had sent her sliding across the top of

the table to Saxon.



"Come on, you flannel-mouths!" Bert yelled at the newcomers,

himself swept away by passion, his black eyes flashing wildly,

his dark face inflamed by the too-ready blood. "Come on, you

cheap skates! Talk about Gettysburg. We'll show you all the

Americans ain't dead yet!"



"Shut your trap--we don't want a scrap with the girls here,"

Billy growled harshly, holding his position in front of the

table. He turned to the three rescuers, who were bewildered by

the lack of anything visible to rescue. "Go on, sports. We don't

want a row. You're in wrong. They ain't nothin' doin' in the

fight line. We don't wanta fight--d'ye get me?"



They still hesitated, and Billy might have succeeded in avoiding

trouble had not the man who had gone down the bank chosen that

unfortunate moment to reappear, crawling groggily on hands and

knees and showing a bleeding face. Again Bert reached him and

sent him downslope, and the other three, with wild yells, sprang

in on Billy, who punched, shifted position, ducked and punched,

and shifted again ere he struck the thiird time. His blows were

clean end hard, scientifically delivered, with the weight of his

body behind.



Saxon, looking on, saw his eyes and learned more about him. She

was frightened, but clear-seeing, and she was startled by the

disappearance of all depth of light and shadow in his eyes. They

showed surface only--a hard, bright surface, almost glazed,

devoid of all expression save deadly seriousness. Bert's eyes

showed madness. The eyes of the Irishmen were angry and serious,

and yet not all serious. There was a wayward gleam in them, as if

they enjoyed the fracas. But in Billy's eyes was no enjoyment. It

was as if he had certain work to do and had doggedly settled down

to do it.



Scarcely more expression did she note in the face, though there

was nothing in common between it and the one she had seen all

day. The boyishness had vanished. This face was mature in a

terrifying, ageless way. There was no anger in it, Nor was it

even pitiless. It seemed to have glazed as hard and passionlessly

as his eyes. Something came to her of her wonderful mother's

tales of the ancient Saxons, and he seemed to her one of those

Saxons, and she caught a glimpse, on the well of her

consciousness, of a long, dark boat, with a prow like the beak of

a bird of prey, and of huge, half-naked men, wing-helmeted, and

one of their faces, it seemed to her, was his face. She did not

reason this. She felt it, and visioned it as by an unthinkable

clairvoyance, and gasped, for the flurry of war was over. It had

lasted only seconds, Bert was dancing on the edge of the slippery

slope and mocking the vanquished who had slid impotently to the

bottom. But Billy took charge.



"Come on, you girls," he commanded. "Get onto yourself, Bert. We

got to get onta this. We can't fight an army."



He led the retreat, holding Saxon's arm, and Bert, giggling and

jubilant, brought up the rear with an indignant Mary who

protested vainly in his unheeding ears.



For a hundred yards they ran and twisted through the trees, and

then, no signs of pursuit appearing, they slowed down to a

dignified saunter. Bert, the trouble-seeker, pricked his ears to

the muffled sound of blows and sobs, and stepped aside to

investigate.



"Oh! look what I've found!" he called.



They joined him on the edge of a dry ditch and looked down. In

the bottom were two men, strays from the fight, grappled together

and still fighting. They were weeping out of sheer fatigue and

helplessness, and the blows they only occasionally struck were

open-handed and ineffectual.



"Hey, you, sport--throw sand in his eyes," Bert counseled.

"That's it, blind him an' he's your'n."



"Stop that!" Billy shouted at the man, who was following

instructions, "Or I'll come down there an' beat you up myself.

It's all over--d'ye get me? It's all over an' everybody's

friends. Shake an' make up. The drinks are on both of you. That's

right--here, gimme your hand an' I'll pull you out."



They left them shaking hands and brushing each other's clothes.



"It soon will be over," Billy grinned to Saxon. "I know 'em.

Fight's fun with them. An' this big scrap's made the days howlin'

success. what did I tell you!--look over at that table there."



A group of disheveled men and women, still breathing heavily,

were shaking hands all around.



"Come on, let's dance," Mary pleaded, urging them in the

direction of the pavilion.



All over the park the warring bricklayers were shaking hands and

making up, while the open-air bars were crowded with the

drinkers.



Saxon walked very close to Billy. She was proud of him. He could

fight, and he could avoid trouble. In all that had occurred he

had striven to avoid trouble. And, also, consideration for her

and Mary had been uppermost in his mind.



"You are brave," she said to him.



"It's like takin' candy from a baby," he disclaimed. "They only

rough-house. They don't know boxin'. They're wide open, an' all

you gotta do is hit 'em. It ain't real fightin', you know." With

a troubled, boyish look in his eyes, he stared at his bruised

knuckles. "An' I'll have to drive team to-morrow with 'em," he

lamented. "Which ain't fun, I'm tellin' you, when they stiffen

up."







CHAPTER V



At eight o'clock the Al Vista band played "Home, Sweet Home,"

and, following the hurried rush through the twilight to the

picnic train, the four managed to get double seats facing each

other. When the aisles and platforms were packed by the hilarious

crowd, the train pulled out for the short run from the suburbs

into Oakland. All the car was singing a score of songs at once,

and Bert, his head pillowed on Mary's breast with her arms around

him, started "On the Banks of the Wabash." And he sang the song

through, undeterred by the bedlam of two general fights, one on

the adjacent platform, the other at the opposite end of the car,

both of which were finally subdued by special policemen to the

screams of women and the crash of glass.



Billy sang a lugubrious song of many stanzas about a cowboy, the

refrain of which was, "Bury me out on the lone pr-rairie."



"That's one you never heard before; my father used to sing it,"

he told Saxon, who was glad that it was ended.



She had discovered the first flaw in him. He was tonedeaf. Not

once had he been on the key.



"I don't sing often," he added.



"You bet your sweet life he don't," Bert exclaimed. "His

friends'd kill him if he did."



"They all make fun of my singin'," he complained to Saxon.

"Honest, now, do you find it as rotten as all that?"



"It 's...it's maybe flat a bit," she admitted reluctantly.



"It don't sound flat to me," he protested. "It's a regular josh

on me. I'll bet Bert put you up to it. You sing something now,

Saxon. I bet you sing good. I can tell it from lookin' at you."



She began "When the Harvest Days Are Over." Bert and Mary joined

in; but when Billy attempted to add his voice he was dissuaded by

a shin-kick from Bert. Saxon sang in a clear, true soprano, thin

but sweet, and she was aware that she was singing to Billy.



"Now THAT is singing what is," he proclaimed, when she had

finished. "Sing it again. Aw, go on. You do it just right. It's

great."



His hand slipped to hers and gathered it in, and as she sang

again she felt the tide of his strength flood warmingly through

her.



"Look at 'em holdin' hands," Bert jeered. "Just a-holdin' hands

like they was afraid. Look at Mary an' me, Come on an' kick in,

you cold-feets. Get together. If you don't, it'll look

suspicious. I got my suspicions already. You're framin' somethin'

up."



Thers was no mistaking his innuendo, and Saxon felt her cheeks

flaming.



"Get onto yourself, Bert," Billy reproved.



"Shut up!" Mary added the weight of her indignation. "You're

awfully raw, Bert Wanhope, an' I won't have anything more to do

with you--there!"



She withdrew her arms and shoved him away, only to receive him

forgivingly half a dozen seconds afterward.



 "Come on, the four of us," Bert went on irrepressibly. "The

night's young. Let's make a time of it--Pabst's Cafe first, and

then some. What you say, Bill? What you say, Saxon? Mary's game."



Saxon waited and wondered, half sick with apprehension of this

man beside her whom she had known so short a time.



"Nope," he said slowly. "I gotta get up to a hard day's work

to-morrow, and I guess the girls has got to, too."



Saxon forgave him his tone-deafness. Here was the kind of man she

always had known existed. It was for some such man that she had

waited. She was twenty-two, and her first marriage offer had come

when she was sixteen. The last had occurred only the month

before, from the foreman of the washing-room, and he had been

good and kind, but not young. But this one beside her--he was

strong and kind and good, and YOUNG. She was too young herself

not to desire youth. There would have been rest from fancy starch

with the foreman, but there would have been no warmth. But this

man beside her.... She caught herself on the verge involuntarily

of pressing his hand that held hers.



"No, Bert, don't tease he's right," Mary was saying. "We've got

to get some sleep. It's fancy starch to-morrow, and all day on

our feet."



It came to Saxon with a chill pang that she was surely older than

Billy. She stole glances at the smoothness of his face, and the

essential boyishness of him, so much desired, shocked her. Of

course he would marry some girl years younger than himself, than

herself. How old was he? Could it be that he was too young for

her? As he seemed to grow insecessible, she was drawn toward him

more compellingly. He was so strong, so gentle. She lived over

the events of the day. There was no flaw there. He had considered

her and Mary, always. And he had torn the program up and danced

only with her. Surely he had liked her, or he would not have done

it.



She slightly moved her hand in his and felt the harsh contact of

his teamster callouses. The sensation was exquisite. He, too,

moved his hand, to accommodate the shift of hers, and she waited

fearfully. She did not want him to prove like other men, and she

could have hated him had he dared to take advantage of that

slight movement of her fingers and put his arm around her. He did

not, and she flamed toward him. There was fineness in him. He was

neither rattle-brained, like Bert, nor coarse like other men she

had encountered. For she had had experiences, not nice, and she

had been made to suffer by the lack of what was termed chivalry,

though she, in turn, lacked that word to describe what she

divined and desired.



And he was a prizefighter. The thought of it almost made her

gasp. Yet he answered not at all to her conception of a

prizefighter. But, then, he wasn't a prizefighter. He had said he

was not. She resolved to ask him about it some time if . . . if

he took her out again. Yet there was little doubt of that, for

when a man danced with one girl a whole day he did not drop her

immediately. Almost she hoped that he was a prizefighter. There

was a delicious tickle of wickedness about it. Prizefighters were

such terrible and mysterious men. In so far as they were out of

the ordinary and were not mere common workingmen such as

carpenters and laundrymen, they represented romance. Power also

they represented. They did not work for bosses, but spectacularly

and magnificently, with their own might, grappled with the great

world and wrung splendid living from its reluctant hands. Some of

them even owned automobiles and traveled with a retinue of

trainers and servants. Perhaps it had been only Billy's modesty

that made him say he had quit fighting. And yet, there were the

callouses on his hands. That showed he had quit.







CHAPTER VI



They said good-bye at the gate. Billy betrayed awkwardness that

was sweet to Saxon. He was not one of the take-it-for-granted

young men. There was a pause, while she feigned desire to go into

the house, yet waited in secret eagerness for the words she

wanted him to say.



"When am I goin' to see you again?" he asked, holding her hand in

his.



She laughed consentingly.



"I live 'way up in East Oakland," he explained. "You know there's

where the stable is, an' most of our teaming is done in that

section, so I don't knock around down this way much. But, say--"

His hand tightened on hers. "We just gotta dance together some

more. I'll tell you, the Orindore Club has its dance Wednesday.

If you haven't a date--have you?"



"No," she said.



"Then Wednesday. What time'll I come for you?"



And when they had arranged the details, and he had agreed that

she should dance some of the dances with the other fellows, and

said good night again, his hand closed more tightly on hers and

drew her toward him. She resisted slightly, but honestly. It was

the custom, but she felt she ought not for fear he might

misunderstand. And yet she wanted to kiss him as she had never

wanted to kiss a man. When it came, her face upturned to his, she

realized that on his part it was an honest kiss. There hinted

nothing behind it. Rugged and kind as himself, it was virginal

almost, and betrayed no long practice in the art of saying

good-bye. All men were not brutes after all, was her thought.



"Good night," she murmured; the gate screeched under her hand;

and she hurried along the narrow walk that led around to the

corner of the house.



"Wednesday," he celled softly.



"Wednesday," she answered.



But in the shadow of the narrow alley between the two houses she

stood still and pleasured in the ring of his foot falls down the

cement sidewalk. Not until they had quite died away did she go

on. She crept up the back stairs and across the kitchen to her

room, registering her thanksgiving that Sarah was asleep.



She lighted the gas, and, as she removed the little velvet hat,

she felt her lips still tingling with the kiss. Yet it had meant

nothing. It was the way of the young men. They all did it. But

their good-night kisses had never tingled, while this one tingled

in her brain as wall as on her lip. What was it? What did it

mean? With a sudden impulse she looked at herself in the glass.

The eyes were happy and bright. The color that tinted her cheeks

so easily was in them and glowing. It was a pretty reflection,

and she smiled, partly in joy, partly in appreciation, and the

smile grew at sight of the even rows of strong white teeth. Why

shouldn't Billy like that face? was her unvoiced query. Other men

had liked it. Other men did like it. Even the other girls

admitted she was a good-looker. Charley Long certainly liked it

from the way he made life miserable for her.



She glanced aside to the rim of the looking-glass where his

photograph was wedged, shuddered, and made a moue of distaste.

There was cruelty in those eyes, and brutishness. He was a brute.

For a year, now, he had bullied her. Other fellows were afraid to

go with her. He warned them off. She had been forced into almost

slavery to his attentions. She remembered the young bookkeeper at

the laundry--not a workingman, but a soft-handed, soft-voiced

gentleman--whom Charley had beaten up at the corner because he

had been bold enough to come to take her to the theater. And she

had been helpless. For his own sake she had never dared accept

another invitation to go out with him.



And now, Wednesday night, she was going with Billy. Billy! Her

heart leaped. There would be trouble, but Billy would save her

from him. She'd like to see him try and beat Billy up.



With a quick movement, she jerked the photograph from its niche

and threw it face down upon the chest of drawers. It fell beside

a small square case of dark and tarnished leather. With a feeling

as of profanation she again seized the offending photograph and

flung it across the room into a corner. At the same time she

picked up the leather case. Springing it open, she gazed at the

daguerreotype of a worn little woman with steady gray eyes and a

hopeful, pathetic mouth. Opposite, on the velvet lining, done in

gold lettering, was, CARLTON FROM DAISY. She read it reverently,

for it represented the father she had never known, and the mother

she had so little known, though she could never forget that those

wise sad eyes were gray.



Despite lack of conventional religion, Saxon's nature was deeply

religious. Her thoughts of God were vague and nebulous, and there

she was frankly puzzled. She could not vision God. Here, in the

daguerreotype, was the concrete; much she had grasped from it,

and always there seemed an infinite more to grasp. She did not go

to church. This was her high altar and holy of holies. She came

to it in trouble, in loneliness, for counsel, divination, end

comfort. In so far as she found herself different from the girls

of her acquaintance, she quested here to try to identify her

characteristics in the pictured face. Her mother had been

different from other women, too. This, forsooth, meant to her

what God meant to others. To this she strove to be true, and not

to hurt nor vex. And how little she really knew of her mother,

and of how much was conjecture and surmise, she was unaware; for

it was through many years she had erected this mother-myth.



Yet was it all myth? She resented the doubt with quick jealousy,

and, opening the bottom drawer of the chest, drew forth a

battered portfolio. Out rolled manuscripts, faded and worn, and

arose a faint far scent of sweet-kept age. The writing was

delicate and curled, with the quaint fineness of half a century

before. She read a stanza to herself:



"Sweet as a wind-lute's airy strains

Your gentle muse has learned to sing,

And California's boundless plains

Prolong the soft notes echoing."



She wondered, for the thousandth time, what a windlute was; yet

much of beauty, much of beyondness, she sensed of this dimly

remembered beautiful mother of hers. She communed a while, then

unrolled a second manuscript. "To C. B.," it read. To Carlton

Brown, she knew, to her father, a love-poem from her mother.

Saxon pondered the opening lines:



"I have stolen away from the crowd in the groves,

Where the nude statues stand, and the leaves point and shiver

At ivy-crowned Bacchus, the Queen of the Loves,

Pandora and Psyche, struck voiceless forever."



This, too, was beyond her. But she breathed the beauty of it.

Bacchus, and Pandora and Psyche--talismans to conjure with! But

alas! the necromancy was her mother's. Strange, meaningless words

that meant so much! Her marvelous mother had known their meaning.

Saxon spelled the three words aloud, letter by letter, for she

did not dare their pronunciation; and in her consciousness

glimmered august connotations, profound and unthinkable. Her mind

stumbled and halted on the star-bright and dazzling boundaries of

a world beyond her world in which her mother had roamed at will.

Again and again, solemnly, she went over the four lines. They

were radiance and light to the world, haunted with phantoms of

pain and unrest, in which she had her being. There, hidden among

those cryptic singing lines, was the clue. If she could only

grasp it, all would be made clear. Of this she was sublimely

confident. She would understand Sarah's sharp tongue, her unhappy

brother, the cruelty of Charley Long, the justness of the

bookkeeper's beating, the day-long, month-long, year-long toil at

the ironing-board.



She skipped a stanza that she knew was hopelessly beyond her, and

tried again:



"The dusk of the greenhouse is luminous yet

With quivers of opal and tremors of gold;

For the sun is at rest, and the light from the west,

Like delicate wine that is mellow and old,



"Flushes faintly the brow of a naiad that stands

In the spray of a fountain, whose seed-amethysts

Tremble lightly a moment on bosom and hands,

Then dip in their basin from bosom and wrists."



"It's beautiful, just beautiful," she sighed. And then, appalled

at the length of all the poem, at the volume of the mystery, she

rolled the manuscript and put it away. Again she dipped in the

drawer, seeking the clue among the cherished fragments of her

mother's hidden soul.



This time it was a small package, wrapped in tissue paper and

tied with ribbon. She opened it carefully, with the deep gravity

and circumstance of a priest before an altar. Appeared a little

red-satin Spanish girdle, whale-boned like a tiny corset,

pointed, the pioneer finery of a frontier woman who had crossed

the plains. It was hand-made after the California-Spanish model

of forgotten days. The very whalebone had been home-shaped of the

raw material from the whaleships traded for in hides and tallow.

The black lace trimming her mother had made. The triple edging of

black velvet strips--her mother's hands had sewn the stitches.



Saxon dreamed over it in a maze of incoherent thought. This was

concrete. This she understood. This she worshiped as man-created

gods have been worshiped on less tangible evidence of their

sojourn on earth.



Twenty-two inches it measured around. She knew it out of many

verifications. She stood up and put it about her waist. This was

part of the ritual. It almost met. In places it did meet. Without

her dress it would meet everywhere as it had met on her mother.

Closest of all, this survival of old California-Ventura days

brought Saxon in touch. Hers was her mother's form. Physically,

she was like her mother. Her grit, her ability to turn off work

that was such an amazement to others, were her mother's. Just so

had her mother been an amazement to her generation--her mother,

the toy-like creature, the smallest and tha youngest of the

strapping pioneer brood, who nevertheless had mothered the brood.

Always it had been her wisdom that was sought, even by the

brothers and sisters a dozen years her senior. Daisy, it was, who

had put her tiny foot down and commanded the removal from the

fever flatlands of Colusa to the healthy mountains of Ventura;

who had backed the savage old Indian-fighter of a father into a

corner and fought the entire family that Vila might marry the man

of her choice; who had flown in the face of the family and of

community morality and demanded the divorce of Laura from her

criminally weak husband; and who on the other hand, had held the

branches of the family together when only misunderstanding and

weak humanness threatened to drive them apart.



The peacemaker and the warrior! All the old tales trooped before

Saxon's eyes. They were sharp with detail, for she had visioned

them many times, though their content was of things she had never

seen. So far as details were concerned, they were her own

creation, for she had never seen an ox, a wild Indian, nor a

prairie schooner. Yet, palpitating and real, shimmering in the

sun-flashed dust of ten thousand hoofs, she saw pass, from East

to West, across a continent, the great hegira of the land-hungry

Anglo-Saxon. It was part and fiber of her. She had been nursed on

its traditions and its facts from the lips of those who had taken

part. Clearly she saw the long wagon-train, the lean, gaunt men

who walked before, the youths goading the lowing oxen that fell

and were goaded to their feet to fall again. And through it all,

a flying shuttle, weaving the golden dazzling thread of

personality, moved the form of her little, indomitable mother,

eight years old, and nine ere the great traverse was ended, a

necromancer and a law-giver, willing her way, and the way and the

willing always good and right.



Saxon saw Punch, the little, rough-coated Skye-terrier with the

honest eyes (who had plodded for weary months), gone lame and

abandoned; she saw Daisy, the chit of a child, hide Punch in the

wagon. She saw the savage old worried father discover the added

burden of the several pounds to the dying oxen. She saw his

wrath, as he held Punch by the scruff of the neck. And she saw

Daisy, between the muzzle of the long-barreled rifle and the

little dog. And she saw Daisy thereafter, through days of alkali

and heat, walking, stumbling, in the dust of the wagons, the

little sick dog, like a baby, in her arms.



But most vivid of all, Saxon saw the fight at Little Meadow--and

Daisy, dressed as for a gala day, in white, a ribbon sash about

her waist, ribbons and a round-comb in her hair, in her hands

small water-pails, step forth into the sunshine on the

flower-grown open ground from the wagon circle, wheels

interlocked, where the wounded screamed their delirium and

babbled of flowing fountains, and go on, through the sunshine and

the wonder-inhibition of the bullet-dealing Indians, a hundred

yards to the waterhole and back again.



Saxon kissed the little, red satin Spanish girdle passionately,

and wrapped it up in haste, with dewy eyes, abandoning the

mystery and godhead of mother and all the strange enigma of

living.



In bed, she projected against her closed eyelids the few rich

scenes of her mother that her child-memory retained. It was her

favorite way of wooing sleep. She had done it all her life--sunk

into the death-blackness of sleep with her mother limned to the

last on her fading consciousness. But this mother was not the

Daisy of the plains nor of the daguerreotype. They had been

before Saxon's time. This that she saw nightly was an older

mother, broken with insomnia and brave with sorrow, who crept,

always crept, a pale, frail creature, gentle and unfaltering,

dying from lack of sleep, living by will, and by will refraining

from going mad, who, nevertheless, could not will sleep, and whom

not even the whole tribe of doctors could make sleep.

Crept--always she crept, about the house, from weary bed to weary

chair and back again through long days and weeks of torment,

never complaining, though her unfailing smile was twisted with

pain, and the wise gray eyes, still wise and gray, were grown

unutterably larger and profoundly deep.



But on this night Saxon did not win to sleep quickly; the little

creeping mother came and went; and in the intervals the face of

Billy, with the cloud-drifted, sullen, handsome eyes, burned

against her eyelids. And once again, as sleep welled up to

smother her, she put to herself the question IS THIS THE MAN?







CHAPTER VII



Tun work in the ironing-room slipped off, but the three days

until Wednesday night were very long. She hummed over the fancy

starch that flew under the iron at an astounding rate.



"I can't see how you do it," Mary admired. "You'll make thirteen

or fourteen this week at that rate."



Saxon laughed, and in the steam from the iron she saw dancing

golden letters that spelled WEDNESDAY.



"What do you think of Billy?" Mary asked.



"I like him," was the frank answer.



"Well, don't let it go farther than that."



"I will if I want to," Saxon retorted gaily.



"Better not," came the warning. "You'll only make trouble for

yourself. He ain't marryin'. Many a girl's found that out. They

just throw themselves at his head, too."



"I'm not going to throw myself at him, or any other man."



"Just thought I'd tell you," Mary concluded. "A word to the

wise."



Saxon had become grave.



"He's not . . . not . . ." she began, than looked the

significance of the question she could not complete.



"Oh, nothin' like that--though there's nothin' to stop him. He's

straight, all right, all right. But he just won't fall for

anything in skirts. He dances, an' runs around, an' has a good

time, an' beyond that--nitsky. A lot of 'em's got fooled on him.

I bet you there's a dozen girls in love with him right now. An'

he just goes on turnin' 'em down. There was Lily Sanderson--you

know her. You seen her at that Slavonic picnic last summer at

Shellmound--that tall, nice-lookin' blonde that was with Butch

Willows?"



"Yes, I remember her," Saxon sald. "What about her?"



"Well, she'd been runnin' with Butch Willows pretty steady, an'

just because she could dance, Billy dances a lot with her. Butch

ain't afraid of nothin'. He wades right in for a showdown, an'

nails Billy outside, before everybody, an' reads the riot act.

An' Billy listens in that slow, sleepy way of his, an' Butch gets

hotter an' hotter, an' everybody expects a scrap.



"An' then Billy says to Butch, 'Are you done?' 'Yes,' Butch says;

'I've said my say, an' what are you goin' to do about it?' An'

Billy says--an' what d'ye think he said, with everybody lookin'

on an' Butch with blood in his eye? Well, he said, 'I guess

nothin', Butch.' Just like that. Butch was that surprised you

could knocked him over with a feather. 'An' never dance with her

no more?' he says. 'Not if you say I can't, Butch,' Billy says.

Just like that.



"Well, you know, any other man to take water the way he did from

Butch--why, everybody'd despise him. But not Billy. You see, he

can afford to. He's got a rep as a fighter, an' when he just

stood back 'an' let Butch have his way, everybody knew he wasn't

scared, or backin' down, or anything. He didn't care a rap for

Lily Sanderson, that was all, an' anybody could see she was just

crazy after him."



The telling of this episode caused Saxon no little worry. Hers

was the average woman's pride, but in the matter of

man-conquering prowess she was not unduly conceited. Billy had

enjoyed her dancing, and she wondered if that were all. If

Charley Long bullied up to him would he let her go as he had let

Lily Sanderson go? He was not a marrying man; nor could Saxon

blind her eyes to the fact that he was eminently marriageable. No

wonder the girls ran after him. And he was a man-subduer as well

as a woman-subduer. Men liked him. Bert Wanhope seemed actually

to love him. She remembered the Butchertown tough in the

dining-room at Weasel Park who had come over to the table to

apologize, and the Irishman at the tug-of-war who had abandoned

all thought of fighting with him the moment he learned his

identity.



A very much spoiled young man was a thought that flitted

frequently through Saxon's mind; and each time she condemned it

as ungenerous. He was gentle in that tantalizing slow way of his.

Despite his strength, he did not walk rough-shod over others.

There was the affair with Lily Sanderson. Saxon analysed it again

and again. He had not cared for the girl, and he had immediately

stepped from between her and Butch. It was just the thing that

Bert, out of sheer wickedness and love of trouble, would not have

done. There would have been a fight, hard feelings, Butch turned

into an enemy, and nothing profited to Lily. But Billy had done

the right thing--done it slowly and imperturbably and with the

least hurt to everybody. All of which made him more desirable to

Saxon and less possible.



She bought another pair of silk stockings that she had hesitated

at for weeks, and on Tuesday night sewed and drowsed wearily over

a new shirtwaist and earned complaint from Sarah concerning her

extravagant use of gas.



Wednesday night, at the Orindore dance, was not all undiluted

pleasure. It was shameless the way the girls made up to Billy,

and, at times, Saxon found his easy consideration for them almost

irritating. Yet she was compelled to acknowledge to herself that

he hurt none of the other fellows' feelings in the way the girls

hurt hers. They all but asked him outright to dance with them,

and little of their open pursuit of him escaped her eyes. She

resolved that she would not be guilty of throwing herself at him,

and withheld dance after dance, and yet was secretly and

thrillingly aware that she was pursuing the right tactics. She

deliberately demonstrated that she was desirable to other men, as

he involuntarily demonstrated his own desirableness to the women.



Her happiness came when he coolly overrode her objections and

insisted on two dances more than she had allotted him. And she

was pleased, as well as angered, when she chanced to overhear two

of the strapping young cannery girls. "The way that little

sawed-off is monopolizin' him," said one. And the other: "You'd

think she might have the good taste to run after somebody of her

own age." "Cradle-snatcher," was the final sting that sent the

angry blood into Saxon's cheeks as the two girls moved away,

unaware that they had been overheard.



Billy saw her home, kissed her at the gate, and got her consent

to go with him to the dance at Germania Hall on Friday night.



"I wasn't thinkin' of goin'," he sald. "But if you'll say the

word . . . Bert's goin' to be there."



Next day, at the ironing boards, Mary told her that she and Bert

were dated for Germania Hall.



"Are you goin'?" Mary asked.



Saxon nodded.



"Billy Roberts?"



The nod was repeated, and Mary, with suspended iron, gave her a

long and curions look.



"Say, an' what if Charley Long butts in?"



Saxon shrugged her shoulders.



They ironed swiftly and silently for a quarter of an hour.



"Well," Mary decided, "if he does butt in maybe he'll get his.

I'd like to see him get it--the big stiff! It all depends how

Billy feels--about you, I mean."



"I'm no Lily Sanderson," Saxon answered indignantly. "I'll never

give Billy Roberts a chance to turn me down."



"You will, if Charley Long butts in. Take it from me, Saxon, he

ain't no gentleman. Look what he done to Mr. Moody. That was a

awful beatin'. An' Mr. Moody only a quiet little man that

wouldn't harm a fly. Well, he won't find Billy Roberts a sissy by

a long shot."



That night, outside the laundry entrance, Saxon found Charley

Long waiting. As he stepped forward to greet her and walk

alongside, she felt the sickening palpitation that he had so

thoroughly taught her to know. The blood ebbed from her face with

the apprehension and fear his appearance caused. She was afraid

of the rough bulk of the man; of the heavy brown eyes, dominant

and confident; of the big blacksmith-hands and the thick strong

fingers with the hair-pads on the back to every first joint. He

was unlovely to the eye, and he was unlovely to all her finer

sensibilities. It was not his strength itself, but the quality of

it and the misuse of it, that affronted her. The beating he had

given the gentle Mr. Moody had meant half-hours of horror to her

afterward. Always did the memory of it come to her accompanied by

a shudder. And yet, without shock, she had seen Billy fight at

Weasel Park in the same primitive man-animal way. But it had been

ditferent. She recognized, but could not analyze, the difference.

She was aware only of the brutishness of this man's hands and

mind.



"You're lookin' white an' all beat to a frazzle," he was saying.

"Why don't you cut the work? You got to some time, anyway. You

can't lose me, kid."



"I wish I could," she replied.



He laughed with harsh joviality. "Nothin' to it, Saxon. You're

just cut out to be Mrs. Long, an' you're sure goin' to be."



"I wish I was as certain about all things as you are," she said

with mild sarcasm that missed.



"Take it from me," he went on, "there's just one thing you can be

certain of--an' that is that I am certain." He was pleased with

the cleverness of his idea and laughed approvingly. "When I go

after anything I get it, an' if anything gets in between it gets

hurt. D'ye get that? It's me for you, an' that's all there is to

it, so you might as well make up your mind and go to workin' in

my home instead of the laundry. Why, it's a snap. There wouldn't

be much to do. I make good money, an' you wouldn't want for

anything. You know, I just washed up from work an' skinned over

here to tell it to you once more, so you wouldn't forget. I ain't

ate yet, an' that shows how much I think of you."



"You'd better go and eat then," she advised, though she knew the

futility of attempting to get rid of him.



She scarcely heard what he said. It had come upon her suddenly

that she was very tired and very small and very weak alongside

this colossus of a man. Would he dog her always? she asked

despairingly, and seemed to glimpse a vision of all her future

life stretched out before her, with always the form and face of

the burly blacksmith pursuing her.



"Come on, kid, an' kick in," he continued. "It's the good old

summer time, an' that's the time to get married."



"But I'm not going to marry you," she protested. "I've told you a

thousand times already."



"Aw, forget it. You want to get them ideas out of your think-box.

Of course, you're goin' to marry me. It's a pipe. An' I'll tell

you another pipe. You an' me's goin' acrost to Frisco Friday

night. There's goin' to he big doin's with the Horseshoers."



"Only I'm not," she contradicted.



"Oh, yes you are," he asserted with absolute assurance. "We'll

eatch the last boat back, an' you'll have one fine time. An' I'll

put you next to some of the good dancers. Oh, I ain't a pincher,

an' I know you like dancin'."



"But I tell you I can't," she reiterated.



He shot a glance of suspicion at her from under the black thatch

of brows that met above his nose and were as one brow.



"Why can't you?"



"A date," she said.



"Who's the bloke?"



"None of your business, Charley Long. I've got a date, that's

all."



"I'll make it my business. Remember that lah-de-dah bookkeeper

rummy? Well, just keep on rememborin' him an' what he got."



"I wish yon'd leave me alone," she pleaded resentfully. "Can't

you be kind just for once?"



The blacksmith laughed unpleasantly.



"If any rummy thinks he can butt in on you an' me, he'll learn

different, an' I'm the little boy that'll learn 'm.--Fridey

night, eh? Where?"



"I won't tell you."



"Where?" he repeated.



Her lips were drawn in tight silence, and in her cheeks were

little angry spots of blood.



"Huh!--As if I couldn't guess! Germania Hall. Well, I'll be

there, an' I'll take you home afterward. D'ye get that? An' you'd

better tell the rummy to beat it unless you want to see'm get his

face hurt."



Saxon, hurt as a prideful woman can be hurt by cavalier

treatment, was tempted to cry out the name and prowess of her

new-found protector. And then came fear. This was a big man, and

Billy was only a boy. That was the way he affected her. She

remembered her first impression of his hands and glanced quickly

at the hands of the man beside her. They seemed twice as large as

Billy's, and the mats of hair seemed to advertise a terrible

strength. No, Billy could not fight this big brute. He must not.

And then to Saxon came a wicked little hope that by the

mysterious and unthinkable ability that prizefighters possessed,

Billy might be able to whip this bully and rid her of him. With

the next glance doubt came again, for her eye dwelt on the

blacksmith's broad shoulders, the cloth of the coat

muscle-wrinkled and the sleeves bulging above the biceps.



"If you lay a hand on anybody I'm going with again---" she began.



"Why, they'll get hurt, of course," Long grinned. "And they'll

deserve it, too. Any rummy that comes between a fellow an' his

girl ought to get hurt."



"But I'm not your girl, and all your saying so doesn't make it

so."



"That's right, get mad," he approved. "I like you for that, too.

You've got spunk an' fight. I like to see it. It's what a man

needs in his wife--and not these fat cows of women. They're the

dead ones. Now you're a live one, all wool, a yard long and a

yard wide."



She stopped before the house and put her hand on the gate.



"Good-bye," she said. "I'm going in."



"Come on out afterward for a run to Idora Park," he suggested.



"No, I'm not feeling good, and I'm going straight to bed as soon

as I eat supper."



"Huh!" he sneered. "Gettin' in shape for the fling to-morrow

night, eh?"



With an impatient movement she opened the gate and stepped

inside.



"I've given it to you straight," he went on. "If you don't go

with me to-morrow night somebody'll get hurt."



"I hope it will be you," she cried vindictively.



He laughed as he threw his head back, stretched his big chest,

and half-lifted his heavy arms. The action reminded her

disgustingly of a great ape she had once seen in a circus.



"Well, good-bye," he said. "See you to-morrow night at Germania

Hall."



"I haven't told you it was Germania Hall."



"And you haven't told me it wasn't. All the same, I'll be there.

And I'll take you home, too. Be sure an' keep plenty of round

dances open fer me. That's right. Get mad. It makes you look

fine."







CHAPTER VIII



The music stopped at the end of the waltz, leaving Billy and

Saxon at the big entrance doorway of the ballroom. Her hand

rested lightly on his arm, and they were promenading on to find

seats, when Charley Long, evidently just arrived, thrust his way

in front of them.



"So you're the buttinsky, eh?" he demanded, his face malignant

with passion and menace.



"Who?--me?" Billy queried gently. "Some mistake, sport. I never

butt in."



"You're goin' to get your head beaten off if you don't make

yourself scarce pretty lively."



"I wouldn't want that to happen for the world," Billy drawled.

"Come on, Saxon. This neighborhood's unhealthy for us."



He started to go on with her, but Long thrust in front again.



"You're too fresh to keep, young fellow," he snarled. "You need

saltin' down. D'ye get me?"



Billy scratched his head, on his face exaggerated puzzlement.



"No, I don't get you," he said. "Now just what was it you said?"



But the big blacksmith turned contemptuously away from him to

Saxon.



"Come here, you. Let's see your program."



"Do you want to dance with him?" Billy asked.



She shook her head.



"Sorry, sport, nothin' doin'," Billy said, again making to start

on.



For the third time the blacksmith blocked the way.



"Get off your foot," said Billy. "You're standin' on it."



Long all but sprang upon him, his hands clenched, one arm just

starting back for the punch while at the same instant shoulders

and chest were coming forward. But he restrained himself at sight

of Billy's unstartled body and cold and cloudy ayes. He had made

no move of mind or muscle. It was as if he were unaware of the

threatened attack. All of which constituted a new thing in Long's

experience.



"Maybe you don't know who I am," he bullied.



"Yep, I do," Billy answered airily. "You're a recordbreaker at

rough-housin'." (Here Long's face showed pleasure.) "You ought to

have the Police Gazette diamond belt for rough-bousin' baby

buggies'. I guess there ain't a one you're afraid to tackle."



"Leave 'm alone, Charley," advised one of the young men who had

crowded about them. "He's Bill Roberts, the fighter. You know'm.

Big Bill."



"I don't care if he's Jim Jeffries. He can't butt in on me this

way."



Nevertheless it was noticeable, even to Saxon, that the fire had

gone out of his fiercenes. Billy's name seemed to have a quieting

effect on obstreperous males.



"Do you know him?" Billy asked her.



She signified yes with her eyes, though it seemed she must cry

out a thousand things against this man who so steadfastly

persecuted her. Billy turned to the blacksmith.



"Look here, sport, you don't want trouble with me. I've got your

number. Besides, what do we want to fight for? Hasn't she got a

say so in the matter?"



"No, she hasn't. This is my affair an' yourn."



Billy shook his head slowly. "No; you're in wrong. I think she

has a say in the matter."



"Well, say it then," Long snarled at Saxon. "who're you goin' to

go with?--me or him? Let's get it settled."



For reply, Saxon reached her free hand over to the hand that

rested on Billy's arm.



"Nuff said," was Billy's remark.



Long glared at Saxon, then transferred the glare to her

protector.



"I've a good mind to mix it with you anyway," Long gritted

through his teeth.



Saxon was elated as they started to move away. Lily Sanderson's

fate had not been hers, and her wonderful man-boy, without the

threat of a blow, slow of speech and imperturbable, had conquered

the big blacksmith.



"He's forced himself upon me all the time," she whispered to

Billy. "He's tried to run me, and beaten up every man that came

near me. I never want to see him again."



Billy halted immediately. Long, who was reluctantly moving to get

out of the way, also halted.



"She says she don't want anything more to do with you," Billy

said to him. "An' what she says goes. If I get a whisper any time

that you've been botherin' her, I'll attend to your case. D'ye

get that?"



Long glowered and remained silent.



"D'ye get that?" Billy repeated, more imperatively.



A growl of assent came from the blacksmith



"All right, then. See you remember it. An' now get outa the way

or I'll walk over you."



Long slunk back, muttering inarticulate threats, and Saxon moved

on as in a dream. Charley Long had taken water. He had been

afraid of this smooth-skinned, blue-eyed boy. She was quit of

him--something no other man had dared attempt for her. And Billy

had liked her better than Lily Sanderson.



Twice Saxon tried to tell Billy the detalls of her acquaintance

with Long, but each time was put off.



"I don't care a rap about it," Billy said the second time.

"You're here, ain't you?"



But she insisted, and when, worked up and angry by the recital,

she had finished, he patted her hand soothingly.



"It's all right, Saxon," he said. "He's just a big stiff. I took

his measure as soon as I looked at him. He won't bother you

again. I know his kind. He's a dog. Roughhouse? He couldn't

rough-house a milk wagon."



"But how do you do it?" she asked breathlessly. "Why are men so

afraid of you? You're just wonderful."



He smiled in an embarrassed way and changed the subject.



"Say," he said, "I like your teeth. They're so white an' regular,

an' not big, an' not dinky little baby's teeth either. They're

... they're just right, an' they fit you. I never seen such fine

teeth on a girl yet. D'ye know, honest, they kind of make me

hungry when I look at 'em. They're good enough to eat."



At midnight, leaving the insatiable Bert and Mary still dancing,

Bllly and Saxon started for home. It was on his suggestion that

they left early, and he felt called upon to explain.



"It's one thing the fightin' game's taught me," he said. "To take

care of myself. A fellow can't work all day and dance all night

and keep in condition. It's the same way with drinkin'--an' not

that I'm a little tin angel. I know what it is. I've been soused

to the guards an' all the rest of it. I like my beer--big

schooners of it; but I don't drink all I want of it. I've tried,

but it don't pay. Take that big stiff to-night that butted in on

us. He ought to had my number. He's a dog anyway, but besides he

had beer bloat. I sized that up the first rattle, an' that's the

difference about who takes the other fellow's number. Condition,

that's what it is."



"But he is so big," Saxon protested. "Why, his fists are twice as

big as yours."



"That don't mean anything. What counts is what's behind the

fists. He'd turn loose like a buckin' bronco. If I couldn't drop

him at the start, all I'd do is to keep away, smother up, an'

wait. An' all of a sudden he'd blow up--go all to pieces, you

know, wind, heart, everything, and then I'd have him where I

wanted him. And the point is he knows it, too."



"You're the first prizefighter I ever knew," Saxon said, after a

pause.



"I'm not any more," he disclaimed hastily. "That's one thing the

fightin' game taught me--to leave it alone. It don't pay. A

fellow trains as fine as silk--till he's all silk, his skin,

everything, and he's fit to live for a hundred years; an' then he

climbs through the ropes for a hard twenty rounds with some tough

customer that's just as good as he is, and in those twenty rounds

he frazzles out all his silk an' blows in a year of his life.

Yes, sometimes he blows in five years of it, or cuts it in half,

or uses up all of it. I've watched 'em. I've seen fellows strong

as bulls fight a hard battle and die inside the year of

consumption, or kidney disease, or anything else. Now what's the

good of it? Money can't buy what they throw away. That's why I

quit the game and went back to drivin' team. I got my silk, an'

I'm goin' to keep it, that's all."



"It must make you feel proud to know you are the master of other

men," she said softly, aware herself of pride in the strength and

skill of him.



"It does," he admitted frankly. "I'm glad I went into the

game--just as glad as I am that I pulled out of it. ... Yep, it's

taught me a lot--to keep my eyes open an' my head cool. Oh, I've

got a temper, a peach of a temper. I get scared of myself

sometimes. I used to be always breakin' loose. But the fightin'

taught me to keep down the steam an' not do things I'd be sorry

for afterward."



"Why, you're the sweetest, easiest tempered man I know," she

interjected.



"Don't you believe it. Just watch me, and sometime you'll see me

break out that bad that I won't know what I'm doin' myself. Oh,

I'm a holy terror when I get started!"



This tacit promise of continued acquaintance gave Saxon a little

joy-thrill.



"Say," he said, as they neared her neighborhood, "what are you

doin' next Sunday?"



"Nothing. No plans at all."



"Well, suppose you an' me go buggy-riding all day out in the

hills?"



She did not answer immediately, and for the moment she was seeing

the nightmare vision of her last buggy-ride; of her fear and her

leap from the buggy; and of the long miles and the stumbling

through the darkness in thin-soled shoes that bruised her feet on

every rock. And then it came to her with a great swell of joy

that this man beside her was not such a man.



"I love horses," she said. "I almost love them better than I do

dancing, only I don't know anything about them. My father rode a

great roan war-horse. He was a captain of cavalry, you know. I

never saw him, but somehow I always can see him on that big

horse, with a sash around his waist and his sword at his side. My

brother George has the sword now, but Tom--he's the brother I

live with says it is mine because it wasn't his father's. You

see, they're only my half-brothers. I was the only child by my

mother's second marriage. That was her real marriage--her

love-marriage, I mean."



Saxon ceased abruptly, embarrassed by her own garrulity; and yet

the impulse was strong to tell this young man all about herself,

and it seemed to her that these far memories were a large part of

her.



"Go on an' tell me about it," Billy urged. "I like to hear about

the old people of the old days. My people was along in there,

too, an' somehow I think it was a better world to live in than

now. Things was more sensible and natural. I don't exactly say

what I mean. But it's like this: I don't understand life to-day.

There's the labor unions an' employers' associations, an'

strikes', an' hard times, an' huntin' for jobs, an' all the rest.

Things wasn't like that in the old days. Everybody farmed, an'

shot their meat, an' got enough to eat, an' took care of their

old foiks. But now it's all a mix-up that I can't understand.

Mebbe I'm a fool, I don't know. But, anyway, go ahead an' tell us

about your mother."



"Well, you see, when she was only a young woman she and Captain

Brown fell in love. He was a soldier then, before the war. And he

was ordered East for the war when she was away nursing her sister

Laura. And then came the news that he was killed at Shiloh. And

she married a man who had loved her for years and years. He was a

boy in the same wagon-train coming across the plains. She liked

him, but she didn't love him. And afterwerd came the news that my

father wasn't killed after all. So it made her very sad, but it

did not spoil her life. She was a good mother end a good wife and

all that, but she was always sad, and sweet, and gentle, and I

think her voice was the most beautiful in the world."



"She was game, all right," Billy approved.



"And my father never married. He loved her all the time. I've got

a lovely poem home that she wrote to him, It's just wonderful,

and it sings like music. Well, long, long afterward her husband

died, and then she and my father made their love marriage. They

didn't get married until 1882, and she was pretty well along."



More she told him, as they stood hy the gate, and Saxon tried to

think that the good-bye kiss was a trifle longer than just

ordinary,



"How about nine o'clock?" he queried across the gate. "Don't

bother about lunch or anything. I'll fix all that up. You just be

ready at nine."







CHAPTER IX



Sunday morning Saxon was beforehand in getting ready, and on her

return to the kitchen from her second journey to peep through the

front windows, Sarah began her customary attack.



"It's a shame an' a disgrace the way some people can afford silk

stockings," she began. "Look at me, a-toilin' and a-stewin' day

an' night, and I never get silk stockings--nor shoes, three pairs

of them all at one time. But there's a just God in heaven, and

there'll be some mighty big surprises for some when the end comes

and folks get passed out what's comin' to them."



Tom, smoking his pipe and cuddling his youngest-born on his

knees, dropped an eyelid surreptitiously on his cheek in token

that Sarah was in a tantrum. Saxon devoted herself to tying a

ribbon in the hair of one of the little girls. Sarah lumbered

heavily about the kitchen, washing and putting away the breakfast

dishes. She straightened her back from the sink with a groan and

glared at Saxon with fresh hostility.



"You ain't sayin' anything, eh? An' why don't you? Because I

guess you still got some natural shame in you a-runnin' with a

prizefighter. Oh, I've heard about your goings-on with Bill

Roberts. A nice specimen he is. But just you wait till Charley

Long gets his hands on him, that's all."



"Oh, I don't know," Tom intervened. "Bill Roberts is a pretty

good boy from what I hear."



Saxon smiled with superior knowledge, and Sarah, catching her,

was infuriated.



"Why don't you marry Charley Long? He's crazy for you, and he

ain't a drinkin' man."



"I guess he gets outside his share of beer," Saxon retorted.



"That's right," her brother supplemented. "An' I know for a fact

that he keeps a keg in the house all the time as well."



"Maybe you've been guzzling from it," Sarah snapped.



"Maybe I have," Tom said, wiping his mouth reminiscently with the

back of his hand.



"Well, he can afford to keep a keg in the house if he wants to,"

she returned to the attack, which now was directed at her husband

as well. "He pays his bills, and he certainly makes good

money--better than most men, anyway."



"An' he hasn't a wife an' children to watch out for," Tom said.



"Nor everlastin' dues to unions that don't do him no good."



"Oh, yes, he has," Tom urged genially. "Blamed little he'd work

in that shop, or any other shop in Oakland, if he didn't keep in

good standing with the Blacksmiths. You don't understand labor

conditions, Sarah. The unions have got to stick, if the men

aren't to starve to death."



"Oh, of course not," Sarah sniffed. "I don't understand anything.

I ain't got a mind. I'm a fool, an' you tell me so right before

the children." She turned savagely on her eldest, who startled

and shrank away. "Willie, your mother is a fool. Do you get that?

Your father says she's a fool--says it right before her face and

yourn. She's just a plain fool. Next he'll be sayin' she's crazy

an' puttin' her away in the asylum. An' how will you like that,

Willie? How will you like to see your mother in a straitjacket

an' a padded cell, shut out from the light of the sun an' beaten

like a nigger before the war, Willie, beaten an' clubbed like a

regular black nigger? That's the kind of a father you've got,

Willie. Think of it, Willie, in a padded cell, the mother that

bore you, with the lunatics sereechin' an' screamin' all around,

an' the quick-lime eatin' into the dead bodies of them that's

beaten to death by the cruel wardens--"



She continued tirelessly, painting with pessimistic strokes the

growing black future her husband was meditating for her, while

the boy, fearful of some vague, incomprehensible catastrophe,

began to weep silently, with a pendulous, trembling underlip.

Saxon, for the moment, lost control of herself.



"Oh, for heaven's sake, can't we be together five minutes without

quarreling?" she blazed.



Sarah broke off from asylum conjurations and turned upon her

sister-in-law.



"Who's quarreling? Can't I open my head without bein' jumped on

by the two of you?"



Saxon shrugged her shoulders despairingly, and Sarah swung about

on her husband.



"Seein' you love your sister so much better than your wife, wby

did you want to marry me, that's borne your children for you, an'

slaved for you, an' toiled for you, an' worked her fingernails

off for you, with no thanks, an 'insultin' me before the

children, an' sayin' I'm crazy to their faces. An' what have you

ever did for me? That's what I want to know--me, that's cooked

for you, an' washed your stinkin' clothes, and fixed your socks,

an' sat up nights with your brats when they was ailin'. Look at

that!"



She thrust out a shapeless, swollen foot, encased in a monstrous,

untended shoe, the dry, raw leather of which showed white on the

edges of bulging cracks.



"Look at that! That's what I say. Look at that!" Her voice was

persistently rising and at the same time growing throaty. "The

only shoes I got. Me. Your wife. Ain't you ashamed? Where are my

three pairs? Look at that stockin'."



Speech failed her, and she sat down suddenly on a chair at the

table, glaring unutterable malevolence and misery. She arose with

the abrupt stiffness of an automaton, poured herself a cup of

cold coffee, and in the same jerky way sat down again. As if too

hot for her lips, she filled her saucer with the greasy-looking,

nondescript fluid, and continued her set glare, her breast rising

and falling with staccato, mechanical movement.



"Now, Sarah, be c'am, be c'am," Tom pleaded anxiously.



In response, slowly, with utmost deliberation, as if the destiny

of empires rested on the certitude of her act, she turned the

saucer of coffee upside down on the table. She lifted her right

hand, slowly, hugely, and in the same slow, huge way landed the

open palm with a sounding slap on Tom's astounded cheek.

Immediately thereafter she raised her voice in the shrill,

hoarse, monotonous madness of hysteria, sat down on the floor,

and rocked back and forth in the throes of an abysmal grief.



Willie's silent weeping turned to noise, and the two little

girls, with the fresh ribbons in their hair, joined him. Tom's

face was drawn and white, though the smitten cheek still blazed,

and Saxon wanted to put her arms comfortingly around him, yet

dared not. He bent over his wife.



"Sarah, you ain't feelin' well. Let me put you to bed, and I'll

finish tidying up."



"Don't touch me!--don't touch me!" she screamed, jerking

violently away from him.



"Take the children out in the yard, Tom, for a walk,

anything--get them away," Saxon said. She was sick, and white,

and trembling. "Go, Tom, please, please. There's your hat. I'll

take care of her. I know just how."



Left to herself, Saxon worked with frantic haste, assuming the

calm she did not possess, but which she must impart to the

screaming bedlamite upon the floor. The light frame house leaked

the noise hideously, and Saxon knew that the houses on either

side were hearing, and the street itself and the houses across

the street. Her fear was that Billy should arrive in the midst of

it. Further, she was incensed, violated. Every fiber rebelled,

aimost in a nausea; yet she maintained cool control and stroked

Sarah's forehead and hair with slow, soothing movements. Soon,

with one arm around her, she managed to win the first diminution

in the strident, atrocious, unceasing scream. A few minutes

later, sobbing heavily, the elder woman lay in bed, across her

forehead and eyes a wet-pack of towel for easement of the

headache she and Saxon tacitly accepted as substitute for the

brain-storm.



When a clatter of hoofs came down the street and stopped, Saxon

was able to slip to the front door and wave her hand to Billy. In

the kitchen she found Tom waiting in sad anxiousness.



"It's all right," she said. "Billy Roberts has come, and I've got

to go. You go in and sit beside her for a while, and maybe she'll

go to sleep. But don't rush her. Let her have her own way. If

she'll let you take her hand, why do it. Try it, anyway. But

first of all, as an opener and just as a matter of course, start

wetting the towel over her eyes."



He was a kindly, easy-going man; but, after the way of a large

percentage of the Western stock, he was undemonstrative. He

nodded, turned toward the door to obey, and paused irresolutely.

The look he gave back to Saxon was almost dog-like in gratitude

and all-brotherly in love. She felt it, and in spirit leapt

toward it.



"It's all right--everything's all right," she cried hastily.



Tom shook his head.



"No, it ain't. It's a shame, a blamed shame, that's what it is."

He shrugged his shoulders. "Oh, I don't care for myself. But it's

for you. You got your life before you yet, little kid sister.

You'll get old, and all that means, fast enough. But it's a bad

start for a day off. The thing for you to do is to forget all

this, and skin out with your fellow, an' have a good time." In

the open door, his hand on the knob to close it after him, he

halted a second time. A spasm contracted his brow. "Hell! Think

of it! Sarah and I used to go buggy-riding once on a time. And I

guess she had her three pairs of shoes, too. Can you beat it?"



In her bedroom Saxon completed her dressing, for an instant

stepping upon a chair so as to glimpse critically in the small

wall-mirror the hang of her ready-made linen skirt. This, and the

jacket, she had altered to fit, and she had double-stitched the

seams to achieve the coveted tailored effect. Still on the chair,

all in the moment of quick clear-seeing, she drew the skirt

tightly back and raised it. The sight was good to her, nor did

she under-appraise the lines of the slender ankle above the low

tan tie nor did she under-appraise the delicate yet mature swell

of calf outlined in the fresh brown of a new cotton stocking.

Down from the chair, she pinned on a firm sailor hat of white

straw with a brown ribbon around the crown that matched her

ribbon belt. She rubbed her cheeks quickly and fiercely to bring

back the color Sarah had driven out of them, and delayed a moment

longer to put on her tan lisle-thread gloves. Once, in the

fashion-page of a Sunday supplement, she had read that no lady

ever put on her gloves after she left the door.



With a resolute self-grip, as she crossed the parlor and passed

the door to Sarah's bedroom, through the thin wood of which came

elephantine moanings and low slubberings, she steeled herself to

keep the color in her cheeks and the brightness in her eyes. And

so well did she succeed that Billy never dreamed that the

radiant, live young thing, tripping lightly down the steps to

him, had just come from a bout with soul-sickening hysteria and

madness.



To her, in the bright sun, Billy's blondness was startling. His

cheeks, smooth as a girl's, were touched with color. The blue

eyes seemed more cloudily blue than usual, and the crisp, sandy

hair hinted more than ever of the pale straw-gold that was not

there. Never had she seen him quite so royally young. As he

smiled to greet her, with a slow white flash of teeth from

between red lips, she caught again the promise of easement and

rest. Fresh from the shattering chaos of her sister-in-law's

mind, Billy's tremendous calm was especially satisfying, and

Saxon mentally laughed to scorn the terrible temper he had

charged to himself.



She had been buggy-riding before, but always behind one horse,

jaded, and livery, in a top-buggy, heavy and dingy, such as

livery stables rent because of sturdy unbreakableness. But here

stood two horses, head-tossing and restless, shouting in every

high-light glint of their satin, golden-sorrel coats that they

had never been rented out in all their glorious young lives.

Between them was a pole inconceivably slender, on them were

harnesses preposterously string-like and fragile. And Billy

belonged here, by elemental right, a part of them and of it, a

master-part and a component, along with the spidery-delicate,

narrow-boxed, wide- and yellow-wheeled, rubber-tired rig,

efficient and capable, as different as he was different from the

other man who had taken her out behind stolid, lumubering horses.

He held the reins in one hand, yet, with low, steady voice,

confident and assuring, held the nervous young animals more by

the will and the spirit of him.



It was no time for lingering. With the quick glance and

fore-knowledge of a woman, Saxon saw, not merely the curious

children clustering about, but the peering of adult faces from

open doors and windows, and past window-shades lifted up or held

aside. With his free hand, Billy drew back the linen robe and

helped her to a place beside him. The high-backed, luxuriously

upholstered seat of brown leather gave her a sense of great

comfort; yet even greater, it seemed to her, was the nearness and

comfort of the man himself and of his body.



"How d'ye like 'em?" he asked, changing the reins to both hands

and chirruping the horses, which went out with a jerk in an

immediacy of action that was new to her. "They're the boss's, you

know. Couldn't rent animals like them. He lets me take them out

for exercise sometimes. If they ain't exercised regular they're a

handful.--Look at King, there, prancin'. Some style, eh? Some

style! The other one's the real goods, though. Prince is his

name. Got to have some bit on him to hold'm.--Ah! Would you?--Did

you see'm, Saxon? Some horse! Some horse!"




From behind came the admiring cheer of the neighborhood children,

and Saxon, with a sigh of content, knew that the happy day had at

last begun.







CHAPTER X



"I don't know horses," Saxon said. "I've never been on one's

back, and the only ones I've tried to drive were single, and

lame, or almost falling down, or something. But I'm not afraid of

horses. I just love them. I was born loving them, I guess."



Billy threw an admiring, appreciative glance at her.



"That's the stuff. That's what I like in a woman--grit. Some of

the girls I've had out--well, take it from me, they made me sick.

Oh, I'm hep to 'em. Nervous, an' trembly, an' screechy, an'

wabbly. I reckon they come out on my account an' not for the

ponies. But me for the brave kid that likes the ponies. You're

the real goods, Saxon, honest to God you are. Why, I can talk

like a streak with you. The rest of 'em make me sick. I'm like a

clam. They don't know nothin', an' they're that scared all the

time--well, I guess you get me"



"You have to be born to love horses, maybe," she answered. "Maybe

it's because I always think of my father on his roan war-horse

that makes me love horses. But, anyway, I do. When I was a little

girl I was drawing horses all the time. My mother always

encouraged me. I've a scrapbook mostly filled with horses I drew

when I was little. Do you know, Billy, sometimes I dream I

actually own a horse, all my own. And lots of times I dream I'm

on a horse's back, or driving him."



"I'll let you drive 'em, after a while, when they've worked their

edge off. They're pullin' now.--There, put your hands in front of

mine--take hold tight. Feel that? Sure you feel it. An' you ain't

feelin' it all by a long shot. I don't dast slack, you bein' such

a lightweight."



Her eyes sparkled as she felt the apportioned pull of the mouths

of the beautiful, live things; and he, looking at her, sparkled

with her in her delight.



"What's the good of a woman if she can't keep up with a man?" he

broke out enthusiastically.



"People that like the same things always get along best

together," she answered, with a triteness that concealed the joy

that was hers at being so spontaneously in touch with him.



"Why, Saxon, I've fought battles, good ones, frazzlin' my silk

away to beat the band before whisky-soaked, smokin' audiences of

rotten fight-fans, that just made me sick clean through. An'

them, that couldn't take just one stiff jolt or hook to jaw or

stomach, a-cheerin' me an' yellin' for blood. Blood, mind you!

An' them without the blood of a shrimp in their bodies. Why,

honest, now, I'd sooner fight before an audience of one--you for

instance, or anybody I liked. It'd do me proud. But them

sickenin', sap-headed stiffs, with the grit of rabbits and the

silk of mangy ky-yi's, a-cheerin' me--ME! Can you blame me for

quittin'the dirty game?--Why, I'd sooner fight before broke-down

old plugs of work-horses that's candidates for chicken-meat, than

before them rotten bunches of stiffs with nothin' thicker'n water

in their veins, an' Contra Costa water at that when the rains is

heavy on the hills."



"I...I didn't know prizefighting was like that," she faltered, as

she released her hold on the lines and sank back again beside

him.



"It ain't the fightin', it's the fight-crowds," he defended with

instant jealousy. "Of course, fightin' hurts a young fellow

because it frazzles the silk outa him an' all that. But it's the

low-lifers in the audience that gets me. Why the good things they

say to me, the praise an' that, is insuiting. Do you get me? It

makes me cheap. Think of it--booze-guzzlin' stiffs that 'd be

afraid to mix it with a sick cat, not fit to hold the coat of any

decent man, think of them a-standin' up on their hind legs an'

yellin' an' cheerin' me--ME!"



"Ha! ha! What d'ye think of that? Ain't he a rogue?"



A big bulldog, sliding obliquely and silently across the street,

unconcerned with the team he was avoiding, had passed so close

that Prince, baring his teeth like a stallion, plunged his head

down against reins and check in an effort to seize the dog.



"Now he's some fighter, that Prince. An' he's natural. He didn't

make that reach just for some low-lifer to yell'm on. He just

done it outa pure cussedness and himself. That's clean. That's

right. Because it's natural. But them fight-fans! Honest to God,

Saxon..."



And Saxon, glimpsing him sidewise, as he watched the horses and

their way on the Sunday morning streets, checking them back

suddenly and swerving to avoid two boys coasting across street on

a toy wagon, saw in him deeps and intensities, all the magic

connotations of temperament, the glimmer and hint of rages

profound, bleaknesses as cold and far as the stars, savagery as

keen as a wolf's and clean as a stallion's, wrath as implacable

as a destroying angel's, and youth that was fire and life beyond

time and place. She was awed and fascinated, with the hunger of

woman bridging the vastness to him, daring to love him with arms

and breast that ached to him, murmuring to herself and through

all the halls of her soul, "You dear, you dear."



"Honest to God, Saxon," he took up the broken thread, "they's

times when I've hated them, when I wanted to jump over the ropes

and wade into them, knock-down and drag-out, an' show'm what

fightin' was. Take that night with Billy Murphy. Billy

Murphy!--if you only knew him. My friend. As clean an' game a boy

as ever jumped inside the ropes to take the decision. Him! We

went to the Durant School together. We grew up chums. His fight

was my fight. My trouble was his trouble. We both took to the

fightin' game. They matched us. Not the first time. Twice we'd

fought draws. Once the decision was his; once it was mine. The

fifth fight of two lovin' men that just loved each other. He's

three years older'n me. He's a wife and two or three kids, an' I

know them, too. And he's my friend. Get it?



"I'm ten pounds heavier--but with heavyweights that 'a all right.

He can't time an' distance as good as me, an' I can keep set

better, too. But he's cleverer an' quicker. I never was quick

like him. We both can take punishment, an' we're both two-handed,

a wallop in all our fists. I know the kick of his, an' he knows

my kick, an' we're both real respectful. And we're even-matched.

Two draws, and a decision to each. Honest, I ain't any kind of a

hunch who's gain' to win, we're that even.



"Now, the fight.--You ain't squeamish, are you?"



"No, no," she cried. "I'd just love to hear--you are so

wonderful."



He took the praise with a clear, unwavering look, and without

hint of acknowledgment.



"We go along--six rounds--seven rounds--eight rounds; an' honors

even. I've been timin' his rushes an' straight-leftin' him, an'

meetin' his duck with a wicked little right upper-cut, an' he's

shaken me on the jaw an' walloped my ears till my head's all

singin' an' buzzin'. An' everything lovely with both of us, with

a noise like a draw decision in sight. Twenty rounds is the

distance, you know.



"An' then his bad luck comes. We're just mixin' into a clinch

that ain't arrived yet, when he shoots a short hook to my

head--his left, an' a real hay-maker if it reaches my jaw. I make

a forward duck, not quick enough, an' he lands bingo on the side

of my head. Honest to God, Saxon, it's that heavy I see some

stars. But it don't hurt an' ain't serious, that high up where

the bone's thick. An' right there he finishes himself, for his

bad thumb, which I've known since he first got it as a kid

fightin' in the sandlot at Watts Tract--he smashes that thumb

right there, on my hard head, back into the socket with an

out-twist, an' all the old cords that'd never got strong gets

theirs again. I didn't mean it. A dirty trick, fair in the game,

though, to make a guy smash his hand on your head. But not

between friends. I couldn't a-done that to Bill Murphy for a

million dollars. It was a accident, just because I was slow,

because I was born slow.



"The hurt of it! Honest, Saxon, you don't know what hurt is till

you've got a old hurt like that hurt again. What can Billy Murphy

do but slow down? He's got to. He ain't fightin' two-handed any

more. He knows it; I know it; The referee knows it; but nobody

else. He goes on a-moving that left of his like it's all right.

But it ain't. It's hurtin' him like a knife dug into him. He

don't dast strike a real blow with that left of his. But it

hurts, anyway. Just to move it or not move it hurts, an' every

little dab-feint that I'm too wise to guard, knowin' there's no

weight behind, why them little dab-touches on that poor thumb

goes right to the heart of him, an' hurts worse than a thousand

boils or a thousand knockouts--just hurts all over again, an'

worse, each time an' touch.



"Now suppose he an' me was boxin' for fun, out in the back yard,

an' he hurts his thumb that way, why we'd have the gloves off in

a jiffy an' I'd be putting cold compresses on that poor thumb of

his an' bandagin' it that tight to keep the inflammation down.

But no. This is a fight for fight-fans that's paid their

admission for blood, an' blood they're goin' to get. They ain't

men. They're wolves.



"He has to go easy, now, an' I ain't a-forcin' him none. I'm all

shot to pieces. I don't know what to do. So I slow down, an' the

fans get hep to it. 'Why don't you fight?' they begin to yell;

'Fake! Fake!' 'Why don't you kiss'm?' 'Lovin' cup for yours, Bill

Roberts!' an' that sort of bunk.



"'Fight!' says The referee to me, low an' savage. 'Fight, or I'll

disqualify you--you, Bill, I mean you.' An' this to me, with a

touch on the shoulder 'so they's no mistakin'.



"It ain't pretty. It ain't right. D'ye know what we was fightin'

for? A hundred bucks. Think of it! An' the game is we got to do

our best to put our man down for the count because of the fans

has bet on us. Sweet, ain't it? Well, that's my last fight. It

finishes me deado. Never again for yours truly.



"'Quit,' I says to Billy Murphy in a clinch; 'for the love of

God, Bill, quit.' An' he says back, in a whisper, 'I can't,

Bill--you know that.'



"An' then the referee drags us apart, an' a lot of the fans

begins to hoot an' boo.



"'Now kick in, damn you, Bill Roberts, an' finish'm' the referee

says to me, an' I tell'm to go to hell as Bill an' me flop into

the next clinch, not hittin', an' Bill touches his thumb again,

an' I see the pain shoot across his face. Game? That good boy's

the limit. An' to look into the eyes of a brave man that's sick

with pain, an' love 'm, an' see love in them eyes of his, an'

then have to go on givin' 'm pain--call that sport? I can't see

it. But the crowd's got its money on us. We don't count. We've

sold ourselves for a hundred bucks, an' we gotta deliver the

goods.



"Let me tell you, Saxon, honest to God, that was one of the times

I wanted to go through the ropes an' drop them fans a-yellin' for

blood an' show 'em what blood is.



"'For God's sake finish me, Bill,' Bill says to me in that

clinch; 'put her over an' I'll fall for it, but I can't lay

down.'



"D'ye want to know? I cry there, right in the ring, in that

clinch. The weeps for me. 'I can't do it, Bill,' I whisper back,

hangin' onto'm like a brother an' the referee ragin' an' draggin'

at us to get us apart, an' all the wolves in the house snarlin'.



'You got 'm!' the audience is yellin'. 'Go in an' finish 'm!'

'The hay for him, Bill; put her across to the jaw an' see 'm

fall!'



"'You got to, Bill, or you're a dog,' Bill says, lookin' love at

me in his eyes as the referee's grip untangles us clear.



"An' them wolves of fans yellin': 'Fake! Fake! Fake!' like that,

an' keepin' it up.



"Well, I done it. They's only that way out. I done it. By God, I

done it. I had to. I feint for 'm, draw his left, duck to the

right past it, takin' it across my shoulder, an come up with my

right to his jaw. An' he knows the trick. He's hep. He's beaten

me to it an' blocked it with his shoulder a thousan' times. But

this time he don't. He keeps himself wide open on purpose. Blim!

It lands. He's dead in the air, an' he goes down sideways,

strikin' his face first on the rosin-canvas an' then layin' dead,

his head twisted under 'm till you'd a-thought his neck was

broke. ME--I did that for a hundred bucks an' a bunch of stiffs

I'd be ashamed to wipe my feet on. An' then I pick Bill up in my

arms an' carry'm to his corner, an' help bring'm around. Well,

they ain't no kick comin'. They pay their money an' they get

their blood, an' a knockout. An' a better man than them, that I

love, layin' there dead to the world with a skinned face on the

mat."



For a moment he was still, gazing straight before him at the

horses, his face hard and angry. He sighed, looked at Saxon, and

smiled.



"An' I quit the game right there. An' Billy Murphy's laughed at

me for it. He still follows it. A side-line, you know, because he

works at a good trade. But once in a while, when the house needs

paintin', or the doctor bills are up, or his oldest kid wants a

bicycle, he jumps out an' makes fifty or a hundred bucks before

some of the clubs. I want you to meet him when it comes handy.

He's some boy I'm tellin' you. But it did make me sick that

night."



Again the harshness and anger were in his face, and Saxon amazed

herself by doing unconsciously what women higher in the social

scale have done with deliberate sincerity. Her hand went out

impulsively to his holding the lines, resting on top of it for a

moment with quick, firm pressure. Her reward was a smile from

lips and eyes, as his face turned toward her.



"Gee!" he exclaimed. "I never talk a streak like this to anybody.

I just hold my hush an' keep my thinks to myself. But, somehow, I

guess it's funny, I kind of have a feelin' I want to make good

with you. An' that's why I'm tellin' you my thinks. Anybody can

dance."



The way led uptown, past the City Hall and the Fourteenth Street

skyscrapers, and out Broadway to Mountain View. Turning to the

right at the cemetery, they climbed the Piedmont Heights to Blair

Park and plunged into the green coolness of Jack Hayes Canyon.

Saxon could not suppress her surprise and joy at the quickness

with which they covered the ground.



"They are beautiful," she said. "I never dreamed I'd ever ride

behind horses like them. I'm afraid I'll wake up now and find

it's a dream. You know, I dream horses all the time. I'd give

anything to own one some time."



"It's funny, ain't it?" Billy answered. "I like horses that way.

The boss says I'm a wooz at horses. An' I know he's a dub. He

don't know the first thing. An' yet he owns two hundred big heavy

draughts besides this light drivin' pair, an' I don't own one."



"Yet God makes the horses," Saxon said.



"It's a sure thing the boss don't. Then how does he have so

many?--two hundred of 'em, I'm tellin' you. He thinks he likes

horses. Honest to God, Saxon, he don't like all his horses as

much as I like the last hair on the last tail of the scrubbiest

of the bunch. Yet they're his. Wouldn't it jar you?"



"Wouldn't it?" Saxon laughed appreciatively. "I just love fancy

shirtwaists, an' I spent my life ironing some of the

beautifullest I've ever seen. It's funny, an' it isn't fair."



Billy gritted his teeth in another of his rages.



"An' the way some of them women gets their shirtwaists. It makes

me sick, thinkin' of you ironin' 'em. You know what I mean,

Saxon. They ain't no use wastin' words over it. You know. I know.

Everybody knows. An' it's a hell of a world if men an' women

sometimes can't talk to each other about such things." His manner

was almost apologetic yet it was defiantly and assertively right.

"I never talk this way to other girls. They'd think I'm workin up

to designs on 'em. They make me sick the way they're always

lookin' for them designs. But you're different I can talk to you

that way. I know I've got to. It's the square thing. You're like

Billy Murphy, or any other man a man can talk to."



She sighed with a great happiness, and looked at him with

unconscious, love-shining eyes.



"It's the same way with me," she said. "The fellows I've run with

I've never dared let talk about such things, because I knew

they'd take advantage of it. Why, all the time, with them, I've a

feeling that we're cheating and lying to each other, playing a

game like at a masquerade ball." She paused for a moment,

hesitant and debating, then went on in a queer low voice. "I

haven't been asleep. I've seen... and heard. I've had my chances,

when I was that tired of the laundry I'd have done almost

anything. I could have got those fancy shirtwaists... an' all the

rest... and maybe a horse to ride. There was a bank cashier...

married, too, if you please. He talked to me straight out. I

didn't count, you know. I wasn't a girl, with a girl's feelings,

or anything. I was nobody. It was just like a business talk. I

learned about men from him. He told me what he'd do. He..."



Her voice died away in sadness, and in the silence she could hear

Billy grit his teeth.



"You can't tell me," he cried. "I know. It's a dirty world--an

unfair, lousy world. I can't make it out. They's no squareness in

it.--Women, with the best that's in 'em, bought an' sold like

horses. I don't understand women that way. I don't understand men

that way. I can't see how a man gets anything but cheated when he

buys such things. It's funny, ain't it? Take my boss an' his

horses. He owns women, too. He might a-owned you, just because

he's got the price. An', Saxon, you was made for fancy

shirtwaists an' all that, but, honest to God, I can't see you

payin' for them that way. It'd be a crime--"



He broke off abruptly and reined in the horses. Around a sharp

turn, speeding down the grade upon them, had appeared an

automobile. With slamming of brakes it was brought to a stop,

while the faces of the occupants took new lease of interest of

life and stared at the young man and woman in the light rig that

barred the way. Billy held up his hand.



"Take the outside, sport," he said to the chauffeur.



"Nothin' doin', kiddo," came the answer, as the chauffeur

measured with hard, wise eyes the crumbling edge of the road and

the downfall of the outside bank.



"Then we camp," Billy announced cheerfully. "I know the rules of

the road. These animals ain't automobile broke altogether, an' if

you think I'm goin' to have 'em shy off the grade you got another

guess comin'."



A confusion of injured protestation arose from those that sat in

the car.



"You needn't be a road-hog because you're a Rube," said the

chauffeur. "We ain't a-goin' to hurt your horses. Pull out so we

can pass. If you don't..."



"That'll do you, sport," was Billy's retort. "You can't talk that

way to yours truly. I got your number an' your tag, my son.

You're standin' on your foot. Back up the grade an' get off of

it. Stop on the outside at the first psssin'-place an' we'll pass

you. You've got the juice. Throw on the reverse."



After a nervous consultation, the chauffeur obeyed, and the car

backed up the hill and out of sight around the turn.



"Them cheap skates," Billy sneered to Saxon, "with a couple of

gallons of gasoline an' the price of a machine a-thinkin' they

own the roads your folks an' my folks made."



"Takln' all night about it?" came the chauffeur's voice from

around the bend. "Get a move on. You can pass."



"Get off your foot," Billy retorted contemptuously. "I'm a-comin'

when I'm ready to come, an' if you ain't given room enough I'll

go clean over you an' your load of chicken meat."



He slightly slacked the reins on the restless, head-tossing

animals, and without need of chirrup they took the weight of the

light vehicle and passed up the hill and apprehensively on the

inside of the purring machine.



"Where was we?" Billy queried, as the clear road showed in front.

"Yep, take my boss. Why should he own two hundred horses, an'

women, an' the rest, an' you an' me own nothin'?"



"You own your silk, Billy," she said softly.



"An' you yours. Yet we sell it to 'em like it was cloth across

the counter at so much a yard. I guess you're hep to what a few

more years in the laundry'll do to you. Take me. I'm sellin' my

silk slow every day I work. See that little finger?" He shifted

the reins to one hand for a moment and held up the free hand for

inspection. "I can't straighten it like the others, an' it's

growin'. I never put it out fightin'. The teamin's done it.

That's silk gone across the counter, that's all. Ever see a old

four-horse teamster's hands? They look like claws they're that

crippled an' twisted."



"Things weren't like that in the old days when our folks crossed

the plains," she answered. "They might a-got their fingers

twisted, but they owned the best goin' in the way of horses and

such."



"Sure. They worked for themselves. They twisted their fingers for

themselves. But I'm twistin' my fingers for my boss. Why, d'ye

know, Saxon, his hands is soft as a woman's that's never done any

work. Yet he owns the horses an' the stables, an' never does a

tap of work, an' I manage to scratch my meal-ticket an' my

clothes. It's got my goat the way things is run. An' who runs 'em

that way? That's what I want to know. Times has changed. Who

changed 'em?"



"God didn't."



"You bet your life he didn't, An' that's another thing that gets

me. Who's God anyway? If he's runnin' things--an' what good is he

if he ain't?--then why does he let my boss, an' men like that

cashier you mentioned, why does he let them own the horses, an'

buy the women, the nice little girls that oughta be lovin' their

own huabands, an' havin' children they're not ashamed of, an'

just bein' happy aecordin' to their nature?"







CHAPTER XI



The horses, resting frequently and lathered by the work, had

climbed the steep grade of the old road to Moraga Valley, and on

the divide of the Contra Costa hills the way descended sharply

through the green and sunny stillness of Redwood Canyon.



"Say, ain't it swell?" Billy queried, with a wave of his hand

indicating the circled tree-groups, the trickle of unseen water,

and the summer hum of bees.



"I love it"' Saxon affirmed. "It makes me want to live in the

country, and I never have."



"Me, too, Saxon. I've never lived in the country in my life--an'

all my folks was country folks."



"No cities then. Everybody lived in the country."



"I guess you're right," he nodded. "They just had to live in the

country."



There was no brake on the light carriage, and Billy became

absorbed in managing his team down the steep, winding road. Saxon

leaned back, eyes closed, with a feeling of ineeffable rest. Time

and again he shot glances at her closed eyes.



"What's the matter?" he asked finally, in mild alarm. "You ain't

sick?"



"It's so beautiful I'm afraid to look," she answered. "It's so

brave it hurts."



"BRAVE?--now that's funnny."



"Isn't it? But it just makes me feel that way. It's brave. Now

the houses and streets and things in the city aren't brave. But

this is. I don't know why. It just is."



"By golly, I think you're right," he exclaimed. "It strikes me

that way, now you speak of it. They ain't no games or tricks

here, no cheatin' an' no lyin'. Them trees just stand up natural

an' strong an' clean like young boys their first time in the ring

before they've learned its rottenness an' how to double-cross an'

lay down to the bettin' odds an' the fightfans. Yep; it is brave.

Say, Saxon, you see things, don't you?" His pause was almost

wistful, and he looked at her and studied her with a caressing

softness that ran through her in resurgent thrills. "D'ye know,

I'd just like you to see me fight some time--a real fight, with

something doin' every moment. I'd be proud to death to do it for

you. An' I'd sure fight some with you lookin' on an'

understandin'. That'd be a fight what is, take it from me. An'

that's funny, too. I never wanted to fight before a woman in my

life. They squeal and screech an' don't understand. But you'd

understand. It's dead open an' shut you would."



A little later, swinging along the flat of the valley, through

the little clearings of the farmers and the ripe grain-stretches

golden in the sunshine, Billy turned to Saxon again.



"Say, you've ben in love with fellows, lots of times. Tell me

about it. What's it like?"



She shook her head slowly.



"I only thought I was in love--and not many times, either--"



"Many times!" he cried.



"Not really ever," she assured him, secretly exultant at his

unconscious jealousy. "I never was really in love. If I had been

I'd be married now. You see, I couldn't see anything else to it

but to marry a man if I loved him."



"But suppose he didn't love you?"



"Oh, I don't know," she smiled, half with facetiousness and half

with certainty and pride. "I think I could make him love me."



"I guess you sure could," Billy proclaimed enthusiastically.



"The trouble is," she went on, "the men that loved me I never

cared for that way.--Oh, look!"



A cottontail rabbit had scuttled across the road, and a tiny dust

cloud lingered like smoke, marking the way of his flight. At the

next turn a dozen quail exploded into the air from under the

noses of the horses. Billy and Saxon exclaimed in mutual delight.



"Gee," he muttered, "I almost wisht I'd ben born a farmer. Folks

wasn't made to live in cities."



"Not our kind, at least," she agreed. Followed a pause and a long

sigh. "It's all so beautiful. It would be a dream just to live

all your life in it. I'd like to be an Indian squaw sometimes."



Several times Billy checked himself on the verge of speech.



"About those fellows you thought you was in love with," he said

finally. "You ain't told me, yet."



"You want to know?" she asked. "They didn't amount to anything."



"Of course I want to know. Go ahead. Fire away."



"Well, first there was Al Stanley--"



"What did he do for a livin'?" Billy demanded, almost as with

authority.



"He wss a gambler."



Billy's face abruptly stiffened, and she could see his eyes

cloudy with doubt in the quick glance he flung at her.



"Oh, it was all right," she laughed. "I was only eight years old.

You see, I'm beginning at the beginning. It was after my mother

died and when I was adopted by Cady. He kept a hotel and saloon.

It was down in Los Angeles. Just a small hotel. Workingmen, just

common laborers, mostly, and some railroad men, stopped at it,

and I guess Al Stanley got his share of their wages. He was so

handsome and so quiet and soft-spoken. And he had the nicest eyes

and the softest, cleanest hands. I can see them now. He played

with me sometimes, in the afternoon, and gave me candy and little

presents. He used to sleep most of the day. I didn't know why,

then. I thought he was a fairy prince in disguise. And then he

got killed, right in the bar-room, but first he killed the man

that killed him. So that was the end of that love affair.



"Next was after the asylum, when I was thirteen and living with

my brother--I've lived with him ever since. He was a boy that

drove a bakery wagon. Almost every morning, on the way to school,

I used to pass him. He would come driving down Wood Street and

turn in on Twelfth. Maybe it was because he drove a horse that

attracted me. Anyway, I must have loved him for a couple of

months. Then he lost his job, or something, for another boy drove

the wagon. And we'd never even spoken to each other.



"Then there was a bookkeeper when I was sixteen. I seem to run to

bookkeepers. It was a bookkeeper at the laundry that Charley Long

beat up. This other one was when I was working in Hickmeyer's

Cannery. He had soft hands, too. But I quickly got all I wanted

of him. He was . . . well, anyway, he had ideas like your boss.

And I never really did love him, truly and honest, Billy. I felt

from the first that he wasn't just right. And when I was working

in the paper-box factory I thought I loved a clerk in Kahn's

Emporium--you know, on Eleventh and Washington. He was all right.

That was the trouble with him. He was too much all right. He

didn't have any life in him, any go. He wanted to marry me,

though. But somehow I couldn't see it. That shows I didn't love

him. He was narrow-chested and skinny, and his hands were always

cold and fishy. But my! he could dress--just like he came out of

a bandbox. He said he was going to drown himself, and all kinds

of things, but I broke with him just the same.



"And after that...well, there isn't any after that. I must have

got particular, I guess, but I didn't see anybody I could love.

It seemed more like a game with the men I met, or a fight. And we

never fought fair on either side. Seemed as if we always had

cards up our sleeves. We weren't honest or outspoken, but instead

it seemed as if we were trying to take advantage of each other.

Charley Long was honest, though. And so was that bank cashier.

And even they made me have the fight feeling harder than ever.

All of them always made me feel I had to take care of myself.

They wouldn't. That was sure."



She stopped and looked with interest at the clean profile of his

face as he watched and guided the homes. He looked at her

inquiringly, and her eyes laughed lazily into his as she

stretched her arms.



"That's all," she concluded. "I've told you everything, which

I've never done before to any one. And it's your turn now."



"Not much of a turn, Saxon. I've never cared for girls--that is,

not enough to want to marry 'em. I always liked men

better--fellows like Billy Murphy. Besides, I guess I was too

interested in trainin' an' fightin' to bother with women much.

Why, Saxon, honest, while I ain't ben altogether good--you

understand what I mean--just the same I ain't never talked love

to a girl in my life. They was no call to."



"The girls have loved you just the same," she teased, while in

her heart was a curious elation at his virginal confession.



He devoted himself to the horses.



"Lots of them," she urged.



Still he did not reply.



"Now, haven't they?"



"Well, it wasn't my fault," he said slowly. "If they wanted to

look sideways at me it was up to them. And it was up to me to

sidestep if I wanted to, wasn't it? You've no idea, Saxon, how a

prizefighter is run after. Why, sometimes it's seemed to me that

girls an' women ain't got an ounce of natural shame in their

make-up. Oh, I was never afraid of them, believe muh, but I

didn't hanker after 'em. A man's a fool that'd let them kind get

his goat.



"Maybe you haven't got love in you," she challenged.



"Maybe I haven't," was his discouraging reply. "Anyway, I don't

see myself lovin' a girl that runs after me. It's all right for

Charley-boys, but a man that is a man don't like bein' chased by

women."



"My mother always said that love was the greatest thing in the

world," Saxon argued. "She wrote poems about it, too. Some of

them were published in the San Jose Mercury."



"What do you think about it?"



"Oh, I don't know," she baffled, meeting his eyes with another

lazy smile. "All I know is it's pretty good to be alive a day

like this."



"On a trip like this--you bet it is," he added promptly.



At one o'clock Billy turned off the road and drove into an open

space among the trees.



"Here's where we eat," he announced. "I thought it'd be better to

have a lunch by ourselves than atop at one of these roadside

dinner counters. An' now, just to make everything safe an'

comfortable, I'm goin' to unharness the horses. We got lots of

time. You can get the lunch basket out an' spread it on the

lap-robe."



As Saxon unpacked she basket she was appalled at his

extravagance. She spread an amazing array of ham and chicken

sandwiches, crab salad, hard-boiled eggs, pickled pigs' feet,

ripe olives and dill pickles, Swiss cheese, salted almonds,

oranges and bananas, and several pint bottles of beer. It was the

quantity as well as the variety that bothered her. It had the

appearance of a reckless attempt to buy out a whole delicatessen

shop.



"You oughtn't to blow yourself that way," she reproved him as he

sat down beside her. "Why it's enough for half a dozen

bricklayers."



"It's all right, isn't it?"



"Yes," she acknowledged. "But that's the trouble. It's too much

so."



"Then it's all right," he concluded. "I always believe in havin'

plenty. Have some beer to wash the dust away before we begin?

Watch out for the glasses. I gotta return them."



Later, the meal finished, he lay on his back, smoking a

cigarette, and questioned her about her earlier history. She had

been telling him of her life in her brother's house, where she

paid four dollars and a half a week board. At fifteen she had

graduated from grammar school and gone to work in the jute mills

for four dollars a week, three of which she had paid to Sarah.



"How about that saloonkeeper?" Billy asked. "How come it he

adopted you?"



She shrugged her shoulders. "I don't know, except that all my

relatives were hard up. It seemed they just couldn't get on. They

managed to scratch a lean living for themselves, and that was

all. Cady--he was the saloonkeeper--had been a soldier in my

father's company, and he always swore by Captain Kit, which was

their nickname for him. My father had kept the surgeons from

amputating his leg in the war, and he never forgot it. He was

making money in the hotel and saloon, and I found out afterward

he helped out a lot to pay the doctors and to bury my mother

alongside of father. I was to go to Uncle Will--that was my

mother's wish; but there had been fighting up in the Ventura

Mountains where his ranch was, and men had been killed. It was

about fences and cattlemen or something, and anyway he was in

jail a long time, and when he got his freedom the lawyers had got

his ranch. He was an old man, then, and broken, and his wife took

sick, and he got a job as night watchman for forty dollars a

month. So he couldn't do anything for me, and Cady adopted me.



"Cady was a good man, if he did run a saloon. His wife was a big,

handsome-looking woman. I don't think she was all right . . . and

I've heard so since. But she was good to me. I don't care what

they say about her, or what she was. She was awful good to me.

After he died, she went altogether bad, and so I went into the

orphan asylum. It wasn't any too good there, and I had three

years of it. And then Tom had married and settled down to steady

work, and he took me out to live with him. And--well, I've been

working pretty steady ever since."



She gazed sadly away across the fields until her eyes came to

rest on a fence bright-splashed with poppies at its base. Billy,

who from his supine position had been looking up at her, studying

and pleasuring in the pointed oval of her woman's face, reached

his hand out slowly as he murmured:



"You poor little kid."



His hand closed sympathetically on her bare forearm, and as she

looked down to greet his eyes she saw in them suprise and

delight.



"Say, ain't your skin cool though," he said. "Now me, I'm always

warm. Feel my hand."



It was warmly moist, and she noted microscopic beads of sweat on

his forehead and clean-shaven upper lip.



"My, but you are sweaty."



She bent to him and with her handkerchief dabbed his lip and

forehead dry, then dried his palms.



"I breathe through my skin, I guess," he explained. "The wise

guys in the trainin' camps and gyms say it's a good sign for

health. But somehow I'm sweatin' more than usual now. Funny,

ain't it?"



She had been forced to unclasp his hand from her arm in order to

dry it, and when she finished, it returned to its old position.



"But, say, ain't your skin cool," he repeated with renewed

wonder. "Soft as velvet, too, an' smooth as silk. It feels

great."



Gently explorative, he slid his hand from wrist to elbow and came

to rest half way back. Tired and languid from the morning in the

sun, she found herself thrilling to his touch and half-dreamily

deciding that here was a man she could love, hands and all.



"Now I've taken the cool all out of that spot." He did not look

up to her, and she could see the roguish smile that curled on his

lips. "So I guess I'll try another."



He shifted his hand along her arm with soft sensuousness, and

she, looking down at his lips, remembered the long tingling they

had given hers the first time they had met.



"Go on and talk," he urged, after a delicious five minutes of

silence. "I like to watch your lips talking. It's funny, but

every move they make looks like a tickly kiss."



Greatly she wanted to stay where she was. Instead, she said:



"If I talk, you won't like what I say."



"Go on," he insisted. "You can't say anything I won't like."



"Well, there's some poppies over there by the fence I want to

pick. And then it's time for us to be going."



"I lose," he laughed. "But you made twenty-five tickle kisses

just the same. I counted 'em. I'll tell you what: you sing 'When

the Harvest Days Are Over,' and let me have your other cool arm

while you're doin' it, and then we'll go."



She sang looking down into his eyes, which ware centered, not on

hers, but on her lips. When she finished, she slipped his hands

from her arms and got up. He was about to start for the horses,

when she held her jacket out to him. Despite the independence

natural to a girl who earned her own living, she had an innate

love of the little services and finenesses; and, also, she

remembered from her childhood the talk by the pioneer women of

the courtesy and attendance of the caballeros of the

Spanish-California days.



Sunset greeted them when, after a wide circle to the east and

south, they cleared the divide of the Contra Costa hills and

began dropping down the long grade that led past Redwood Peak to

Fruitvale. Beneath them stretched the flatlands to the bay,

checkerboarded into fields and broken by the towns of Elmhurst,

San Leandro, and Haywards. The smoke of Oakland filled the

western sky with haze and murk, while beyond, across the bay,

they could see the first winking lights of San Francisco.



Darkness was on them, and Billy had become curiously silent. For

half an hour he had given no recognition of her existence save

once, when the chill evening wind caused him to tuck the robe

tightly about her and himself. Half a dozen times Saxon found

herself on the verge of the remark, "What's on your mind?" but

each time let it remain unuttered. She sat very close to him. The

warmth of their bodies intermingled, and she was aware of a great

restfulness and content.



"Say, Saxon," he began abruptly. "It's no use my holdin' it in

any longer. It's ben in my mouth all day, ever since lunch.

What's the matter with you an' me gettin' married?"



She knew, very quietly and very gladly, that he meant it.

Instinctively she wss impelled to hold off, to make him woo her,

to make herself more desirably valuable ere she yielded. Further,

her woman's sensitiveness and pride were offended. She had never

dreamed of so forthright and bald a proposal from the man to whom

she would give herself. The simplicity and directness of Billy's

proposal constituted almost a hurt. On the other hand she wanted

him so much--how much she had not realized until now, when he had

so unexpectedly made himself accessible.



"Well you gotta say something, Saxon. Hand it to me, good or bad;

but anyway hand it to me. An' just take into consideration that I

love you. Why, I love you like the very devil, Saxon. I must,

because I'm askin' you to marry me, an' I never asked any girl

that before."



Another silence fell, and Saxon found herself dwelling on the

warmth, tingling now, under the lap-robe. When she realized

whither her thoughts led, she blushed guiltily in the darkness.



"How old are you, Billy?" she questioned, with a suddenness and

irrelevance as disconcerting as his first words had been.



"Twenty-two," he answered.



"I am twenty-four."



"As if I didn't know. When you left the orphan asylum and how old

you were, how long you worked in the jute mills, the cannery, the

paper-box factory, the laundry--maybe you think I can't do

addition. I knew how old you was, even to your birthday."



"That doesn't change the fact that I'm two years older."



"What of it? If it counted for anything, I wouldn't be lovin'

you, would I? Your mother was dead right. Love's the big stuff.

It's what counts. Don't you see? I juat love you, an' I gotta

have you. It's natural, I guess; and I've always found with

horses, dogs, and other folks, that what's natural is right.

There's no gettin' away from it, Saxon; I gotta have you, an' I'm

just hopin' hard you gotta have me. Maybe my hands ain't soft

like bookkeepers' an' clerks, but they can work for you, an'

fight like Sam Hill for you, and, Saxon, they can love you."



The old sex antagonism which she had always experienced with men

seemed to have vanished. She had no sense of being on the

defensive. This was no game. It was what she had been looking for

and dreaming about. Before Billy she was defenseless, and there

was an all-satisfaction in the knowledge. She could deny him

nothing. Not even if he proved to be like the others. And out of

the greatness of the thought rose a greater thought--he would not

so prove himself.



She did not speak. Instead, in a glow of spirit and flesh, she

reached out to his left hand and gently tried to remove it from

the rein. He did not understand; but when she persisted he

shifted the rein to his right and let her have her will with the

other hand. Her head bent over it, and she kissed the teamster

callouses.



For the moment he was stunned.



"You mean it?" he stammered.



For reply, she kissed the hand again and murmured:



"I love your hands, Billy. To me they are the most beautiful

hands in the world, and it would take hours of talking to tell

you all they mean to me."



"Whoa!" he called to the horses.



He pulled them in to a standstill, soothed them with his voice,

and made the reins fast around the whip. Then he turned to her

with arms around her and lips to lips.



"Oh, Billy, I'll make you a good wife," she sobbed, when the kiss

was broken.



He kissed her wet eyes and found her lips again.



"Now you know what I was thinkin' and why I was sweatin' when we

was eatin' lunch. Just seemed I couldn't hold in much longer from

tellin' you. Why, you know, you looked good to me from the first

moment I spotted you."



"And I think I loved you from that first day, too, Billy. And I

was so proud of you all that day, you were so kind and gentle,

and so strong, and the way the men all respected you and the

girls all wanted you, and the way you fought those three Irishmen

when I was behind the picnic table. I couldn't love or marry a

man I wasn't proud of, and I'm so proud of you, so proud."



"Not half as much as I am right now of myself," he answered, "for

having won you. It's too good to he true. Maybe the alarm

clock'll go off and wake me up in a couple of minutes. Well,

anyway, if it does, I'm goin' to make the best of them two

minutes first. Watch out I don't eat you, I'm that hungry for

you."



He smothered her in an embrace, holding her so tightly to him

that it almost hurt. After what was to her an age-long period of

bliss, his arms relaxed and he seemed to make an effort to draw

himself together.



 "An' the clock ain't gone off yet," he whispered against her

cheek. "And it's a dark night, an' there's Fruitvale right ahead,

an' if there ain't King and Prince standin' still in the middle

of the road. I never thought the time'd come when I wouldn't want

to take the ribbons on a fine pair of horses. But this is that

time. I just can't let go of you, and I've gotta some time

to-night. It hurts worse'n poison, but here goes."



He restored her to herself, tucked the disarranged robe about

her, and chirruped to the impatient team.



Half an hour later he called "Whoa!"



"I know I'm awake now, but I don't know but maybe I dreamed all

the rest, and I just want to make sure."



And again be made the reins fast and took her in his arms.







CHAPTER XII



The days flew by for Saxon. She worked on steadily at the

laundry, even doing more overtime than usual, and all her free

waking hours were devoted to preparations for the great change

and to Billy. He had proved himself God's own impetuous lover by

insisting on getting married the next day after the proposal, and

then by resolutely refusing to compromise on more than a week's

delay.



"Why wait?" he demanded. "We're not gettin' any younger so far as

I can notice, an' think of all we lose every day we wait."



In the end, he gave in to a month, which was well, for in two

weeks he was transferred, with half a dozen other drivers, to

work from the big stables of Corberly and Morrison in West

Oakland. House-hunting in the other end of town ceased, and on

Pine Street, between Fifth and Fourth, and in immediate proximity

to the great Southern Pacific railroad yards, Billy and Saxon

rented a neat cottage of four small rooms for ten dollars a

month.



"Dog-cheap is what I call it, when I think of the small rooms

I've ben soaked for," was Billy's judgment. "Look at the one I

got now, not as big as the smallest here, an' me payin' six

dollars a month for it."



"But it's furnished," Saxon remmded him. "You see, that makes a

difference."



But Billy didn't see.



"I ain't much of a scholar, Saxon, but I know simple arithmetic;

I've soaked my watch when I was hard up, and I can calculate

interest. How much do you figure it will cost to furnish the

house, carpets on the floor, linoleum on the kitchen, and all?"



"We can do it nicely for three hundred dollars," she answered.

"I've been thinking it over and I'm sure we can do it for that."



"Three hundred," he muttered, wrinkling his brows with

concentration. "Three hundred, say at six per cent.--that'd be

six cents on the dollar, sixty cents on ten dollars, six dollars

on the hundred, on three hundred eighteen dollars. Say--I'm a

bear at multiplyin' by ten. Now divide eighteen by twelve, that'd

be a dollar an' a half a month interest." He stopped, satisfied

that he had proved his contention. Then his face quickened with a

fresh thought. "Hold on! That ain't all. That'd be the interest

on the furniture for four rooms. Divide by four. What's a dollar

an' a half divided by four?"



"Four into fifteen, three times and three to carry," Saxon

recited glibly. "Four into thirty is seven, twenty-eight, two to

carry; and two-fourths is one-half. There you are."



"Gee! You're the real bear at figures." He hesitated. "I didn't

follow you. How much did you say it was?"



"Thirty-seven and a half cents."



"Ah, ha! Now we'll see how much I've ben gouged for my one room.

Ten dollars a month for four rooms is two an' a half for one. Add

thirty-seven an' a half cents interest on furniture, an' that

makes two dollars an' eighty-seven an' a half cents. Subtract

from six dollars ..."



"Three dollars and twelve and a half cents," she supplied

quickly.



"There we are! Three dollars an' twelve an' a half cents I'm

jiggered out of on the room I'm rentin'. Say! Bein' married is

like savin' money, ain't it?"



"But furniture wears out, Billy."



"By golly, I never thought of that. It ought to be figured, too.

Anyway, we've got a snap here, and next Saturday afternoon you've

gotta get off from the laundry so as we can go an' buy our

furniture. I saw Salinger's last night. I give'm fifty down, and

the rest installment plan, ten dollars a month. In twenty-five

months the furniture's ourn. An' remember, Saxon, you wanta buy

everything you want, no matter how much it costs. No scrimpin' on

what's for you an' me. Get me?"



She nodded, with no betrayal on her face of the myriad secret

economies that filled her mind. A hint of moisture glistened in

her eyes.



"You're so good to me, Billy," she murmured, as she came to him

and was met inside his arms.



"So you've gone an' done it," Mary commented, one morning in the

laundry. They had not been at work ten minutes ere her eye had

glimpsed the topaz ring on the third finger of Saxon's left hand.

"Who's the lucky one? Charley Long or Billy Roberts?"



"Billy," was the answer.



"Huh! Takin' a young boy to raise, eh?"



Saxon showed that the stab had gone home, and Mary was all

contrition.



"Can't you take a josh? I'm glad to death at the news. Billy's a

awful good man, and I'm glad to see you get him. There ain't many

like him knockin' 'round, an' they ain't to be had for the

askin'. An' you're both lucky. You was just made for each other,

an' you'll make him a better wife than any girl I know. when is

it to be?"



Going home from the laundry a few days later, Saxon encountered

Charley Long. He blocked the sidewalk, and compelled speech with

her.



"So you're runnin' with a prizefighter," he sneered. "A blind man

can see your finish."



For the first time she was unafraid of this big-bodied,

black-browed men with the hairy-matted hands and fingers. She

held up her left hand.



"See that? It's something, with all your strength, that you could

never put on my finger. Billy Roberts put it on inside a week. He

got your number, Charley Long, and at the same time he got me."



"Skiddoo for you," Long retorted. "Twenty-three's your number."



"He's not like you," Saxon went on. "He's a man, every bit of

him, a fine, clean man."



Long laughed hoarsely.



"He's got your goat all right."



"And yours," she flashed back.



"I could tell you things about him. Saxon, straight, he ain't no

good. If I was to tell you--"



"You'd better get out of my way," she interrupted, "or I'll tell

him, and you know what you'll get, you great big bully."



Long shuffled uneasily, then reluctantly stepped aside.



"You're a caution," he said, half admiiringly.



"So's Billy Roberts," she laughed, and continned on her way.

After half a dozen steps she stopped. "Say," she called.



The big blacksmith turned toward her with eagerness.



"About a block back," she said, "I saw a man with hip disease.

You might go and beat him up."



Of one extravagance Saxon was guilty in the course of the brief

engagement period. A full day's wages she spent in the purchase

of half a dozen cabinet photographs of herself. Billy had

insisted that life was unendurable could he not look upon her

semblance the last thing when he went to bed at night and the

first thing when he got up in the morning. In return, his

photographs, one conventional and one in the stripped fighting

costume of the ring, ornamented her looking glass. It was while

gazing at the latter that she was reminded of her wonderful

mother's tales of the ancient Saxons and sea-foragers of the

English coasts. From the chest of drawers that had crossed the

plains she drew forth another of her several precious heirloom--a

scrap-book of her mother's in which was pasted much of the

fugitive newspaper verse of pioneer California days. Also, there

were copies of paintings and old wood engravings from the

magazines of a generation and more before.



Saxon ran the pages with familiar fingers and stopped at the

picture she was seeking. Between bold headlands of rock and under

a gray cloud-blown sky, a dozen boats, long and lean and dark,

beaked like monstrous birds, were landing on a foam-whitened

beach of sand. The men in the boats, half naked, huge-muscled and

fair-haired, wore winged helmets. In their hands were swords and

spears, and they were leaping, waist-deep, into the sea-wash and

wading ashore. Opposed to them, contesting the landing, were

skin-clad savages, unlike Indians, however, who clustered on the

beach or waded into the water to their knees. The first blows

were being struck, and here and there the bodies of the dead and

wounded rolled in the surf. One fair-haired invader lay across

the gunwale of a boat, the manner of his death told by the arrow

that transfixed his breast. In the air, leaping past him into the

water, sword in hand, was Billy. There was no mistaking it. The

striking blondness, the face, the eyes, the mouth were the same.

The very expression on the face was what had been on Billy's the

day of the picnic when he faced the three wild Irishmen.



Somewhere out of the ruck of those warring races had emerged

Billy's ancestors, and hers, was her afterthought, as she closed

the book and put it back in the drawer. And some of those

ancestors had made this ancient and battered chest of drawers

which had crossed the salt ocean and the plains and been pierced

by a bullet in the fight with the Indians at Little Meadow.

Almost, it seemed, she could visualize the women who had kept

their pretties and their family homespun in its drawers--the

women of those wandering generations who were grandmothers and

greater great grandmothers of her own mother. Well, she sighed,

it was a good stock to be born of, a hard-working, hard-fighting

stock. She fell to wondering what her life would have been like

had she been born a Chinese woman, or an Italian woman like those

she saw, head-shawled or bareheaded, squat, ungainly and swarthy,

who carried great loads of driftwood on their heads up from tha

beach. Then she laughed at her foolishness, remembered Billy and

the four-roomed cottage on Pine Street, and went to bed with her

mind filled for the hundredth time with the details of the

furniture.







CHAPTER XIII



"Our cattle were all played out," Saxon was saying, "and winter

was so near that we couldn't dare try to cross the Great American

Desert, so our train stopped in Salt Lake City that winter. The

Mormons hadn't got bad yet, and they were good to us."



"You talk as though you were there," Bert commented.



"My mother was," Saxon answered proudly. "She was nine years old

that winter."



They were seated around the table in the kitchen of the little

Pine Street cottage, making a cold lunch of sandwiches, tamales,

and bottled beer. It being Sunday, the four were free from work,

and they had come early, to work harder than on any week day,

washing walls and windows, scrubbing floors, laying carpets and

linoleum, hanging curtains, setting up the stove, putting the

kitchen utensils and dishes away, and placing the furniture.



"Go on with the story, Saxon," Mary begged. "I'm just dyin' to

hear. And Bert, you just shut up and listen."



"Well, that winter was when Del Hancock showed up. He was

Kentucky born, but he'd been in the West for years. He was a

scout, like Kit Carson, and he knew him well. Many's a time Kit

Carson and he slept under the same blankets. They were together

to California and Oregon with General Fremont. Well, Del Hancock

was passing on his way through Salt Lake, going I don't know

where to raise a company of Rocky Mountain trappers to go after

beaver some new place he knew about. Ha was a handsome man. He

wore his hair long like in pictures, and had a silk sash around

his waist he'd learned to wear in California from the Spanish,

and two revolvers in his belt. Any woman 'd fall in love with him

first sight. Well, he saw Sadie, who was my mother's oldest

sister, and I guess she looked good to him, for he stopped right

there in Salt Lake and didn't go a step. He was a great Indian

fighter, too, and I heard my Aunt Villa say, when I was a little

girl, that he had the blackest, brightest eyes, and that the way

he looked was like an eagle. He'd fought duels, too, the way they

did in those days, and he wasn't afraid of anything.



"Sadie was a beauty, and she flirted with him and drove him

crazy. Maybe she wasn't sure of her own mind, I don't know. But I

do know that she didn't give in as easy as I did to Billy.

Finally, he couldn't stand it any more. Ha rode up that night on

horseback, wild as could be. 'Sadie,' he said, 'if you don't

promise to marry me to-morrow, I'll shoot myself to-night right

back of the corral.' And he'd have done it, too, and Sadie knew

it, and said she would. Didn't they make love fast in those

days?"



"Oh, I don't know," Mary sniffed. "A week after you first laid

eyes on Billy you was engaged. Did Billy say he was going to

shoot himself back of the laundry if you turned him down?"



"I didn't give him a chance," Saxon confessed. "Anyway Del

Hancock and Aunt Sadie got married next day. And they were very

happy afterward, only she died. And after that he was killed,

with General Custer and all the rest, by the Indians. He was an

old man by then, but I guess he got his share of Indians before

they got him. Men like him always died fighting, and they took

their dead with them. I used to know Al Stanley when I was a

little girl. He was a gambler, but he was game. A railroad man

shot him in the back when he was sitting at a table. That shot

killed him, too. He died in about two seconds. But before he died

he'd pulled his gun and put three bullets into the man that

killed him."



"I don't like fightin'," Mary protested. "It makes me nervous.

Bert gives me the willies the way he's always lookin' for

trouble. There ain't no sense in it."



"And I wouldn't give a snap of my fingers for a man without

fighting spirit," Saxon answered. "why, we wouldn't be here

to-day if it wasn't for the fighting spirit of our people before

us."



"You've got the real goods of a fighter in Billy," Bert assured

her; "a yard long and a yard wide and genuine A Number One,

long-fleeced wool. Billy's a Mohegan with a scalp-lock, that's

what he is. And when he gets his mad up it's a case of get out

from under or something will fall on you--hard."



"Just like that," Mary added.



Billy, who had taken no part in the conversation, got up, glanced

into the bedroom off the kitchen, went into the parlor and the

bedroom off the parlor, then returned and stood gazing with

puzzled brows into the kitchen bedroom.



"What's eatin' you, old man," Bert queried. "You look as though

you'd lost something or was markin' a three-way ticket. What you

got on your chest? Cough it up."



"Why, I'm just thinkin' where in Sam Hill's the bed an' stuff for

the back bedroom."



"There isn't any," Saxon explained. "We didn't order any."



"Then I'll see about it to-morrow."



"What d'ye want another bed for?" asked Bert. "Ain't one bed

enough for the two of you?"



"You shut up, Bert!" Mary cried. "Don't get raw."



"Whoa, Mary!" Bert grinned. "Back up. You're in the wrong stall

as usual."



"We don't need that room," Saxon was saying to Billy. "And so I

didn't plan any furniture. That money went to buy better carpets

and a better stove."



Billy came over to her, lifted her from the chair, and seated

himself with her on his knees.



"That's right, little girl. I'm glad you did. The best for us

every time. And to-morrow night I want you to run up with me to

Salinger's an' pick out a good bedroom set an' carpet for that

room. And it must be good. Nothin' snide."



"It will cost fifty dollars," she objected.



"That's right," he nodded. "Make it cost fifty dollars and not a

cent less. We're goin' to have the best. And what's the good of

an empty room? It'd make the house look cheap. Why, I go around

now, seein' this little nest just as it grows an' softens, day by

day, from the day we paid the cash money down an' nailed the

keys. Why, almost every moment I'm drivin' the horses, all day

long, I just keep on seein' this nest. And when we're married,

I'll go on seein' it. And I want to see it complete. If that

room'd he bare-floored an' empty, I'd see nothin' but it and its

bare floor all day long. I'd be cheated. The house'd be a lie.

Look at them curtains you put up in it, Saxon. That's to make

believe to the neighbors that it's furnished. Saxon, them

curtains are lyin' about that room, makin' a noise for every one

to hear that that room's furnished. Nitsky for us. I'm goin' to

see that them curtains tell the truth."



"You might rent it," Bert suggested. "You're close to the

railroad yards, and it's only two blocks to a restaurant."



"Not on your life. I ain't marryin' Saxon to take in lodgers. If

I can't take care of her, d'ye know what I'll do ? Go down to

Long Wharf, say 'Here goes nothin',' an' jump into the bay with a

stone tied to my neck. Ain't I right, Saxon?"



It was contrary to her prudent judgment, but it fanned her pride.

She threw her arms around her lover's neck, and said, ere she

kissed him:



"You're the boss, Billy. What you say goes, and always will go."



"Listen to that!" Bert gibed to Mary. "That's the stuff. Saxon's

onto her job."



"I guess we'll talk things over together first before ever I do

anything," Billy was saying to Saxon.



"Listen to that," Mary triumphed. "You bet the man that marries

me'll have to talk things over first."



"Billy's only givin' her hot air," Bert plagued. "They all do it

before they're married."



Mary sniffed contemptuously.



"I'll bet Saxon leads him around by the nose. And I'm goin' to

say, loud an' strong, that I'll lead the man around by the nose

that marries me."



"Not if you love him," Saxon interposed.



"All the more reason," Mary pursued.



Bert assumed an expression and attitude of mournful dejection.



"Now you see why me an' Mary don't get married," he said. "I'm

some big Indian myself, an' I'll be everlastingly jiggerooed if I

put up for a wigwam I can't be boss of."



"And I'm no squaw," Mary retaliated, "an' I wouldn't marry a big

buck Indian if all the rest of the men in the world was dead."



"Well this big buck Indian ain't asked you yet."



"He knows what he'd get if he did."



"And after that maybe he'll think twice before he does ask you."



Saxon, intent on diverting the conversation into pleasanter

channels, clapped her hands as if with sudden recollection.



"Oh! I forgot! I want to show you something." From her purse she

drew a slender ring of plain gold and passed it around. "My

mother's wedding ring. I've worn it around my neck always, like a

locket. I cried for it so in the orphan asylum that the matron

gave it back for me to wear. And now, just to think, after next

Tuesday I'll be wearing it on my finger. Look, Billy, see the

engraving on the inside."



"C to D, 1879," he read.



"Carlton to Daisy--Carlton was my father's first name. And now,

Billy, you've got to get it engraved for you and me."



Mary was all eagerness and delight.



"Oh, it's fine," she cried. "W to S, 1907."



Billy considered a moment.



"No, that wouldn't be right, because I'm not giving it to Saxon."



"I'll tell you what," Saxon said. "W and S."



"Nope." Billy shook his head. "S and W, because you come first

with me."



"If I come first with you, you come first with us. Billy, dear, I

insist on W and S."



"You see," Mary said to Bert. "Having her own way and leading him

by the nose already."



Saxon acknowledged the sting.



"Anyway you want, Billy," she surrendered. His arms tightened

about her.



"We'll talk it over first, I guess."







CHAPTER XIV



Sarah was conservative. Worse, she had crystallized at the end of

her love-time with the coming of her first child. After that she

was as set in her ways as plaster in a mold. Her mold was the

prejudices and notions of her girlhood and the house she lived

in. So habitual was she that any change in the customary round

assumed the proportions of a revolution. Tom had gone through

many of these revolutions, three of them when he moved house.

Then his stamina broke, and he never moved house again.



So it was that Saxon had held back the announcement of her

approaching marriage until it was unavoidable. She expected a

scene, and she got it.



"A prizefighter, a hoodlum, a plug-ugly," Sarah sneered, after

she had exhausted herself of all calamitous forecasts of her own

future and the future of her children in the absence of Saxon's

weekly four dollars and a half. "I don't know what your mother'd

thought if she lived to see the day when you took up with a tough

like Bill Roberts. Bill! Why, your mother was too refined to

associate with a man that was called Bill. And all I can say is

you can say good-bye to silk stockings and your three pair of

shoes. It won't be long before you'll think yourself lucky to go

sloppin' around in Congress gaiters and cotton stockin's two pair

for a quarter."



"Oh, I'm not afraid of Billy not being able to keep me in all

kinds of shoes," Saxon retorted with a proud toss of her head.



"You don't know what you're talkin' about." Sarah paused to laugh

in mirthless discordance. "Watch for the babies to come. They

come faster than wages raise these days."



"But we're not going to have any babies ... that is, at first.

Not until after the furniture is all paid for anyway."



"Wise in your generation, eh? In my days girls were more modest

than to know anything about disgraceful subjects."



"As babies?" Saxon queried, with a touch of gentle malice.



"Yes, as babies."



"The first I knew that babies were disgraceful. Why, Sarah, you,

with your five, how disgraceful you have been. Billy and I have

decided not to be half as disgraceful. We're only going to have

two--a boy and a girl."



Tom chuckled, but held the peace by hiding his face in his coffee

cup. Sarah, though checked by this flank attack, was herself an

old hand in the art. So temporary was the setback that she

scarcely paused ere hurling her assault from a new angle.



"An' marryin' so quick, all of a sudden, eh? If that ain't

suspicious, nothin' is. I don't know what young women's comin'

to. They ain't decent, I tell you. They ain't decent. That's what

comes of Sunday dancin' an' all the rest. Young women nowadays

are like a lot of animals. Such fast an' looseness I never saw

..."



Saxon was white with anger, but while Sarah wandered on in her

diatribe, Tom managed to wink privily and prodigiously at his

sister and to implore her to help in keeping the peace.



"It's all right, kid sister," he comforted Saxon when they were

alone. "There's no use talkin' to Sarah. Bill Roberts is a good

boy. I know a lot about him. It does you proud to get him for a

husband. You're bound to he happy with him . . ." His voice sank,

and his face seemed suddenly to be very old and tired as he went

on anxiously. "Take warning from Sarah. Don't nag. Whatever you

do, don't nag. Don't give him a perpetual-motion line of chin.

Kind of let him talk once in a while. Men have some horse sense,

though Sarah don't know it. Why, Sarah actually loves me, though

she don't make a noise like it. The thing for you is to love your

husband, and, by thunder, to make a noise of lovin' him, too. And

then you can kid him into doing 'most anything you want. Let him

have his way once in a while, and he'll let you have yourn. But

you just go on lovin' him, and leanin' on his judgement--he's no

fool--and you'll be all hunky-dory. I'm scared from goin' wrong,

what of Sarah. But I'd sooner be loved into not going wrong."



"Oh, I'll do it, Tom," Saxon nodded, smiling through the tears

his sympathy had brought into her eyes. "And on top of it I'm

going to do something else, I'm going to make Billy love me and

just keep on loving me. And then I won't have to kid him into

doing some of the things I want. He'll do them because he loves

me, you see."



"You got the right idea, Saxon. Stick with it, an' you'll win

out."



Later, when she had put on her hat to start for the laundry, she

found Tom waiting for her at the corner.



"An', Saxon," he said, hastily and haltingly, "you won't take

anything I've said . . . you know . .--about Sarah . . . as bein'

in any way disloyal to her? She's a good woman, an' faithful. An'

her life ain't so easy by a long shot. I'd bite out my tongue

before I'd say anything against her. I gueas all folks have their

troubles. It's hell to be poor, ain't it?"



"You've been awful good to me, Tom. I can never forget it. And I

know Sarah means right. She does do her best."



"I won't be able to give you a wedding present," her brother

ventured apologetically. "Sarah won't hear of it. Says we didn't

get none from my folks when we got married. But I got something

for you just the same. A surprise. You'd never guess it."



Saxon waited.



"When you told me you was goin' to get married, I just happened

to think of it, an' I wrote to brother George, askin' him for it

for you. An' by thunder he sent it by express. I didn't tell you

because I didn't know but maybe he'd sold it. He did sell the

silver spurs. He needed the money, I guess. But the other, I had

it sent to the shop so as not to bother Sarah, an' I sneaked it

in last night an' hid it in the woodshed."



"Oh, it is something of my father's! What is it? Oh, what is it?"



"His army sword."



"The one he wore on his roan war horse! Oh, Tom, you couldn't

give me a better present. Let's go back now. I want to see it. We

can slip in the back way. Sarah's washing in the kitchen, and she

won't begin hanging out for an hour."



"I spoke to Sarah about lettin' you take the old chest of drawers

that was your mother's," Tom whispered, as they stole along the

narrow alley between the houses. "Only she got on her high horse.

Said that Daisy was as much my mother as yourn, even if we did

have different fathers, and that the chest had always belonged in

Daisy's family and not Captain Kit's, an' that it was mine, an'

what was mine she had some say-so about."



"It's all right," Saxon reassured him. "She sold it to me last

night. She was waiting up for me when I got home with fire in her

eye."



"Yep, she was on the warpath all day after I mentioned it. How

much did you give her for it?"



"Six dollars."



"Robbery--it ain't worth it," Tom groaned. "It's all cracked at

one end and as old as the hills."



"I'd have given ten dollars for it. I'd have given 'most anything

for it, Tom. It was mother's, you know. I remember it in her room

when she was still alive."



In the woodshed Tom resurrected the hidden treasure and took off

the wrapping paper. Appeared a rusty, steel-scabbarded saber of

the heavy type carried by cavalry officers in Civil War days. It

was attached to a moth-eaten sash of thick-woven crimson silk

from which hung heavy silk tassels. Saxon almost seized it from

her brother in her eagerness. She drew forth the blade and

pressed her lips to the steel.



It was her last day at the laundry. She was to quit work that

evening for good. And the next afternoon, at five, she and Billy

were to go before a justice of the peace and be married. Bert and

Mary were to be the witnesses, and after that the four were to go

to a private room in Barnum's Restaurant for the wedding supper.

That over, Bert and Mary would proceed to a dance at Myrtle Hall,

while Billy and Saxon would take the Eighth Street car to Seventh

and Pine. Honeymoons are infrequent in the working class. The

next morning Billy must be at the stable at his regular hour to

drive his team out.



All the women in the fancy starch room knew it was Saxon's last

day. Many exulted for her, and not a few were envious of her, in

that she had won a husband and to freedom from the suffocating

slavery of the ironing board. Much of bantering she endured; such

was the fate of every girl who married out of the fancy starch

room. But Saxon was too happy to be hurt by the teasing, a great

deal of which was gross, but all of which was good-natured.



In the steam that arose from under her iron, and on the surfaces

of the dainty lawns and muslins that flew under her hands, she

kept visioning herself in the Pine Street cottage; and steadily

she hummed under her breath her paraphrase of the latest popular

song:



"And when I work, and when I work,

I'll always work for Billy."



By three in the afternoon the strain of the piece-workers in the

humid, heated room grew tense. Elderly women gasped and sighed;

the color went out of the cheeks of the young women, their faces

became drawn and dark circles formed under their eyes; but all

held on with weary, unabated speed. The tireless, vigilant

forewoman kept a sharp lookout for incipient hysteria, and once

led a narrow-chested, stoop-shouldered young thing out of the

place in time to prevent a collapse.



Saxon was startled by the wildest scream of terror she had evor

heard. The tense thread of human resolution snapped; wills and

nerves broke down, and a hundred women suspended their irons or

dropped them. It was Mary who had screamed so terribly, and Saxon

saw a strange black animal flapping great claw-like wings and

nestling on Mary's shoulder. With the scream, Mary crouched down,

and the strange creature, darting into the air, fluttered full

into the startled face of a woman at the next board. This woman

promptly screamed and fainted. Into the air again, the flying

thing darted hither and thither, while the shrieking, shrinking

women threw up their arms, tried to run away along the aisles, or

cowered under their ironing boards.



"It's only a bat!" the forewoman shouted. She was furious. "Ain't

you ever seen a bat? It won't eat you!"



But they were ghetto people, and were not to be quieted. Some

woman who could not see the cause of the uproar, out of her

overwrought apprehension raised the cry of fire and precipitated

the panic rush for the doors. All of them were screaming the

stupid, soul-sickening high note of terror, drowning the

forewoman's voice. Saxon had been merely startled at first, but

the screaming panic broke her grip on herself and swept her away.

Though she did not scream, she fled with the rest. When this

horde of crazed women debouched on the next department, Those who

worked there joined in the stampede to escape from they knew not

what danger. In ten minutes the laundry was deserted, save for a

few men wandering about with hand grenades in futile search for

the cause of the disturbance.



The forewoman was stout, but indomitable. Swept along half the

length of an aisle by the terror-stricken women, she had broken

her way back through the rout and quickly caught the

light-blinded visitant in a clothes basket.



"Maybe I don't know what God looks like, but take it from me I've

seen a tintype of the devil," Mary gurgled, emotionally

fluttering back and forth between laughter and tears.



But Saxon was angry with herself, for she had been as frightened

as the rest in that wild flight for out-of-doors.



"We're a lot of fools," she said. "It was only a bat. I've heard

about them. They live in the country. They wouldn't hurt a fly.

They can't see in the daytime. That was what was the matter with

this one. It was only a bat."



"Huh, you can't string me," Mary replied. "It was the devil." She

sobbed a moment, and then laughed hysterically again. "Did you

see Mrs. Bergstrom faint? And it only touched her in the face.

Why, it was on my shoulder and touching my bare neck like the

hand of a corpse. And I didn't faint." She laughed again. "I

guess, maybe, I was too scared to faint."



"Come on back," Saxon urged. "We've lost half an hour."



"Not me. I'm goin' home after that, if they fire me. I couldn't

iron for sour apples now, I'm that shaky."



One woman had broken a leg, another an arm, and a number nursed

milder bruises and bruises. No bullying nor entreating of the

forewoman could persuade the women to return to work. They were

too upset and nervous, and only here and there could one be found

brave enough to re-enter the bullding for the hats and lunch

baskets of the others. Saxon was one of the handful that returned

and worked till six o'clock.







CHAPTER XV



"Why, Bert!--you're squiffed!" Mary cried reproachfully.



The four were at the table in the private room at Barnum's. The

wedding supper, simple enough, but seemingly too expensive to

Saxon, had been eaten. Bert, in his hand a glass of California

red wine, which the management supplied for fifty cents a bottle,

was on his feet endeavoring a speech. His face was flushed; his

black eyes wers feverishly bright.



"You've ben drinkin' before you met me," Mary continued. "I can

see it stickin' out all over you."



"Consult an oculist, my dear," he replied. "Bertram is himself

to-night. An' he is here, arisin' to his feet to give the glad

hand to his old pal. Bill, old man, here's to you. It's how-de-do

an' good-bye, I guess. You're a married man now, Bill, an' you

got to keep regular hours. No more runnin' around with the boys.

You gotta take care of yourself, an' get your life insured, an'

take out an accident policy, an' join a buildin' an' loan

society, an' a buryin' association--"



"Now you shut up, Bert," Mary broke in. "You don't talk about

buryin's at weddings. You oughta be ashamed of yourself."



"Whoa, Mary! Back up! I said what I said because I meant it. I

ain't thinkin' what Mary thinks. What I was thinkin' ... Let me

tell you what I was thinkin'. I said buryin' association, didn't

I? Well, it was not with the idea of castin' gloom over this

merry gatherin'. Far be it..."



He was so evidently seeking a way out of his predicament, that

Mary tossed her head triumphantly. This acted as a spur to his

reeling wits.



"Let me tell you why," he went on. "Because, Bill, you got such

an all-fired pretty wife, that's why. All the fellows is crazy

over her, an' when they get to runnin' after her, what'll you be

doin'? You'll be gettin' busy. And then won't you need a buryin'

association to bury 'em? I just guess yes. That was the

compliment to your good taste in skirts I was tryin' to come

across with when Mary butted in."



His glittering eyes rested for a moment in bantering triumph on

Mary.



"Who says I'm squiffed? Me? Not on your life. I'm seein' all

things in a clear white light. An' I see Bill there, my old

friend Bill. An' I don't see two Bills. I see only one. Bill was

never two-faced in his life. Bill, old man, when I look at you

there in the married harness, I'm sorry--" He ceased abruptly and

turned on Mary. "Now don't go up in the air, old girl. I'm onto

my job. My grandfather was a state senator, and he could spiel

graceful an' pleasin' till the cows come home. So can I.--Bill,

when I look at you, I'm sorry. I repeat, I'm sorry. He glared

challengingly at Mary. "For myself when I look at you an' know

all the happiness you got a hammerlock on. Take it from me,

you're a wise guy, bless the women. You've started well. Keep it

up. Marry 'em all, bless 'em. Bill, here's to you. You're a

Mohegan with a scalplock. An' you got a squaw that is some squaw,

take it from me. Minnehaha, here's to you--to the two of you--an'

to the papooses, too, gosh-dang them!"



He drained the glass suddenly and collapsed in his chair,

blinking his eyes across at the wedded couple while tears

trickled unheeded down his cheeks. Mary's hand went out

soothingly to his, completing his break-down.



"By God, I got a right to cry," he sobbed. "I'm losin' my best

friend, ain't I? It'll never be the same again never. When I

think of the fun, an' scrapes, an' good times Bill an' me has had

together, I could darn near hate you, Saxon, sittin' there with

your hand in his."



"Cheer up, Bert," she laughed gently. "Look at whose hand you are

holding."



"Aw, it's only one of his cryin' jags," Mary said, with a

harshness that her free hand belied as it caressed his hair with

soothing strokes. "Buck up, Bert. Everything's all right. And now

it's up to Bill to say something after your dandy spiel."



Bert recovered himself quickly with another glass of wine.



"Kick in, Bill," he cried. "It's your turn now."



"I'm no hotair artist," Billy grumbled. "What'll I say, Saxon?

They ain't no use tellin' 'em how happy we are. They know that."



"Tell them we're always going to he happy," she said. "And thank

them for all their good wishes, and we both wish them the same.

And we're always going to be together, like old times, the four

of us. And tell them they're invited down to 507 Pine Street next

Sunday for Sunday dinner.--And, Mary, if you want to come

Saturday night you can sleep in the spare bedroom."



"You've told'm yourself, better'n I could." Billy clapped his

hands. "You did yourself proud, an' I guess they ain't much to

add to it, but just the same I'm goin' to pass them a hot one."



He stood up, his hand on his glass. His clear blue eyes under the

dark brows and framed by the dark lashes, seemed a deeper blue,

and accentuated the blondness of hair and skin. The smooth cheeks

were rosy--not with wine, for it was only his second glass--but

with health and joy. Saxon, looking up at him, thrilled with

pride in him, he was so well-dressed, so strong, so handsome, so

clean-looking--her man-boy. And she was aware of pride in

herself, in her woman's desirableness that had won for her so

wonderful a lover.



"Well, Bert an' Mary, here you are at Saxon's and my wedding

supper. We're just goin' to take all your good wishes to heart,

we wish you the same back, and when we say it we mean more than

you think we mean. Saxon an' I believe in tit for tat. So we're

wishin' for the day when the table is turned clear around an'

we're sittin' as guests at your weddin' supper. And then, when

you come to Sunday dinner, you can both stop Saturday night in

the spare bedroom. I guess I was wised up when I furnished it,

eh?"



"I never thought it of you, Billy!" Mary exclaimed. "You're every

hit as raw as Bert. But just the same ... "



There was a rush of moisture to her eyes. Her voice faltered and

broke. She smiled through her tears at them, then turned to look

at Bert, who put his arm around her and gathered her on to his

knees.



When they left the restaurant, the four walked to Eighth and

Broadway, where they stopped beside the electric car. Bert and

Billy were awkward and silent, oppressed by a strange aloofness.

But Mary embraced Saxon with fond anxiousness.



"It's all right, dear," Mary whispered. "Don't be scared. It's

all right. Think of all the other women in the world."



The conductor clanged the gong, and the two couples separated in

a sudden hubbub of farewell.



"Oh, you Mohegan!" Bert called after, as the car got under way.

"Oh, you Minnehaha!"



"Remember what I said," was Mary's parting to Saxon.





The car stopped at Seventh and Pine, the terminus of the line. It

was only a little over two blocks to the cottage. On the front

steps Billy took the key from his pocket.



"Funny, isn't it?" he said, as the key turned in tlie lock. "You

an' me. Just you an' me."



While he lighted the lamp in the parlor, Saxon was taking off her

hat. He went into the bedroom and lighted the lamp there, then

turned back and stood in the doorway. Saxon, still unaccountably

fumbling with her hatpins, stole a glance at him. He held out his

arms.



"Now," he said.



She came to him, and in his arms he could feel her trembling.


