






BOOK II



CHAPTER I



The first evening after the marriage night Saxon met Billy at the

door as he came up the front steps. After their embrace, and as

they crossed the parlor hand in hand toward the kitchen, he

filled his lungs through his nostrils with audible satisfaction.



"My, but this house smells good, Saxon! It ain't the coffee--I

can smell that, too. It's the whole house. It smells ... well, it

just smells good to me, that's all."



He washed and dried himself at the sink, while she heated the

frying pan on the front hole of the stove with the lid off. As he

wiped his hands he watched her keenly, and cried out with

approbation as she dropped the steak in the fryin pan.



"Where'd you learn to cook steak on a dry, hot pan? It's the only

way, but darn few women seem to know about it."



As she took the cover off a second frying pan and stirred the

savory contents with a kitchen knife, he came behind her, passed

his arms under her arm-pits with down-drooping hands upon her

breasts, and bent his head over her shoulder till cheek touched

cheek.



"Um-um-um-m-m! Fried potatoes with onions like mother used to

make. Me for them. Don't they smell good, though! Um-um-m-m-m!"



The pressure of his hands relaxed, and his cheek slid caressingly

past hers as he started to release her. Then his hands closed

down again. She felt his lips on her hair and heard his

advertised inhalation of delight.



"Um-um-m-m-m! Don't you smell good--yourself, though! I never

understood what they meant when they said a girl was sweet. I

know, now. And you're the sweetest I ever knew."



His joy was boundless. When he returned from combing his hair in

the bedroom and sat down at the small table opposite her, he

paused with knife and fork in hand.



"Say, bein' married is a whole lot more than it's cracked up to

be by most married folks. Honest to God, Saxon, we can show 'em a

few. We can give 'em cards and spades an' little casino an' win

out on big casino and the aces. I've got but one kick comin'."



The instant apprehension in her eyes provoked a chuckle from him.



"An' that is that we didn't get married quick enough. Just think.

I've lost a whole week of this."



Her eyes shone with gratitude and happiness, and in her heart she

solemnly pledged herself that never in all their married life

would it be otherwise.



Supper finished, she cleared the table and began washing the

dishes at the sink. When he evinced the intention of wiping them,

she caught him by the lapels of the coat and backed him into a

chair.



"You'll sit right there, if you know what's good for you. Now be

good and mind what I say. Also, you will smoke a cigarette.--No;

you're not going to watch me. There's the morning paper beside

you. And if you don't hurry to read it, I'll be through these

dishes before you've started."



As he smoked and read, she continually glanced across at him from

her work. One thing more, she thought--slippers; and then the

picture of comfort and content would be complete.



Several minutes later Billy put the paper aside with a sigh.



"It's no use," he complained. "I can't read."



"What's the matter?" she teased. "Eyes weak?"



"Nope. They'ra sore, and there's only one thing to do 'em any

good, an' that's lookin' at you."



"All right, then, baby Billy; I'll be through in a jiffy."



When she had washed the dish towel and scalded out the sink, she

took off her kitchen apron, came to him, and kissed first one eye

and then the other.



"How are they now. Cured?"



"They feel some better already."



She repeated the treatment.



"And now?"



"Still better."



"And now?"



"Almost well."



After he had adjudged them well, he ouched and informed her that

there was still some hurt in the right eye.



In the course of treating it, she cried out as in pain. Billy was

all alarm.



"What is it? What hurt you?"



"My eyes. They're hurting like sixty."



And Billy became physician for a while and she the patient. When

the cure was accomplished, she led him into the parlor, where, by

the open window, they succeeded in occupying the same Morris

chair. It was the most expensive comfort in the house. It had

cost seven dollars and a half, and, though it was grander than

anything she had dreamed of possessing, the extravagance of it

had worried her in a half-guilty way all day.



The salt chill of the air that is the blessing of all the bay

cities after the sun goes down crept in about them. They heard

the switch engines puffing in the railroad yards, and the

rumbling thunder of the Seventh Street local slowing down in its

run from the Mole to stop at West Oakland station. From the

street came the noise of children playing in the summer night,

and from the steps of the house next door the low voices of

gossiping housewives.



"Can you beat it?" Billy murmured. "When I think of that

six-dollar furnished room of mine, it makes me sick to think what

I was missin' all the time. But there's one satisfaction. If I'd

changed it sooner I wouldn't a-had you. You see, I didn't know

you existed only until a couple of weeks ago."



His hand crept along her bare forearm and up and partly under the

elbow-sleeve.



"Your skin's so cool," he said. "It ain't cold; it's cool. It

feels good to the hand."



"Pretty soon you'll be calling me your cold-storage baby," she

laughed.



"And your voice is cool," he went on. "It gives me the feeling

just as your hand does when you rest it on my forehead. It's

funny. I can't explain it. But your voice just goes all through

me, cool and fine. It's like a wind of coolness--just right. It's

like the first of the sea-breeze settin' in in the afternoon

after a scorchin' hot morning. An' sometimes, when you talk low,

it sounds round and sweet like the 'cello in the Macdonough

Theater orchestra. And it never goes high up, or sharp, or

squeaky, or scratchy, like some women's voices when they're mad,

or fresh, or excited, till they remind me of a bum phonograph

record. Why, your voice, it just goes through me till I'm all

trembling--like with the everlastin' cool of it. It's it's

straight delicious. I guess angels in heaven, if they is any,

must have voices like that."



After a few minutes, in which, so inexpreasible was her happiness

that she could only pass her hand through his hair and cling to

him, he broke out again.



"I'll tell you what you remind me of. Did you ever see a

thoroughbred mare, all shinin' in the sun, with hair like satin

an' skin so thin an' tender that the least touch of the whip

leaves a mark--all fine nerves, an' delicate an' sensitive,

that'll kill the toughest bronco when it comes to endurance an'

that can strain a tendon in a flash or catch death-of-cold

without a blanket for a night? I wanta tell you they ain't many

beautifuler sights in this world. An' they're that fine-strung,

an' sensitive, an' delicate. You gotta handle 'em right-side up,

glass, with care. Well, that's what you remind me of. And I'm

goin' to make it my job to see you get handled an' gentled in the

same way. You're as different from other women as that kind of a

mare is from scrub work-horse mares. You're a thoroughbred.

You're clean-cut an' spirited, an' your lines ...



"Say, d'ye know you've got some figure? Well, you have. Talk

about Annette Kellerman. You can give her cards and spades. She's

Australian, an' you're American, only your figure ain't. You're

different. You're nifty--I don't know how to explain it. Other

women ain't built like you. You belong in some other country.

You're Frenchy, that's what. You're built like a French woman an'

more than that--the way you walk, move, stand up or sit down, or

don't do anything."



And he, who had never been out of California, or, for that

matter, had never slept a night away from his birthtown of

Oakland, was right in his judgment. She was a flower of

Anglo-Saxon stock, a rarity in the exceptional smallness and

fineness of hand and foot and bone and grace of flesh and

carriage--some throw-back across the face of time to the foraying

Norman-French that had intermingled with the sturdy Saxon breed.



"And in the way you carry your clothes. They belong to you. They

seem just as much part of you as the cool of your voice and skin.

They're always all right an' couldn't be better. An' you know, a

fellow kind of likes to be seen taggin' around with a woman like

you, that wears her clothes like a dream, an' hear the other

fellows say: 'Who's Bill's new skirt? She's a peach, ain't she?

Wouldn't I like to win her, though.' And all that sort of talk."



And Saxon, her cheek pressed to his, knew that she was paid in

full for all her midnight sewings and the torturing hours of

drowsy stitching when her head nodded with the weariness of the

day's toil, while she recreated for herself filched ideas from

the dainty garments that had steamed under her passing iron.



"Say, Saxon, I got a new name for you. You're my Tonic Kid.

That's what you are, the Tonic Kid."



"And you'll never get tired of me?" she queried.



"Tired? Why we was made for each other."



"Isn't it wonderful, our meeting, Billy? We might never have met.

It was just by accident that we did."



"We was born lucky," he proclaimed. "That's a cinch."



"Maybe it was more than luck," she ventured.



"Sure. It just had to be. It was fate. Nothing could a-kept us

apart."



They sat on in a silence that was quick with unuttered love, till

she felt him slowly draw her more closely and his lips come near

to her ear as they whispered: "What do you say we go to bed?"





Many evenings they spent like this, varied with an occasional

dance, with trips to the Orpheum and to Bell's Theater, or to the

moving picture shows, or to the Friday night band concerts in

City Hall Park. Often, on Sunday, she prepared a lunch, and he

drove her out into the hills behind Prince and King, whom Billy's

employer was still glad to have him exercise.



Each morning Saxon was called by the alarm clock. The first

morning he had insisted upon getting up with her and building the

fire in the kitchen stove. She gave in the first morning, but

after that she laid the fire in the evening, so that all that was

required was the touching of a match to it. And in bed she

compelled him to remain for a last little doze ere she called him

for breakfast. For the first several weeks she prepared his lunch

for him. Then, for a week, he came down to dinner. After that he

was compelled to take his lunch with him. It depended on how far

distant the teaming was done.



"You're not starting right with a man," Mary cautioned. "You wait

on him hand and foot. You'll spoil him if you don't watch out.

It's him that ought to be waitin' on you."



"He's the bread-winner," Saxon replied. "He works harder than I,

and I've got more time than I know what to do with--time to burn.

Besides, I want to wait on him because I love to, and because ...

well, anyway, I want to."







CHAPTER II



Despite the fastidiousness of her housekeeping, Saxon, once she

had systematized it, found time and to spare on her hands.

Especially during the periods in which her husband carried his

lunch and there was no midday meal to prepare, she had a number

of hours each day to herself. Trained for years to the routine of

factory and laundry work, she could not abide this unaccustomed

idleness. She could not bear to sit and do nothing, while she

could not pay calls on her girlhood friends, for they still

worked in factory and laundry. Nor was she acquainted with the

wives of the neighborhood, save for one strange old woman who

lived in the house next door and with whom Saxon had exchanged

snatches of conversation over the backyard division fence.



One time-consuming diversion of which Saxon took advantage was

free and unlimited baths. In the orphan asylum and in Sarah's

house she had been used to but one bath a week. As she grew to

womanhood she had attempted more frequent baths. But the effort

proved disastrous, arousing, first, Sarah's derision, and next,

her wrath. Sarah had crystallized in the era of the weekly

Saturday night bath, and any increase in this cleansing function

was regarded by her as putting on airs and as an insinuation

against her own cleanliness. Also, it was an extravagant misuse

of fuel, and occasioned extra towels in the family wash. But now,

in Billy's house, with her own stove, her own tub and towels and

soap, and no one to say her nay, Saxon was guilty of a daily

orgy. True, it was only a common washtub that she placed on the

kitchen floor and filled by hand; but it was a luxury that had

taken her twenty-four years to achieve. It was from the strange

woman next door that Saxon received a hint, dropped in casual

conversation, of what proved the culminating joy of bathing. A

simple thing--a few drops of druggist's ammonia in the water; but

Saxon had never heard of it before.



She was destined to learn much from the strange woman. The

acquaintance had begun one day when Saxon, in the back yard, was

hanging out a couple of corset covers and several pieces of her

finest undergarments. The woman leaning on the rail of her back

porch, had caught her eye, and nodded, as it seemed to Saxon,

half to her and half to the underlinen on the line.



"You're newly married, aren't you?" the woman asked. "I'm Mrs.

Higgins. I prefer my first name, which is Mercedes."



"And I'm Mrs. Roberts," Saxon replied, thrilling to the newness

of the designation on her tongue. "My first name is Saxon."



"Strange name for a Yankee woman," the other commented.



"Oh, but I'm not Yankee," Saxon exclaimed. "I'm Californian."



"La la," laughed Mercedes Higgins. "I forgot I was in America. In

other lands all Americans are called Yankees. It is true that you

are newly married?"



Saxon nodded with a happy sigh. Mercedes sighed, too.



"Oh, you happy, soft, beautiful young thing. I could envy you to

hatred--you with all the man-world ripe to be twisted about your

pretty little fingers. And you don't realize your fortune. No one

does until it's too late."



Saxon was puzzled and disturbed, though she answered readily:



"Oh, but I do know how lucky I am. I have the finest man in the

world."



Mercedes Higgins sighed again and changed the subject. She nodded

her head at the garments.



"I see you like pretty things. It is good judgment for a young

woman. They're the bait for men--half the weapons in the battle.

They win men, and they hold men--" She broke off to demand almost

fiercely: "And you, you would keep your husband?--always,

always--if you can?"



"I intend to. I will make him love me always and always."



Saxon ceased, troubled and surprised that she should be so

intimate with a stranger.



"'Tis a queer thing, this love of men," Mercedes said. "And a

failing of all women is it to believe they know men like books.

And with breaking hearts, die they do, most women, out of their

ignorance of men and still foolishly believing they know all

about them. Oh, la la, the little fools. And so you say, little

new-married woman, that you will make your man love you always

and always? And so they all say it, knowing men and the queerness

of men's love the way they think they do. Easier it is to win the

capital prize in the Little Louisiana, but the little new-married

women never know it until too late. But you--you have begun well.

Stay by your pretties and your looks. 'Twas so you won your man,

'tis so you'll hold him. But that is not all. Some time I will

talk with you and tell what few women trouble to know, what few

women ever come to know.--Saxon!--'tis a strong, handsome name

for a woman. But you don't look it. Oh, I've watched you. French

you are, with a Frenchiness beyond dispute. Tell Mr. Roberts I

congratulate him on his good taste."



She paused, her hand on the knob of her kitchen door.



"And come and see me some time. You will never be sorry. I can

teach you much. Come in the afternoon. My man is night watchman

in the yards and sleeps of mornings. He's sleeping now."



Saxon went into the house puzzling and pondering. Anything but

ordinary was this lean, dark-skinned woman, with the face

withered as if scorched in great heats, and the eyes, large and

black, that flashed and flamed with advertisement of an

unquenched inner conflagration. Old she was--Saxon caught herself

debating anywhere between fifty and seventy; and her hair, which

had once been blackest black, was streaked plentifully with gray.

Especially noteworthy to Saxon was her speech. Good English it

was, better than that to which Saxon was accustomed. Yet the

woman was not American. On the other hand, she had no perceptible

accent. Rather were her words touched by a foreignness so elusive

that Saxon could not analyze nor place it.



"Uh, huh," Billy said, when she had told him that evening of the

day's event. "So SHE'S Mrs. Higgins? He's a watchman. He's got

only one arm. Old Higgins an' her--a funny bunch, the two of

them. The people's scared of her--some of 'em. The Dagoes an'

some of the old Irish dames thinks she's a witch. Won't have a

thing to do with her. Bert was tellin' me about it. Why, Saxon,

d'ye know, some of 'em believe if she was to get mad at 'em, or

didn't like their mugs, or anything, that all she's got to do is

look at 'em an' they'll curl up their toes an' croak. One of the

fellows that works at the stable--you've seen 'm--Henderson--he

lives around the corner on Fifth--he says she's bughouse."



"Oh, I don't know," Saxon defended her new acquaintance. "She may

be crazy, but she says the same thing you're always saying. She

says my form is not American but French."



"Then I take my hat off to her," Billy responded. "No wheels in

her head if she says that. Take it from me, she's a wise gazabo."



"And she speaks good English, Billy, like a school teacher, like

what I guess my mother used to speak. She's educated."



"She ain't no fool, or she wouldn't a-sized you up the way she

did."



"She told me to congratulate you on your good taste in marrying

me," Saxon laughed.



"She did, eh? Then give her my love. Me for her, because she

knows a good thing when she sees it, an' she ought to be

congratulating you on your good taste in me."



It was on another day that Mercedes Higgins nodded, half to

Saxon, and half to the dainty women's things Saxon was hanging on

the line.



"I've been worrying over your washing, little new-wife," was her

greeting.



"Oh, but I've worked in the laundry for years," Saxon said

quickly.



Mercedes sneered scornfully.



"Steam laundry. That's business, and it's stupid. Only common

things should go to a steam laundry. That is their punishment for

being common. But the pretties! the dainties! the flimsies!--la

la, my dear, their washing is an art. It requires wisdom, genius,

and discretion fine as the clothes are fine. I will give you a

recipe for homemade soap. It will not harden the texture. It will

give whiteness, and softness, and life. You can wear them long,

and fine white clothes are to be loved a long time. Oh, fine

washing is a refinement, an art. It is to be done as an artist

paints a picture, or writes a poem, with love, holily, a true

sacrament of beauty.



"I shall teach you better ways, my dear, better ways than you

Yankees know. I shall teach you new pretties." She nodded her

head to Saxon's underlinen on the line. "I see you make little

laces. I know all laces--the Belgian, the Maltese, the

Mechlin--oh, the many, many loves of laces! I shall teach you

some of the simpler ones so that you can make them for yourself,

for your brave man you are to make love you always and always."



On her first visit to Mercedes Higgins, Saxon received the recipe

for home-made soap and her head was filled with a minutiae of

instruction in the art of fine washing. Further, she was

fascinated and excited by all the newness and strangeness of the

withered old woman who blew upon her the breath of wider lands

and seas beyond the horizon.



"You are Spanish?" Saxon ventnred.



"No, and yes, and neither, and more. My father was Irish, my

mother Peruvian-Spanish. 'Tis after her I took, in color and

looks. In other ways after my father, the blue-eyed Celt with the

fairy song on his tongue and the restless feet that stole the

rest of him away to far-wandering. And the feet of him that he

lent me have led me away on as wide far roads as ever his led

him."



Saxon remembered her school geography, and with her mind's eye

she saw a certain outline map of a continent with jiggly wavering

parallel lines that denoted coast.



"Oh," she cried, "then you are South American."



Mercedes shrugged her shoulders.



"I had to be born somewhere. It was a great ranch, my mother's.

You could put all Oakland in one of its smallest pastures."



Mercedes Higgins sighed cheerfully and for the time was lost in

retrospection. Saxon was curious to hear more about this woman

who must have lived much as the Spanish-Californians had lived in

the old days.



"You received a good education," she said tentatively. "Your

English is perfect."



"Ah, the English came afterward, and not in school. But, as it

goes, yes, a good education in all things but the most

important--men. That, too, came afterward. And little my mother

dreamed--she was a grand lady, what you call a

cattle-queen--little she dreamed my fine education was to fit me

in the end for a night watchman's wife." She laughed genuinely at

the grotesqueness of the idea. "Night watchman, laborers, why, we

had hundreds, yes, thousands that toiled for us. The peons--they

are like what you call slaves, almost, and the cowboys, who could

ride two hundred miles between side and side of the ranch. And in

the big house servants beyond remembering or counting. La la, in

my mother's house were many servants."



Mercedes Higgins was voluble as a Greek, and wandered on in

reminiscence.



"But our servants were lazy and dirty. The Chinese are the

servants par excellence. So are the Japanese, when you find a

good one, but not so good as the Chinese. The Japanese

maidservants are pretty and merry, but you never know the moment

they'll leave you. The Hindoos are not strong, but very obedient.

They look upon sahibs and memsahibs as gods! I was a

memsahib--which means woman. I once had a Russian cook who always

spat in the soup for luck. It was very funny. But we put up with

it. It was the custom."



"How you must have traveled to have such strange servants!" Saxon

encouraged.



The old woman laughed corroboration.



"And the strangest of all, down in the South Seas, black slaves,

little kinky-haired cannibals with bones through their noses.

When they did not mind, or when they stole, they were tied up to

a cocoanut palm behind the compound and lashed with whips of

rhinoceros hide. They were from an island of cannibals and

head-hunters, and they never cried out. It was their pride. There

was little Vibi, only twelve years old--he waited on me--and when

his back was cut in shreds and I wept over him, he would only

laugh and say, 'Short time little bit I take 'm head belong big

fella white marster.' That was Bruce Anstey, the Englishman who

whipped him. But little Vibi never got the head. He ran away and

the bushmen cut off his own head and ate every bit of him."



Saxon chilled, and her face was grave; but Mercedes Higgins

rattled on.



"Ah, those were wild, gay, savage days. Would you believe it, my

dear, in three years those Englishmen of the plantation drank up

oceans of champagne and Scotch whisky and dropped thirty thousand

pounds on the adventure. Not dollars--pounds, which means one

hundred and fifty thousand dollars. They were princes while it

lasted. It was splendid, glorious. It was mad, mad. I sold half

my beautiful jewels in New Zealand before I got started again.

Bruce Anstey blew out his brains at the end. Roger went mate on a

trader with a black crew, for eight pounds a month. And Jack

Gilbraith--he was the rarest of them all. His people were wealthy

and titled, and he went home to England and sold cat's meat, sat

around their big house till they gave him more money to start a

rubber plantation in the East Indies somewhere, on Sumatra, I

think--or was it New Guinea?"



And Saxon, back in her own kitchen and preparing supper for

Billy, wondered what lusts and rapacities had led the old,

burnt-faced woman from the big Peruvian ranch, through all the

world, to West Oakland and Barry Higgins Old Barry was not the

sort who would fling away his share of one hundred and fifty

thousand dollars, much less ever attain to such opulence.

Besides, she had mentioned the names of other men, but not his.



Much more Mercedes had talked, in snatches and fragments. There

seemed no great country nor city of the old world or the new in

which she had not been. She had even been in Klondike, ten years

before, in a half-dozen flashing sentences picturing the

fur-clad, be-moccasined miners sowing the barroom floors with

thousands of dollars' worth of gold dust. Always, so it seemed to

Saxon, Mrs. Higgins had been with men to whom money was as water.







CHAPTER III



Saxon, brooding over her problem of retaining Billy's love, of

never staling the freshness of their feeling for each other and

of never descending from the heights which at present they were

treading, felt herself impelled toward Mrs. Higgins. SHE knew;

surely she must know. Had she not hinted knowledge beyond

ordinary women's knowledge?



Several weeks went by, during which Saxon was often with her. But

Mrs. Higgins talked of all other matters, taught Saxon the making

of certain simple laces, and instructed her in the arts of

washing and of marketing. And then, one afternoon, Saxon found

Mrs. Higgins more voluble than usual, with words, clean-uttered,

that rippled and tripped in their haste to escape. Her eyes were

flaming. So flamed her face. Her words were flames. There was a

smell of liquor in the air and Saxon knew that the old woman had

been drinking. Nervous and frightened, at the same time

fascinated, Saxon hemstitched a linen handkerchief intended for

Billy and listened to Mercedes' wild flow of speech.



"Listen, my dear. I shall tell you about the world of men. Do not

be stupid like all your people, who think me foolish and a witch

with the evil eye. Ha! ha! When I think of silly Maggie Donahue

pulling the shawl across her baby's face when we pass each other

on the sidewalk! A witch I have been, 'tis true, but my witchery

was with men. Oh, I am wise, very wise, my dear. I shall tell you

of women's ways with men, and of men's ways with women, the best

of them and the worst of them. Of the brute that is in all men,

of the queerness of them that breaks the hearts of stupid women

who do not understand. And all women are stupid. I am not stupid.

La la, listen.



"I am an old woman. And like a woman, I'll not tell you how old I

am. Yet can I hold men. Yet would I hold men, toothless and a

hundred, my nose touching my chin. Not the young men. They were

mine in my young days. But the old men, as befits my years. And

well for me the power is mine. In all this world I am without kin

or cash. Only have I wisdom and memories--memories that are

ashes, but royal ashes, jeweled ashes. Old women, such as I,

starve and shiver, or accept the pauper's dole and the pauper's

shroud. Not I. I hold my man. True, 'tis only Barry Higgins--old

Barry, heavy, an ox, but a male man, my dear, and queer as all

men are queer. 'Tis true, he has one arm." She shrugged her

shoulders. "A compensation. He cannot beat me, and old bones are

tender when the round flesh thins to strings.



"But when I think of my wild young lovers, princes, mad with the

madness of youth! I have lived. It is enough. I regret nothing.

And with old Barry I have my surety of a bite to eat and a place

by the fire. And why? Because I know men, and shall never lose my

cunning to hold them. 'Tis bitter sweet, the knowledge of them,

more sweet than bitter--men and men and men! Not stupid dolts,

nor fat bourgeois swine of business men, but men of temperament,

of flame and fire; madmen, maybe, but a lawless, royal race of

madmen.



"Little wife-woman, you must learn. Variety! There lies the

magic. 'Tis the golden key. 'Tis the toy that amuses. Without it

in the wife, the man is a Turk; with it, he is her slave, and

faithful. A wife must be many wives. If you would have your

husband's love you must be all women to him. You must be ever

new, with the dew of newness ever sparkling, a flower that never

blooms to the fulness that fades. You must be a garden of

flowers, ever new, ever fresh, ever different. And in your garden

the man must never pluck the last of your posies.



"Listen, little wife-woman. In the garden of love is a snake. It

is the commonplace. Stamp on its head, or it will destroy the

garden. Remember the name. Commonplace. Never be too intimate.

Men only seem gross. Women are more gross than men.--No, do not

argue, little new-wife. You are an infant woman. Women are less

delicate than men. Do I not know? Of their own husbands they will

relate the most intimate love-secrets to other women. Men never

do this of their wives. Explain it. There is only one way. In all

things of love women are less delicate. It is their mistake. It

is the father and the mother of the commonplace, and it is the

commonplace, like a loathsome slug, that beslimes and destroys

love.



"Be delicate, little wife-woman. Never be without your veil,

without many veils. Veil yourself in a thousand veils, all

shimmering and glittering with costly textures and precious

jewels. Never let the last veil be drawn. Against the morrow

array yourself with more veils, ever more veils, veils without

end. Yet the many veils must not seem many. Each veil must seem

the only one between you and your hungry lover who will have

nothing less than all of you. Each time he must seem to get all,

to tear aside the last veil that hides you. He must think so. It

must not be so. Then there will be no satiety, for on the morrow

he will find another last veil that has escaped him.



"Remember, each veil must seem the last and only one. Always you

must seem to abandon all to his arms; always you must reserve

more that on the morrow and on all the morrows you may abandon.

Of such is variety, surprise, so that your man's pursuit will be

everlasting, so that his eyes will look to you for newness, and

not to other women. It was the freshness and the newness' of your

beauty and you, the mystery of you, that won your man. When a man

has plucked and smelled all the sweetness of a flower, he looks

for other flowers. It is his queerness. You must ever remain a

flower almost plucked yet never plucked, stored with vats of

sweet unbroached though ever broached.



"Stupid women, and all are stupid, think the first winning of the

man the final victory. Then they settle down and grow fat, and

state, and dead, and heartbroken. Alas, they are so stupid. But

you, little infant-woman with your first victory, you must make

your love-life an unending chain of victories. Each day you must

win your man again. And when you have won the last victory, when

you can find no more to win, then ends love. Finis is written,

and your man wanders in strange gardens. Remember, love must be

kept insatiable. It must have an appetite knife-edged and never

satisfied. You must feed your lover well, ah, very well, most

well; give, give, yet send him away hungry to come back to you

for more.



Mrs. Higgins stood up suddenly and crossed out of the room. Saxon

had not failed to note the litheness and grace in that lean and

withered body. She watched for Mrs. Higgins' return, and knew

that the litheness and grace had not been imagined.



"Scarcely have I told you the first letter in love's alphabet,"

said Mercedes Higgins, as she reseated herself.



In her hands was a tiny instrument, beautifully grained and

richly brown, which resembled a guitar save that it bore four

strings. She swept them back and forth with rhythmic forefinger

and lifted a voice, thin and mellow, in a fashion of melody that

was strange, and in a foreign tongue, warm-voweled, all-voweled,

and love-exciting. Softly throbbing, voice and strings arose on

sensuous crests of song, died away to whisperings and caresses,

drifted through love-dusks and twilights, or swelled again to

love-cries barbarically imperious in which were woven plaintive

calls and madnesses of invitation and promise. It went through

Saxon until she was as this instrument, swept with passional

strains. It seemed to her a dream, and almost was she dizzy, when

Mercedes Higgins ceased.



"If your man had clasped the last of you, and if all of you were

known to him as an old story, yet, did you sing that one song, as

I have sung it, yet would his arms again go out to you and his

eyes grow warm with the old mad lights. Do you see? Do you

understand, little wife-woman?"



Saxon could only nod, her lips too dry for speech.



"The golden koa, the king of woods," Mercedes was crooning over

the instrument. "The ukulele--that is what the Hawaiians call it,

which means, my dear, the jumping flea. They are golden-fleshed,

the Hawalians, a race of lovers, all in the warm cool of the

tropic night where the trade winds blow."



Again she struck the strings. She sang in another language, which

Saxon deemed must be French. It was a gayly-devilish lilt,

tripping and tickling. Her large eyes at times grew larger and

wilder, and again narrowed in enticement and wickedness. When she

ended, she looked to Saxon for a verdict.



"I don't like that one so well," Saxon said.



Mercedes shrugged her shoulders.



"They all have their worth, little infant-woman with so much to

learn. There are times when men may be won with wine. There are

times when men may be won with the wine of song, so queer they

are. La la, so many ways, so many ways. There are your pretties,

my dear, your dainties. They are magic nets. No fisherman upon

the sea ever tangled fish more successfully than we women with

our flimsies. You are on the right path. I have seen men enmeshed

by a corset cover no prettier, no daintier, than these of yours I

have seen on the line.



"I have called the washing of fine linen an art. But it is not

for itself alone. The greatest of the arts is the conquering of

men. Love is the sum of all the arts, as it is the reason for

their existence. Listen. In all times and ages have been women,

great wise women. They did not need to be beautiful. Greater then

all woman's beauty was their wisdom. Princes end potentates bowed

down before them. Nations battled over them. Empires crashed

because of them. Religions were founded on them. Aphrodite,

Astarte, the worships of the night--listen, infant-woman, of the

great women who conquered worlds of men."



And thereafter Saxon listened, in a maze, to what almost seemed a

wild farrago, save that the strange meaningless phrases were

fraught with dim, mysterious significance. She caught glimmerings

of profounds inexpressible and unthinkable that hinted

connotations lawless and terrible. The woman's speech was a lava

rush, scorching and searing; and Saxon's cheeks, and forehead,

and neck burned with a blush that continuously increased. She

trembled with fear, suffered qualms of nausea, thought sometimes

that she would faint, so madly reeled her brain; yet she could

not tear herself away, sad sat on and on, her sewing forgotten on

her lap, staring with inward sight upon a nightmare vision beyond

all imagining. At last, when it seemed she could endure no more,

and while she was wetting her dry lips to cry out in protest,

Mercedes ceased.



"And here endeth the first lesson," she said quite calmly, then

laughed with a laughter that was tantalizing and tormenting.

"What is the matter? You are not shocked?"



"I am frightened," Saxon quavered huskily, with a half-sob of

nervousness. "You frighten me. I am very foolish, and I know so

little, that I had never dreamed ... THAT."



Mercedes nodded her head comprehendingly.



"It is indeed to be frightened at," she said. "It is solemn; it

is terrible; it is magnificent!"







CHAPTER IV



Saxon had been clear-eyed all her days, though her field of

vision had been restricted. Clear-eyed, from her childhood days

with the saloonkeeper Cady and Cady's good-natured but unmoral

spouse, she had observed, and, later, generalized much upon sex.

She knew the post-nuptial problem of retaining a husband's love,

as few wives of any class knew it, just as she knew the

pre-nuptial problem of selecting a husband, as few girls of the

working class knew it.



She had of herself developed an eminently rational philosophy of

love. Instinctively, and consciously, too, she had made toward

delicacy, and shunned the perils of the habitual and commonplace.

Thoroughly aware she was that as she cheapened herself so did she

cheapen love. Never, in the weeks of their married life, had

Billy found her dowdy, or harshly irritable, or lethargic. And

she had deliberately permeated her house with her personal

atmosphere of coolness, and freshness, and equableness. Nor had

she been ignorant of such assets as surprise and charm. Her

imagination had not been asleep, and she had been born with

wisdom. In Billy she had won a prize, and she knew it. She

appreciated his lover's ardor and was proud. His open-handed

liberality, his desire for everything of the best, his own

personal cleanliness and care of himself she recognized as far

beyond the average. He was never coarse. He met delicacy with

delicacy, though it was obvious to her that the initiative in all

such matters lay with her and must lie with her always. He was

largely unconscious of what he did and why. But she knew in all

full clarity of judgment. And he was such a prize among men.



Despite her clear sight of her problem of keeping Billy a lover,

and despite the considerable knowledge and experience arrayed

before her mental vision, Mercedes Higgins had spread before her

a vastly wider panorama. The old woman had verified her own

conclusions, given her new ideas, clinched old ones, and even

savagely emphasized the tragic importance of the whole problem.

Much Saxon remembered of that mad preachment, much she guessed

and felt, and much had been beyond her experience and

understanding. But the metaphors of the veils and the flowers,

and the rules of giving to abandonment with always more to

abandon, she grasped thoroughly, and she was enabled to formulate

a bigger and stronger love-philosophy. In the light of the

revelation she re-examined the married lives of all she had ever

known, and, with sharp definiteness as never before, she saw

where and why so many of them had failed.



With renewed ardor Saxon devoted herself to her household, to her

pretties, and to her charms. She marketed with a keener desire

for the best, though never ignoring the need for economy. From

the women's pages of the Sunday supplements, and from the women's

magazines in the free reading room two blocks away, she gleaned

many idess for the preservation of her looks. In a systematic way

she exercised the various parts of her body, and a certain period

of time each day she employed in facial exercises and massage for

the purpose of retaining the roundness and freshness, and

firmness and color. Billy did not know. These intimacies of the

toilette were not for him. The results, only, were his. She drew

books from the Carnegie Library and studied physiology and

hygiene, and learned a myriad of things about herself and the

ways of woman's health that she had never been taught by Sarah,

the women of the orphan asylum, nor by Mrs. Cady.



After long debate she subscribed to a woman's magazine, the

patterns and lessons of which she decided were the best suited to

her taste and purse. The other woman's magazines she had aceess

to in the free reading room, and more than one pattern of lace

and embroidery she copied by means of tracing paper. Before the

lingerie windows of the uptown shops she often stood and studied;

nor was she above taking advantage, when small purchases were

made, of looking over the goods at the hand-embroidered underwear

counters. Once, she even considered taking up with hand-painted

china, but gave over the idea when she learned its expensiveness.



She slowly replaced all her simple maiden underlinen with

garments which, while still simple, were wrought with beautiful

French embroidery, tucks, and drawnwork. She crocheted fine

edgings on the inexpensive knitted underwear she wore in winter.

She made little corset covers and chemises of fine but fairly

inexpensive lawns, and, with simple flowered designs and perfect

laundering, her nightgowns were always sweetly fresh and dainty.

In some publication she ran across a brief printed note to the

effect that French women were just beginning to wear fascinating

beruffled caps at the breakfast table. It meant nothing to her

that in her case she must first prepare the breakfast. Promptly

appeared in the house a yard of dotted Swiss muslin, and Saxon

was deep in experimenting on patterns for herself, and in sorting

her bits of laces for suitable trimmings. The resultant dainty

creation won Mercedes Higgins' enthusiastic approval.



Saxon made for herself simple house slips of pretty gingham, with

neat low collars turned back from her fresh round throat. She

crocheted yards of laces for her underwear, and made Battenberg

in abundance for her table and for the bureau. A great

achievement, that aroused Billy's applause, was an Afghan for the

bed. She even ventured a rag carpet, which, the women's magazines

informed her, had newly returned into fashion. As a matter of

course she hemstitched the best table linen and bed linen they

could afford.



As the happy months went by she was never idle. Nor was Billy

forgotten. When the cold weather came on she knitted him

wristlets, which he always religiously wore from the house and

pocketed immediately thereafter. The two sweaters she made for

him, however, received a better fate, as did the slippers which

she insisted on his slipping into, on the evenings they remained

at home.



The hard practical wisdom of Mercedes Higgins proved of immense

help, for Saxon strove with a fervor almost religious to have

everything of the best and at the same time to be saving. Here

she faced the financial and economic problem of keeping house in

a society where the cost of living rose faster than the wages of

industry. And here the old woman taught her the science of

marketing so thoroughly that she made a dollar of Billy's go half

as far again as the wives of the neighborhood made the dollars of

their men go.



Invariably, on Saturday night, Billy poured his total wages into

her lap. He never asked for an accounting of what she did with

it, though he continually reiterated that he had never fed so

well in his life. And always, the wages still untouched in her

lap, she had him take out what he estimated he would need for

spending money for the week to come. Not only did she bid him

take plenty but she insisted on his taking any amount extra that

he might desire at any time through the week. And, further, she

insisted he should not tell her what it was for.



"You've always had money in your pocket," she reminded him, "and

there's no reason marriage should change that. If it did, I'd

wish I'd never married you. Oh, I know about men when they get

together. First one treats and then another, and it takes money.

Now if you can't treat just as freely as the rest of thcm, why I

know you so well that I know you'd stay away from them. And that

wouldn't be right ... to you, I mean. I want you to be together

with men. It's good for a man."



And Billy buried her in his arms and swore she was the greatest

little bit of woman that ever came down the pike.



"Why," he jubilated; "not only do I feed better, and live more

comfortable, and hold up my end with the fellows; but I'm

actually saving money--or you are for me. Here I am, with

furniture being paid for regular every month, and a little woman

I'm mad over, and on top of it money in the bank. How much is it

now?"



"Sixty-two dollars," she told him. "Not so bad for a rainy day.

You might get sick, or hurt, or something happen.



It was in mid-winter, when Billy, with quite a deal of obvious

reluctance, broached a money matter to Saxon. His old friend,

Billy Murphy, was laid up with la grippe, and one of his

children, playing in the street, had been seriously injured by a

passing wagon. Billy Murphy, still feeble after two weeks in bed,

had asked Billy for the loan of fifty dollars.



"It's perfectly safe," Billy concluded to Saxon. "I've known him

since we was kids at the Durant School together. He's straight as

a die."



"That's got nothing to do with it," Saxon chided. "If you were

single you'd have lent it to him immediately, wouldn't you?"



Billy nodded.



"Then it's no different because you're married. It's your money,

Billy."



"Not by a damn sight," he cried. "It ain't mine. It's ourn. And I

wouldn't think of lettin' anybody have it without seein' you

first."



"I hope you didn't tell him that," she ssid with quick concern.



"Nope," Billy laughed. "I knew, if I did, you'd be madder'n a

hatter. I just told him I'd try an' figure it out. After all, I

was sure you'd stand for it if you had it."



"Oh, Billy," she murmured, her voice rich and low with love;

"maybe you don't know it, but that's one of the sweetest things

you've said since we got married."



The more Saxon saw of Mercedes Higgins the less did she

understand her. That the old woman was a close-fisted miser,

Saxon soon learned. And this trait she found hard to reconcile

with her tales of squandering. On the other hand, Saxon was

bewildered by Mercedes' extravagance in personal matters. Her

underlinen, hand-made of course, was very costly. The table she

set for Barry was good, but the table for herself was vastly

better. Yet both tables were set on the same table. While Barry

contented himaelf with solid round steak, Mercedes ate

tenderloin. A huge, tough muttonchop on Barry's plate would be

balanced by tiny French chops on Mercedes' plate. Tea was brewed

in separate pots. So was coffee. While Barry gulped twenty-five

cent tea from a large and heavy mug, Mercedes sipped three-dollar

tea from a tiny cup of Belleek, rose-tinted, fragile as all

egg-shell. In the same manner, his twenty-five cent coffee was

diluted with milk, her eighty cent Turkish with cream.



"'Tis good enough for the old man," she told Saxon. "He knows no

better, and it would be a wicked sin to waste it on him."



Little traffickings began between the two women. After Mercedes

had freely taught Saxon the loose-wristed facility of playing

accompaniments on the ukulele, she proposed an exchange. Her time

was past, she said, for such frivolities, and she offered the

instrument for the breakfast cap of which Saxon had made so good

a success.



"It's worth a few dollars," Mercedes said. "It cost me twenty,

though that was years ago. Yet it is well worth the value of the

cap."



"But wouldn't the cap be frivolous, too?" Saxon queried, though

herself well pleased with the bargain.



"'Tis not for my graying hair," Mercedes frankly disclaimed. "I

shall sell it for the money. Much that I do, when the rheumatism

is not maddening my fingers, I sell. La la, my dear, 'tis not old

Barry's fifty a month that'll satisfy all my expensive tastes.

'Tis I that make up the difference. And old age needs money as

never youth needs it. Some day you will learn for yourself."



"I am well satisfied with the trade," Saxon said. "And I shall

make me another cap when I can lay aside enough for the

material."



"Make several," Mercedes advised. "I'll sell them for you,

keeping, of course, a small commission for my services. I can

give you six dollars apiece for them. We will consult about them.

The profit will more than provide material for your own."







CHAPTER V



Four eventful things happened in the course of the winter. Bert

and Mary got married and rented a cottage in the neighborhood

three blocks away. Billy's wages were cut, along with the wages

of all the teamsters in Oakland. Billy took up shaving with a

safety razor. And, finally, Saxon was proven a false prophet and

Sarah a true one.



Saxon made up her mind, beyond any doubt, ere she confided the

news to Billy. At first, while still suspecting, she had felt a

frightened sinking of the heart and fear of the unknown and

unexperienced. Then had come economic fear, as she contemplated

the increased expense entailed. But by the time she had made

surety doubly sure, all was swept away before a wave of

passionate gladness. HERS AND BILLY'S! The phrase was continually

in her mind, and each recurrent thought of it brought an actual

physical pleasure-pang to her heart.



The night she told the news to Billy, he withheld his own news of

the wage-cut, and joined with her in welcoming the little one.



"What'll we do? Go to the theater to celebrate?" he asked,

relaxing the pressure of his embrace so that she might speak. "Or

suppose we stay in, just you and me, and ... and the three of

us?"



"Stay in," was her verdict. "I just want you to hold me, and hold

me, and hold me."



"That's what I wanted, too, only I wasn't sure, after bein' in

the house all day, maybe you'd want to go out."



There was frost in the air, and Billy brought the Morris chair in

by the kitchen stove. She lay cuddled in his arms, her head on

his shoulder, his cheek against her hair.



"We didn't make no mistake in our lightning marriage with only a

week's courtin'," he reflected aloud. "Why, Saxon, we've been

courtin' ever since just the same. And now . . . my God, Saxon,

it's too wonderful to be true. Think of it! Ourn! The three of

us! The little rascal! I bet he's goin' to he a boy. An' won't I

learn 'm to put up his fists an' take care of himself! An'

swimmin' too. If he don't know how to swim by the time he's

six..."



"And if HE'S a girl?"



"SHE'S goin' to he a boy," Billy retorted, joining in the playful

misuse of pronouns.



And both laughed and kissed, and sighed with content. "I'm goin'

to turn pincher, now," he announced, after quite an interval of

meditation. "No more drinks with the boys. It's me for the water

wagon. And I'm goin' to ease down on smokes. Huh! Don't see why I

can't roll my own cigarettes. They're ten times cheaper'n tailor-

mades. An' I can grow a beard. The amount of money the barbers

get out of a fellow in a year would keep a baby."



"Just you let your beard grow, Mister Roberts, and I'll get a

divorce," Saxon threatened. "You're just too handsome and strong

with a smooth face. I love your face too much to have it covered

up.--Oh, you dear! you dear! Billy, I never knew what happiness

was until I came to live with you."



"Nor me neither."



"And it's always going to be so?"



"You can just bet," he assured her.



"I thought I was going to he happy married," she went on; "but I

never dreamed it would be like this." She turned her head on his

shoulder and kissed his cheek. "Billy, it isn't happiness. It's

heaven."



And Billy resolutely kept undivulged the cut in wages. Not until

two weeks later, when it went into effect, and he poured the

diminished sum into her lap, did he break it to her. The next

day, Bert and Mary, already a month married, had Sunday dinner

with them, and the matter came up for discussion. Bert was

particularly pessmistic, and muttered dark hints of an impending

strike in the railroad shops.



"If you'd all shut your traps, it'd be all right," Mary

criticized. "These union agitators get the railroad sore. They

give me the cramp, the way they butt in an' stir up trouble. If I

was boss I'd cut the wages of any man that listened to them."



"Yet you belonged to the laundry workers' union," Saxon rebuked

gently.



"Because I had to or I wouldn't a-got work. An' much good it ever

done me."



"But look at Billy," Bert argued "The teamsters ain't ben sayin'

a word, not a peep, an' everything lovely, and then, bang, right

in the neck, a ten per cent cut. Oh, hell, what chance have we

got? We lose. There's nothin' left for us in this country we've

made and our fathers an' mothers before us. We're all shot to

pieces. We Can see our finish--we, the old stock, the children of

the white people that broke away from England an' licked the tar

outa her, that freed the slaves, an' fought the Indians, 'an made

the West! Any gink with half an eye can see it comin'."



"But what are we going to do about it?" Saxon questioned

anxiously.



"Fight. That's all. The country's in the hands of a gang of

robbers. Look at the Southern Pacific. It runs California."



"Aw, rats, Bert," Billy interrupted. "You're takin' through your

lid. No railroad can ran the government of California."



"You're a bonehead," Bert sneered. "And some day, when it's too

late, you an' all the other boneheads'll realize the fact.

Rotten? I tell you it stinks. Why, there ain't a man who wants to

go to state legislature but has to make a trip to San Francisco,

an' go into the S. P. offices, an' take his hat off, an' humbly

ask permission. Why, the governors of California has been

railroad governors since before you and I was born. Huh! You

can't tell me. We're finished. We're licked to a frazzle. But

it'd do my heart good to help string up some of the dirty thieves

before I passed out. D'ye know what we are?--we old white stock

that fought in the wars, an' broke the land, an' made all this?

I'll tell you. We're the last of the Mohegans."



"He scares me to death, he's so violent," Mary said with

unconcealed hostility. "If he don't quit shootin' off his mouth

he'll get fired from the shops. And then what'll we do? He don't

consider me. But I can tell you one thing all right, all right.

I'll not go back to the laundry." She held her right hand up and

spoke with the solemnity of an oath. "Not so's you can see it.

Never again for yours truly."



"Oh, I know what you're drivin' at," Bert said with asperity.

"An' all I can tell you is, livin' or dead, in a job or out, no

matter what happens to me, if you will lead that way, you will,

an' there's nothin' else to it."



"I guess I kept straight before I met you," she came back with a

toss of the head. "And I kept straight after I met you, which is

going some if anybody should ask you."



Hot words were on Bert's tongue, but Saxon intervened and brought

about peace. She was concerned over the outcome of their

marriage. Both were highstrung, both were quick and irritable,

and their continual clashes did not augur well for their future.



The safety razor was a great achievement for Saxon. Privily she

conferred with a clerk she knew in Pierce's hardware store and

made the purchase. On Sunday morning, after breakfast, when Billy

was starting to go to the barber shop, she led him into the

bedroom, whisked a towel aside, and revealed the razor box,

shaving mug, soap, brush, and lather all ready. Billy recoiled,

then came back to make curious investigation. He gazed pityingly

at the safety razor.



"Huh! Call that a man's tool!"



"It'll do the work," she said. "It does it for thousands of men

every day."



But Billy shook his head and backed away.



"You shave three times a week," she urged. "That's forty-five

cents. Call it half a dollar, and there are fifty-two weeks in

the year. Twenty-six dollars a year just for shaving. Come on,

dear, and try it. Lots of men swear by it."



He shook his head mutinously, and the cloudy deeps of his eyes

grew more cloudy. She loved that sullen handsomeness that made

him look so boyish, and, laughing and kissing him, she forced him

into a chair, got off his coat, and unbuttoned shirt and

undershirt and turned them in.



Threatening him with, "If you open your mouth to kick I'll shove

it in," she coated his face with lather.



"Wait a minute," she checked him, as he reached desperately for

the razor. "I've been watching the barbers from the sidewalk.

This is what they do after the lather is on."



And thereupon she proceeded to rub the lather in with her

fingers.



"There," she said, when she had coated his face a second time.

"You're ready to begin. Only remember, I'm not always going to do

this for you. I'm just breaking you in, you see."



With great outward show of rebellion, half genuine, half

facetious, he made several tentative scrapes with the razor. He

winced violently, and violently exclaimed:



"Holy jumping Jehosaphat!"



He examined his face in the glass, and a streak of blood showed

in the midst of the lather.



"Cut!--by a safety razor, by God! Sure, men swear by it. Can't

blame 'em. Cut! By a safety!"



"But wait a second," Saxon pleaded. "They have to be regulated.

The clerk told me. See those little screws. There ... That's it

.. turn them around."



Again Billy applied the blade to his face. After a couple of

scrapes, be looked at himself closely in the mirror, grinned, and

went on shaving. With swiftness and dexterity he scraped his face

clean of lather. Saxon clapped her hands.



"Fine," Billy approved. "Great! Here. Give me your hand. See what

a good job it made."



He started to rub her hand against his cheek. Saxon jerked away

with a little cry of disappointment, then examined him closely.



"It hasn't shaved at all," she said.



"It's a fake, that's what it is. It cuts the hide, but not the

hair. Me for the barber."



But Saxon was persistent.



"You haven't given it a fair trial yet. It was regulated too

much. Let me try my hand at it. There, that's it, betwixt and

between. Now, lather again and try it."



This time the unmistakable sand-papery sound of hair-severing

could he heard.



"How is it?" she fluttered anxiously.



"It gets the--ouch!--hair," Billy grunted, frowning and making

faces. "But it--gee!--say!--ouch!--pulls like Sam Hill."



"Stay with it," she encouraged. "Don't give up the ship, big

Injun with a scalplock. Remember what Bert says and be the last

of the Mohegans."



At the end of fifteen minutes he rinsed his face and dried it,

sighing with relief.



"It's a shave, in a fashion, Saxon, but I can't say I'm stuck on

it. It takes out the nerve. I'm as weak as a cat."



He groaned with sudden discovery of fresh misfortune.



"What's the matter now?" she asked.



"The back of my neck--how can I shave the back of my neck? I'll

have to pay a barber to do it."



Saxon's consternation was tragic, but it only lasted a moment.

She took the brush in her hand.



"Sit down, Billy."



"What?--you?" he demanded indignantly.



"Yes; me. If any barber is good enough to shave your neck, and

then I am, too."



Billy moaned and groaned in the abjectness of humility and

surrender, and let her have her way.



"There, and a good job," she informed him when she had finished.

"As easy as falling off a log. And besides, it means twenty-six

dollars a year. And you'll buy the crib, the baby buggy, the

pinning blankets, and lots and lots of things with it. Now sit

still a minute longer."



She rinsed and dried the back of his neck and dusted it with

talcum powder.



"You're as sweet as a clean little baby, Billy Boy."



The unexpected and lingering impact of her lips on the back of

his neck made him writhe with mingled feelings not all

unpleasant.



Two days later, though vowing in the intervening time to have

nothing further to do with the instrument of the devil, he

permitted Saxon to assist him to a second shave. This time it

went easier.



"It ain't so bad," he admitted. "I'm gettin' the hang of it. It's

all in the regulating. You can shave as close as you want an' no

more close than you want. Barbers can't do that. Every once an'

awhile they get my face sore."



The third shave was an unqualified success, and the culminating

bliss was reached when Saxon presented him with a bottle of witch

hazel. After that he began active proselyting. He could not wait

a visit from Bert, but carried the paraphernalia to the latter's

house to demonstrate.



"We've ben boobs all these years, Bert, runnin' the chances of

barber's itch an' everything. Look at this, eh? See her take

hold. Smooth as silk. Just as easy... There! Six minutes by the

clock. Can you beat it? When I get my hand in, I can do it in

three. It works in the dark. It works under water. You couldn't

cut yourself if you tried. And it saves twenty-six dollars a

year. Saxon figured it out, and she's a wonder, I tell you."







CHAPTER VI



The trafficking between Saxon and Mercedes increased. The latter

commanded a ready market for all the fine work Saxon could

supply, while Saxon was eager and happy in the work. The expected

babe and the cut in Billy's wages had caused her to regard the

economic phase of existence more seriously than ever. Too little

money was being laid away in the bank, and her conscience pricked

her as she considered how much she was laying out on the pretty

necessaries for the household and herself. Also, for the first

time in her life she was spending another's earnings. Since a

young girl she had been used to spending her own, and now, thanks

to Mercedes she was doing it again, and, out of her profits,

assaying more expensive and delightful adventures in lingerie.



Mercedes suggested, and Saxon carried out and even bettered, the

dainty things of thread and texture. She made ruffled chemises of

sheer linen, with her own fine edgings and French embroidery on

breast and shoulders; linen hand-made combination undersuits; and

nightgowns, fairy and cobwebby, embroidered, trimmed with Irish

lace. On Mercedes' instigation she executed an ambitious and

wonderful breakfast cap for which the old woman returned her

twelve dollars after deducting commission.



She was happy and busy every waking moment, nor was preparation

for the little one neglected. The only ready made garments she

bought were three fine little knit shirts. As for the rest, every

bit was made by her own hands--featherstitched pinning blankets,

a crocheted jacket and cap, knitted mittens, embroidered bonnets;

slim little princess slips of sensible length; underskirts on

absurd Lilliputian yokes; silk-embroidered white flannel

petticoats; stockings and crocheted boots, seeming to burgeon

before her eyes with wriggly pink toes and plump little calves;

and last, but not least, many deliciously soft squares of

bird's-eye linen. A little later, as a crowning masterpiece, she

was guilty of a dress coat of white silk, embroidered. And into

all the tiny garments, with every stitch, she sewed love. Yet

this love, so unceasingly sewn, she knew when she came to

consider and marvel, was more of Billy than of the nebulous,

ungraspable new bit of life that eluded her fondest attempts at

visioning.



"Huh," was Billy's comment, as he went over the mite's wardrobe

and came back to center on the little knit shirts, "they look

more like a real kid than the whole kit an' caboodle. Why, I can

see him in them regular manshirts."



Saxon, with a sudden rush of happy, unshed tears, held one of the

little shirts up to his lips. He kissed it solemnly, his eyes

resting on Saxon's.



"That's some for the boy," he said, "but a whole lot for you."



But Saxon's money-earning was doomed to cease ignominiously and

tragically. One day, to take advantage of a department store

bargain sale, she crossed the bay to San Francisco. Passing along

Sutter Street, her eye was attracted by a display in the small

window of a small shop. At first she could not believe it; yet

there, in the honored place of the window, was the wonderful

breakfast cap for which she had received twelve dollars from

Mercedes. It was marked twenty-eight dollars. Saxon went in and

interviewed the shopkeeper, an emaciated, shrewd-eyed and

middle-aged woman of foreign extraction.



"Oh, I don't want to buy anything," Saxon said. "I make nice

things like you have here, and I wanted to know what you pay for

them-for that breakfast cap in the window, for instance."



The woman darted a keen glance to Saxon's left hand, noted the

innumerable tiny punctures in the ends of the first and second

fingers, then appraised her clothing and her face.



"Can you do work like that?"



Saxon nodded.



"I paid twenty dollars to the woman that made that." Saxon

repressed an almost spasmodic gasp, and thought coolly for a

space. Mercedes had given her twelve. Then Mercedes had pocketed

eight, while she, Saxon, had furnished the material and labor.



"Would you please show me other hand-made things nightgowns,

chemises, and such things, and tell me the prices you pay?"



"Can you do such work?"



"Yes."



"And will you sell to me?"



"Certainly," Saxon answered. "That is why I am here."



"We add only a small amount when we sell," the woman went on;

"you see, light and rent and such things, as well as a profit or

else we could not be here."



"It's only fair," Saxon agreed.



Amongst the beautiful stuff Saxon went over, she found a

nightgown and a combination undersuit of her own manufacture. For

the former she had received eight dollars from Mercedes, it was

marked eighteen, and the woman had paid fourteen; for the latter

Saxon received six, it was marked fifteen, and the woman had paid

eleven.



"Thank you," Saxon said, as she drew on her gloves. "I should

like to bring you some of my work at those prices."



"And I shall be glad to buy it ... if it is up to the mark." The

woman looked at her severely. "Mind you, it must be as good as

this. And if it is, I often get special orders, and I'll give you

a chance at them."



Mercedes was unblushingly candid when Saxon reproached her.



"You told me you took only a commission," was Saxon's accusation.



"So I did; and so I have."



"But I did all the work and bought all the materials, yet you

actually cleared more out of it than I did. You got the lion's

share."



"And why shouldn't I, my dear? I was the middleman. It's the way

of the world. 'Tis the middlemen that get the lion's share."



"It seems to me most unfair," Saxon reflected, more in sadness

than anger.



"That is your quarrel with the world, not with me," Mercedes

rejoined sharply, then immediately softened with one of her quick

changes. "We mustn't quarrel, my dear. I like you so much. La la,

it is nothing to you, who are young and strong with a man young

and strong. Listen, I am an old woman. And old Barry can do

little for me. He is on his last legs. His kidneys are 'most

gone. Remember, 'tis I must bury him. And I do him honor, for

beside me he'll have his last long steep. A stupid, dull old man,

heavy, an ox, 'tis true; but a good old fool with no trace of

evil in him. The plot is bought and paid for--the final

installment was made up, in part, out of my commissions from you.

Then there are the funeral expenses. It must be done nicely. I

have still much to save. And Barry may turn up his toes any day."



Saxon sniffed the air carefully, and knew the old woman had been

drinking again.



"Come, my dear, let me show you." Leading Saxon to a large sea

chest in the bedroom, Mercedes lifted the lid. A faint perfume,

as of rose-petals, floated up. "Behold, my burial trousseau. Thus

I shall wed the dust."



Saxon's amazement increased, as, article by article, the old

woman displayed the airiest, the daintiest, the most delicious

and most complete of bridal outfits. Mercedes held up an ivory

fan.



"In Venice 'twas given me, my dear.--See, this comb, turtle

shell; Bruce Anstey made it for me the week before he drank his

last bottle and scattered his brave mad brains with a Colt's

44.--This scarf. La la, a Liberty scarf--"



"And all that will be buried with you," Saxon mused, "Oh, the

extravagance of it!"



Mercedes laughed.



"Why not? I shall die as I have lived. It is my pleasure. I go to

the dust as a bride. No cold and narrow bed for me. I would it

were a coach, covered with the soft things of the East, and

pillows, pillows, without end."



"It would buy you twenty funerals and twenty plots," Saxon

protested, shocked by this blasphemy of conventional death. "It

is downright wicked."



"'Twill be as I have lived," Mercedes said complacently. "And

it's a fine bride old Barry'll have to come and lie beside him."

She closed the lid and sighed. "Though I wish it were Bruce

Anstey, or any of the pick of my young men to lie with me in the

great dark and to crumble with me to the dust that is the real

death."



She gazed at Saxon with eyes heated by alcohol and at the same

time cool with the coolness of content.



"In the old days the great of earth were buried with their live

slaves with them. I but take my flimsies, my dear."



"Then you aren't afraid of death? ...in the least?"



Mercedes shook her head emphatically.



"Death is brave, and good, and kind. I do not fear death. 'Tis of

men I am afraid when I am dead. So I prepare. They shall not have

me when I am dead."



Saxon was puzzled.



"They would not want you then," she said.



"Many are wanted," was the answer. "Do you know what becomes of

the aged poor who have no money for burial? They are not buried.

Let me tell you. We stood before great doors. He was a queer man,

a professor who ought to have been a pirate, a man who lectured

in class rooms when he ought to have been storming walled cities

or robbing banks. He was slender, like Don Juan. His hands were

strong as steel. So was his spirit. And he was mad, a bit mad, as

all my young men have been. 'Come, Mercedes,' he said; 'we will

inspect our brethren and become humble, and glad that we are not

as they--as yet not yet. And afterward, to-night, we will dine

with a more devilish taste, and we will drink to them in golden

wine that will be the more golden for having seen them. Come,

Mercedes.'



"He thrust the great doors open, and by the hand led me in. It

was a sad company. Twenty-four, that lay on marble slabs, or sat,

half erect and propped, while many young men, bright of eye,

bright little knives in their hands, glanced curiously at me from

their work."



"They were dead?" Saxon interrupted to gasp.



"They were the pauper dead, my dear. 'Come, Mercedes,' said he.

'There is more to show you that will make us glad we are alive.'

And he took me down, down to the vats. The salt vats, my dear. I

was not afraid. But it was in my mind, then, as I looked, how it

would be with me when I was dead. And there they were, so many

lumps of pork. And the order came, 'A woman; an old woman.' And

the man who worked there fished in the vats. The first was a man

he drew to see. Again he fished and stirred. Again a man. He was

impatient, and grumbled at his luck. And then, up through the

brine, he drew a woman, and by the face of her she was old, and

he was satisfied."



"It is not true!" Saxon cried out.



"I have seen, my dear, I know. And I tell you fear not the wrath

of God when you are dead. Fear only the salt vats. And as I stood

and looked, and as be who led me there looked at me and smiled

and questioned and bedeviled me with those mad, black,

tired-scholar's eyes of his, I knew that that was no way for my

dear clay. Dear it is, my clay to me; dear it has been to others.

La la, the salt vat is no place for my kissed lips and love-

lavished body." Mercedes lifted the lid of the chest and gazed

fondly at her burial pretties. "So I have made my bed. So I shall

lie in it. Some old philosopher said we know we must die; we do

not believe it. But the old do believe. I believe.



"My dear, remember the salt vats, and do not be angry with me

because my commissions have been heavy. To escape the vats I

would stop at nothing steal the widow's mite, the orphan's crust,

and pennies from a dead man's eyes."



"Do you believe in God?" Saxon asked abruptly, holding herself

together despite cold horror.



Mercedes dropped the lid and shrugged her shoulders.



"Who knows? I shall rest well."



"And punishment?" Saxon probed, remembering the unthinkable tale

of the other's life.



"Impossible, my dear. As some old poet said, 'God's a good

fellow.' Some time I shall talk to you about God. Never be afraid

of him. Be afraid only of the salt vats and the things men may do

with your pretty flesh after you are dead."







CHAPTER VII



Billy quarreled with good fortune. He suspected he was too

prosperous on the wages he received. What with the accumulating

savings account, the paying of the monthly furniture installment

and the house rent, the spending money in pocket, and the good

fare he was eating, he was puzzled as to how Saxon managed to pay

for the goods used in her fancy work. Several times he had

suggested his inability to see how she did it, and been baffled

each time by Saxon's mysterious laugh.



"I can't see how you do it on the money," he was contending one

evening.



He opened his mouth to speak further, then closed it and for five

minutes thought with knitted brows.



"Say," he said, "what's become of that frilly breakfast cap you

was workin' on so hard, I ain't never seen you wear it, and it

was sure too big for the kid."



Saxon hesitated, with pursed lips and teasing eyes. With her,

untruthfulness had always been a difficult matter. To Billy it

was impossible. She could see the cloud-drift in his eyes

deepening and his face hardening in the way she knew so well when

he was vexed.



"Say, Saxon, you ain't ... you ain't ... sellin' your work?"



And thereat she related everything, not omitting Mercedes

Higgins' part in the transaction, nor Mercedes Higgins'

remarkable burial trousseau. But Billy was not to be led aside by

the latter. In terms anything but uncertain he told Saxon that

she was not to work for money.



"But I have so much spare time, Billy, dear," she pleaded.



He shook his head.



"Nothing doing. I won't listen to it. I married you, and I'll

take care of you. Nobody can say Bill Roberts' wife has to work.

And I don't want to think it myself. Besides, it ain't

necessary."



"But Billy--" she began again.



"Nope. That's one thing I won't stand for, Saxon. Not that I

don't like fancy work. I do. I like it like hell, every bit you

make, but I like it on YOU. Go ahead and make all you want of it,

for yourself, an' I'll put up for the goods. Why, I'm just

whistlin' an' happy all day long, thinkin' of the boy an' seein'

you at home here workin' away on all them nice things. Because I

know how happy you are a-doin' it. But honest to God, Saxon, it'd

all be spoiled if I knew you was doin' it to sell. You see, Bill

Roberts' wife don't have to work. That's my brag--to myself, mind

you. An' besides, it ain't right."



"You're a dear," she whispered, happy despite her disappointment.



"I want you to have all you want," be continued. "An' you're

goin' to get it as long as I got two hands stickin' on the ends

of my arms. I guess I know how good the things are you wear--good

to me, I mean, too. I'm dry behind the ears, an' maybe I've

learned a few things I oughtn't to before I knew you. But I know

what I'm talkin' about, and I want to say that outside the

clothes down underneath, an' the clothes down underneath the

outside ones, I never saw a woman like you. Oh--"



He threw up his hands as if despairing of ability to express what

he thought and felt, then essayed a further attempt.



"It's not a matter of bein' only clean, though that's a whole

lot. Lots of women are clean. It ain't that. It's something more,

an' different. It's ... well, it's the look of it, so white, an'

pretty, an' tasty. It gets on the imagination. It's something I

can't get out of my thoughts of you. I want to tell you lots of

men can't strip to advantage, an' lots of women, too. But

you--well, you're a wonder, that's all, and you can't get too

many of them nice things to suit me, and you can't get them too

nice.



"For that matter, Saxon, you can just blow yourself. There's lots

of easy money layin' around. I'm in great condition. Billy Murphy

pulled down seventy-five round iron dollars only last week for

puttin' away the Pride of North Beach. That's what ha paid us the

fifty back out of."



But this time it was Saxon who rebelled.



"There's Carl Hansen," Billy argued. "The second Sharkey, the

alfalfa sportin' writers are callin' him. An' he calls himself

Champion of the United States Navy. Well, I got his number. He's

just a big stiff. I've seen 'm fight, an' I can pass him the

sleep medicine just as easy. The Secretary of the Sportin' Life

Club offered to match me. An' a hundred iron dollars in it for

the winner. And it'll all be yours to blow in any way you want.

What d'ye say?"



"If I can't work for money, you can't fight," was Saxon's

ultimatum, immediately withdrawn. "But you and I don't drive

bargains. Even if you'd let me work for money, I wouldn't let you

fight. I've never forgotten what you told me about how

prizefighters lose their silk. Well, you're not going to lose

yours. It's half my silk, you know. And if you won't fight, I

won't work--there. And more, I'll never do anything you don't

want me to, Billy."



"Same here," Billy agreed. "Though just the same I'd like most to

death to have just one go at that squarehead Hansen." He smiled

with pleasure at the thought. "Say, let's forget it all now, an'

you sing me 'Harvest Days' on that dinky what-you-may-call-it."



When she had complied, accompanying herself on the ukulele, she

suggested his weird "Cowboy's Lament." In some inexplicable way

of love, she had come to like her husband's one song. Because he

sang it, she liked its inanity and monotonousness; and most of

all, it seemed to her, she loved his hopeless and adorable

flatting of every note. She could even sing with him, flatting as

accurately and deliciously as he. Nor did she undeceive him in

his sublime faith.



"I guess Bert an' the rest have joshed me all the time," he said.



"You and I get along together with it fine," she equivoeated; for

in such matters she did not deem the untruth a wrong.



Spring was on when the strike came in the railroad shops. The

Sunday before it was called, Saxon and Billy had dinner at Bert's

house. Saxon's brother came, though he had found it impossible to

bring Sarah, who refused to budge from her household rut. Bert

was blackly pessimistic, and they found him singing with sardonic

glee:



"Nobody loves a mil-yun-aire.

Nobody likes his looks.

Nobody'll share his slightest care,

He classes with thugs and crooks.

Thriftiness has become a crime,

So spend everything you earn;

We're living now in a funny time,

When money is made to burn."



Mary went about the dinner preparation, flaunting unmistakable

signals of rebellion; and Saxon, rolling up her sleeves and tying

on an apron, washed the breakfast dishes. Bert fetched a pitcher

of steaming beer from the corner saloon, and the three men smoked

and talked about the coming strike.



"It oughta come years ago," was Bert's dictum. "It can't come any

too quick now to suit me, but it's too late. We're beaten thumbs

donn. Here's where the last of the Mohegans gets theirs, in the

neck, ker-whop!"



"Oh, I don't know," Tom, who had been smoking his pipe gravely,

began to counsel. "Organized labor's gettin' stronger every day.

Why, I can remember when there wasn't any unions in California,

Look at us now--wages, an' hours, an' everything."



"You talk like an organizer," Bert sneered, "shovin' the bull con

on the boneheads. But we know different. Organized wages won't

buy as much now as unorganized wages used to buy. They've got us

whipsawed. Look at Frisco, the labor leaders doin' dirtier

polities than the old parties, pawin' an' squabblin' over graft,

an' goin' to San Quentin, while--what are the Frisco carpenters

doin'? Let me tell you one thing, Tom Brown, if you listen to all

you hear you'll hear that every Frisco carpenter is union an'

gettin' full union wages. Do you believe it? It's a damn lie.

There ain't a carpenter that don't rebate his wages Saturday

night to the contractor. An' that's your buildin' trades in San

Francisco, while the leaders are makin' trips to Europe on the

earnings of the tenderloin--when they ain't coughing it up to the

lawyers to get out of wearin' stripes."



"That's all right," Tom concurred. "Nobody's denyin' it. The

trouble is labor ain't quite got its eyes open. It ought to play

politics, but the politics ought to be the right kind."



"Socialism, eh?" Bert caught him up with scorn. "Wouldn't they

sell us out just as the Ruefs and Schmidts have?"



"Get men that are honest," Billy said. "That's the whole trouble.

Not that I stand for socialism. I don't. All our folks was a long

time in America, an' I for one won't stand for a lot of fat

Germans an' greasy Russian Jews tellin' me how to run my country

when they can't speak English yet."



"Your country!" Bert cried. "Why, you bonehead, you ain't got a

country. That's a fairy story the grafters shove at you every

time they want to rob you some more."



"But don't vote for the grafters," Billy contended. "If we

selected honest men we'd get honest treatment."



"I wish you'd come to some of our meetings, Billy," Tom said

wistfully. "If you would, you'd get your eyes open an' vote the

socialist ticket next election."



"Not on your life," Billy declined. ""When you catch me in a

socialist meeting'll be when they can talk like white men."



Bert was humming:



"We're living now in a funny time,

When money is made to burn."



Mary was too angry with her husband, because of the impending

strike and his incendiary utterances, to hold conversation with

Saxon, and the latter, bepuzzled, listened to the conflicting

opinions of the men.



"Where are we at?" she asked them, with a merriness that

concealed her anxiety at heart.



"We ain't at," Bert snarled. "We're gone."



"But meat and oil have gone up again," she chafed. "And Billy's

wages have been cut, and the shop men's were cut last year.

Something must be done."



"The only thing to do is fight like hell," Bert answered. "Fight,

an' go down fightin'. That's all. We're licked anyhow, but we can

have a last run for our money."



"That's no way to talk," Tom rebuked.



"The time for talkin' 's past, old cock. The time for fightin' 's

come."



"A hell of a chance you'd have against regular troops and machine

guns," Billy retorted.



"Oh, not that way. There's such things as greasy sticks that go

up with a loud noise and leave holes. There's such things as

emery powder--"



"Oh, ho!" Mary burst out upon him, arms akimbo. "So that's what

it means. That's what the emery in your vest pocket meant."



Her husband ignored her. Tom smoked with a troubled air. Billy

was hurt. It showed plainly in his face.



"You ain't ben doin' that, Bert?" he asked, his manner showing

his expectancy of his friend's denial.



"Sure thing, if you wont to know. I'd see'm all in hell if I

could, before I go."



"He's a bloody-minded anarchist," Mary complained. "Men like him

killed McKinley, and Garfield, an'--an' an' all the rest. He'll

be hung. You'll see. Mark my words. I'm glad there's no children

in sight, that's all."



"It's hot air," Billy comforted her.



"He's just teasing you," Saxon soothed. "He always was a josher."



But Mary shook her head.



"I know. I hear him talkin' in his sleep. He swears and curses

something awful, an' grits his teeth. Listen to him now."



Bert, his handsome face bitter and devil-may-care, had tilted his

chair back against the wall and was singing



"Nobody loves a mil-yun-aire,

Nobody likes his looks,

Nobody'll share his slightest care,

He classes with thugs and crooks."



Tom was saying something about reasonableness and justice, and

Bert ceased from singing to catch him up.



"Justice, eh? Another pipe-dream. I'll show you where the working

class gets justice. You remember Forbes--J. Alliston

Forbes--wrecked the Alta California Trust Company an' salted down

two cold millions. I saw him yesterday, in a big hell-bent

automobile. What'd he get? Eight years' sentence. How long did he

serve? Less'n two years. Pardoned out on account of ill health.

Ill hell! We'll be dead an' rotten before he kicks the bucket.

Here. Look out this window. You see the back of that house with

the broken porch rail. Mrs. Danaker lives there. She takes in

washin'. Her old man was killed on the railroad. Nitsky on

damages--contributory negligence, or

fellow-servant-something-or-other flimflam. That's what the

courts handed her. Her boy, Archie, was sixteen. He was on the

road, a regular road-kid. He blew into Fresno an' rolled a drunk.

Do you want to know how much he got? Two dollars and eighty

cents. Get that? --Two-eighty. And what did the alfalfa judge

hand'm? Fifty years. He's served eight of it already in San

Quentin. And he'll go on serving it till he croaks. Mrs. Danaker

says he's bad with consumption--caught it inside, but she ain't

got the pull to get'm pardoned. Archie the Kid steals two dollars

an' eighty cents from a drunk and gets fifty years. J. Alliston

Forbes sticks up the Alta Trust for two millions en' gets less'n

two years. Who's country is this anyway? Yourn an' Archie the

Kid's? Guess again. It's J. Alliston Forbes'--Oh:



"Nobody likes a mil-yun-aire,

Nobody likes hia looks,

Nobody'll share his slightest care,

He classes with thugs and crooks."



Mary, at the sink, where Saxon was just finishing the last dish,

untied Saxon's apron and kissed her with the sympathy that women

alone feel for each other under the shadow of maternity.



"Now you sit down, dear. You mustn't tire yourself, and it's a

long way to go yet. I'll get your sewing for you, and you can

listen to the men talk. But don't listen to Bert. He's crazy."



Saxon sewed and listened, and Bert's face grew bleak and bitter

as he contemplated the baby clothes in her lap.



"There you go," he blurted out, "bringin' kids into the world

when you ain't got any guarantee you can feed em.



"You must a-had a souse last night," Tom grinned.



Bert shook his head.



"Aw, what's the use of gettin' grouched?" Billy cheered. "It's a

pretty good country."



"It WAS a pretty good country," Bert replied, "when we was all

Mohegans. But not now. We're jiggerooed. We're hornswoggled.

We're backed to a standstill. We're double-crossed to a

fare-you-well. My folks fought for this country. So did yourn,

all of you. We freed the niggers, killed the Indians, an starved,

an' froze, an' sweat, an' fought. This land looked good to us. We

cleared it, an' broke it, an' made the roads, an' built the

cities. And there was plenty for everyhody. And we went on

fightin' for it. I had two uncles killed at Gettysburg. All of us

was mixed up in that war. Listen to Saxon talk any time what her

folks went through to get out here an' get ranches, an' horses,

an' cattle, an' everything. And they got 'em. All our folks' got

'em, Mary's, too--"



"And if they'd ben smart they'd a-held on to them," she

interpolated.



"Sure thing," Bert continued. "That's the very point. We're the

losers. We've ben robbed. We couldn't mark cards, deal from the

bottom, an' ring in cold decks like the others. We're the white

folks that failed. You see, times changed, and there was two

kinds of us, the lions and the plugs. The plugs only worked, the

lions only gobbled. They gobbled the farms, the mines, the

factories, an' now they've gobbled the government. We're the

white folks an' the children of white folks, that was too busy

being good to be smart. We're the white folks that lost out.

We're the ones that's ben skinned. D'ye get me?"



"You'd make a good soap-boxer," Tom commended, "if only you'd get

the kinks straightened out in your reasoning."



"It sounds all right, Bert," Billy said, "only it ain't. Any man

can get rich to-day--"



"Or be president of the United States," Bert snapped. "Sure

thing--if he's got it in him. Just the same I ain't heard you

makin' a noise like a millionaire or a president. Why? You ain't

got it in you. You're a bonehead. A plug. That's why. Skiddoo for

you. Skiddoo for all of us."



At the table, while they ate, Tom talked of the joys of

farm-life he had known as a boy and as a young man, and confided

that it was his dream to go and take up government land somewhere

as his people had done before him. Unfortunately, as he

explained, Sarah was set, so that the dream must remain a dream.



"It's all in the game," Billy sighed. "It's played to rules. Some

one has to get knocked out, I suppose."



A little later, while Bert was off on a fresh diatribe, Billy

became aware that he was making comparisons. This house was not

like his house. Here was no satisfying atmosphere. Things seemed

to run with a jar. He recollected that when they arrived the

breakfast dishes had not yet been washed. With a man's general

obliviousness of household affairs, he had not noted details; yet

it had been borne in on him, all morning, in a myriad ways, that

Mary was not the housekeeper Saxon was. He glanced proudly across

at her, and felt the spur of an impulse to leave his seat, go

around, and embrace her. She was a wife. He remembered her dainty

undergarmenting, and on the instant, into his brain, leaped the

image of her so appareled, only to be shattered by Bert.



"Hey, Bill, you seem to think I've got a grouch. Sure thing. I

have. You ain't had my experiences. You've always done teamin'

an' pulled down easy money prizefightin'. You ain't known hard

times. You ain't ben through strikes. You ain't had to take care

of an old mother an' swallow dirt on her account. It wasn't until

after she died that I could rip loose an' take or leave as I felt

like it.



"Take that time I tackled the Niles Electric an' see what a

work-plug gets handed out to him. The Head Cheese sizes me up,

pumps me a lot of questions, an' gives me an application blank. I

make it out, payin' a dollar to a doctor they sent me to for a

health certificate. Then I got to go to a picture garage an' get

my mug taken for the Niles Electric rogues' gallery. And I cough

up another dollar for the mug. The Head Squirt takes the blank,

the health certificate, and the mug, an' fires more questions.

DID I BELONG TO A LABOR UNION?--ME? Of course I told'm the truth

I guess nit. I needed the job. The grocery wouldn't give me any

more tick, and there was my mother.



"Huh, thinks I, here's where I'm a real carman. Back platform for

me, where I can pick up the fancy skirts. Nitsky. Two dollars,

please. Me--my two dollars. All for a pewter badge. Then there

was the uniform--nineteen fifty, and get it anywhere else for

fifteen. Only that was to be paid out of my first month. And then

five dollars in change in my pocket, my own money. That was the

rule.--I borrowed that five from Tom Donovan, the policeman. Then

what? They worked me for two weeks without pay, breakin' me in."



"Did you pick up any fancy skirts?" Saxon queried teasingly.



Bert shook his head glumly.



"I only worked a month. Then we organized, and they busted our

union higher'n a kite."



"And you boobs in the shops will be busted the same way if you go

out on strike," Mary informed him.



"That's what I've ben tellin' you all along," Bert replied. "We

ain't got a chance to win."



"Then why go out?" was Saxon's question.



He looked at her with lackluster eyes for a moment, then answered



"Why did my two uncles get killed at Gettysburg?"







CHAPTER VIII



Saxon went about her housework greatly troubled. She no longer

devoted herself to the making of pretties. The materials cost

money, and she did not dare. Bert's thrust had sunk home. It

remained in her quivering consciousness like a shaft of steel

that ever turned and rankled. She and Billy were responsible for

this coming young life. Could they be sure, after all, that they

could adequately feed and clothe it and prepare it for its way in

the world? Where was the guaranty? She remembered, dimly, the

blight of hard times in the past, and the plaints of fathers and

mothers in those days returned to her with a new significance.

Almost could she understand Sarah's chronic complaining.



Hard times were already in the neighborhood, where lived the

families of the shopmen who had gone out on strike. Among the

small storekeepers, Saxon, in the course of the daily marketing,

could sense the air of despondency. Light and geniality seemed to

have vanished. Gloom pervaded everywhere. The mothers of the

children that played in the streets showed the gloom plainly in

their faces. When they gossiped in the evenings, over front gates

and on door stoops, their voices were subdued and less of

laughter rang out.



Mary Donahue, who had taken three pints from the milkman, now

took one pint. There were no more family trips to the moving

picture shows. Scrap-meat was harder to get from the butcher.

Nora Delaney, in the third house, no longer bought fresh fish for

Friday. Salted codfish, not of the best quality, was now on her

table. The sturdy children that ran out upon the street between

meals with huge slices of bread and butter and sugar now came out

with no sugar and with thinner slices spread more thinly with

butter. The very custom was dying out, and some children already

had desisted from piecing between meals.



Everywhere was manifest a pinching and scraping, a tightenig and

shortening down of expenditure. And everywhere was more

irritation. Women became angered with one another, and with the

children, more quickly than of yore; and Saxon knew that Bert and

Mary bickered incessantly.



"If she'd only realize I've got troubles of my own," Bert

complained to Saxon.



She looked at him closely, and felt fear for him in a vague, numb

way. His black eyes seemed to burn with a continuous madness. The

brown face was leaner, the skin drawn tightly across the

cheekbones. A slight twist had come to the mouth, which seemed

frozen into bitterness. The very carriage of his body and the way

he wore his hat advertised a recklessness more intense than had

been his in the past.



Sometimes, in the long afternoons, sitting by the window with

idle hands, she caught herself reconstructing in her vision that

folk-migration of her people across the plains and mountains and

deserts to the sunset land by the Western sea. And often she

found herself dreaming of the arcadian days of her people, when

they had not lived in cities nor been vexed with labor unions and

employers' associations. She would remember the old people's

tales of self-sufficingness, when they shot or raised their own

meat, grew their own vegetables, were their own blacksmiths and

carpenters, made their own shoes--yes, and spun the cloth of the

clothes they wore. And something of the wistfulness in Tom's face

she could see as she recollected it when he talked of his dream

of taking up government land.



A farmer's life must be fine, she thought. Why was it that people

had to live in cities? Why had times changed? If there had been

enough in the old days, why was there not enough now? Why was it

necessary for men to quarrel and jangle, and strike and fight,

all about the matter of getting work? Why wasn't there work for

all?--Only that morning, and she shuddered with the recollection,

she had seen two scabs, on their way to work, beaten up by the

strikers, by men she knew by sight, and some by name, who lived

in the neighhorhood. It had happened directly across the street.

It had been cruel, terrible--a dozen men on two. The children had

begun it by throwing rocks at the scabs and cursing them in ways

children should not know. Policemen had run upon the scene with

drawn revolvers, and the strikers had retreated into the houses

and through the narrow alleys between the houses. One of the

scabs, unconscious, had been carried away in an ambulance; the

other, assisted by special railroad police, had been taken away

to the shops. At him, Mary Donahue, standing on her front stoop,

her child in her arms, had hurled such vile abuse that it had

brought the blush of shame to Saxon's cheeks. On the stoop of the

house on the other side, Saxon had noted Mercedes, in the height

of the beating up, looking on with a queer smile. She had seemed

very eager to witness, her nostrils dilated and swelling like the

beat of pulses as she watched. It had struck Saxon at the time

that the old woman was quite unalarmed and only curious to see.



To Mercedes, who was so wise in love, Saxon went for explanation

of what was the matter with the world. But the old woman's wisdom

in affairs industrial and economic was cryptic and unpalatable.



"La la, my dear, it is so simple. Most men are born stupid. They

are the slaves. A few are born clever. They are the masters. God

made men so, I suppose."



"Then how about God and that terrible beating across the street

this morning?"



"I'm afraid he was not interested," Mercedes smiled. "I doubt he

even knows that it happened."



"I was frightened to death," Saxon declared. "I was made sick by

it. And yet you--I saw you--you looked on as cool as you please,

as if it was a show."



"It was a show, my dear."



"Oh, how could you?"



"La la, I have seen men killed. It is nothing strange. All men

die. The stupid ones die like oxen, they know not why. It is

quite funny to see. They strike each other with fists and clubs,

and break each other's heads. It is gross. They are like a lot of

animals. They are like dogs wrangling over bones. Jobs are bones,

you know. Now, if they fought for women, or ideas, or bars of

gold, or fabulous diamonds, it would be splendid. But no; they

are only hungry, and fight over scraps for their stomach."



"Oh, if I could only understand!" Saxon murmured, her hands

tightly clasped in anguish of incomprehension and vital need to

know.



"There is nothing to understand. It is clear as print. There have

always been the stupid and the clever, the slave and the master,

the peasant and the prince. There always will be."



"But why?"



"Why is a peasant a peasant, my dear? Because he is a peasant.

Why is a flea a flea?"



Saxon tossed her head fretfully.



"Oh, but my dear, I have answered. The philosophies of the world

can give no better answer. Why do you like your man for a husband

rather than any other man? Because you like him that way, that is

all. Why do you like? Because you like. Why does fire burn and

frost bite? Why are there clever men and stupid men? masters and

slaves? employers and workingmen? Why is black black? Answer that

and you answer everything."



"But it is not right That men should go hungry and without work

when they want to work if only they can get a square deal," Saxon

protested.



"Oh, but it is right, just as it is right that stone won't burn

like wood, that sea sand isn't sugar, that thorns prick, that

water is wet, that smoke rises, that things fall down and not

up."



But such doctrine of reality made no impression on Saxon.

Frankly, she could not comprehend. It seemed like so much

nonsense.



"Then we have no liberty and independence," she cried

passionately. "One man is not as good as another. My child has

not the right to live that a rich mother's child has."



"Certainly not," Mercedes answered.



"Yet all my people fought for these things," Saxon urged,

remembering her school history and the sword of her father.



"Democracy--the dream of the stupid peoples. Oh, la la, my dear,

democracy is a lie, an enchantment to keep the work brutes

content, just as religion used to keep them content. When they

groaned in their misery and toil, they were persuaded to keep on

in their misery and toil by pretty tales of a land beyond the

skies where they would live famously and fat while the clever

ones roasted in everlasting fire. Ah, how the clever ones must

have chuckled! And when that lie wore out, and democracy was

dreamed, the clever ones saw to it that it should be in truth a

dream, nothing but a dream. The world belongs to the great and

clever."



"But you are of the working people," Saxon charged.



The old woman drew herself up, and almost was angry.



"I? Of the working people? My dear, because I had misfortune with

moneys invested, because I am old and can no longer win the brave

young men, because I have outlived the men of my youth and there

is no one to go to, because I live here in the ghetto with Barry

Higgins and prepare to die--why, my dear, I was born with the

masters, and have trod all my days on the necks of the stupid. I

have drunk rare wines and sat at feasts that would have supported

this neighborhood for a lifetime. Dick Golden and I--it was

Dickie's money, but I could have had it Dick Golden and I dropped

four hundred thousand francs in a week's play at Monte Carlo. He

was a Jew, but he was a spender. In India I have worn jewels that

could have saved the lives of ten thousand families dying before

my eyes."



"You saw them die? ... and did nothing?" Saxon asked aghast.



"I kept my jewels--la la, and was robbed of them by a brute of a

Russian officer within the year."



"And you let them die," Saxon reiterated.



"They were cheap spawn. They fester and multiply like maggots.

They meant nothing--nothing, my dear, nothing. No more than your

work people mean here, whose crowning stupidity is their

continuing to beget more stupid spawn for the slavery of the

masters."



So it was that while Saxon could get little glimmering of common

sense from others, from the terrible old woman she got none at

all. Nor could Saxon bring herself to believe much of what she

considered Mercedes' romancing. As the weeks passed, the strike

in the railroad shops grew bitter and deadly. Billy shook his

head and confessed his inability to make head or tail of the

troubles that were looming on the labor horizon.



"I don't get the hang of it," he told Saxon. "It's a mix-up. It's

like a roughhouse with the lights out. Look at us teamsters. Here

we are, the talk just starting of going out on sympathetic strike

for the mill-workers. They've ben out a week, most of their

places is filled, an' if us teamsters keep on haulin' the

mill-work the strike's lost."



"Yet you didn't consider striking for yourselves when your wages

were cut," Saxon said with a frown.



"Oh, we wasn't in position then. But now the Frisco teamsters and

the whole Frisco Water Front Confederation is liable to back us

up. Anyway, we're just talkin' about it, that's all. But if we do

go out, we'll try to get back that ten per cent cut."



"It's rotten politics," he said another time. "Everybody's

rotten. If we'd only wise up and agree to pick out honest men--"



"But if you, and Bert, and Tom can't agree, how do you expect all

the rest to agree?" Saxon asked.



"It gets me," he admitted. "It's enough to give a guy the willies

thinkin' about it. And yet it's plain as the nose on your face.

Get honest men for politics, an' the whole thing's straightened

out. Honest men'd make honest laws, an' then honest men'd get

their dues. But Bert wants to smash things, an' Tom smokes his

pipe and dreams pipe dreams about by an' by when everybody votes

the way he thinks. But this by an' by ain't the point. We want

things now. Tom says we can't get them now, an' Bert says we

ain't never goin' to get them. What can a fellow do when

everybody's of different minds? Look at the socialists

themselves. They're always disagreeing, splittin' up, an' firin'

each other out of the party. The whole thing's bughouse, that's

what, an' I almost get dippy myself thinkin' about it. The point

I can't get out of my mind is that we want things now."



He broke off abruptly and stared at Saxon.



"What is it?" he asked, his voice husky with anxiety. "You ain't

sick ... or .. or anything?"



One hand she had pressed to her heart; but the startle and fright

in her eyes was changing into a pleased intentness, while on her

mouth was a little mysterious smile. She seemed oblivious to her

husband, as if listening to some message from afar and not for

his ears. Then wonder and joy transfused her face, and she looked

at Billy, and her hand went out to his.



"It's life," she whispered. "I felt life. I am so glad, so glad."



The next evening when Billy came home from work, Saxon caused him

to know and undertake more of the responsibilities of fatherhood.



"I've been thinking it over, Billy," she began, "and I'm such a

healthy, strong woman that it won't have to be very expensive.

There's Martha Skelton--she's a good midwife."



But Billy shook his head.



"Nothin' doin' in that line, Saxon. You're goin' to have Doc

Hentley. He's Bill Murphy's doc, an' Bill swears by him. He's an

old cuss, but he's a wooz."



"She confined Maggie Donahue," Saxon argued; "and look at her and

her baby."



"Well, she won't confine you--not so as you can notice it."



"But the doctor will charge twenty dollars," Saxon pursued, "and

make me get a nurse because I haven't any womenfolk to come in.

But Martha Skelton would do everything, and it would be so much

cheaper."



But Billy gathered her tenderly in his arms and laid down the

law.



"Listen to me, little wife. The Roberts family ain't on the

cheap. Never forget that. You've gotta have the baby. That's your

business, an' it's enough for you. My business is to get the

money an' take care of you. An' the best ain't none too good for

you. Why, I wouldn't run the chance of the teeniest accident

happenin' to you for a million dollars. It's you that counts. An'

dollars is dirt. Maybe you think I like that kid some. I do. Why,

I can't get him outa my head. I'm thinkin' about'm all day long.

If I get fired, it'll be his fault. I'm clean dotty over him. But

just the same, Saxon, honest to God, before I'd have anything

happen to you, break your little finger, even, I'd see him dead

an' buried first. That'll give you something of an idea what you

mean to me.



"Why, Saxon, I had the idea that when folks got married they just

settled down, and after a while their business was to get along

with each other. Maybe it's the way it is with other people; but

it ain't that way with you an' me. I love you more 'n more every

day. Right now I love you more'n when I began talkin' to you five

minutes ago. An' you won't have to get a nurse. Doc Hentley'll

come every day, an' Mary'll come in an' do the housework, an'

take care of you an' all that, just as you'll do for her if she

ever needs it."



As the days and weeks pussed, Saxon was possessed by a conscious

feeling of proud motherhood in her swelling breasts. So

essentially a normal woman was she, that motherhood was a

satisfying and passionate happiness. It was true that she had her

moments of apprehension, but they were so momentary and faint

that they tended, if anything, to give zest to her happiness.



Only one thing troubled her, and that was the puzzling and

perilous situation of labor which no one seemed to understand,

her self least of all.



"They're always talking about how much more is made by machinery

than by the old ways," she told her brother Tom. "Then, with all

the machinery we've got now, why don't we get more?"



"Now you're talkin'," he answered. "It wouldn't take you long to

understand socialism."



But Saxon had a mind to the immediate need of things.



"Tom, how long have you been a socialist?"



"Eight years."



"And you haven't got anything by it?"



"But we will ... in time."



"At that rate you'll be dead first," she challenged.



Tom sighed.



"I'm afraid so. Things move so slow."



Again he sighed. She noted the weary, patient look in his face,

the bent shoulders, the labor-gnarled hands, and it all seemed to

symbolize the futility of his social creed.







CHAPTER IX



It began quietly, as the fateful unexpected so often begins.

Children, of all ages and sizes, were playing in the street, and

Saxon, by the open front window, was watching them and dreaming

day dreams of her child soon to be. The sunshine mellowed

peacefully down, and a light wind from the bay cooled the air and

gave to it a tang of salt. One of the children pointed up Pine

Street toward Seventh. All the children ceased playing, and

stared and pointed. They formed into groups, the larger boys, of

from ten to twelve, by themselves, the older girls anxiously

clutching the small children by the hands or gathering them into

their arms.



Saxon could not see the cause of all this, but she could guess

when she saw the larger boys rush to the gutter, pick up stones,

and sneak into the alleys between the houses. Smaller boys tried

to imitate them. The girls, dragging the tots by the arms, banged

gates and clattered up the front steps of the small houses. The

doors slammed behind them, and the street was deserted, though

here and there front shades were drawn aside so that

anxious-faced women might peer forth. Saxon heard the uptown

train puffing and snorting as it pulled out from Center Street.

Then, from the direction of Seventh, came a hoarse, throaty

manroar. Still, she could see nothing, and she remembered

Mercedes Higgins' words "THEY ARE LIKE DOGS WRANGLING OVER BONES.

JOBS ARE BONES, YOU KNOW"



The roar came closer, and Saxon, leaning out, saw a dozen scabs,

conveyed by as many special police and Pinkertons, coming down

the sidewalk on her side of tho street. They came compactly, as

if with discipline, while behind, disorderly, yelling confusedly,

stooping to pick up rocks, were seventy-five or a hundred of the

striking shopmen. Saxon discovered herself trembling with

apprehension, knew that she must not, and controlled herself. She

was helped in this by the conduct of Mercedes Higgins. The o]d

woman came out of her front door, dragging a chair, on which she

coolly seated herself on the tiny stoop at the top of the steps.



In the hands of the special police were clubs. The Pinkertons

carried no visible weapons. The strikers, urging on from behind,

seemed content with yelling their rage and threats, and it

remained for the children to precipitate the conflict. From

across the street, between the Olsen and the Isham houses, came a

shower of stones. Most of these fell short, though one struck a

scab on the head. The man was no more than twenty feet away from

Saxon. He reeled toward her front picket fence, drawing a

revolver. With one hand he brushed the blood from his eyes and

with the other he discharged the revolver into the Isham house. A

Pinkerton seized his arm to prevent a second shot, and dragged

him along. At the same instant a wilder roar went up from the

strikers, while a volley of stones came from between Saxon's

house and Maggie Donahue's. The scabs and their protectors made a

stand, drawing revolvers. From their hard, determined

faces--fighting men by profession--Saxon could augur nothing but

bloodshed and death. An elderly man, evidently the leader, lifted

a soft felt hat and mopped the perspiration from the bald top of

his head. He was a large man, very rotund of belly and helpless

looking. His gray beard was stained with streaks of tobacco

juice, and he was smoking a cigar. He was stoop-shouldered, and

Saxon noted the dandruff on the collar of his coat,



One of the men pointed into the street, and several of his

companions laughed. The cause of it was the little Olsen boy,

barely four years old, escaped somehow from his mother and

toddling toward his economic enemies. In his right he bore a rock

so heavy that he could scarcely lift it. With this he feebly

threatened them. His rosy little face was convulsed with rage,

and he was screaming over and over "Dam scabs! Dam scabs! Dam

scabs!" The laughter with which they greeted him only increased

his fury. He toddled closer, and with a mighty exertion threw the

rock, It fell a scant six feet beyond his hand.



This much Saxon saw, and also Mrs. Olsen rushing into the street

for her child. A rattling of revolver-shots from the strikers

drew Saxon's attention to the men beneath her. One of them cursed

sharply and examined the biceps of his left arm, which hung

limply by his side, Down the hand she saw the blood beginning to

drip. She knew she ought not remain and watch, but the memory of

her fighting forefathers was with her, while she possessed no

more than normal human fear--if anything, less. She forgot her

child in the eruption of battle that had broken upon her quiet

street, And she forgot the strikers, and everything else, in

amazement at what had happened to the round-bellied,

cigar-smoking leader. In some strange way, she knew not how, his

head had become wedged at the neck between the tops of the

pickets of her fence. His body hung down outside, the knees not

quite touching the ground. His hat had fallen off, and the sun

was making an astounding high light on his bald spot. The cigar,

too, was gone. She saw he was looking at her. One hand, between

the pickets, seemed waving at her, and almost he seemed to wink

at her jocosely, though she knew it to be the contortion of

deadly pain.



Possibly a second, or, at most, two seconds, she gazed at this,

when she was aroused by Bert's voice. He was running along the

sidewMk, in front of her house, and behind him charged several

more strikers, while he shouted: "Come on, you Mohegans! We got

'em nailed to the cross!"



In his left hand he carried a pick-handle, in his right a

revolver, already empty, for he clicked the cylinder vainly

around as he ran. With an abrupt stop, dropping the pick-handle,

he whirled half about, facing Saxon's gate. He was sinking down,

when he straightened himself to throw the revolver into the face

of a scab who was jumping toward him. Then he began swaying, at

the same time sagging at the knees and waist. Slowly, with

infinite effort, he caught a gate picket in his right hand, and,

still slowly, as if lowering himself, sank down, while past him

leaped the crowd of strikers he had led.



It was battle without quarter--a massacre. The scabs and their

protectors, surrounded, backed against Saxon's fence, fought like

cornered rats, but could not withstand the rush of a hundred men.

Clubs and pick-handles were swinging, revolvers were exploding,

and cobblestones were flung with crushing effect at arm's

distance. Saxon saw young Frank Davis, a friend of Bert's and a

father of several months' standing, press the muzzle of his

revolver against a scab's stomach and fire. There were curses and

snarls of rage, wild cries of terror and pain. Mercedes was

right. These things were not men. They were beasts, fighting over

bones, destroying one another for bones.



JOBS ARE BONES; JOBS ARE BONES. The phrase was an incessant

iteration in Saxon's brain. Much as she might have wished it, she

was powerless now to withdraw from the window. It was as if she

were paralyzed. Her brain no longer worked. She sat numb,

staring, incapable of anything save seeing the rapid horror

before her eyes that flashed along like a moving picture film

gone mad. She saw Pinkertons, special police, and strikers go

down. One scab, terribly wounded, on his knees and begging for

mercy, was kicked in the face. As he sprawled backward another

striker, standing over him, fired a revolver into his chest,

quickly and deliberately, again and again, until the weapon was

empty. Another scab, backed over the pickets by a hand clutching

his throat, had his face pulped by a revolver butt. Again and

again, continually, the revolver rose and fell, and Saxon knew

the man who wielded it--Chester Johnson. She had met him at

dances and danced with him in the days before she was married. He

had always been kind and good natured. She remembered the Friday

night, after a City Hall band concert, when he had taken her and

two other girls to Tony's Tamale Grotto on Thirteenth street. And

after that they had all gone to Pabst's Cafe and drunk a glass of

beer before they went home. It was impossible that this could be

the same Chester Johnson. And as she looked, she saw the

round-bellied leader, still wedged by the neck between the

pickets, draw a revolver with his free hand, and, squinting

horribly sidewise, press the muzzle against Chester's side. She

tried to scream a warning. She did scream, and Chester looked up

and saw her. At that moment the revolver went off, and he

collapsed prone upon the body of the scab. And the bodies of

three men hung on her picket fence.



Anything could happen now. Quite without surprise, she saw the

strikers leaping the fence, trampling her few little geraniums

and pansies into the earth as they fled between Mercedes' house

and hers. Up Pine street, from the railroad yards, was coming a

rush of railroad police and Pinkertons, firing as they ran. While

down Pine street, gongs clanging, horses at a gallop, came three

patrol wagons packed with police. The strikers were in a trap.

The only way out was between the houses and over the back yard

fences. The jam in the narrow alley prevented them all from

escaping. A dozen were cornered in the angle between the front of

her house and the steps. And as they had done, so were they done

by. No effort was made to arrest. They were clubbed down and shot

down to the last man by the guardians of the peace who were

infuriated by what had been wreaked on their brethren.



It was all over, and Saxon, moving as in a dream, clutching the

banister tightly, came down the front steps. The round-bellied

leader still leered at her and fluttered one hand, though two big

policemen were just bending to extricate him. The gate was off

its hinges, which seemed strange, for she had been watching all

the time and had not seen it happen.



Bert's eyes were closed. His lips were blood-flecked, and there

was a gurgling in his throat as if he were trying to say

something. As she stooped above him, with her handkerchief

brushing the blood from his cheek where some one had stepped on

him, his eyes opened. The old defiant light was in them. He did

not know her. The lips moved, and faintly, almout reminiscently,

he murmured, "The last of the Mohegans, the last of the

Mohegans." Then he groaned, and the eyelids drooped down again.

He was not dead. She knew that, The chest still rose and fell,

and the gurgling still continued in his throat.



She looked up. Mercedes stood beside her. The old woman's eyes

were very bright, her withered cheeks flushed.



"Will you help me carry him into the house?" Saxon asked.



Mercedes nodded, turned to a sergeant of police, and made the

request to him. The sergeant gave a swift glance at Bert, and his

eyes were bitter and ferocious as he refused.



"To hell with'm. We'll care for our own."



"Maybe you and I can do it," Saxon said.



"Don't be a fool." Mercedes was beckoning to Mrs. Olsen across

the street. "You go into the house, little mother that is to be.

This is bad for you. We'll carry him in. Mrs. Olsen is coming,

and we'll get Maggie Donahue."



Saxon led the way into the back bedroom which Billy had insisted

on furnishing. As she opened the door, the carpet seemed to fly

up into her face as with the force of a blow, for she remembered

Bert had laid that carpet. And as the women placed him on the bed

she recalled that it was Bert and she, between them, who had set

the bed up one Sunday morning.



And then she felt very queer, and was surprised to see Mercedes

regarding her with questioning, searching eyes. After that her

queerness came on very fast, and she descended into the hell of

pain that is given to women alone to know. She was supported,

half-carried, to the front bedroom. Many faces were about

her--Mercedes, Mrs. Olsen, Maggie Donahue. It seemed she must ask

Mrs. Olsen if she had saved little Emil from the street, but

Mercedes cleared Mrs. Olsen out to look after Bert, and Maggie

Donahue went to answer a knock at the front door. From the street

came a loud hum of voices, punctuated by shouts and commands, and

from time to time there was a clanging of the gongs of ambulances

and patrol wagon's. Then appeared the fat, comfortable face of

Martha Shelton, and, later, Dr. Hentley came. Once, in a clear

interval, through the thin wall Saxon heard the high opening

notes of Mary's hysteria. And, another time, she heard Mary

repeating over and over. "I'll never go back to the laundry.

Never. Never."







CHAPTER X



Billy could never get over the shock, during that period, of

Saxon's appearance. Morning after morning, and evening after

evening when he came home from work, he would enter the room

where she lay and fight a royal battle to hide his feelings and

make a show of cheerfulness and geniality. She looked so small

lying there so small and shrunken and weary, and yet so

child-like in her smallness. Tenderly, as he sat beside her, he

would take up her pale hand and stroke the slim, transparent arm,

marveling at the smallness and delicacy of the bones.



One of her first questions, puzzling alike to Billy and Mary,

was:



"Did they save little Emil Olsen?"



And when she told them how he had attacked, singlehanded, the

whole twenty-four fighting men, Billy's face glowed with

appreciation.



"The little cuss!" he said. "That's the kind of a kid to be proud

of."



He halted awkwardly, and his very evident fear that he had hurt

her touched Saxon. She put her hand out to his.



"Billy," she began; then waited till Mary left the room.



"I never asked before--not that it matters ... now. But I waited

for you to tell me. Was it ... ?"



He shook his head.



"No; it was a girl. A perfect little girl. Only ... it was too

soon."



She pressed his hand, and almost it was she that sympathized with

him in his affliction.



"I never told you, Billy--you were so set on a boy; but I

planned, just the same, if it was a girl, to call her Daisy. You

remember, that was my mother's name."



He nodded his approbation.



"Say, Saxon, you know I did want a boy like the very dickens ...

well, I don't care now. I think I'm set just as hard on a girl,

an', well, here's hopin' the next will be called ... you wouldn't

mind, would you?"



"What?"



"If we called it the same name, Daisy?"



"Oh, Billy! I was thinking the very same thing."



Then his face grew stern as he went on.



"Only there ain't goin' to be a next. I didn't know what havin'

children was like before. You can't run any more risks like

that."



"Hear the big, strong, afraid-man talk!" she jeered, with a wan

smile. "You don't know anything about it. How can a man? I am a

healthy, natural woman. Everything would have been all right this

time if ... if all that fighting hadn't happened. Where did they

bury Bert?"



"You knew?"



"All the time. And where is Mercedes? She hasn't been in for two

days."



"Old Barry's sick. She's with him."



He did not tell her that the old night watchman was dying, two

thin walls and half a dozen feet away.



Saxon's lips were trembling, and she began to cry weakly,

clinging to Billy's hand with both of hers.



"I--I can't help it," she sobbed. "I'll be all right in a minute

... Our little girl, Billy. Think of it! And I never saw her!"





She was still lying on her bed, when, one evening, Mary saw fit

to break out in bitter thanksgiving that she had escaped, and was

destined to escape, what Saxon had gone through.



"Aw, what are you talkin' about?" Billy demanded. "You'll get

married some time again as sure as beans is beans."



"Not to the best man living," she proclaimed. "And there ain't no

call for it. There's too many people in the world now, else why

are there two or three men for every job? And, besides, havin'

children is too terrible."



Saxon, with a look of patient wisdom in her face that became

glorified as she spoke, made answer:



"I ought to know what it means. I've been through it, and I'm

still in the thick of it, and I want to say to you right now, out

of all the pain and the ache and the sorrow, that it is the most

beautiful, wonderful thing in the world."





As Saxon's strength came back to her (and when Doctor Hentley had

privily assured Billy that she was sound as a dollar), she

herself took up the matter of the industrial tragedy that had

taken place before her door. The militia had been called out

immediately, Billy informed her, and was encamped then at the

foot of Pine street on the waste ground next to the railroad

yards. As for the strikers, fifteen of them were in jail. A house

to house search had been made in the neighborhood by the police,

and in this way nearly the whole fifteen, all wounded, had been

captured. It would go hard with them, Billy foreboded gloomily.

The newspapers were demanding blood for blood, and all the

ministers in Oakland had preached fierce sermons against the

strikers. The railroad had filled every place, and it was well

known that the striking shopmen not only would never get their

old jobs back but were blacklisted in every railroad in the

United States. Already they were beginning to scatter. A number

had gone to Panama, and four were talking of going to Ecuador to

work in the shops of the railroad that ran over the Andes to

Quito.



With anxiety keenly concealed, she tried to feel out Billy's

opinion on what had happened.



"That shows what Bert's violent methods come to," she said.



He shook his head slowly and gravely.



"They'll hang Chester Johnson, anyway," be answered indirectly.

"You know him. You told me you used to dance with him. He was

caught red-handed, lyin' on the body of a scab he beat to death.

Old Jelly Belly's got three bullet holes in him, but he ain't

goin' to die, and he's got Chester's number. They'll hang'm on

Jelly Belly's evidence. It was all in the papers. Jelly Belly

shot him, too, a-hangin' by the neck on our pickets."



Saxon shuddered. Jelly Belly must be the man with the bald spot

and the tobacco-stained whiskers.



"Yes," she said. "I saw it all. It seemed he must have hung there

for hours."



"It was all over, from first to last, in five minutes."



"It seemed ages and ages."



"I guess that's the way it seemed to Jelly Belly, stuck on the

pickets," Billy smiled grimly. "But he's a hard one to kill. He's

been shot an' cut up a dozen different times. But they say now

he'll be crippled for life--have to go around on crutches, or in

a wheel-chair. That'll stop him from doin' any more dirty work

for the railroad. He was one of their top gun-fighters--always up

to his ears in the thick of any fightin' that was goin' on. He

never was leery of anything on two feet, I'll say that much

for'm."



"Where does he live?" Saxon inquired.



"Up on Adeline, near Tenth--fine neighborhood an' fine

two-storied house. He must pay thirty dollars a month rent. I

guess the railroad paid him pretty well."



"Then he must be married?"



"Yep. I never seen his wife, but he's got one son, Jack, a

passenger engineer. I used to know him. He was a nifty boxer,

though he never went into the ring. An' he's got another son

that's teacher in the high school. His name's Paul. We're about

the same age. He was great at baseball. I knew him when we was

kids. He pitched me out three times hand-runnin' once, when the

Durant played the Cole School."



Saxon sat back in the Morris chair, resting and thinking. The

problem was growing more complicated than ever. This elderly,

round-bellied, and bald-headed gunfighter, too, had a wife and

family. And there was Frank Davis, married barely a year and with

a baby boy. Perhaps the scab he shot in the stomach had a wife

and children. All seemed to be acquainted, members of a very

large family, and yet, because of their particular families, they

battered and killed each other. She had seen Chester Johnson kill

a scab, and now they were going to hang Chester Johnson, who had

married Kittie Brady out of the cannery, and she and Kittie Brady

had worked together years before in the paper box factory.



Vainly Saxon waked for Billy to say something that would show he

did not countenance the killing of the scabs.



"It was wrong," she ventured finally.



"They killed Bert," he countered. "An' a lot of others. An' Frank

Davis. Did you know he was dead? Had his whole lower jaw shot

away--died in the ambulance before they could get him to the

receiving hospital. There was never so much killin' at one time

in Oakland before."



"But it was their fault," she contended. "They began it. It was

murder."



Billy did not reply, but she heard him mutter hoarsely. She knew

he said "God damn them"; but when she asked, "What?" he made no

answer. His eyes were deep with troubled clouds, while the mouth

had hardened, and all his face was bleak.



To her it was a heart-stab. Was he, too, like the rest? Would he

kill other men who had families, like Bert, and Frank Davis, and

Chester Johnson had killed? Was he, too, a wild beast, a dog that

would snarl over a bone?



She sighed. Life was a strange puzzle. Perhaps Mercedes Higgins

was right in her cruel statement of the terms of existence.



"What of it," Billy laughed harshly, as if in answer to her

unuttered questions. "It's dog eat dog, I guess, and it's always

ben that way. Take that scrap outside there. They killed each

other just like the North an' South did in the Civil War."



"But workingmen can't win that way, Billy. You say yourself that

it spoiled their chance of winning."



"I suppose not," he admitted reluctantly. "But what other chance

they've got to win I don't see. Look at 'us. We'll be up against

it next."



"Not the teamsters?" she cried.



He nodded gloomily.



"The bosses are cuttin' loose all along the line for a high old

time. Say they're goin' to beat us to our knees till we come

crawlin' back a-beggin' for our jobs. They've bucked up real high

an' mighty what of all that killin' the other day. Havin' the

troops out is half the fight, along with havin' the preachers an'

the papers an' the public behind 'em. They're shootin' off their

mouths already about what they're goin' to do. They're sure

gunning for trouble. First, they're goin' to hang Chester Johnson

an' as many more of the fifteen as they can. They say that flat.

The Tribune, an' the Enquirer an' the Times keep sayin' it over

an over every day. They're all union-hustin' to beat the band. No

more closed shop. To hell with organized labor. Why, the dirty

little Intelligencer come out this morning an' said that every

union official in Oakland ought to be run outa town or stretched

up. Fine, Eh? You bet it's fine.



"Look at us. It ain't a case any more of sympathetic strike for

the mill-workers. We got our own troubles. They've fired our four

best men--the ones that was always on the conference committees.

Did it without cause. They're lookin' for trouble, as I told you,

an' they'll get it, too, if they don't watch out. We got our tip

from the Frisco Water Front Confederation. With them backin' us

we'll go some."



"You mean you'll ... strike?" Saxon asked.



He bent his head.



"But isn't that what they want you to do?--from the way they're

acting?"



"What "s the difference?" Billy shrugged his shoulders, then

continued. "It's better to strike than to get fired. We beat 'em

to it, that's all, an' we catch 'em before they're ready. Don't

we know what they're doin'? They're collectin' gradin'-camp

drivers an' mule-skinners all up an' down the state. They got

forty of 'em, feedin' 'em in a hotel in Stockton right now, an'

ready to rush 'em in on us an' hundreds more like 'em. So this

Saturday's the last wages I'll likely bring home for some time."



Saxon closed her eyes and thought quietly for five minutes. It

was not her way to take things excitedly. The coolness of poise

that Billy so admired never deserted her in time of emergency.

She realized that she herself was no more than a mote caught up

in this tangled, nonunderstandable conflict of many motes.



"We'll have to draw from our savings to pay for this month's

rent," she said brightly.



Billy's face fell.



"We ain't got as much in the bank as you think," he confessed.

"Bert had to be buried, you know, an I coughed up what the others

couldn't raise."



"How much was it?"



"Forty dollars. I was goin' to stand off the butcher an' the rest

for a while. They knew I was good pay. But they put it to me

straight. They'd been carryin' the shopmen right along an was up

against it themselves. An' now with that strike smashed they're

pretty much smashed themselves. So I took it all out of the bank.

I knew you wouldn't mind. You don't, do you?"



She smiled bravely, and bravely overcame the sinking feeling at

her heart.



"It was the only right thing to do, Billy. I would have done it

if you were lying sick, and Bert would have done it for you an'

me if it had been the other way around."



His face was glowing.



"Gee, Saxon, a fellow can always count on you. You're like my

right hand. That's why I say no more babies. If I lose you I'm

crippled for life."



"We've got to economize," she mused, nodding her appreciation.

"How much is in bank?"



"Just about thirty dollars. You see, I had to pay Martha Skelton

an' for the ... a few other little things. An' the union took

time by the neck and levied a four dollar emergency assessment on

every member just to be ready if the strike was pulled off. But

Doc Hentley can wait. He said as much. He's the goods, if anybody

should ask you. How'd you like'm?"



"I liked him. But I don't know about doctors. He's the first I

ever had--except when I was vaccinated once, and then the city

did that."



"Looks like the street car men are goin' out, too. Dan Fallon's

come to town. Came all the way from New York. Tried to sneak in

on the quiet, but the fellows knew when he left New York, an'

kept track of him all the way acrost. They have to. He's

Johnny-on-the-Spot whenever street car men are licked into shape.

He's won lots of street car strikes for tha bosses. Keeps an army

of strike breakers an' ships them all over the country on special

trains wherever they're needed. Oakland's never seen labor

troubles like she's got and is goin' to get. All hell's goin' to

break loose from the looks of it."



"Watch out for yourself, then, Billy. I don't want to lose you

either."



"Aw, that's all right. I can take care of myself. An' besides, it

ain't as though we was licked. We got a good chance."



"But you'll lose if there is any killing."



"Yep; we gotta keep an eye out against that."



"No violence."



"No gun-fighting or dynamite," he assented. "But a heap of

scabs'll get their heads broke. That has to be."



"But you won't do any of that, Billy."



"Not so as any slob can testify before a court to havin' seen

me." Then, with a quick shift, he changed the subject. "Old Barry

Higgins is dead. I didn't want to tell you till you was outa bed.

Buried'm a week ago. An' the old woman's movin' to Frisco. She

told me she'd be in to say good-bye. She stuck by you pretty well

them first couple of days, an' she showed Martha Shelton a few

that made her hair curl. She got Martha's goat from the jump."







CHAPTER XI



With Billy on strike and away doing picket duty, and with the

departure of Mercedes and the death of Bert, Saxon was left much

to herself in a loneliness that even in one as healthy-minded as

she could not fail to produce morbidness. Mary, too, had left,

having spoken vaguely of taking a job at housework in Piedmont.



Billy could help Saxon little in her trouble. He dimly sansed her

suffering, without comprehending the scope and intensity of it.

He was too man-practical, and, by his very sex, too remote from

the intimate tragedy that was hers. He was an outsider at the

best, a friendly onlooker who saw little. To her the baby had

been quick and real. It was still quick and real. That was her

trouble. By no deliberate effort of will could she fill the

achiiig void of its absence. Its reality became, at times, an

hallucination. Somewhere it still was, and she must find it. She

would catch herself, on occasion, listening with strained ears

for the cry she had never heard, yet which, in fancy, she had

heard a thousand times in the happy months before the end. Twice

she left her bed in her sleep and went searching--each time

coming to herself beside her mother's chest of drawers in which

were the tiny garments. To herself, at such moments, she would

say, "I had a baby once." And she would say it, aloud, as she

watched the children playing in the street.



One day, on the Eighth street cars, a young mother sat beside

her, a crowing infant in her arms. And Saxon said to her:



"I had a baby once. It died."



The mother looked at her, startled, half-drew the baby tighter in

her arms, jealously, or as if in fear; then she softened as she

said:



"You poor thing."



"Yes," Saxon nodded. "It died."



Tear's welled into her eyes, and the telling of her grief seemed

to have brought relief. But all the day she suffered from an

almost overwhelming desire to recite her sorrow to the world--to

the paying teller at the bank, to the elderly floor-walker in

Salinger's, to the blind woman, guided by a little boy, who

played on the concertina--to every one save the policeman. The

police were new and terrible creatures to her now. She had seen

them kill the strikers as mercilessly as the strikers had killed

the scabs. And, unlike the strikers, the police were professional

killers. They were not fighting for jobs. They did it as a

business. They could have taken prisoners that day, in the angle

of her front steps and the house. But they had not.

Unconsciously, whenever approaching one, she edged across the

sidewalk so as to get as far as possible away from him. She did

not reason it out, but deeper than consciousness was the feeling

that they were typical of something inimical to her and hers.



At Eighth and Broadway, waiting for her car to return home, the

policeman on the corner recognized her and greeted her. She

turned white to the lips, and her heart fluttered painfully. It

was only Ned Hermanmann, fatter, bronder-faced, jollier looking

than ever. He had sat across the aisle from her for three terms

at school. He and she had been monitors together of the

composition books for one term. The day the powder works blew up

at Pinole, breaking every window in the school, he and she had

not joined in the panic rush for out-of-doors. Both had remained

in the room, and the irate principal had exhibited them, from

room to room, to the cowardly classes, and then rewarded them

with a month's holiday from school. And after that Ned Hermanmann

had become a policeman, and married Lena Highland, and Saxon had

heard they had five children.



But, in spite of all that, he was now a policeman, and Billy was

now a striker. Might not Ned Hermanmann some day club and shoot

Billy just as those other policemen clubbed and shot the strikers

by her front steps?



"What's the matter, Saxon?" he asked. "Sick?"



She nodded and choked, unable to speak, and started to move

toward her car which was coming to a stop.



"I'll help you," he offered.



She shrank away from his hand.



"No; I'm all right," she gasped hurriedly. "I'm not going to take

it. I've forgotten something."



She turned away dizzily, up Broadway to Ninth. Two blocks along

Ninth, she turned down Clay and back to Eighth street, where she

waited for another car.





As the summer months dragged along, the industrial situation in

Oakland grew steadily worse. Capital everywhere seemed to have

selected this city for the battle with organized labor. So many

men in Oakland were out on strike, or were locked out, or were

unable to work because of the dependence of their trades on the

other tied-up trade's, that odd jobs at common labor were hard to

obtain. Billy occasionally got a day's wdrk to do, but did not

earn enough to make both ends meet, despite the small strike

wages received at first, and despite the rigid economy he and

Saxon practiced.



The table she set had scarcely anything in common with that of

their first married year. Not alone was every item of cheaper

quality, but many items had disappeared. Meat, and the poorest,

was very seldom on the table. Cow's milk had given place to

condensed milk, and even the sparing use of the latter had

ceased. A roll of butter, when they had it, lastad half a dozen

times as long as formerly. Where Billy had been used to drinking

three cups of coffee for breakfast, he now drank one. Saxon

boiled this coffee an atrocious length of time, and she paid

twenty cents a pound for it.



The blight of hard times was on all the neighborhood. The

families not involved in one strike were touched by some other

strike or by the cessation of work in some dependent trade. Many

single young men who were lodgers had drifted away, thus

increasing the house rent of the families which had sheltered

them.



"Gott!" said the butcher to Saxon. "We working class all suffer

together. My wife she cannot get her teeth fixed now. Pretty soon

I go smash broke maybe."



Once, when Billy was preparing to pawn his watch, Saxon suggested

his borrowing the money from Billy Murphy.



"I was plannin' that," Billy answered, "only I can't now. I

didn't tell you what happened Tuesday night at the Sporting Life

Club. You remember that squarehead Champion of the United States

Navy? Bill was matched with him, an' it was sure easy money. Bill

had 'm goin' south by the end of the sixth round, an' at the

seventh went in to finish 'm. And then--just his luck, for his

trade's idle now--he snaps his right forearm. Of course the

squarehead comes back at 'm on the jump, an' it's good night for

Bill. Gee! Us Mohegans are gettin' our bad luck handed to us in

chunks these days."



"Don't!" Saxon cried, shuddering involuntarily.



"What?" Billy asked with open mouth of surprise.



"Don't say that word again. Bert was always saying it."



"Oh, Mohegans. All right, I won't. You ain't superstitions, are

you?"



"No; but just the same there's too much truth in the word for me

to like it. Sometimes it seems as though he was right. Times have

changed. They've changed even since I was a little girl. We

crossed the plains and opened up this country, and now we're

losing even the chance to work for a living in it. And it's not

my fault, it's not your fault. We've got to live well or bad just

hy luck, it seems. There's no other way to explain it."



"It beats me," Billy concurred. "Look at the way I worked last

year. Never missed a day. I'd want to never miss a day this year,

an' here I haven't done a tap for weeks an' weeks an' weeks. Say!

Who runs this country anyway?"



Saxon had stopped the morning paper, but frequently Maggie

Donahue's boy, who served a Tribune route, tossed an "extra" on

her steps. From its editorials Saxon gleaned that organized labor

was trying to run the country and that it was making a mess of

it. It was all the fault of domineering labor--so ran the

editorials, column by column, day by day; and Saxon was

convinced, yet remained unconvinced. The social puzzle of living

was too intricate.



The teamsters' strike, backed financially by the teamsters of San

Francisco and by the allied unions of the San Francisco Water

Front Confederation, promised to be long-drawn, whether or not it

was successful. The Oakland harness-washers and stablemen, with

few exceptions, had gone out with the teamsters. The teaming

firm's were not half-filling their contracts, but the employers'

association was helping them. In fact, half the employers'

associations of the Pacific Coast were helping the Oakland

Employers' Association.



Saxon was behind a month's rent, which, when it is considered

that rent was paid in advance, was equivalent to two months.

Likewise, she was two months behind in the installments on the

furniture. Yet she was not pressed very hard by Salinger's, the

furniture dealers.



"We're givin' you all the rope we can," said their collector. "My

orders is to make yon dig up every cent I can and at the same

time not to be too hard. Salinger's are trying to do the right

thing, but they're up against it, too. You've no idea how many

accounts like yours they're carrying along. Sooner or later

they'll have to call a halt or get it in the neck themselves. And

in the meantime just see if you can't scrape up five dollars by

next week--just to cheer them along, you know."



One of the stablemen who had not gone out, Henderson by name,

worked at Billy's stables. Despite the urging of the bosses to

eat and sleep in the stable like the other men, Henderson had

persisted in coming home each morning to his little house around

the corner from Saxon's on Fifth street. Several times she had

seen him swinging along defiantly, his dinner pail in his hand,

while the neighborhood boys dogged his heels at a safe distance

and informed him in yapping chorus that he was a scab and no

good. But one evening, on his way to work, in a spirit of bravado

he went into the Pile-Drivers' Home, the saloon at Seventh and

Pine. There it was his mortal mischance to encounter Otto Frank,

a striker who drove from the same stable. Not many minutes later

an ambulance was hurrylug Henderson to the receiving hospital

with a fractured skull, while a patrol wagon was no less swiftly

carrying Otto Frank to the city prison.



Maggie Donahue it was, eyes shining with gladness, who told Saxon

of the happening.



"Served him right, too, the dirty scab," Maggie concluded.



"But his poor wife!" was Saxon's cry. "She's not strong. And then

the children. She'll never be able to take care of them if her

husband dies."



"An' serve her right, the damned slut!"



Saxon was both shocked and hurt by the Irishwoman's brutality.

But Maggie was implacable.



" 'Tis all she or any woman deserves that'll put up an' live with

a scab. What about her children? Let'm starve, an' her man

a-takin' the food out of other children's mouths."



Mrs. Olsen's attitude was different. Beyond passive sentimental

pity for Henderson's wife and children, she gave them no thought,

her chief concern being for Otto Frank and Otto Frank's wife and

children--herself and Mrs. Frank being full sisters.



"If he dies, they will hang Otto," she asid. "And then what will

poor Hilda do? She has varicose veins in both legs, and she never

can stand on her feet all day an' work for wages. And me, I

cannot help. Ain't Carl out of work, too?"



Billy had still another point of view.



"It will give the strike a black eye, especially if Henderson

croaks," he worried, when he came home. "They'll hang Frank on

record time. Besides, we'll have to put up a defense, an' lawyers

charge like Sam Hill. They'll eat a hole in our treasury you

could drive every team in Oakland through. An' if Frank hadn't

ben screwed up with whisky he'd never a-done it. He's the

mildest, good-naturedest man sober you ever seen."



Twice that evening Billy left the house to find out if Henderson

was dead yet. In the morning the papers gave little hope, and the

evening papers published his death. Otto Frank lay in jail

without bail. The Tribune demanded a quick trial and summary

execution, calling on the prospective jury manfully to do its

duty and dwelling at length on the moral effect that would be so

produced upon the lawless working class. It went further,

emphasising the salutary effect machine guns would have on the

mob that had taken the fair city of Oakland by the throat.



And all such occurrences struck at Saxon personally. Practically

alone in the world, save for Billy, it was her life, and his, and

their mutual love-life, that was menaced. From the moment he left

the house to the moment of his return she knew no peace of mind.

Rough work was afoot, of which he told her nothing, and she knew

he was playing his part in it. On more than one occasion she

noticed fresh-broken skin on his knuckles. At such times he was

remarkably taciturn, and would sit in brooding silence or go

almost immediately to bed. She was afraid to have this habit of

reticence grow on him, and bravely she bid for his confidence.

She climbed into his lap and inside his arms, one of her arms

around his neck, and with the free hand she caressed his hair

back from the forehead and smoothed out tbe moody brows.



"Now listen to me, Billy Boy," she began lightly. "You haven't

been playing fair, and I won't have it. No!" She pressed his lips

shut with her fingers. "I'm doing the talking now, and because

you haven't been doing your share of the talking for some time.

You remember we agreed at the start to always talk things over. I

was the first to break this, when I sold my fancy work to Mrs.

Higgins without speaking to you about it. And I was very sorry. I

am still sorry. And I've never done it since. Now it's your turn.

You're not talking things over with me. You are doing things you

don't tell me about.



"Billy, you're dearer to me than anything else in the world. You

know that. We're sharing each other's lives, only, just now,

there's something you're not sharing. Every time your knuckles

are sore, there's something you don't share. If you can't trust

me, you can't trust anybody. And, besides, I love you so that no

matter what you do I'll go on loving you just the same."



Billy gazed at her with fond incredulity.



"Don't be a pincher," she teased. "Remember, I stand for whatever

you do."



"And you won't buck against me?" he queried.



"How can I? I'm not your boss, Billy. I wouldn't boss you for

anything in the world. And if you'd let me boss you, I wouldn't

love you half as much."



He digested this slowly, and finally nodded.



"An' you won't be mad?"



"With you? You've never seen me mad yet. Now come on and be

generous and tell me how you hurt your knuckles. It's fresh

to-day. Anybody can see that."



"All right. I'll tell you how it happened." He stopped and

giggled with genuine boyish glee at some recollection. "It's like

this. You won't be mad, now? We gotta do these sort of things to

hold our own. Well, here's the show, a regular movin' picture

except for file talkin'. Here's a big rube comin' along, hayseed

stickin' out all over, hands like hams an' feet like Mississippi

gunboats. He'd make half as much again as me in size an' he's

young, too. Only he ain't lookin' for trouble, an' he's as

innocent as ... well, he's the innocentest scab that ever come

down the pike an' bumped into a couple of pickets. Not a regular

strike-breaker, you see, just a big rube that's read the bosses'

ads an' come a-humpin' to town for the big wages.



"An' here's Bud Strothers an' me comin' along. We always go in

pairs that way, an' sometimes bigger bunches. I flag the rube.

'Hello,' says I, 'lookin' for a job?' 'You bet,' says he. 'Can

you drive?' 'Yep.' 'Four horses!' 'Show me to 'em,' says he. 'No

josh, now,' says I; 'you're sure wantin' to drive?' 'That's what

I come to town for,' he says. 'You're the man we're lookin' for,'

says I. 'Come along, an' we'll have you busy in no time.'



"You see, Saxon, we can't pull it off there, because there's Tom

Scanlon--you know, the red-headed cop only a couple of blocks

away an' pipin' us off though not recognizin' us. So away we go,

the three of us, Bud an' me leadin' that boob to take our jobs

away from us I guess nit. We turn into the alley back of

Campwell's grocery. Nobody in sight. Bud stops short, and the

rube an' me stop.



" 'I don't think he wants to drive,' Bud says, considerin'. An'

the rube says quick, 'You betcher life I do.' 'You're dead sure

you want that job?' I says. Yes, he's dead sure. Nothin's goin'

to keep him away from that job. Why, that job's what he come to

town for, an' we can't lead him to it too quick.



" 'Well, my friend,' says I, 'it's my sad duty to inform you that

you've made a mistake.' 'How's that?' he says. 'Go on,' I says;

'you're standin' on your foot.' And, honest to God, Saxon, that

gink looks down at his feet to see. 'I don't understand,' says

he. 'We're goin' to show you,' says I.



"An' then--Biff! Bang! Bingo! Swat! Zooie! Ker-slambango-blam!

Fireworks, Fourth of July, Kingdom Come, blue lights,

sky-rockets, an' hell fire--just like that. It don't take long

when you're scientific an' trained to tandem work. Of course it's

hard on the knuckles. But say, Saxon, if you'd seen that rube

before an' after you'd thought he was a lightnin' change artist.

Laugh? You'd a-busted."



Billy halted to give vent to his own mirth. Saxon forced herself

to join with him, but down in her heart was horror. Mercedes was

right. The stupid workers wrangled and snarled over jobs. The

clever masters rode in automobiles and did not wrangle and snarl.

They hired other stupid ones to do the wrangling and snarling for

them. It was men like Bert and Frank Davis, like Chester Johnson

and Otto Frank, like Jelly Belly and the Pinkertons, like

Henderson and all the rest of the scabs, who were beaten up,

shot, clubbed, or hanged. Ah, the clever ones were very clever.

Nothing happened to them. They only rode in their automobiles.



" 'You big stiffs,' the rube snivels as he crawls to his feet at

the end," Billy was continuing. " 'You think you still want that

job?' I ask. He shakes his head. Then I read'm the riot act

'They's only one thing for you to do, old hoss, an' that's beat

it. D'ye get me? Beat it. Back to the farm for YOU. An' if you

come monkeyin' around town again, we'll be real mad at you. We

was only foolin' this time. But next time we catch you your own

mother won't know you when we get done with you.'



"An'--say!--you oughta seen'm beat it. I bet he's goin' yet. Ah'

when he gets back to Milpitas, or Sleepy Hollow, or wherever he

hangs out, an' tells how the boys does things in Oakland, it's

dollars to doughnuts they won't be a rube in his district that'd

come to town to drive if they offered ten dollars an hour."



"It was awful," Saxon said, then laughed well-simulated

appreciation.



"But that was nothin'," Billy went on. "A bunch of the boys

caught another one this morning. They didn't do a thing to him.

My goodness gracious, no. In less'n two minutes he was the worst

wreck they ever hauled to the receivin' hospital. The evenin'

papers gave the score: nose broken, three bad scalp wounds, front

teeth out, a broken collarbone, an' two broken ribs. Gee! He

certainly got all that was comin' to him. But that's nothin'.

D'ye want to know what the Frisco teamsters did in the big strike

before the Earthquake? They took every scab they caught an' broke

both his arms with a crowbar. That was so he couldn't drive, you

see. Say, the hospitals was filled with 'em. An' the teamsters

won that strike, too."



"But is it necessary, Billy, to be so terrible? I know they're

scabs, and that they're taking the bread out of the strikers'


children's mouths to put in their own children's mouths, and that

it isn't fair and all that; but just the same is it necessary to

be so ... terrible?"



"Sure thing," Billy answered confidently. "We just gotta throw

the fear of God into them--when we can do it without bein'

caught."



"And if you're caught?"



"Then the union hires the lawyers to defend us, though that ain't

much good now, for the judges are pretty hostyle, an' the papers

keep hammerin' away at them to give stiffer an' stiffer

sentences. Just the same, before this strike's over there'll be a

whole lot of guys a-wishin' they'd never gone scabbin'."



Very cautiously, in the next half hour, Saxon tried to feel out

her husband's attitude, to find if he doubted the rightness of

the violence he and his brother teamsters committed. But Billy's

ethical sanction was rock-bedded and profound. It never entered

his head that he was not absolutely right. It was the game.

Caught in its tangled meshes, he could see no other way to play

it than the way all men played it. He did not stand for dynamite

and murder, however. But then the unions did not stand for such.

Quite naive was his explanation that dynamite and murder did not

pay; that such actions always brought down the condemnation of

the public and broke the strikes. But the healthy beating up of a

scab, he contended--the "throwing of the fear of God into a

scab," as he expressed it--was the only right and proper thing to

do.



"Our folks never had to do such things," Saxon said finally.

"They never had strikes nor scabs in those times."



"You bet they didn't," Billy agreed "Them was the good old days.

I'd liked to a-lived then." He drew a long breath and sighed.

"But them times will never come again."



"Would you have liked living in the country?" Saxon asked.



"Sure thing."



"There's lots of men living in the country now," she suggested.



"Just the same I notice them a-hikin' to town to get our jobs,"

was his reply.







CHAPTER XII



A gleam of light came, when Billy got a job driving a grading

team for the contractors of the big bridge then building at

Niles. Before he went he made certain that it was a union job.

And a union job it was for two days, when the concrete workers

threw down their tools. The contractors, evidently prepared for

such happening, immediately filled the places of the concrete men

with nonunion Italians. Whereupon the carpenters, structural

ironworkers and teamsters walked out; and Billy, lacking train

fare, spent the rest of the day in walking home.



"I couldn't work as a scab," he concluded his tale.



"No," Saxon said; "you couldn't work as a scab."



But she wondered why it was that when men wanted to work, and

there was work to do, yet they were unable to work because their

unions said no. Why were there unions? And, if unions had to be,

why were not all workingmen in them? Then there would be no

scabs, and Billy could work every day. Also, she wondered where

she was to get a sack of flour, for she had long since ceased the

extravagance of baker's bread. And so many other of the

neighborhood women had done this, that the little Welsh baker had

closed up shop and gone away, taking his wife and two little

daughters with him. Look where she would, everybody was being

hurt by the industrial strife.



One afternoon came a caller at her door, and that evening came

Billy with dubious news. He had been approached that day. All he

had to do, he told Saxon, was to say the word, and he could go

into the stable as foreman at one hundred dollars a month.



The nearness of such a sum, the possibility of it, was almost

stunning to Saxon, sitting at a supper which consisted of boiled

potatoes, warmed-over beans, and a small dry onion which they

were eating raw. There was neither bread, coffee, nor butter. The

onion Billy had pulled from his pocket, having picked it up in

the street. One hundred dollars a month! She moistened her lips

and fought for control.



"What made them offer it to you?" she questioned.



"That's easy," was his answer. "They got a dozen reasons. The guy

the boss has had exercisin' Prince and King is a dub. King has

gone lame in the shoulders. Then they're guessin' pretty strong

that I'm the party that's put a lot of their scabs outa

commission. Macklin's ben their foreman for years an' years--why

I was in knee pants when he was foreman. Well, he's sick an' all

in. They gotta have somebody to take his place. Then, too, I've

been with 'em a long time. An' on top of that, I'm the man for

the job. They know I know horses from the ground up. Hell, it's

all I'm good for, except sluggin'."



"Think of it, Billy!" she broathed. "A hundred dollars a month! A

hundred dollars a month!"



"An' throw the fellows down," he said.



It was not a question. Nor was it a statement. It was anything

Saxon chose to make of it. They looked at each other. She waited

for him to speak; but he continued merely to look. It came to her

that she was facing one of the decisive moments of her life, and

she gripped herself to face it in all coolness. Nor would Billy

proffer her the slightest help. Whatever his own judgment might

be, he masked it with an expressionless face. His eyes betrayed

nothing. He looked and waited.



"You ... you can't do that, Billy," she said finally. "You can't

throw the fellows down."



His hand shot out to hers, and his face was a sudden, radiant

dawn.



"Put her there!" he cried, their hands meeting and clasping.

"You're the truest true blue wife a man ever had. If all the

other fellows' wives was like you, we could win any strike we

tackled."



"What would you have done if you weren't married, Billy?"



"Seen 'em in hell first."



"Than it doesn't make any difference being married. I've got to

stand by you in everything you stand for. I'd be a nice wife if I

didn't."



She remembered her caller of the afternoon, and knew the moment

was too propitious to let pass.



"There was a man here this afternoon, Billy. He wanted a room. I

told him I'd speak to you. He said he would pay six dollars a

month for the back bedroom. That would pay half a month's

installment on the furniture and buy a sack of flour, and we're

all out of flour."



Billy's old hostility to the idea was instantly uppermost, and

Saxon watched him anxiously.



"Some scab in the shops, I suppose?"



"No; he's firing on the freight run to San Jose. Harmon, he said

his name was, James Harmon. They've just transferred him from the

Truckee division. He'll sleep days mostly, he said; and that's

why he wanted a quiet house without children in it."



In the end, with much misgiving, and only after Saxon had

insistently pointed out how little work it entailed on her, Billy

consented, though he continued to protest, as an afterthought



"But I don't want you makin' beds for any man. It ain't right,

Saxon. I oughta take care of you."



"And you would," she flashed back at him, "if you'd take the

foremanship. Only you can't. It wouldn't be right. And if I'm to

stand by you it's only fair to let me do what I can."



James Harmon proved even less a bother than Saxon had

anticipated. For a fireman he was scrupulously clean, always

washing up in the roundhouse before he came home. He used the key

to the kitchen door, coming and going by the back steps. To Saxon

he barely said how-do-you-do or good day; and, sleeping in the

day time and working at night, he was in the house a week before

Billy laid eyes on him.



Billy had taken to coming home later and later, and to going out

after supper by himself. He did not offer to tell Saxon where he

went. Nor did she ask. For that matter it required little

shrewdness on her part to guess. The fumes of whisky were on his

lips at such times. His slow, deliberate ways were even slower,

even more deliberate. Liquor did not affect his legs. He walked

as soberly as any man. There was no hesitancy, no faltering, in

his muscular movements. The whisky went to his brain, making his

eyes heavy-lidded and the cloudiness of them more cloudy. Not

that he was flighty, nor quick, nor irritable. On the contrary,

the liquor imparted to his mental processes a deep gravity and

brooding solemnity. He talked little, but that little was ominous

and oracular. At such times there was no appeal from his

judgment, no discussion. He knew, as God knew. And when he chose

to speak a harsh thought, it was ten-fold harsher than

ordinarily, because it seemed to proceed out of such profundity

of cogitation, because it was as prodigiously deliberate in its

incubation as it was in its enunciation.



It was not a nice side he was showing to Saxon. It was, almost,

as if a stranger had come to live with her. Despite herself, she

found herself beginning to shrink from him. And little could she

comfort herself with the thought that it was not his real self,

for she remembered his gentleness and considerateness, all his

finenesses of the past. Then he had made a continual effort to

avoid trouble and fighting. Now he enjoyed it, exulted in it,

went looking for it. All this showed in his face. No longer was

he the smiling, pleasant-faced boy. He smiled infrequently now.

His face was a man's face. The lips, the eyes, the lines were

harsh as his thoughts were harsh.



He was rarely unkind to Saxon; but, on the other hand he was

rarely kind. His attitude toward her was growing negative. He was

disinterested. Despite the fight for the union she was enduring

with him, putting up with him shoulder to shoulder, she occupied

but little space in his mind. When he acted toward her gently,

she could see that it was merely mechanical, just as she was well

aware that the endearing terms he used, the endearing caresses he

gave, were only habitual. The spontaneity and warmth had gone

out. Often, when he was not in liquor, flashes of the old Billy

came back, but even such flashes dwindled in frequency. He was

growing preoccupied, moody. Hard times and the bitter stresses of

industrial conflict strained him. Especially was this apparent in

his sleep, when he suffered paroxysms of lawless dreams, groaning

and muttering, clenching his fists, grinding his teeth, twisting

with muscular tensions, his face writhing with passions and

violences, his throat guttering with terrible curses that rasped

and aborted on his lips. And Saxon, lying beside him, afraid of

this visitor to her bed whom she did not know, remembered what

Mary had told her of Bert. He, too, had cursed and clenched his

fists, in his nights fought out the battles of his days.



One thing, however, Saxon saw clearly. By no deliberate act of

Billy's was he becoming this other and unlovely Billy. Were there

no strike, no snarling and wrangling over jobs, there would be

only the old Billy she had loved in all absoluteness. This

sleeping terror in him would have lain asleep. It was something

that was being awakened in him, an image incarnate of outward

conditions, as cruel, as ugly, as maleficent as were those

outward conditions. But if the strike continued, then, she

feared, with reason, would this other and grisly self of Billy

strengthen to fuller and more forbidding stature. And this, she

knew, would mean the wreck of their love-life. Such a Billy she

could not love; in its nature such a Billy was not lovable nor

capable of love. And then, at the thought of offspring, she

shuddered. It was too terrible. And at such moments of

contemplation, from her soul the inevitable plaint of the human

went up: WHY? WHY? WHY?



Billy, too, had his unanswerable queries.



"Why won't the building trades come out?" he demanded wrathfuly

of the obscurity that veiled the ways of living and the world.

"But no; O'Brien won't stand for a strike, and he has the

Building Trades Council under his thumb. But why don't they chuck

him and come out anyway? We'd win hands down all along the line.

But no, O'Brien's got their goat, an' him up to his dirty neck in

politics an' graft! An' damn the Federation of Labor! If all the

railroad boys had come out, wouldn't the shop men have won

instead of bein' licked to a frazzle? Lord, I ain't had a smoke

of decent tobacco or a cup of decent coffee in a coon's age. I've

forgotten what a square meal tastes like. I weighed myself

yesterday. Fifteen pounds lighter than when the strike begun. If

it keeps on much more I can fight middleweight. An' this is what

I get after payin' dues into the union for years and years. I

can't get a square meal, an' my wife has to make other men's

beds. It makes my tired ache. Some day I'll get real huffy an'

chuck that lodger out."



"But it's not his fault, Billy," Saxon protested.



"Who said it was?" Billy snapped roughly. "Can't I kick in

general if I want to? Just the same it makes me sick. What's the

good of organized labor if it don't stand together? For two cents

I'd chuck the whole thing up an' go over to the employers. Only I

wouldn't, God damn them! If they think they can beat us down to

our knees, let'em go ahead an' try it, that's all. But it gets me

just the same. The whole world's clean dippy. They ain't no sense

in anything. What's the good of supportin' a union that can't win

a strike? What's the good of knockin' the blocks off of scabs

when they keep a-comin' thick as ever? The whole thing's

bughouse, an' I guess I am, too."



Such an outburst on Billy's part was so unusual that it was the

only time Saxon knew it to occur. Always he was sullen, and

dogged, and unwhipped; while whisky only served to set the

maggots of certitude crawling in his brain.



One night Billy did not get home till after twelve. Saxon's

anxiety was increased by the fact that police fighting and head

breaking had been reported to have occurred. When Billy came, his

appearance verified the report. His coatsleeves were half torn

off. The Windsor tie had disappeared from under his soft

turned-down collar, and every button had been ripped off the

front of the shirt. When he took his hat off, Saxon was

frightened by a lump on his head the size of an apple.



"D'ye know who did that? That Dutch slob Hermanmann, with a riot

club. An' I'll get'm for it some day, good an' plenty. An'

there's another fellow I got staked out that'll be my meat when

this strike's over an' things is settled down. Blanchard's his

name, Roy Blanchard."



"Not of Blanchard, Perkins and Company?" Saxon asked, busy

washing Billy's hurt and making her usual fight to keep him calm.



"Yep; except he's the son of the old man. What's he do, that

ain't done a tap of work in all his life except to blow the old

man's money? He goes strike-breakin'. Grandstand play, that's

what I call it. Gets his name in the papers an makes all the

skirts he runs with fluster up an' say: 'My! Some bear, that Roy

Blanchard, some bear.' Some bear--the gazabo! He'll be bear-meat

for me some day. I never itched so hard to lick a man in my life.



"And--oh, I guess I'll pass that Dutch cop up. He got his

already. Somebody broke his head with a lump of coal the size of

a water bucket. That was when the wagons was turnin' into

Franklin, just off Eighth, by the old Galindo Hotel. They was

hard fightin' there, an' some guy in the hotel lams that coal

down from the second story window.



"They was fightin' every block of the way--bricks, cobblestones,

an' police-clubs to beat the band. They don't dast call out the

troops. An' they was afraid to shoot. Why, we tore holes through

the police force, an' the ambulanees and patrol wagons worked

over-time. But say, we got the procession blocked at Fourteenth

and Broadway, right under the nose of the City Hall, rushed the

rear end, cut out the horses of five wagons, an' handed them

college guys a few love-pats in passin'. All that saved 'em from

hospital was the police reserves. Just the same we had 'em jammed

an hour there. You oughta seen the street cars blocked,

too--Broadway, Fourteenth, San Pablo, as far as you could see."



"But what did Blanchard do?" Saxon called him back.



"He led the procession, an' he drove my team. All the teams was

from my stable. He rounded up a lot of them college

fellows--fraternity guys, they're called--yaps that live off

their fathers' money. They come to the stable in big tourin' cars

an' drove out the wagons with half the police of Oakland to help

them. Say, it was sure some day. The sky rained cobblestones. An'

you oughta heard the clubs on our heads--rat-tat-tat-tat,

rat-tat-tat-tat! An' say, the chief of police, in a police auto,

sittin' up like God Almighty--just before we got to Peralta

street they was a block an' the police chargin', an' an old

woman, right from her front gate, lammed the chief of police full

in the face with a dead cat. Phew! You could hear it. 'Arrest

that woman!' he yells, with his handkerchief out. But the boys

beat the cops to her an' got her away. Some day? I guess yes. The

receivin' hospital went outa commission on the jump, an' the

overflow was spilled into St. Mary's Hospital, an' Fabiola, an' I

don't know where else. Eight of our men was pulled, an' a dozen

of the Frisco teamsters that's come over to help. They're holy

terrors, them Frisco teamsters. It seemed half the workingmen of

Oakland was helpin' us, an' they must be an army of them in jail.

Our lawyers'll have to take their cases, too.



"But take it from me, it's the last we'll see of Roy Blanchard

an' yaps of his kidney buttin' into our affairs. I guess we

showed 'em some football. You know that brick buildin' they're

puttin' up on Bay street? That's where we loaded up first, an',

say, you couldn't see the wagon-seats for bricks when they

started from the stables. Blanchard drove the first wagon, an' he

was knocked clean off the seat once, but he stayed with it."



"He must have been brave," Saxon commented.



"Brave?" Billy flared. "With the police, an' the army an' navy

behind him? I suppose you'll be takin' their part next. Brave?

A-takin' the food outa the mouths of our women an children.

Didn't Curley Jones's little kid die last night? Mother's milk

not nourishin', that's what it was, because she didn't have the

right stuff to eat. An' I know, an' you know, a dozen old aunts,

an' sister-in-laws, an' such, that's had to hike to the poorhouse

because their folks couldn't take care of 'em in these times."



In the morning paper Saxon read the exciting account of the

futile attempt to break the teamsters' strike. Roy Blanchard was

hailed a hero and held up as a model of wealthy citizenship. And

to save herself she could not help glowing with appreciation of

his courage. There was something fine in his going out to face

the snarling pack. A brigadier general of the regular army was

quoted as lamenting the fact that the troops had not been called

out to take the mob by the throat and shake law and order into

it. "This is the time for a little healthful bloodletting," was

the conclusion of his remarks, after deploring the pacific

methods of the police. "For not until the mob has been thoroughly

beaten and cowed will tranquil industrial conditions obtain."



That evening Saxon and Billy went up town. Returning home and

finding nothing to eat, he had taken her on one arm, his overcoat

on the other. The overcoat he had pawned at Uncle Sam's, and he

and Saxon had eaten drearily at a Japanese restaurant which in

some miraculous way managed to set a semi-satisfying meal for ten

cents. After eating, they started on their way to spend an

additional five cents each on a moving picture show.



At the Central Bank Building, two striking teamsters accosted

Billy and took him away with them. Saxon waited on the corner,

and when he returned, three quarters of an hour later, she knew

he had been drinking.



Half a block on, passing the Forum Cafe, he stopped suddenly. A

limousine stood at the curb, and into it a young man was helping

several wonderfully gowned women. A chauffeur sat in the driver's

sent. Billy touched the young man on the arm. He was as

broad-shouldered as Billy and slightly taller. Blue-eyed,

strong-featured, in Saxon's opinion he was undeniably handsome.



"Just a word, sport," Billy said, in a low, slow voice.



The young man glanced quickly at Billy and Saxon, and asked

impatiently:



"Well, what is it?"



"You're Blanchard," Billy began. "I seen you yesterday lead out

that bunch of teams."



"Didn't I do it all right?" Blanchard asked gaily, with a flash

of glance to Saxon and back again.



"Sure. But that ain't what I want to talk about."



"Who are you?" the other demanded with sudden suspicion.



"A striker. It just happens you drove my team, that's all. No;

don't move for a gun." (As Blanchard half reached toward his hip

pocket.) "I ain't startin' anythin' here. But I just want to tell

you something."



"Be quick, then."



Blanchard lifted one foot to step into the machine.



"Sure," Billy went on without any diminution of his exasperating

slowness. "What I want to tell you is that I'm after you. Not

now, when the strike's on, but some time later I'm goin' to get

you an' give you the beatin' of your life."



Blanchard looked Billy over with new interest and measuring eyes

that sparkled with appreciation.



"You are a husky yourself," he said. "But do you think you can do

it?"



"Sure. You're my meat."



"All right, then, my friend. Look me up after the strike is

settled, and I'll give you a chance at me."



"Remember," Billy added, "I got you staked out."



Blanchard nodded, smiled genially to both of them, raised his hat

to Saxon, and stepped into the machine.







CHAPTER XIII



From now on, to Saxon, life seemed bereft of its last reason and

rhyme. It had become senseless, nightmarish. Anything irrational

was possible. There was nothing stable in the anarchic flux of

affairs that swept her on she knew not to what catastrophic end.

Had Billy been dependable, all would still have been well. With

him to cling to she would have faced everything fearlessly. But

he had been whirled away from her in the prevailing madness. So

radical was the change in him that he seemed almost an intruder

in the house. Spiritually he was such an intruder. Another man

looked out of his eyes--a man whose thoughts were of violence and

hatred; a man to whom there was no good in anything, and who had

become an ardent protagonist of the evil that was rampant aud

universal. This man no longer condemned Bert, himself muttering

vaguely of dynamite, end sabotage, and revolution.



Saxon strove to maintain that sweetness and coolness of flesh and

spirit that Billy had praised in the old days. Once, only, she

lost control. He had been in a particularly ugly mood, and a

final harshness and unfairness cut her to the quick.



"Who are you speaking to?" she flamed out at him.



He was speechless and abashed, and could only stare at her face,

which was white with anger.



"Don't you ever speak to me like that again, Billy," she

commanded.



"Aw, can't you put up with a piece of bad temper?" he muttered,

half apologetically, yet half defiantly. "God knows I got enough

to make me cranky."



After he left the house she flung herself on the bed and cried

heart-brokenly. For she, who knew so thoroughly the humility of

love, was a proud woman. Only the proud can be truly humble, as

only the strong may know the fullness of gentleness. But what was

the use, she demanded, of being proud and game, when the only

person in the world who mattered to her lost his own pride and

gameness and fairness and gave her the worse share of their

mutual trouble?



And now, as she had faced alone the deeper, organic hurt of the

loss of her baby, she faced alone another, and, in a way, an even

greater personal trouble. Perhaps she loved Billy none the less,

but her love was changing into something less proud, less

confident, less trusting; it was becoming shot through with

pity--with the pity that is parent to contempt. Her own loyalty

was threatening to weaken, and she shuddered and shrank from the

contempt she could see creeping in.



She struggled to steel herself to face the situation. Forgiveness

stole into her heart, and she knew relief until the thought came

that in the truest, highest love forgiveness should have no

place. And again she cried, and continued her battle. After all,

one thing was incontestable: THIS BILLY WES NOT THE BILLY SHE HAD

LOVED. This Billy was another man, a sick man, and no more to be

held responsible than a fever-patient in the ravings of delirium.

She must be Billy's nurse, without pride, without contempt, with

nothing to forgive. Besides, he was really bearing the brunt of

the fight, was in the thick of it, dizzy with the striking of

blows and the blows he received. If fault there was, it lay

elsewhere, somewhere in the tangled scheme of things that made

men snarl over jobs like dogs over bones.



So Saxon arose and buckled on her armor again for the hardest

fight of all in the world's arena--the woman's fight. She ejected

from her thought all doubting and distrust. She forgave nothing,

for there was nothing requiring forgiveness. She pledged herself

to an absoluteness of belief that her love and Billy's was

unsullied, unperturbed--serere as it had always been, as it would

be when it came back again after the world settled down once more

to rational ways.



That night, when he came home, she proposed, as an emergency

measure, that she should resume her needlework and help keep the

pot boiling until the strike was over, But Billy would hear

nothing of it.



"It's all right," he assured her repeatedly. "They ain't no call

for you to work. I'm goin' to get some money before the week is

out. An' I'll turn it over to you. An' Saturday night we'll go to

the show--a real show, no movin' pictures. Harvey's nigger

minstrels is comin' to town. We'll go Saturday night. I'll have

the money before that, as sure as beans is beans."



Friday evening he did not come home to supper, which Saxon

regretted, for Maggie Donahue had returned a pan of potatoes and

two quarts of flour (borrowed the week before), and it was a

hearty meal that awaited him. Saxon kept the stove going till

nine o'clock, when, despite her reluctance, she went to bed. Her

preference would have been to wait up, but she did not dare,

knowing full well what the effect would be on him did he come

home in liquor.



The clock had just struck one, when she heard the click of the

gate. Slowly, heavily, ominously, she heard him come up the steps

and fumble with his key at the door. He entered the bedroom, and

she heard him sigh as he sat down. She remained quiet, for she

had learned the hypersensitiveness induced by drink and was

fastidiously careful not to hurt him even with the knowledge that

she had lain awake for him. It was not easy. Her hands were

clenched till the nails dented the palms, and her body was rigid

in her passionate effort for control. Never had he come home as

bad as this.



"Saxon," he called thickly. "Saxon."



She stired and yawned.



"What is it?" she asked.



"Won't you strike a light? My fingers is all thumbs."



Without looking at him, she complied; but so violent was the

nervous trembling of her hands that the glass chimney tinkled

against the globe and the match went out.



"I ain't drunk, Saxon," he said in the darkness, a hint of

amusement in his thick voice. "I've only had two or three jolts

... of that sort."



On her second attempt with the lamp she succeeded. When she

turned to look at him she screamed with fright. Though she had

heard his voice and knew him to be Billy, for the instant she did

not recognize him. His face was a face she had never known.

Swollen, bruised, discolored, every feature had been beaten out

of all semblance of familiarity. One eye was entirely closed, the

other showed through a narrow slit of blood-congested flesh. One

ear seemed to have lost most of its skin. The whole face was a

swollen pulp. His right jaw, in particular, was twice the size of

the left. No wonder his speech had been thick, was her thought,

as she regarded the fearfully cut and swollen lips that still

bled. She was sickened by the sight, and her heart went out to

him in a great wave of tenderness. She wanted to put her arms

around him, and cuddle and soothe him; but her practical judgment

bade otherwise.



"You poor, poor boy," she cried. "Tell me what you want me to do

first. I don't know about such things."



"If you could help me get my clothes off," he suggested meekly

and thickly. "I got 'em on before I stiffened up."



"And then hot water--that will be good," she said, as she began

gently drawing his coat sleeve over a puffed and helpless hand.



"I told you they was all thumbs," he grimaced, holding up his

hand and squinting at it with the fraction of sight remaining to

him.



"You sit and wait," she said, "till I start the fire and get the

hot water going. I won't be a minute. Then I'll finish getting

your clothes off."



From the kitchen she could hear him mumbling to himself, and when

she returned he was repeating over and over:



"We needed the money, Saxon. We needed the money."



Drunken he was not, she could see that, and from his babbling she

knew he was partly delirious.



"He was a surprise box," he wandered on, while she proceeded to

undress him; and bit by bit she was able to piece together what

had happened. "He was an unknown from Chicago. They sprang him on

me. The secretary of the Acme Club warned me I'd have my hands

full. An' I'd a-won if I'd been in condition. But fifteen pounds

off without trainin' ain't condition, Then I'd been drinkin'

pretty regular, an' I didn't have my wind."



But Saxon, stripping his undershirt, no longer heard him. As with

his face, she could not recognize his splendidly muscled back.

The white sheath of silken skin was torn and bloody. The

lacerations occurred oftenest in horizontal lines, though there

were perpendicular lines as well.



"How did you get all that?" she asked.



"The ropes. I was up against 'em more times than I like to

remember. Gee! He certainly gave me mine. But I fooled 'm. He

couldn't put me out. I lasted the twenty rounds, an' I wanta tell

you he's got some marks to remember me by. If he ain't got a

couple of knuckles broke in the left hand I'm a geezer.--Here,

feel my head here. Swollen, eh? Sure thing. He hit that more

times than he's wishin' he had right now. But, oh, what a lacin'!

What a lacin'! I never had anything like it before. The Chicago

Terror, they call 'm. I take my hat off to 'm. He's some bear.

But I could a-made 'm take the count if I'd ben in condition an'

had my wind.--Oh! Ouch! Watch out! It's like a boil!"



Fumbling at his waistband, Saxon's hand had come in contact with

a brightly inflamed surface larger than a soup plate



"That's from the kidney blows," Billy explained. "He was a

regular devil at it. 'Most every clench, like clock work, down

he'd chop one on me. It got so sore I was wincin' ... until I got

groggy an' didn't know much of anything. It ain't a knockout

blow, you know, but it's awful wearin' in a long fight. It takes

the starch out of you."



When his knees were bared, Saxon could see the skin across the

knee-caps was broken and gone.



"The skin ain't made to stand a heavy fellow like me on the

knees," he volunteered. "An' the rosin in the canvas cuts like

Sam Hill."



The tears were in Saxon's eyes, and she could have cried over the

manhandled body of her beautiful sick boy.



As she carried his pants across the room to hang them up, a

jingle of money came from them. He called her back, and from the

pocket drew forth a handful of silver.



"We needed the money, we needed the money," he kept muttering, as

he vainly tried to count the coins; and Saxon knew that his mind

was wandering again.



It cut her to the heart, for she could not but remember the harsh

thoughts that had threatened her loyalty during the week past.

After all, Billy, the splendid physical man, was only a boy, her

boy. And he had faced and endured all this terrible punishment

for her, for the house and tha furniture that were their house

and furniture. He said so, now, when he scarcely knew what he

said. He said "WE needed the money." She was not so absent from

his thoughts as she had fancied. Here, down to the naked tie-ribs

of his soul, when he was half unconscious, the thought of her

persisted, was uppermost. We needed the money. WE!



The tears were trickling down her checks as she bent over him,

and it seemed she had never loved him so much as now.



"Here; you count," he said, abandoning the effort and handing the

money to her. "... How much do you make it?"



"Nineteen dollars and thirty-five cents."



"That's right ... the loser's end ... twenty dollars. I had some

drinks, an' treated a couple of the boys, an' then there was

carfare. If I'd a-won, I'd a-got a hundred. That's what I fought

for. It'd a-put us on Easy street for a while. You take it an'

keep it. It's better 'n nothin'."



In bed, he could not sleep because of his pain, and hour by hour

she worked over him, renewing the hot compresses over his

bruises, soothing the lacerations with witch hazel and cold cream

and the tenderest of finger tips. And all the while, with broken

intervals of groaning, he babbled on, living over the fight,

seeking relief in telling her his trouble, voicing regret at loss

of the money, and crying out the hurt to his pride. Far worse

than the sum of his physical hurts was his hurt pride.



"He couldn't put me out, anyway. He had full swing at me in the

times when I was too much in to get my hands up. The crowd was

crazy. I showed 'em some stamina. They was times when he only

rocked me, for I'd evaporated plenty of his steam for him in the

openin' rounds. I don't know how many times he dropped me. things

was gettin' too dreamy ...



"Sometimes, toward the end, I could see three of him in the ring

at once, an' I wouldn't know which to hit an' which to duck ...



"But I fooled 'm. When I couldn't see, or feel, an' when my knees

was shakin an my head goin' like a merry-go-round, I'd fall safe

into clenches just the same. I bet the referee's arms is tired

from draggin' us apart ...



"But what a lacin'! What a lacin'! Say, Saxon ... where are you?

Oh, there, eh? I guess I was dreamin'. But, say, let this be a

lesson to you. I broke my word an' went fightin', an' see what I

got. Look at me, an' take warnin' so you won't make the same

mistake an' go to makin' an' sellin' fancy work again ...



"But I fooled 'em--everybody. At the beginnin' the bettin' was

even. By the sixth round the wise gazabos was offerin' two to one

against me. I was licked from the first drop outa the

box--anybody could see that; but he couldn't put me down for the

count. By the tenth round they was offerin' even that I wouldn't

last the round. At the eleventh they was offerin' I wouldn't last

the fifteenth. An' I lasted the whole twenty. But some

punishment, I want to tell you, some punishment.



"Why, they was four rounds I was in dreamland all the time ...

only I kept on my feet an' fought, or took the count to eight an'

got up, an' stalled an' covered an' whanged away. I don't know

what I done, except I must a-done like that, because I wasn't

there. I don't know a thing from the thirteenth, when he sent me

to the mat on my head, till the eighteenth.



"Where was I? Oh, yes. I opened my eyes, or one eye, because I

had only one that would open. An' there I was, in my corner, with

the towels goin' an' ammonia in my nose an' Bill Murphy with a

chunk of ice at the back of my neck. An' there, across the ring,

I could see the Chicago Terror, an' I had to do some thinkin' to

remember I was fightin' him. It was like I'd been away somewhere

an' just got back. 'What round's this comin'?' I ask Bill. 'The

eighteenth,' says he. 'The hell,' I says. 'What's come of all the

other rounds? The last I was figlitin' in was the thirteenth.'

'You're a wonder,' says Bill. 'You've ben out four rounds, only

nobody knows it except me. I've ben tryin' to get you to quit all

the time.' Just then the gong sounds, an' I can see the Terror

startin' for me. 'Quit,' says Bill, makin' a move to throw in the

towel. 'Not on your life,' I says. 'Drop it, Bill.' But he went

on wantin' me to quit. By that time the Terror had come across to

my corner an' was standin' with his hands down, lookin' at me.

The referee was lookin', too, an' the house was that quiet,

lookin', you could hear a pin drop. An' my head was gettin' some

clearer, but not much.



"'You can't win,' Bill says.



"'Watch me,' says I. An' with that I make a rush for the Terror,

catchin' him unexpeeted. I'm that groggy I can't stand, but I

just keep a-goin', wallopin' the Terror clear across the ring to

his corner, where he slips an' falls, an' I fall on top of 'm.

Say, that crowd goes crazy.



"Where was I?--My head's still goin' round I guess. It's buzzin'

like a swarm of bees."



"You'd just fallen on top of him in his corner," Saxon prompted.



"Oh, yes. Well, no sooner are we on our feet--an' I can't

stand--I rush 'm the same way back across to my corner an' fall

on 'm. That was luck. We got up, an' I'd a-fallen, only I

clenched an' held myself up by him. 'I got your goat,' I says to

him. 'An' now I'm goin' to eat you up.'



"I hadn't his goat, but I was playin' to get a piece of it, an' I

got it, rushin' 'm as soon as the referee drags us apart an'

fetchin' 'm a lucky wallop in the stomach that steadied 'm an'

made him almighty careful. Too almighty careful. He was afraid to

chance a mix with me. He thought I had more fight left in me than

I had. So you see I got that much of his goat anyway.



"An' he couldn't get me. He didn't get me. An' in the twentieth

we stood in the middle of the ring an' exchanged wallops even. Of

course, I'd made a fine showin' for a licked man, but he got the

decision, which was right. But I fooled 'm. He couldn't get me.

An' I fooled the gazabos that was bettin' he would on short

order."



At last, as dawn came on, Billy slept. He groaned and moaned, his

face twisting with pain, his body vainly moving and tossing in

quest of easement.



So this was prizefighting, Saxon thought. It was much worse than

she had dreamed. She had had no idea that such damage could be

wrought with padded gloves. He must never fight again. Street

rioting was preferable. She was wondering how much of his silk

had been lost, when he mumbled and opened his eyes.



"What is it?" she asked, ere it came to her that his eyes were

unseeing and that he was in delirium.



"Saxon! ... Saxon!" he called.



"Yes, Billy. What is it?"



His hand fumbled over the bed where ordinarily it would have

encountered her.



Again he called her, and she cried her presence loudly in his

ear. He sighed with relief and muttered brokenly:



"I had to do it. ... We needed the money."



His eyes closed, and he slept more soundly, though his muttering

continued. She had heard of congestion of the brain, and was

frightened. Then she remembered his telling her of the ice Billy

Murphy had held against his head.



Throwing a shawl over her head, she ran to the Pile Drivers' Home

on Seventh street. The barkeeper had just opened, and was

sweeping out. From the refrigerator he gave her all the ice she

wished to carry, breaking it into convenient pieces for her. Back

in the house, she applied the ice to the base of Billy's brain,

placed hot irons to his feet, and bathed his head with witch

hazel made cold by resting on the ice.



He slept in the darkened room until late afternoon, when, to

Saxon's dismay, he insisted on getting up.



"Gotta make a showin'," he explained. "They ain't goin' to have

the laugh on me."



In torment he was helped by her to dress, and in torment he went

forth from the house so that his world should have ocular

evidence that the beating he had received did not keep him in

bed.



It was another kind of pride, different from a woman's, and Saxon

wondered if it were the less admirable for that.







CHAPTER XIV



In the days that followed Billy's swellings went down and the

bruises passed away with surprising rapidity. The quick healing

of the lacerations attested the healthiness of his blood. Only

remained the black eyes, unduly conspicuous on a face as blond as

his. The discoloration was stubborn, persisting half a month, in

which time happened divers events of importance.



Otto Frank's trial had been expeditious. Found guilty by a jury

notable for the business and professional men on it, the death

sentence was passed upon him and he was removed to San Quentin

for execution.



The case of Chester Johnson and the fourteen others had taken

longer, but within the same week, it, too, was finished. Chester

Johnson was sentenced to be hanged. Two got life; three, twenty

years. Only two were acquitted. The remaining seven received

terms of from two to ten years.



The effect on Saxon was to throw her into deep depression. Billy

was made gloomy, but his fighting spirit was not subdued.



"Always some men killed in battle," he said. "That's to be

expected. But the way of sentencin' 'em gets me. All found guilty

was responsible for the killin'; or none was responsible. If all

was, then they should get the same sentence. They oughta hang

like Chester Johnson, or else he oughtn't to hang. I'd just like

to know how the judge makes up his mind. It must be like markin'

China lottery tickets. He plays hunches. He looks at a guy an'

waits for a spot or a number to come into his head. How else

could he give Johnny Black four years an' Cal Hutchins twenty

years? He played the hunches as they came into his head, an' it

might just as easy ben the other way around an' Cal Hutchins got

four years an' Johnny Black twenty.



"I know both them boys. They hung out with the Tenth an' Kirkham

gang mostly, though sometimes they ran with my gang. We used to

go swimmin' after school down to Sandy Beach on the marsh, an' in

the Transit slip where they said the water was sixty feet deep,

only it wasn't. An' once, on a Thursday, we dug a lot of clams

together, an' played hookey Friday to peddle them. An' we used to

go out on the Rock Wall an' catch pogies an' rock cod. One

day--the day of the eclipse--Cal caught a perch half as big as a

door. I never seen such a fish. An' now he's got to wear the

stripes for twenty years. Lucky he wasn't married. If he don't

get the consumption he'll be an old man when he comes out. Cal's

mother wouldn't let 'm go swimmin', an' whenever she suspected

she always licked his hair with her tongue. If it tasted salty,

he got a beltin'. But he was onto himself. Comin' home, he'd jump

somebody's front fence an' hold his head under a faucet."



"I used to dance with Chester Johnson," Saxon said. "And I knew

his wife, Kittie Brady, long and long ago. She had next place at

the table to me in the paper-box factory. She's gone to San

Francisco to her married sister's. She's going to have a baby,

too. She was awfully pretty, and there was always a string of

fellows after her."



The effect of the conviction and severe sentences was a bad one

on the union men. Instead of being disheartening, it intensified

the bitterness. Billy's repentance for having fought and the

sweetness and affection which had flashed up in the days of

Saxon's nursing of him were blotted out. At home, he scowled and

brooded, while his talk took on the tone of Bert's in the last

days ere that Mohegan died. Also, Billy stayed away from home

longer hours, and was again steadily drinking.



Saxon well-nigh abandoned hope. Almost was she steeled to the

inevitable tragedy which her morbid fancy painted in a thousand

guises. Oftenest, it was of Billy being brought home on a

stretcher. Sometimes it was a call to the telephone in the corner

grocery and the curt information by a strange voice that her

husband was lying in the receiving hospital or the morgue. And

when the mysterious horse-poisoning cases occurred, and when the

residence of one of the teaming magnates was half destroyed by

dynamite, she saw Billy in prison, or wearing stripes, or

mounting to the scaffold at San Quentin while at the same time

she could see the little cottage on Pine street besieged by

newspaper reporters and photographers.



Yet her lively imagination failed altogether to anticipate the

real catastrophe. Harmon, the fireman lodger, passing through the

kitchen on his way out to work, had paused to tell Saxon about

the previous day's train-wreck in the Alviso marshes, and of how

the engineer, imprisoned under the overturned engine and unhurt,

being drowned by the rising tide, had begged to be shot. Billy

came in at the end of the narrative, and from the somber light in

his heavy-lidded eyes Saxon knew he had been drinking. He

glowered at Harmon, and, without greeting to him or Saxon, leaned

his shoulder against the wall.



Harmon felt the awkwardness of the situation, and did his best to

appear oblivious.



"I was just telling your wife--" he began, but was savagely

interrupted.



"I don't care what you was tellin' her. But I got something to

tell you, Mister Man. My wife's made up your bed too many times

to suit me."



"Billy!" Saxon cried, her face scarlet with resentment, and hurt,

and shame.



Billy ignored her. Harmon was saying:



"I don't understand--"



"Well, I don't like your mug," Billy informed him. "You're

standin' on your foot. Get off of it. Get out. Beat it. D'ye

understand that?"



"I don't know what's got into him," Saxon gasped hurriedly to the

fireman. "He's not himself. Oh, I am so ashamed, so ashamed."



Billy turned on her.



"You shut your mouth an' keep outa this."



"But, Billy," she remonstrated.



"An' get outa here. You go into the other room."



"Here, now," Harmon broke in. "This is a fine way to treat a

fellow."



"I've given you too much rope as it is," was Billy's answer.



"I've paid my rent regularly, haven't I?"



"An' I oughta knock your block off for you. Don't see any reason

I shouldn't, for that matter."



"If you do anything like that, Billy--" Saxon began.



"You here still? Well, if you won't go into the other room, I'll

see that you do."



His hand clutched her arm. For one instant she resisted his

strength; and in that instant, the flesh crushed under his

fingers, she realized the fullness of his strength.



In the front room she could only lie back in the Morris chair

sobbing, and listen to what occurred in the kitchen. "I'll stay

to the end of the week," the fireman was saying. "I've paid in

advance."



"Don't make no mistake," came Billy's voice, so slow that it was

almost a drawl, yet quivering with rage. "You can't get out too

quick if you wanta stay healthy--you an' your traps with you. I'm

likely to start something any moment."



"Oh, I know you're a slugger--" the fireman's voice began.



Then came the unmistakable impact of a blow; the crash of glass;

a scuffle on the back porch; and, finally, the heavy bumps of a

body down the steps. She heard Billy reenter the kitchen, move

about, and knew he was sweeping up the broken glass of the

kitchen door. Then he washed himself at the sink, whistling while

he dried his face and hands, and walked into the front room. She

did not look at him. She was too sick and sad. He paused

irresolutely, seeming to make up his mind.



"I'm goin' up town," he stated. "They's a meeting of the union.

If I don't come back it'll be because that geezer's sworn out a

warrant."



He opened the front door and paused. She knew he was looking at

her. Then the door closed and she heard him go down the steps.



Saxon was stunned. She did not think. She did not know what to

think. The whole thing was incomprehensible, incredible. She lay

back in the chair, her eyes closed, her mind almost a blank,

crushed by a leaden feeling that the end had come to everything.



The voices of children playing in the street aroused her. Night

had fallen. She groped her way to a lamp and lighted it. In the

kitchen she stared, lips trembling, at the pitiful, half prepared

meal. The fire had gone out. The water had boiled away from the

potatoes. When she lifted the lid, a burnt smell arose.

Methodically she scraped and cleaned the pot, put things in

order, and peeled and sliced the potatoes for next day's frying.

And just as methodically she went to bed. Her lack of

nervousness, her placidity, was abnormal, so abnormal that she

closed her eyes and was almost immediately asleep. Nor did she

awaken till the sunshine was streaming into the room.



It was the first night she and Billy had slept apart. She was

amazed that she had not lain awake worrying about him. She lay

with eyes wide open, scarcely thinking, until pain in her arm

attracted her attention. It was where Billy had gripped her. On

examination she found the bruised flesh fearfully black and blue.

She was astonished, not by the spiritual fact that such bruise

had been administered by the one she loved most in the world, but

by the sheer physical fact that an instant's pressure had

inflicted so much damage. The strength of a man was a terrible

thing. Quite impersonally, she found herself wondering if Charley

Long were as strong as Billy.



It was not until she dressed and built the fire that she began to

think about more immediate things. Billy had not returned. Then

he was arrested. What was she to do?--leave him in jail, go away,

and start life afresh? Of course it was impossible to go on

living with a man who had behaved as he had. But then, came

another thought, WAS it impossible? After all, he was her

husband. FOR BETTER OR WORSE--the phrase reiterated itself, a

monotonous accompaniment to her thoughts, at the back of her

consciousness. To leave him was to surrender. She carried the

matter before the tribunal of her mother's memory. No; Daisy

would never have surrendered. Daisy was a fighter. Then she,

Saxon, must fight. Besides--and she acknowledged it--readily,

though in a cold, dead way--besides, Billy was better than most

husbands. Better than any other husband she had heard of, she

concluded, as she remembered many of his earlier nicenesses and

finenesses, and especially his eternal chant: NOTHING IS TOO GOOD

FOR US. THE ROBERTSES AIN'T ON THE CHEAP.



At eleven o'clock she had a caller. It was Bud Strothers, Billy's

mate on strike duty. Billy, he told her, had refused bail,

refused a lawyer, had asked to be tried by the Court, had pleaded

guilty, and had received a sentence of sixty dollars or thirty

days. Also, he had refused to let the boys pay his fine.



"He's clean looney," Strothers summed up. "Won't listen to

reason. Says he'll serve the time out. He's been tankin' up too

regular, I guess. His wheels are buzzin'. Here, he give me this

note for you. Any time you want anything send for me. The boys'll

all stand by Bill's wife. You belong to us, you know. How are you

off for money?"



Proudly she disclaimed any need for money, and not until her

visitor departed did she read Billy's note:



Dear Saxon--Bud Strothers is going to give you this. Don't worry

about me. I am going to take my medicine. I deserve it--you know

that. I guess I am gone bughouse. Just the same, I am sorry for

what I done. Don't come to see me. I don't want you to. If you

need money, the union will give you some. The business agent is

all right. I will be out in a month. Now, Saxon, you know I love

you, and just say to yourself that you forgive me this time, and

you won't never have to do it again.



                                  Billy.



Bud Strothers was followed by Maggie Donahue, and Mrs. Olsen, who

paid neighborly calls of cheer and were tactful in their offers

of help and in studiously avoiding more reference than was

necessary to Billy's predicament.



In the afternoon James Harmon arrived. He limped slightly, and

Saxon divined that he was doing his best to minimize that

evidence of hurt. She tried to apologize to him, but he would not

listen.



"I don't blame you, Mrs. Roberts," he said. "I know it wasn't

your doing. But your husband wasn't just himself, I guess. He was

fightin' mad on general principles, and it was just my luck to

get in the way, that was all."



"But just the same--"



The fireman shook his head.



"I know all about it. I used to punish the drink myself, and I

done some funny things in them days. And I'm sorry I swore that

warrant out and testified. But I was hot in the collar. I'm

cooled down now, an' I'm sorry I done it."



"You're awfully good and kind," she said, and then began

hesitantly on what was bothering her. "You ... you can't stay

now, with him... away, you know."



"Yes; that wouldn't do, would it? I'll tell you: I'll pack up

right now, and skin out, and then, before six o'clock, I'll send

a wagon for my things. Here's the key to the kitchen door."



Much as he demurred, she compelled him to receive back the

unexpired portion of his rent. He shook her hand heartily at

leaving, and tried to get her to promise to call upon him for a

loan any time she might be in need.



"It's all right," he assured her. "I'm married, and got two boys.

One of them's got his lungs touched, and she's with 'em down in

Arizona campin' out. The railroad helped with passes."



And as he went down the steps she wondered that so kind a man

should be in so madly cruel a world.



The Donahue boy threw in a spare evening paper, and Saxon found

half a column devoted to Billy. It was not nice. The fact that he

had stood up in the police court with his eyes blacked from some

other fray was noted. He was described as a bully, a hoodlum, a

rough-neck, a professional slugger whose presence in the ranks

was a disgrace to organized labor. The assault he had pleaded

guilty of was atrocious and unprovoked, and if he were a fair

sample of a striking teamster, the only wise thing for Oakland to

do was to break up the union and drive every member from the

city. And, finally, the paper complained at the mildness of the

sentence. It should have been six months at least. The judge was

quoted as expressing regret that he had been unable to impose a

six months' sentence, this inability being due to the condition

of the jails, already crowded beyond capacity by the many eases

of assault committed in the course of the various strikes.



That night, in bed, Saxon experienced her first loneliness. Her

brain seemed in a whirl, and her sleep was broken by vain

gropings for the form of Billy she imagined at her side. At last,

she lighted the lamp and lay staring at the ceiling, wide-eyed,

conning over and over the details of the disaster that had

overwhelmed her. She could forgive, and she could not forgive.

The blow to her love-life had been too savage, too brutal. Her

pride was too lacerated to permit her wholly to return in memory

to the other Billy whom she loved. Wine in, wit out, she repeated

to herself; but the phrase could not absolve the man who had

slept by her side, and to whom she had consecrated herself. She

wept in the loneliness of the all-too-spacious bed, strove to

forget Billy's incomprehensible cruelty, even pillowed her cheek

with numb fondness against the bruise of her arm; but still

resentment burned within her, a steady flame of protest against

Billy and all that Billy had done. Her throat was parched, a dull

ache never ceased in her breast, and she was oppressed by a

feeling of goneness. WHY, WHY?--And from the puzzle of the world

came no solution.



In the morning she received a visit from Sarah--the second in all

the period of her marriage; and she could easily guess her

sister-in-law's ghoulish errand. No exertion was required for the

assertion of all of Saxon's pride. She refused to be in the

slightest on the defensive. There was nothing to defend, nothing

to explain. Everything was all right, and it was nobody's

business anyway. This attitude but served to vex Sarah.



"I warned you, and you can't say I didn't," her diatribe ran. "I

always knew he was no good, a jailbird, a hoodlum, a slugger. My

heart sunk into my boots when I heard you was runnin' with a

prizefighter. I told you so at the time. But no; you wouldn't

listen, you with your highfalutin' notions an' more pairs of

shoes than any decent woman should have. You knew better'n me.

An' I said then, to Tom, I said, 'It's all up with Saxon now.'

Them was my very words. Them that touches pitch is defiled. If

you'd only a-married Charley Long! Then the family wouldn't a-ben

disgraced. An' this is only the beginnin', mark me, only the

beginnin'. Where it'll end, God knows. He'll kill somebody yet,

that plug-ugly of yourn, an' be hanged for it. You wait an' see,

that's all, an' then you'll remember my words. As you make your

bed, so you will lay in it"



"Best bed I ever had," Saxon commented.



"So you can say, so you can say," Sarah snorted.



"I wouldn't trade it for a queen's bed," Saxon added.



"A jailbird's bed," Sarah rejoined witheringly.



"Oh, it's the style," Saxon retorted airily. "Everybody's getting

a taste of jail. Wasn't Tom arrested at some street meeting of

the socialists? Everybody goes to jail these days."



The barb had struck home.



"But Tom was acquitted," Sarah hastened to proclaim.



"Just the same he lay in jail all night without bail."



This was unanswerable, and Sarah executed her favorite tactic of

attack in flank.



"A nice come-down for you, I must say, that was raised straight

an' right, a-cuttin' up didoes with a lodger."



"Who says so?" Saxon blazed with an indignation quickly mastered.



"Oh, a blind man can read between the lines. A lodger, a young

married woman with no self respect, an' a prizefighter for a

husband--what else would they fight about?"



"Just like any family quarrel, wasn't it?" Saxon smiled placidly.



Sarah was shocked into momentary speechlessness.



"And I want you to understand it," Saxon continued. "It makes a

woman proud to have men fight over her. I am proud. Do you hear?

I am proud. I want you to tell them so. I want you to tell all

your neighbors. Tell everybody. I am no cow. Men like me. Men

fight for me. Men go to jail for me. What is a woman in the world

for, if it isn't to have men like her? Now, go, Sarah; go at

once, and tell everybody what you've read between the lines. Tell

them Billy is a jailbird and that I am a bad woman whom all men

desire. Shout it out, and good luck to you. And get out of my

house. And never put your feet in it again. You are too decent a

woman to come here. You might lose your reputation. And think of

your children. Now get out. Go."



Not until Sarah had taken an amazed and horrified departure did

Saxon fling herself on the bed in a convulsion of tears. She had

been ashamed, before, merely of Billy's inhospitality, and

surliness, and unfairness. But she could see, now, the light in

which others looked on the affair. It had not entered Saxon's

head. She was confident that it had not entered Billy's. She knew

his attitude from the first. Always he had opposed taking a

lodger because of his proud faith that his wife should not work.

Only hard times had compelled his consent, and, now that she

looked back, almost had she inveigled him into consenting.



But all this did not alter the viewpoint the neighborhood must

hold, that every one who had ever known her must hold. And for

this, too, Billy was responsible. It was more terrible than all


the other things he had been guilty of put together. She could

never look any one in the face again. Maggie Donahue and Mrs.

Olsen had been very kind, but of what must they have been

thinking all the time they talked with her? And what must they

have said to each other? What was everybody saying?--over front

gates and back fences,--the men standing on the corners or

talking in saloons?



Later, exhausted by her grief, when the tears no longer fell, she

grew more impersonal, and dwelt on the disasters that had

befallen so many women since the strike troubles began--Otto

Frank's wife, Henderson's widow, pretty Kittie Brady, Mary, all

the womenfolk of the other workmen who were now wearing the

stripes in San Quentin. Her world was crashing about her ears. No

one was exempt. Not only had she not escaped, but hers was the

worst disgrace of all. Desperately she tried to hug the delusion

that she was asleep, that it was all a nightmare, and that soon

the alarm would go off and she would get up and cook Billy's

breakfast so that he could go to work.



She did not leave the bed that day. Nor did she sleep. Her brain

whirled on and on, now dwelling at insistent length upon her

misfortunes, now pursuing the most fantastic ramifications of

what she considered her disgrace, and, again, going back to her

childhood and wandering through endless trivial detail. She

worked at all the tasks she had ever done, performing, in fancy,

the myriads of mechanical movements peculiar to each

occupation--shaping and pasting in the paper box factory, ironing

in the laundry, weaving in the jute mill, peeling fruit in the

cannery and countless boxes of scalded tomatoes. She attended all

her dances and all her picnics over again; went through her

school days, recalling the face and name and seat of every

schoolmate; endured the gray bleakness of the years in the orphan

asylum; revisioned every memory of her mother, every tale; and

relived all her life with Billy. But ever--and here the torment

lay--she was drawn back from these far-wanderings to her present

trouble, with its parch in the throat, its ache in the breast,

and its gnawing, vacant goneness.







CHAPTER XV



All that night Saxon lay, unsleeping, without taking off her

clothes, and when she arose in the morning and washed her face

and dressed her hair she was aware of a strange numbness, of a

feeling of constriction about her head as if it were bound by a

heavy band of iron. It seemed like a dull pressure upon her

brain. It was the beginning of an illness that she did not know

as illness. All she knew was that she felt queer. It was not

fever. It was not cold. Her bodily health was as it should be,

and, when she thought about it, she put her condition down to

nerves--nerves, according to her ideas and the ideas of her

class, being unconnected with disease.



She had a strange feeling of loss of self, of being a stranger to

herself, and the world in which she moved seemed a vague and

shrouded world. It lacked sharpness of definition. Its customary

vividness was gone. She had lapses of memory, and was continually

finding herself doing unplanned things. Thus, to her

astonishment, she came to in the back yard hanging up the week's

wash. She had no recollection of having done it, yet it had been

done precisely as it should have been done. She had boiled the

sheets and pillow-slips and the table linen. Billy's woolens had

been washed in warm water only, with the home-made soap, the

recipe of which Mercedes had given her. On investigation, she

found she had eaten a mutton chop for breakfast. This meant that

she had been to the butcher shop, yet she had no memory of having

gone. Curiously, she went into the bedroom. The bed was made up

and everything in order.



At twilight she came upon herself in the front room, seated by

the window, crying in an ecstasy of joy. At first she did not

know what this joy was; then it came to her that it was because

she had lost her baby. "A blessing, a blessing," she was chanting

aloud, wringing her hands, but with joy, she knew it was with joy

that she wrung her hands.



The days came and went. She had little notion of time. Sometimes,

centuries agone, it seemed to her it was since Billy had gone to

jail. At other times it was no more than the night before. But

through it all two ideas persisted: she must not go to see Billy

in jail; it was a blessing she had lost her baby.



Once, Bud Strothers came to see her. She sat in the front room

and talked with him, noting with fascination that there were

fringes to the heels of his trousers. Another day, the business

agent of the union called. She told him, as she had told Bud

Strothers, that everything was all right, that she needed

nothing, that she could get along comfortably until Billy came

out.



A fear began to haunt her. WHEN HE CAME OUT. No; it must not be.

There must not be another baby. It might LIVE. No, no, a thousand

times no. It must not be. She would run away first. She would

never see Billy again. Anything but that. Anything but that.



This fear persisted. In her nightmare-ridden sleep it became an

accomplished fact, so that she would awake, trembling, in a cold

sweat, crying out. Her sleep had become wretched. Sometimes she

was convinced that she did not sleep at all, and she knew that

she had insomnia, and remembered that it was of insomnia her

mother had died.



She came to herself one day, sitting in Doctor Hentley's office.

He was looking at her in a puzzled way.



"Got plenty to eat?" he was asking.



She nodded.



"Any serious trouble?"



She shook her head.



"Everything's all right, doctor . . . except . . ."



"Yes, yes," he encouraged.



And then she knew why she had come. Simply, explicitly,she told

him. He shook his head slowly.



"It can't be done, little woman," he said



"Oh, but it can!" she cried. "I know it can."



"I don't mean that," he answered. "I mean I can't tell you. I

dare not. It is against the law. There is a doctor in Leavenworth

prison right now for that."



In vain she pleaded with him. He instanced his own wife and

children whose existence forbade his imperiling



"Besides, there is no likelihood now," he told her.



"But there will be, there is sure to be," she urged.



But he could only shake his head sadly.



"Why do you want to know?" he questioned finally.



Saxon poured her heart out to him. She told of her first year of

happiness with Billy, of the hard times caused by the labor

troubles, of the change in Billy so that there was no love-life

left, of her own deep horror. Not if it died, she concluded. She

could go through that again. But if it should live. Billy would

soon be out of jail, and then the danger would begin. It was only

a few words. She would never tell any one. Wild horses could not

drag it out of her.



But Doctor Hentley continued to shake his head. "I can't tell

you, little woman. It's a shame, but I can't take the risk. My

hands are tied. Our laws are all wrong. I have to consider those

who are dear to me."



It was when she got up to go that he faltered. "Come here," he

said. "Sit closer."



He prepared to whisper in her ear, then, with a sudden excess of

caution, crossed the room swiftly, opened the door, and looked

out. When he sat down again he drew his chair so close to hers

that the arms touched, and when he whispered his beard tickled

her ear.



"No, no," he shut her off when she tried to voice her gratitude.

"I have told you nothing. You were here to consult me about your

general health. You are run down, out of condition--"



As he talked he moved her toward the door. When he opened it, a

patient for the dentist in the adjoining office was standing in

the hall. Doctor Hentley lifted his voice.



"What you need is that tonic I prescribed. Remember that. And

don't pamper your appetite when it comes back. Eat strong,

nourishing food, and beefsteak, plenty of beefsteak. And don't

cook it to a cinder. Good day."



At times the silent cottage became unendurable, and Saxon would

throw a shawl about her head and walk out the Oakland Mole, or

cross the railroad yards and the marshes to Sandy Beach where

Billy had said he used to swim. Also, by going out the Transit

slip, by climbing down the piles on a precarious ladder of iron

spikes, and by crossing a boom of logs, she won access to the

Rock Wall that extended far out into the bay and that served as a

barrier between the mudflats and the tide-scoured channel of

Oakland Estuary. Here the fresh sea breezes blew and Oakland sank

down to a smudge of smoke behind her, while across the bay she

could see the smudge that represented San Francisco. Ocean

steamships passed up and down the estuary, and lofty-masted

ships, towed by red-stacked tugs.



She gazed at the sailors on the ships, wondered on what far

voyages and to what far lands they went, wondered what freedoms

were theirs. Or were they girt in by as remorseless and cruel a

world as the dwellers in Oakland were? Were they as unfair, as

unjust, as brutal, in their dealings with their fellows as were

the city dwellers? It did not seem so, and sometimes she wished

herself on board, out-bound, going anywhere, she cared not where,

so long as it was away from the world to which she had given her

best and which had trampled her in return.



She did not know always when she left the house, nor where her

feet took her. Once, she came to herself in a strange part of

Oakland. The street was wide and lined with rows of shade trees.

Velvet lawns, broken only by cement sidewalks, ran down to the

gutters. The houses stood apart and were large. In her vocabulary

they were mansions. What had shocked her to consciousness of

herself was a young man in the driver's seat of a touring car

standing at the curb. He was looking at her curiously and she

recognized him as Roy Blanchard, whom, in front of the Forum,

Billy had threatened to whip. Beside the car, bareheaded, stood

another young man. He, too, she remembered. He it was, at the

Sunday picnic where she first met Billy, who had thrust his cane

between the legs of the flying foot-racer and precipitated the

free-for-all fight. Like Blanchard, he was looking at her

curiously, and she became aware that she had been talking to

herself. The babble of her lips still beat in her ears. She

blushed, a rising tide of shame heating her face, and quickened

her pace. Blanchard sprang out of the car and came to her with

lifted hat. "Is anything the matter?" he asked.



She shook her head, and, though she had stopped, she evinced her

desire to go on.



"I know you," he said, studying her face. "You were with the

striker who promised me a licking."



"He is my husband," she said.



"Oh! Good for him." He regarded her pleasantly and frankly. "But

about yourself? Isn't there anything I can do for you? Something

IS the matter."



"No, I'm all right," she answered. "I have been sick," she lied;

for she never dreamed of connecting her queerness with sickness.



"You look tired," he pressed her. "I can take you in the machine

and run you anywhere you want. It won't be any trouble. I've

plenty of time."



Saxon shook her head.



"If... if you would tell me where I can catch the Eighth street

cars. I don't often come to this part of town."



He told her where to find an electric car and what transfers to

make, and she was surprised at the distance she had wandered.



"Thank you," she said. "And good bye."



"Sure I can't do anything now?"



"Sure."



"Well, good bye," he smiled good humoredly. "And tell that

husband of yours to keep in good condition. I'm likely to make

him need it all when he tangles up with me."



"Oh, but you can't fight with him," she warned. "You mustn't. You

haven't got a show."



"Good for you," he admired. "That's the way for a woman to stand

up for her man. Now the average woman would be so afraid he was

going to get licked--"



"But I'm not afraid. .. for him. It's for you. He's a terrible

fighter. You wouldn't have any chance. It would be like....

like...."



"Like taking candy from a baby?" Blanchard finished for her.



"Yes," she nodded. "That's just what he would call it. And

whenever he tells you you are standing on your foot watch out for

him. Now I must go. Good bye, and thank you again."



She went on down the sidewalk, his cheery good bye ringing in her

ears. He was kind--she admitted it honestly; yet he was one of

the clever ones, one of the masters, who, according to Billy,

were responsible for all the cruelty to labor, for the hardships

of the women, for the punishment of the labor men who were

wearing stripes in San Quentin or were in the death cells

awaiting the scaffold. Yet he was kind, sweet natured, clean,

good. She could read his character in his face. But how could

this be, if he were responsible for so much evil? She shook her

head wearily. There was no explanation, no understanding of this

world which destroyed little babes and bruised women's breasts.



As for her having strayed into that neighborhood of fine

residences, she was unsurprised. It was in line with her

queerness. She did so many things without knowing that she did

them. But she must be careful. It was better to wander on the

marshes and the Rock Wall.



Especially she liked the Rock Wall. There was a freedom about it,

a wide spaciousness that she found herself instinctively trying

to breathe, holding her arms out to embrace and make part of

herself. It was a more natural world, a more rational world. She

could understand it--understand the green crabs with white-

bleached claws that scuttled before her and which she could see

pasturing on green-weeded rocks when the tide was low. Here,

hopelessly man-made as the great wall was, nothing seemed

artificial. There were no men here, no laws nor conflicts of men.

The tide flowed and ebbed; the sun rose and set; regularly each

afternoon the brave west wind came romping in through the Golden

Gate, darkening the water, cresting tiny wavelets, making the

sailboats fly. Everything ran with frictionless order. Everything

was free. Firewood lay about for the taking. No man sold it by

the sack. Small boys fished with poles from the rocks, with no

one to drive them away for trespass, catching fish as Billy had

caught fish, as Cal Hutchins had caught fish. Billy had told her

of the great perch Cal Hutchins caught on the day of the eclipse,

when he had little dreamed the heart of his manhood would be

spent in convict's garb.



And here was food, food that was free. She watched the small boys

on a day when she had eaten nothing, and emulated them, gathering

mussels from the rocks at low water, cooking them by placing them

among the coals of a fire she built on top of the wall. They

tasted particularly good. She learned to knock the small oysters

from the rocks, and once she found a string of fresh-caught fish

some small boy had forgotten to take home with him.



Here drifted evidences of man's sinister handiwork--from a

distance, from the cities. One flood tide she found the water

covered with muskmelons. They bobbed and bumped along up the

estuary in countless thousands. Where they stranded against the

rocks she was able to get them. But each and every melon--and she

patiently tried scores of them--had been spoiled by a sharp gash

that let in the salt water. She could not understand. She asked

an old Portuguese woman gathering driftwood.



"They do it, the people who have too much," the old woman

explained, straightening her labor-stiffened back with such an

effort that almost Saxon could hear it creak. The old woman's

black eyes flashed angrily, and her wrinkled lips, drawn tightly

across toothless gums, wry with bitterness. "The people that have

too much. It is to keep up the price. They throw them overboard

in San Francisco."



"But why don't they give them away to the poor people?" Saxon

asked.



"They must keep up the price."



"But the poor people cannot buy them anyway," Saxon objected. "It

would not hurt the price."



The old woman shrugged her shoulders.



"I do not know. It is their way. They chop each melon so that the

poor people cannot fish them out and eat anyway. They do the same

with the oranges, with the apples. Ah, the fishermen! There is a

trust. When the boats catch too much fish, the trust throws them

overboard from Fisherman Wharf, boat-loads, and boat-loads, and

boatloads of the beautiful fish. And the beautiful good fish sink

and are gone. And no one gets them. Yet they are dead and only

good to eat. Fish are very good to eat."



And Saxon could not understand a world that did such things--a

world in which some men possessed so much food that they threw it

away, paying men for their labor of spoiling it before they threw

it away; and in the same world so many people who did not have

enough food, whose babies died because their mothers' milk was

not nourishing, whose young men fought and killed one another for

the chance to work, whose old men and women went to the poorhouse

because there was no food for them in the little shacks they wept

at leaving. She wondered if all the world were that way, and

remembered Mercedes' tales. Yes; all the world was that way. Had

not Mercedes seen ten thousand families starve to death in that

far away India, when, as she had said, her own jewels that she

wore would have fed and saved them all? It was the poorhouse and

the salt vats for the stupid, jewels and automobiles for the

clever ones.



She was one of the stupid. She must be. The evidence all pointed

that way. Yet Saxon refused to accept it. She was not stupid. Her

mother had not been stupid, nor had the pioneer stock before her.

Still it must be so. Here she sat, nothing to eat at home, her

love-husband changed to a brute beast and lying in jail, her arms

and heart empty of the babe that would have been there if only

the stupid ones had not made a shambles of her front yard in

their wrangling over jobs.



She sat there, racking her brain, the smudge of Oakland at her

back, staring across the bay at the smudge of Ban Francisco. Yet

the sun was good; the wind was good, as was the keen salt air in

her nostrils; the blue sky, flecked with clouds, was good. All

the natural world was right, and sensible, and beneficent. It was

the man-world that was wrong, and mad, and horrible. Why were the

stupid stupid? Was it a law of God? No; it could not be. God had

made the wind, and air, and sun. The man-world was made by man,

and a rotten job it was. Yet, and she remembered it well, the

teaching in the orphan asylum, God had made everything. Her

mother, too, had believed this, had believed in this God. Things

could not be different. It was ordained.



For a time Saxon sat crushed, helpless. Then smoldered protest,

revolt. Vainly she asked why God had it in for her. What had she

done to deserve such fate? She briefly reviewed her life in quest

of deadly sins committed, and found them not. She had obeyed her

mother; obeyed Cady, the saloon-keeper, and Cady's wife; obeyed

the matron and the other women in the orphan asylum; obeyed Tom

when she came to live in his house, and never run in the streets

because he didn't wish her to. At school she had always been

honorably promoted, and never had her deportment report varied

from one hundred per cent. She had worked from the day she left

school to the day of her marriage. She had been a good worker,

too. The little Jew who ran the paper box factory had almost wept

when she quit. It was the same at the cannery. She was among the

high-line weavers when the jute mills closed down. I And she had

kept straight. It was not as if she had been ugly or

unattractive. She had known her temptations and encountered her

dangers. The fellows had been crazy about her. They had run after

her, fought over her, in a way to turn most girls' heads. But she

had kept straight. And then had come Billy, her reward. She had

devoted herself to him, to his house, to all that would nourish

his love; and now she and Billy were sinking down into this

senseless vortex of misery and heartbreak of the man-made world.



No, God was not responsible. She could have made a better world

herself--a finer, squarer world. This being so, then there was no

God. God could not make a botch. The matron had been wrong, her

mother had been wrong. Then there was no immortality, and Bert,

wild and crazy Bert, falling at her front gate with his foolish

death-cry, was right. One was a long time dead.



Looking thus at life, shorn of its superrational sanctions, Saxon

floundered into the morass of pessimism. There was no

justification for right conduct in the universe, no square

deal for her who had earned reward, for the millions who worked

like animals, died like animals, and were a long time and forever

dead. Like the hosts of more learned thinkers before her, she

concluded that the universe was unmoral and without concern for

men.



And now she sat crushed in greater helplessness than when she had

included God in the scheme of injustice. As long as God was,

there was always chance for a miracle, for some supernatural

intervention, some rewarding with ineffable bliss. With God

missing, the world was a trap. Life was a trap. She was like a

linnet, caught by small boys and imprisoned in a cage. That was

because the linnet was stupid. But she rebelled. She fluttered

and beat her soul against the hard face of things as did the

linnet against the bars of wire. She was not stupid. She did not

belong in the trap. She would fight her way out of the trap.

There must be such a way out. When canal boys and rail-splitters,

the lowliest of the stupid lowly, as she had read in her school

history, could find their way out and become presidents of the

nation and rule over even the clever ones in their automobiles,

then could she find her way out and win to the tiny reward she

craved--Billy, a little love, a little happiness. She would not

mind that the universe was unmoral, that there was no God, no

immortality. She was willing to go into the black grave and

remain in its blackness forever, to go into the salt vats and let

the young men cut her dead flesh to sausage-meat, if--if only she

could get her small meed of happiness first.



How she would work for that happiness! How she would appreciate

it, make the most of each least particle of it! But how was she

to do it, Where was the paths She could not vision it. Her eyes

showed her only the smudge of San Francisco, the smudge of

Oakland, where men were breaking heads and killing one another,

where babies were dying, born and unborn, and where women were

weeping with bruised breasts.







CHAPTER XVI



Her vague, unreal existence continued. It seemed in some previous

life-time that Billy had gone away, that another life-time would

have to come before he returned. She still suffered from

insomnia. Long nights passed in succession, during which she

never closed her eyes. At other times she slept through long

stupors, waking stunned and numbed, scarcely able to open her

heavy eyes, to move her weary limbs. The pressure of the iron

band on her head never relaxed. She was poorly nourished. Nor had

she a cent of money. She often went a whole day without eating.

Once, seventy-two hours elapsed without food passing her lips.

She dug clams in the marsh, knocked the tiny oysters from the

rocks, and gathered mussels.



And yet, when Bud Strothers came to see how she was getting

along, she convinced him that all was well. One evening after

work, Tom came, and forced two dollars upon her. He was terribly

worried. He would like to help more, but Sarah was expecting

another baby. There had been slack times in his trade because of

the strikes in the other trades. He did not know what the country

was coming to. And it was all so simple. All they had to do was

see things in his way and vote the way he voted. Then everybody

would get a square deal. Christ was a Socialist, he told her.



"Christ died two thousand years ago," Saxon said.



"Well?" Tom queried, not catching her implication.



"Think," she said, "think of all the men and women who died in

those two thousand years, and socialism has not come yet. And in

two thousand years more it may be as far away as ever. Tom, your

socialism never did you any good. It is a dream."



"It wouldn't be if--" he began with a flash of resentment.



"If they believed as you do. Only they don't. You don't succeed

in making them."



"But we are increasing every year," he argued.



"Two thousand years is an awfully long time," she said quietly.



Her brother's tired face saddened as he noted. Then he sighed:



"Well, Saxon, if it's a dream, it is a good dream."



"I don't want to dream," was her reply. "I want things real. I

want them now."



And before her fancy passed the countless generations of the

stupid lowly, the Billys and Saxons, the Berts and Marys, the

Toms and Sarahs. And to what end? The salt vats and the grave.

Mercedes was a hard and wicked woman, but Mercedes was right. The

stupid must always be under the heels of the clever ones. Only

she, Saxon, daughter of Daisy who had written wonderful poems and

of a soldier-father on a roan war-horse, daughter of the strong.

generations who hall won half a world from wild nature and the

savage Indian--no, she was not stupid. It was as if she suffered

false imprisonment. There was some mistake. She would find the

way out.



With the two dollars she bought a sack of flour and half a sack

of potatoes. This relieved the monotony of her clams and mussels.

Like the Italian and Portuguese women, she gathered driftwood and

carried it home, though always she did it with shamed pride,

timing her arrival so that it would be after dark. One day, on

the mud-flat side of the Rock Wall, an Italian fishing boat

hauled up on the sand dredged from the channel. From the top of

the wall Saxon watched the men grouped about the charcoal

brazier, eating crusty Italian bread and a stew of meat and

vegetables, washed down with long draughts of thin red wine. She

envied them their freedom that advertised itself in the

heartiness of their meal, in the tones of their chatter and

laughter, in the very boat itself that was not tied always to one

place and that carried them wherever they willed. Afterward, they

dragged a seine across the mud-flats and up on the sand,

selecting for themselves only the larger kinds of fish. Many

thousands of small fish, like sardines, they left dying on the

sand when they sailed away. Saxon got a sackful of the fish, and

was compelled to make two trips in order to carry them home,

where she salted them down in a wooden washtubs



Her lapses of consciousness continued. The strangest thing she

did while in such condition was on Sandy Beach. There she

discovered herself, one windy afternoon, lying in a hole she had

dug, with sacks for blankets. She had even roofed the hole in

rough fashion by means of drift wood and marsh grass. On top of

the grass she had piled sand.



Another time she came to herself walking across the  marshes, a

bundle of driftwood, tied with bale-rope, on her shoulder.

Charley Long was walking beside her. She could see his face in

the starlight. She wondered dully how long he had been talking,

what he had said. Then she was curious to hear what he was

saying. She was not afraid, despite his strength, his wicked

nature, and tho loneliness and darkness of the marsh.



"It's a shame for a girl like you to have to do this," he was

saying, apparently in repetition of what he had already urged.

"Come on an' say the word, Saxon. Come on an' say the word."



Saxon stopped and quietly faced him.



"Listen, Charley Long. Billy's only doing thirty days, and his

time is almost up. When he gets out your life won't be worth a

pinch of salt if I tell him you've been bothering me. Now listen.

If you go right now away from here, and stay away, I won't tell

him. That's all I've got to say."



The big blacksmith stood in scowling indecisions his face

pathetic in its fierce yearning, his hands making unconscious,

clutching contractions.



"Why, you little, small thing," he said desperately, "I could

break you in one hand. I could--why, I could do anything I

wanted. I don't want to hurt you, Saxon. You know that. Just say

the word--"



"I've said the only word I'm going to say."



"God!" he muttered in involuntary admiration. "You ain't afraid.

You ain't afraid."



They faced each other for long silent minutes.



"Why ain't you afraid?" he demanded at last, after peering into

the surrounding darkness as if searching for her hidden allies.



"Because I married a man," Saxon said briefly. "And now you'd

better go."



When he had gone she shifted the load of wood to her other

shoulder and started on, in her breast a quiet thrill of pride in

Billy. Though behind prison bars, still she leaned against his

strength. The mere naming of him was sufficient to drive away a

brute like Charley Long.



On the day that Otto Frank was hanged she remained indoors. The

evening papers published the account. There had been no reprieve.

In Sacramento was a railroad Governor who might reprieve or even

pardon bank-wreckers and grafters, but who dared not lift his

finger for a workingman. All this was the talk of the

neighborhood. It had been Billy's talk. It had been Bert's talk.



The next day Saxon started out the Rock Wall, and the specter of

Otto Frank walked by her side. And with him was a dimmer, mistier

specter that she recognized as Billy. Was he, too, destined to

tread his way to Otto Frank's dark end? Surely so, if the blood

and strike continued. He was a fighter. He felt he was right in

fighting. It was easy to kill a man. Even if he did not intend

it, some time, when he was slugging a scab, the scab would

fracture his skull on a stone curbing or a cement sidewalk. And

then Billy would hang. That was why Otto Frank hanged. He had not

intended to kill Henderson. It was only by accident that

Henderson's skull was fractured. Yet Otto Frank had been hanged

for it just the same.



She wrung her hands and wept loudly as she stumbled among the

windy rocks. The hours passed, and she was lost to herself and

her grief. When she came to she found herself on the far end of

the wall where it jutted into the bay between the Oakland and

Alameda Moles. But she could see no wall. It was the time of the

full moon, and the unusual high tide covered the rocks. She was

knee deep in the water, and about her knees swam scores of big

rock rats, squeaking and fighting, scrambling to climb upon her

out of the flood. She screamed with fright and horror, and kicked

at them. Some dived and swam away under water; others circled

about her warily at a distance; and one big fellow laid his teeth

into her shoe. Him she stepped on and crushed with her free foot.

By this time, though still trembling, she was able coolly to

consider the situation. She waded to a stout stick of driftwood a

few feet away, and with this quickly cleared a space about

herself.



A grinning small boy, in a small, bright-painted and half-decked

skiff, sailed close in to the wall and let go his sheet to spill

the wind. "Want to get aboard?" he called.



"Yes," she answered. "There are thousands of big rats here. I'm

afraid of them."



He nodded, ran close in, spilled the wind from his sail, the

boat's way carrying it gently to her.



"Shove out its bow," he commanded. "That's right. I don't want to

break my centerboard.... An' then jump aboard in the

stern--quick!--alongside of me."



She obeyed, stepping in lightly beside him. He held the tiller up

with his elbow, pulled in on the sheet, and as the sail filled

the boat sprang away over the rippling water.



"You know boats," the boy said approvingly.



He was a slender, almost frail lad, of twelve or thirteen years,

though healthy enough, with sunburned freckled face and large

gray eyes that were clear and wistful.



Despite his possession of the pretty boat, Saxon was quick to

sense that he was one of them, a child of the people.



"First boat I was ever in, except ferryboats," Saxon laughed.



He looked at her keenly. "Well, you take to it like a duck to

water is all I can say about it. Where d'ye want me to land you?"



"Anywhere."



He opened his mouth to speak, gave her another long look,

considered for a space, then asked suddenly: "Got plenty of

time?"



She nodded.



"All day?"



Again she nodded.



"Say--I'll tell you, I'm goin' out on this ebb to Goat Island for

rockcod, an' I'll come in on the flood this evening. I got plenty

of lines an' bait. Want to come along7 We can both fish. And what

you catch you can have."



Saxon hesitated. The freedom and motion of the small boat

appealed to her. Like the ships she had envied, it was outbound.



"Maybe you'll drown me," she parleyed.



The boy threw back his head with pride.



"I guess I've been sailin' many a long day by myself, an' I ain't

drowned yet."



"All right," she consented. "Though remember, I don't know

anything about boats."



"Aw, that's all right.--Now I'm goin' to go about. When I say

'Hard a-lee!' like that, you duck your head so the boom don't hit

you, an' shift over to the other side."



He executed the maneuver, Saxon obeyed, and found herself sitting

beside him on the opposite side of the boat, while the boat

itself, on the other tack, was heading toward Long Wharf where

the coal bunkers were. She was aglow with admiration, the more so

because the mechanics of boat-sailing was to her a complex and

mysterious thing.



"Where did you learn it all?" she inquired.



"Taught myself, just naturally taught myself. I liked it, you

see, an' what a fellow likes he's likeliest to do. This is my

second boat. My first didn't have a centerboard. I bought it for

two dollars an' learned a lot, though it never stopped leaking.

What d 'ye think I paid for this one? It's worth twenty-five

dollars right now. What d 'ye think I paid for it?"



"I give up," Saxon said. "How much?"



"Six dollars. Think of it! A boat like this! Of course I done a

lot of work, an' the sail cost two dollars, the oars one forty,

an' the paint one seventy-five. But just the same eleven dollars

and fifteen cents is a real bargain. It took me a long time

saving for it, though. I carry papers morning and

evening--there's a boy taking my route for me this afternoon--I

give 'm ten cents, an' all the extras he sells is his; and I'd

a-got the boat sooner only I had to pay for my shorthand lessons.

My mother wants me to become a court reporter. They get sometimes

as much as twenty dollars a day. Gee! But I don't want it. It's a

shame to waste the money on the lessons."



"What do you want?" she asked, partly from idleness, and yet with

genuine curiosity; for she felt drawn to this boy in knee pants

who was so confident and at the same time so wistful.



"What do I want?" he repeated after her.



Turning his head slowly, he followed the sky-line, pausing

especially when his eyes rested landward on the brown Contra

Costa hills, and seaward, past Alcatraz, on the Golden Glate. The

wistfulness in his eyes was overwhelming and went to her heart.



"That," he said, sweeping the circle of the world with a wave of

his arm.



"That?" she queried.



He looked at her, perplexed in that he had not made his meaning

clear.



"Don't you ever feel that way?" he asked, bidding for sympathy

with his dream. "Don't you sometimes feel you'd die if you didn't

know what's beyond them hills an' what's beyond the other hills

behind them hills? An' the Golden Gate! There's the Pacific Ocean

beyond, and China, an' Japan, an' India, an'. .. an' all the

coral islands. You can go anywhere out through the Golden

Gate--to Australia, to Africa, to the seal islands, to the North

Pole, to Cape Horn. Why, all them places are just waitin' for me

to come an' see 'em. I've lived in Oakland all my life, but I'm

not going to live in Oakland the rest of my life, not by a long

shot. I'm goin' to get away. .. away. .."



Again, as words failed to express the vastness of his desire, the

wave of his arm swept the circle of the world.



Saxon thrilled with him. She too, save for her earlier childhood,

had lived in Oakland all her life. And it had been a good place

in which to live. .. until now. And now, in all its nightmare

horror, it was a place to get away from, as with her people the

East had been a place to get away from. And why not? The world

tugged at her, and she felt in touch with the lad's desire. Now

that she thought of it, her race had never been given to staying

long in one place. Always it had been on the move. She remembered

back to her mother's tales, and to the wood engraving in her

scrapbook where her half-clad forebears, sword in hand, leaped

from their lean beaked boats to do battle on the blood-drenched

sands of England.



"Did you ever hear about the Anglo-Saxons?" she asked the boy.



"You bet!" His eyes glistened, and he looked at her with new

interest. "I'm an Anglo-Saxon, every inch of me. Look at the

color of my eyes, my skin. I'm awful white where I ain't

sunburned. An' my hair was yellow when I was a baby. My mother

says it'll be dark brown by the time I'm grown up, worse luck.

Just the same, I'm Anglo-Saxon. I am of a fighting race. We ain't

afraid of nothin'. This bay--think I'm afraid of it!" He looked

out over the water with flashing eye of scorn. "Why, I've crossed

it when it was howlin' an' when the scow schooner sailors said I

lied an' that I didn't. Huh! They were only squareheads. Why, we

licked their kind thousands of years ago. We lick everything we

go up against. We've wandered all over the world, licking the

world. On the sea, on the land, it's all the same. Look at Ivory

Nelson, look at Davy Crockett, look at Paul Jones, look at Clive,

an' Kitchener, an' Fremont, an' Kit Carson, an' all of 'em."



Saxon nodded, while he continued, her own eyes shining, and it

came to her what a glory it would be to be the mother of a

man-child like this. Her body ached with the fancied quickening

of unborn life. A good stock, a good stock, she thought to

herself. Then she thought of herself and Billy, healthy shoots of

that same stock, yet condemned to childlessness because of the

trap of the manmade world and the curse of being herded with the

stupid ones.



She came back to the boy.



"My father was a soldier in the Civil War," he was telling her,

"a scout an' a spy. The rebels were going to hang him twice for a

spy. At the battle of Wilson's Creek he ran half a mile with his

captain wounded on his back. He's got a bullet in his leg right

now, just above the knee. It's been there all these years. He let

me feel it once. He was a buffalo hunter and a trapper before the

war. He was sheriff of his county when he was twenty years old.

An' after the war, when he was marshal of Silver City, he cleaned

out the bad men an' gun-fighters. He's been in almost every state

in the Union. He could wrestle any man at the railings in his

day, an' he was bully of the raftsmen of the Susquehanna when he

was only a youngster. His father killed a man in a standup fight

with a blow of his fist when he was sixty years old. An' when he

was seventy-four, his second wife had twins, an' he died when he

was plowing in the field with oxen when he was ninety-nine years

old. He just unyoked the oxen, an' sat down under a tree, an'

died there sitting up. An' my father's just like him. He's pretty

old now, but he ain't afraid of nothing. He's a regular

Anglo-Saxon, you see. He's a special policeman, an' he didn't do

a thing to the strikers in some of the fightin'. He had his face

all cut up with a rock, but he broke his club short off over some

hoodlum's head."



He paused breathlessly and looked at her.



"Gee!" he said. "I'd hate to a-ben that hoodlum."



"My name is Saxon," she said.



"Your name?"



"My first name."



"Gee!" he cried. "You're lucky. Now if mine had been only

Erling--you know, Erling the Bold--or Wolf, or Swen, or Jarl!"



"What is it?" she asked.



"Only John," he admitted sadly. "But I don't let 'em call one

John. Everybody's got to call me Jack. I've scrapped with a dozen

fellows that tried to call me John, or Johnnie--wouldn't that

make you sick?--Johnnie!"



They were now off the coal bunkers of Long Wharf, and the boy put

the skiff about, heading toward San Francisco. They were well out

in the open bay. The west wind had strengthened and was

whitecapping the strong ebb tide. The boat drove merrily along.

When splashes of spray flew aboard, wetting them, Saxon laughed,

and the boy surveyed her with approval. They passed a ferryboat,

and the passengers on the upper deck crowded to one side to watch

them. In the swell of the steamer's wake, the skiff shipped

quarter-full of water. Saxon picked up an empty can and looked at

the boy.



"That's right," he said. "Go ahead an' bale out." And, when she

had finished: "We'll fetch Goat Island next tack. Right there off

the Torpedo Station is where we fish, in fifty feet of water an'

the tide runnin' to beat the band. You're wringing wet, ain't

you? Gee! You're like your name. You're a Saxon, all right. Are

you married?"



Saxon nodded, and the boy frowned.



"What'd you want to do that for, Now you can't wander over the

world like I'm going to. You're tied down. You're anchored for

keeps."



"It's pretty good to be married, though," she smiled.



"Sure, everybody gets married. But that's no reason to be in a

rush about it. Why couldn't you wait a while, like me, I'm goin'

to get married, too, but not until I'm an old man an' have been

everywheres."



Under the lee of Goat Island, Saxon obediently sitting still, he

took in the sail, and, when the boat had drifted to a position to

suit him, he dropped a tiny anchor. He got out the fish lines and

showed Saxon how to bait her hooks with salted minnows. Then they

dropped the lines to bottom, where they vibrated in the swift

tide, and waited for bites.



"They'll bite pretty soon," he encouraged. "I've never failed but

twice to catch a mess here. What d'ye say we eat while we're

waiting?"



Vainly she protested she was not hungry. He shared his lunch with

her with a boy's rigid equity, even to the half of a hard-boiled

egg and the half of a big red apple.



Still the rockcod did not bite. From under the stern-sheets he

drew out a cloth-bound book.



"Free Library," he vouchsafed, as he began to read, with one hand

holding the place while with the other he waited for the tug on

the fishline that would announce rockcod.



Saxon read the title. It was "Afloat in the Forest."



"Listen to this," he said after a few minutes, and he read

several pages descriptive of a great flooded tropical forest

being navigated by boys on a raft.



"Think of that!" he concluded. "That's the Amazon river in flood

time in South America. And the world's full of places like

that--everywhere, most likely, except Oakland. Oakland's just a

place to start from, I guess. Now that's adventure, I want to

tell you. Just think of the luck of them boys! All the same, some

day I'm going to go over the Andes to the headwaters of the

Amazon, all through the rubber country, an' canoe down the Amazon

thousands of miles to its mouth where it's that wide you can't

see one bank from the other an' where you can scoop up perfectly

fresh water out of the ocean a hundred miles from land."



But Saxon was not listening. One pregnant sentence had caught her

fancy. Oakland just a place to start from. She had never viewed

the city in that light. She had accepted it as a place to live

in, as an end in itself. But a place to start from! Why not! Why

not like any railroad station or ferry depot! Certainly, as

things were going, Oakland was not a place to stop in. The boy

was right. It was a place to start from. But to go where? Here

she was halted, and she was driven from the train of thought by a

strong pull and a series of jerks on the line. She began to haul

in, hand under hand, rapidly and deftly, the boy encouraging her,

until hooks, sinker, and a big gasping rockcod tumbled into the

bottom of the boat. The fish was free of the hook, and she baited

afresh and dropped the line over. The boy marked his place and

closed the book.



"They'll be biting soon as fast as we can haul 'em in," he said.



But the rush of fish did not come immediately.



"Did you ever read Captain Mayne Reid?" he asked. "Or Captain

Marryatt? Or Ballantyne?"



She shook her head.



"And you an Anglo-Saxon!" he cried derisively. "Why, there's

stacks of 'em in the Free Library. I have two cards, my mother's

an' mine, an' I draw 'em out all the time, after school, before I

have to carry my papers. I stick the books inside my shirt, in

front, under the suspenders. That holds 'em. One time, deliverin'

papers at Second an' Market--there's an awful tough gang of kids

hang out there--I got into a fight with the leader. He hauled off

to knock my wind out, an' he landed square on a book. You ought

to seen his face. An' then I landed on him. An' then his whole

gang was goin' to jump on me, only a couple of iron-molders

stepped in an' saw fair play. I gave 'em the books to hold."



"Who won?" Saxon asked.



"Nobody," the boy confessed reluctantly. "I think I was lickin'

him, but the molders called it a draw because the policeman on

the beat stopped us when we'd only teen fightin' half an hour.

But you ought to seen the crowd. I bet there was five hundred--"



He broke off abruptly and began hauling in his line. Saxon, too,

was hauling in. And in the next couple of hours they caught

twenty pounds of fish between them.



That night, long after dark, the little, half-decked skiff sailed

up the Oakland Estuary. The wind was fair but light, and the boat

moved slowly, towing a long pile which the boy had picked up

adrift and announced as worth three dollars anywhere for the wood

that was in it. The tide flooded smoothly under the full moon,

and Saxon recognized the points they passed--the Transit slip,

Sandy Beach, the shipyards, the nail works, Market street wharf.

The boy took the skiff in to a dilapidated boat-wharf at the foot

of Castro street, where the scow schooners, laden with sand and

gravel, lay hauled to the shore in a long row. He insisted upon

an equal division of the fish, because Saxon had helped catch

them, though he explained at length the ethics of flotsam to show

her that the pile was wholly his.



At Seventh and Poplar they separated, Saxon walking on alone to

Pine street with her load of fish. Tired though she was from the

long day, she had a strange feeling of well-being, and, after

cleaning the fish, she fell asleep wondering, when good times

came again, if she could persuade Billy to get a boat and go out

with her on Sundays as she had gone out that day.







CHAPTER VII



She slept all night, without stirring, without dreaming, and

awoke naturally and, for the first time in weeks, refreshed. She

felt her old self, as if some depressing weight had been lifted,

or a shadow had been swept away from between her and the sun. Her

head was clear. The seeming iron band that had pressed it so hard

was gone. She was cheerful. She even caught herself humming aloud

as she divided the fish into messes for Mrs. Olsen, Maggie

Donahue, and herself. She enjoyed her gossip with each of them,

and, returning home, plunged joyfully into the task of putting

the neglected house in order. She sang as she worked, and ever as

she sang the magic words of the boy danced and sparkled among the

notes: OAKLAND IS JUST A PLACE TO START FROM.



Everything was clear as print. Her and Billy's problem was as

simple as an arithmetic problem at school: to carpet a room so

many feet long, so many feet wide, to paper a room so many feet

high, so many feet  around. She had been sick in her head, she

had had strange lapses, she had been irresponsible. Very well.

All this had been because of her troubles--troubles in which she

had had no hand in the making. Billy's case was hers precisely.

He had behaved strangely because he had been irresponsible. And

all their troubles were the troubles of the trap. Oakland was the

trap. Oakland was a good place to start from.



She reviewed the events of her married life. The strikes and the

hard times had caused everything. If it had not been for the

strike of the shopmen and the fight in her front yard, she would

not have lost her baby. If Billy had not been made desperate by

the idleness and the hopeless fight of the teamsters, he would

not have taken to drinking. If they had not been hard up, they

would not have taken a lodger, and Billy would not be in jail.



Her mind was made up. The city was no place for her and Billy, no

place for love nor for babies. The way out was simple. They would

leave Oakland. It was the stupid that remained and bowed their

heads to fate. But she and Billy were not stupid. They would not

bow their heads. They would go forth and face fate.--Where, she

did not know. But that would come. The world was large. Beyond

the encircling hills, out through the Golden Gate, somewhere they

would find what they desired. The boy had been wrong in one

thing. She was not tied to Oakland, even if she was married. The

world was free to her and Billy as it had been free to the

wandering generations before them. It was only the stupid who had

been left behind everywhere in the race's wandering. The strong

had gone on. Well, she and Billy were strong. They would go on,

over the brown Contra Costa hills or out through the Golden Gate.



The day before Billy's release Saxon completed her meager

preparations to receive him. She was without money, and, except

for her resolve not to offend Billy in that way again, she would

have borrowed ferry fare from Maggie Donahue and journeyed to San

Francisco to sell some of her personal pretties. As it was, with

bread and potatoes and salted sardines in the house, she went out

at the afternoon low tide and dug clams for a chowder. Also, she

gathered a load of driftwood, and it was nine in the evening when

she emerged from the marsh, on her shoulder a bundle of wood and

a short-handled spade, in her free hand the pail of clams. She

sought the darker side of the street at the corner and hurried

across the zone of electric light to avoid detection by the

neighbors. But a woman came toward her, looked sharply and

stopped in front of her. It was Mary.



"My God, Saxon!" she exclaimed. "Is it as bad as this?"



Saxon looked at her old friend curiously, with a swift glance

that sketched all the tragedy. Mary was thinner, though there was

more color in her cheeks--color of which Saxon had her doubts.

Mary's bright eyes were handsomer, larger--too large, too

feverish bright, too restless. She was well dressed--too well

dressed; and she was suffering from nerves. She turned her head

apprehensively to glance into the darkness behind her.



"My God!" Saxon breathed. "And you. .." She shut her lips, then

began anew. "Come along to the house," she said.



"If you're ashamed to be seen with me--" Mary blurted, with one

of her old quick angers.



"No, no," Saxon disclaimed. "It's the driftwood and the clams. I

don't want the neighbors to know. Come along."



"No; I can't, Saxon. I'd like to, but I can't. I've got to catch

the next train to F'risco. I've ben waitin' around. I knocked at

your back door. But the house was dark. Billy's still in, ain't

he?"



"Yes, he gets out to-morrow."



"I read about it in the papers," Mary went on hurriedly, looking

behind her. "I was in Stockton when it happened." She turned upon

Saxon almost savagely. "You don't blame me, do you? I just

couldn't go back to work after bein' married. I was sick of work.

Played out, I guess, an' no good anyway. But if you only knew how

I hated the laundry even before I got married. It's a dirty

world. You don't dream. Saxon, honest to God, you could never

guess a hundredth part of its dirtiness. Oh, I wish I was dead, I

wish I was dead an' out of it all. Listen--no, I can't now.

There's the down train puffin' at Adeline. I'll have to run for

it. Can I come--"



"Aw, get a move on, can't you?" a man's voice interrupted.



Behind her the speaker had partly emerged from the darkness. No

workingman, Saxon could see that--lower in the world scale,

despite his good clothes, than any workingman.



"I'm comin', if you'll only wait a second," Mary placated.



And by her answer and its accents Saxon knew that Mary was afraid

of this man who prowled on the rim of light.



Mary turned to her.



"I got to beat it; good bye," she said, fumbling in the palm of

her glove.



She caught Saxon's free hand, and Saxon felt a small hot coin

pressed into it. She tried to resist, to force it back.



"No, no," Mary pleaded. "For old times. You can do as much for me

some day. I'll see you again. Good bye."



Suddenly, sobbing, she threw her arms around Saxon's waist,

crushing the feathers of her hat against the load of wood as she

pressed her face against Saxon's breast. Then she tore herself

away to arm's length, passionate, queering, and stood gazing at

Saxon.



"Aw, get a hustle, get a hustle," came from the darkness the

peremptory voice of the man.



"Oh, Saxon!" Mary sobbed; and was gone.



In the house, the lamp lighted, Saxon looked at the coin. It was

a five-dollar piece--to her, a fortune. Then she thought of Mary,

and of the man of whom she was afraid. Saxon registered another

black mark against Oakland. Mary was one more destroyed. They

lived only five years, on the average, Saxon had heard somewhere.

She looked at the coin and tossed it into the kitchen sink. When

she cleaned the clams, she heard the coin tinkle down the vent

pipe.



It was the thought of Billy, next morning, that led Saxon to go

under the sink, unscrew the cap to the catchtrap, and rescue the

five-dollar piece. Prisoners were not well fed, she had been

told; and the thought of placing clams and dry bread before

Billy, after thirty days of prison fare, was too appalling for

her to contemplate. She knew how he liked to spread his butter on

thick, how he liked thick, rare steak fried on a dry hot pan, and

how he liked coffee that was coffee and plenty of it.



Not until after nine o'clock did Billy arrive, and she was

dressed in her prettiest house gingham to meet him. She peeped on

him as he came slowly up the front steps, and she would have run

out to him except for a group of neighborhood children who were

staring from across the street. The door opened before him as his

hand reached for the knob, and, inside, he closed it by backing

against it, for his arms were filled with Saxon. No, he had not

had breakfast, nor did he want any now that he had her. He had

only stopped for a shave. He had stood the barber off, and he had

walked all the way from the City Hall because of lack of the

nickel carfare. But he'd like a bath most mighty well, and a

change of clothes. She mustn't come near him until he was clean.



When all this was accomplished, he sat in the kitchen and watched

her cook, noting the driftwood she put in the stove and asking

about it. While she moved about, she told how she had gathered

the wood, how she had managed to live and not be beholden to the

union, and by the time they were seated at the table she was

telling him about her meeting with Mary the night before. She did

not mention the five dollars.



Billy stopped chewing the first mouthful of steak. His expression

frightened her. He spat the meat out on his plate.



"You got the money to buy the meat from her," he accused slowly.

"You had no money, no more tick with the butcher, yet here's

meat. Am I right?"



Saxon could only bend her head.



The terrifying, ageless look had come into his face, the bleak

and passionless glaze into his eyes, which she had first seen on

the day at Weasel Park when he had fought with the three

Irishmen.



"What else did you buy?" he demanded--not roughly, not angrily,

but with the fearful coldness of a rage that words could not

express.



To her surprise, she had grown calm. What did it matter? It was

merely what one must expect, living in Oakland--something to be

left behind when Oakland was a thing behind, a place started

from.



"The coffee," she answered. "And the butter."



He emptied his plate of meat and her plate into the frying pan,

likewise the roll of butter and the slice on the table, and on

top he poured the contents of the coffee canister. All this he

carried into the back yard and dumped in the garbage can. The

coffee pot he emptied into the sink. "How much of the money you

got left?" he next wanted to know.



Saxon had already gone to her purse and taken it out.



"Three dollars and eighty cents," she counted, handing it to him.

"I paid forty-five cents for the steak."



He ran his eye over the money, counted it, and went to the front

door. She heard the door open and close, and knew that the silver

had been flung into the street. When he came back to the kitchen,

Saxon was already serving him fried potatoes on a clean plate.



"Nothin's too good for the Robertses," he said; "but, by God,

that sort of truck is too high for my stomach. It's so high it

stinks."



He glanced at the fried potatoes, the fresh slice of dry bread,

and the glass of water she was placing by his plate.



"It's all right," she smiled, as he hesitated. "There's nothing

left that's tainted."



He shot a swift glance at her face, as if for sarcasm, then

sighed and sat down. Almost immediately he was up again and

holding out his arms to her.



"I'm goin' to eat in a minute, but I want to talk to you first,"

he said, sitting down and holding her closely. "Besides, that

water ain't like coffee. Gettin' cold won't spoil it none. Now,

listen. You're the only one I got in this world. You wasn't

afraid of me an' what I just done, an' I'm glad of that. Now

we'll forget all about Mary. I got charity enough. I'm just as

sorry for her as you. I'd do anything for her. I'd wash her feet

for her like Christ did. I'd let her eat at my table, an' sleep

under my roof. But all that ain't no reason I should touch

anything she's earned. Now forget her. It's you an' me, Saxon,

only you an' me an' to hell with the rest of the world. Nothing

else counts. You won't never have to be afraid of me again.

Whisky an' I don't mix very well, so I'm goin' to cut whisky out.

I've been clean off my nut, an' I ain't treated you altogether

right. But that's all past. It won't never happen again. I'm

goin' to start out fresh.



"Now take this thing. I oughtn't to acted so hasty. But I did. I

oughta talked it over. But I didn't. My damned temper got the

best of me, an' you know I got one. If a fellow can keep his

temper in boxin', why he can keep it in bein' married, too. Only

this got me too sudden-like. It's something I can't stomach, that

I never could stomach. An' you wouldn't want me to any more'n I'd

want you to stomach something you just couldn't."



She sat up straight on his knees and looked at him, afire with an

idea.



"You mean that, Billy?"



"Sure I do."



"Then I'll tell you something I can't stomach any more. I'll die

if I have to."



"Well?" he questioned, after a searching pause.



"It's up to you," she said.



"Then fire away."



"You don't know what you're letting yourself in for," she warned.

"Maybe you'd better back out before it's too late."



He shook his head stubbornly.



"What you don't want to stomach you ain't goin' to stomach. Let

her go."



"First," she commenced, "no more slugging of scabs."



His mouth opened, but he checked the involuntary protest.



"And, second, no more Oakland."



"I don't get that last."



"No more Oakland. No more living in Oakland. I'll die if I have

to. It's pull up stakes and get out."



He digested this slowly.



"Where?" he asked finally.



"Anywhere. Everywhere. Smoke a cigarette and think it over."



He shook his head and studied her.



"You mean that?" he asked at length.



"I do. I want to chuck Oakland just as hard as you wanted to

chuck the beefsteak, the coffee, and the butter."



She could see him brace himself. She could feel him brace his

very body ere he answered.



"All right then, if that's what you want. We'll quit Oakland.

We'll quit it cold. God damn it, anyway, it never done nothin'

for me, an' I guess I'm husky enough to scratch for us both

anywheres. An' now that's settled, just tell me what you got it

in for Oakland for."



And she told him all she had thought out, marshaled all the facts

in her indictment of Oakland, omitting nothing, not even her last

visit to Doctor Hentley's office nor Billy's drinking. He but

drew her closer and proclaimed his resolves anew. The time

passed. The fried potatoes grew cold, and the stove went out.



When a pause came, Billy stood up, still holding her. He glanced

at the fried potatoes.



"Stone cold," he said, then turned to her. "Come on. Put on your

prettiest. We're goin' up town for something to eat an' to

celebrate. I guess we got a celebration comin', seein' as we're

going to pull up stakes an' pull our freight from the old burg.

An' we won't have to walk. I can borrow a dime from the barber,

an' I got enough junk to hock for a blowout."



His junk proved to be several gold medals won in his amateur days

at boxing tournaments. Once up town and in the pawnshop, Uncle

Sam seemed thoroughly versed in the value of the medals, and

Billy jingled a handful of silver in his pocket as they walked

out.



He was as hilarious as a boy, and she joined in his good spirits.

When he stopped at a corner cigar store to buy a sack of Bull

Durham, he changed his mind and bought Imperials.



"Oh, I'm a regular devil," he laughed. "Nothing's too good

to-day--not even tailor-made smokes. An' no chop houses nor Jap

joints for you an' me. It's Barnum's."



They strolled to the restaurant at Seventh and Broadway where

they had had their wedding supper.



"Let's make believed we're not married," Saxon suggested.



"Sure," he agreed, "--an' take a private room so as the waiter'll

have to knock on the door each time he comes in."



Saxon demurred at that.



"It will be too expensive, Billy. You'll have to tip him for the

knocking. We'll take the regular dining room."



"Order anything you want," Billy said largely, when they were

seated. "Here's family porterhouse, a dollar an' a half. What

d'ye say?"



"And hash-browned," she abetted, "and coffee extra special, and

some oysters first--I want to compare them with the rock

oysters."



Billy nodded, and looked up from the bill of fare.



"Here's mussels bordelay. Try an order of them, too, an' see if

they beat your Rock Wall ones."



"Why not?" Saxon cried, her eyes dancing. "The world is ours.

We're just travelers through this town."



"Yep, that's the stuff," Billy muttered absently. He was looking

at the theater column. He lifted his eyes from the paper.

"Matinee at Bell's. We can get reserved seats for a

quarter.--Doggone the luck anyway!"



His exclamation was so aggrieved and violent that it brought

alarm into her eyes.



"If I'd only thought," he regretted, "we could a-gone to the

Forum for grub. That's the swell joint where fellows like Roy

Blanchard hangs out, blowin' the money we sweat for them."



They bought reserved tickets at Bell's Theater; but it was too

early for the performance, and they went down Broadway and into

the Electric Theater to while away the time on a moving picture

show. A cowboy film was run off, and a French comic; then came a

rural drama situated somewhere in the Middle West. It began with

a farm yard scene. The sun blazed down on a corner of a barn and

on a rail fence where the ground lay in the mottled shade of

large trees overhead. There were chickens, ducks, and turkeys,

scratching, waddling, moving about. A big sow, followed by a

roly-poly litter of seven little ones, marched majestically

through the chickens, rooting them out of the way. The hens, in

turn, took it out on the little porkers, pecking them when they

strayed too far from their mother. And over the top rail a horse

looked drowsily on, ever and anon, at mathematically precise

intervals, switching a lazy tail that flashed high lights in the

sunshine.



"It's a warm day and there are flies--can't you just feel it?"

Saxon whispered.



"Sure. An' that horse's tail! It's the most natural ever. Gee! I

bet he knows the trick of clampin' it down over the reins. I

wouldn't wonder if his name was Iron Tail."



A dog ran upon the scene. The mother pig turned tail and with

short ludicrous jumps, followed by her progeny and pursued by the

dog, fled out of the film. A young girl came on, a sunbonnet

hanging down her back, her apron caught up in front and filled

with grain which she threw to the buttering fowls. Pigeons flew

down from the top of the film and joined in the scrambling feast.

The dog returned, wading scarcely noticed among the feathered

creatures, to wag his tail and laugh up at the girl. And, behind,

the horse nodded over the rail and switched on. A young man

entered, his errand immediately known to an audience educated in

moving pictures. But Saxon had no eyes for the love-making, the

pleading forcefulness, the shy reluctance, of man and maid. Ever

her gaze wandered back to the chickens, to the mottled shade

under the trees, to the warm wall of the barn, to the sleepy

horse with its ever recurrent whisk of tail



She drew closer to Billy, and her hand, passed around his arm,

sought his hand.



"Oh, Billy," she sighed. "I'd just die of happiness in a place

like that." And, when the film was ended. "We got lots of time

for Bell's. Let's stay and see that one over again."



They sat through a repetition of the performance, and when the

farm yard scene appeared, the longer Saxon looked at it the more

it affected her. And this time she took in further details. She

saw fields beyond, rolling hills in the background, and a

cloud-flecked sky. She identified some of the chickens,

especially an obstreperous old hen who resented the thrust of the

sow's muzzle, particularly pecked at the little pigs, and laid

about her with a vengeance when the grain fell. Saxon looked back

across the fields to the hills and sky, breathing the

spaciousness of it, the freedom, the content. Tears welled into

her eyes and she wept silently, happily.



"I know a trick that'd fix that old horse if he ever clamped his

tail down on me," Billy whispered



"Now I know where we're going when we leave Oakland," she

informed him.



"Where?"



"There."



He looked at her, and followed her gaze to the screen. "Oh," he

said, and cogitated. "An' why shouldn't we?" he added.



"Oh, Billy, will you?"



Her lips trembled in her eagerness, and her whisper broke and was

almost inaudible "Sure," he said. It was his day of royal

largess.



"What you want is yourn, an' I'll scratch my fingers off for it.

An' I've always had a hankerin' for the country myself. Say! I've

known horses like that to sell for half the price, an' I can sure

cure 'em of the habit."







CHAPTER XVIII



It was early evening when they got off the car at Seventh and

Pine on their way home from Bell's Theater. Billy and Saxon did

their little marketing together, then separated at the corner,

Saxon to go on to the house and prepare supper, Billy to go and

see the boys--the teamsters who had fought on in the strike

during his month of retirement.



"Take care of yourself, Billy," she called, as he started off.



"Sure," he answered, turning his face to her over his shoulder.



Her heart leaped at the smile. It was his old, unsullied

love-smile which she wanted always to see on his face--for which,

armed with her own wisdom and the wisdom of Mercedes, she would

wage the utmost woman's war to possess. A thought of this flashed

brightly through her brain, and it was with a proud little smile

that she remembered all her pretty equipment stored at home in

the bureau and the chest of drawers.



Three-quarters of an hour later, supper ready, all but the

putting on of the lamb chops at the sound of his step, Saxon

waited. She heard the gate click, but instead of his step she

heard a curious and confused scraping of many steps. She flew to

open the door. Billy stood there, but a different Billy from the

one she had parted from so short a time before. A small boy,

beside him, held his hat. His face had been fresh-washed, or,

rather, drenched, for his shirt and shoulders were wet. His pale

hair lay damp and plastered against his forehead, and was

darkened by oozing blood. Both arms hung limply by his side. But

his face was composed, and he even grinned.



"It's all right," he reassured Saxon. "The joke's on me. Somewhat

damaged but still in the ring." He stepped gingerly across the

threshold. "--Come on in, you fellows. We're all mutts together."



He was followed in by the boy with his hat, by Bud Strothers and

another teamster she knew, and by two strangers. The latter were

big, hard-featured, sheepish-faced men, who stared at Saxon as if

afraid of her.



"It's all right, Saxon," Billy began, but was interrupted by Bud.



"First thing is to get him on the bed an' cut his clothes off

him. Both arms is broke, and here are the ginks that done it."



He indicated the two strangers, who shuffled their feet with

embarrassment and looked more sheepish than ever.



Billy sat down on the bed, and while Saxon held the lamp, Bud and

the strangers proceeded to cut coat, shirt, and undershirt from

him.



"He wouldn't go to the receivin' hospital," Bud said to Saxon.



"Not on your life," Billy concurred. "I had 'em send for Doc

Hentley. He'll be here any minute. Them two arms is all I got.

They've done pretty well by me, an' I gotta do the same by them.-

-No medical students a-learnin' their trade on me."



"But how did it happens" Saxon demanded, looking from Billy to

the two strangers, puzzled by the amity that so evidently existed

among them all.



"Oh, they're all right," Billy dashed in. "They done it through

mistake. They're Frisco teamsters, an' they come over to help

us--a lot of 'em."



The two teamsters seemed to cheer up at this, and nodded their

heads.



"Yes, missus," one of them rumbled hoarsely. "It's all a mistake,

an'... well, the joke's on us."



"The drinks, anyway," Billy grinned.



Not only was Saxon not excited, but she was scarcely perturbed.

What had happened was only to be expected.



It was in line with all that Oakland had already done to her and

hers, and, besides, Billy was not dangerously hurt. Broken arms

and a sore head would heal. She brought chairs and seated

everybody.



"Now tell me what happened," she begged. "I'm all at sea, what of

you two burleys breaking my husband's arms, then seeing him home

and holding a love-fest with him."



"An' you got a right," Bud Strothers assured her. "You see, it

happened this way--"



"You shut up, Bud," Billy broke it. "You didn't see anything of

it."



Saxon looked to the San Francisco teamsters.



"We'd come over to lend a hand, seein' as the Oakland boys was

gettin' some the short end of it," one spoke up, "an' we've sure

learned some scabs there's better trades than drivin' team. Well,

me an' Jackson here was nosin' around to see what we can see,

when your husband comes moseyin' along. When he--"



"Hold on," Jackson interrupted. "get it straight as you go along.

We reckon we know the boys by sight. But your husband we ain't

never seen around, him bein'. .."



"As you might say, put away for a while," the first teamster took

up the tale. "So, when we sees what we thinks is a scab dodgin'

away from us an' takin' the shortcut through the alley--"



"The alley back of Campbell's grocery," Billy elucidated.



"Yep, back of the grocery," the first teamster went on; "why,

we're sure he's one of them squarehead scabs, hired through

Murray an' Ready, makin' a sneak to get into the stables over the

back fences."



"We caught one there, Billy an' me," Bud interpolated.



"So we don't waste any time," Jackson said, addressing himself to

Saxon. "We've done it before, an' we know how to do 'em up brown

an' tie 'em with baby ribbon. So we catch your husband right in

the alley."



"I was lookin' for Bud," said Billy. "The boys told me I'd find

him somewhere around the other end of the alley. An' the first

thing I know, Jackson, here, asks me for a match."



"An' right there's where I get in my fine work," resumed the

first teamster.



"What?" asked Saxon.



"That." The man pointed to the wound in Billy's scalp. "I laid 'm

out. He went down like a steer, an' got up on his knees dippy,

a-gabblin' about somebody standin' on their foot. He didn't know

where he was at, you see, clean groggy. An' then we done it."



The man paused, the tale told.



"Broke both his arms with the crowbar," Bud supplemented.



"That's when I come to myself, when the bones broke," Billy

corroborated. "An' there was the two of 'em givin' me the ha-ha.

'That'll last you some time,' Jackson was sayin'. An' Anson says,

'I'd like to see you drive horses with them arms.' An' then

Jackson says, 'let's give 'm something for luck.' An' with that

he fetched me a wallop on the jaw--"



"No," corrected Anson. "That wallop was mine."



"Well, it sent me into dreamland over again," Billy sighed. "An'

when I come to, here was Bud an' Anson an' Jackson dousin' me at

a water trough. An' then we dodged a reporter an' all come home

together."



Bud Strothers held up his fist and indicated freshly abraded

skin.



"The reporter-guy just insisted on samplin' it," he said. Then,

to Billy: "That's why I cut around Ninth an' caught up with you

down on Sixth."



A few minutes later Doctor Hentley arrived, and drove the men

from the rooms. They waited till he had finished, to assure

themselves of Billy's well being, and then departed. In the

kitchen Doctor Hentley washed his hands and gave Saxon final

instructions. As he dried himself he sniffed the air and looked

toward the stove where a pot was simmering.



"Clams," he said. "Where did you buy them?"



"I didn't buy them," replied Saxon. "I dug them myself."



"Not in the marsh?" he asked with quickened interest.



"Yes."



"Throw them away. Throw them out. They're death and corruption.

Typhoid--I've got three cases now, all traced to the clams and

the marsh."



When he had gone, Saxon obeyed. Still another mark against

Oakland, she reflected--Oakland, the man-trap, that poisoned

those it could not starve.



"If it wouldn't drive a man to drink," Billy groaned, when Saxon

returned to him. "Did you ever dream such luck? Look at all my

fights in the ring, an' never a broken bone, an' here, snap,

snap, just like that, two arms smashed."



"Oh, it might be worse," Saxon smiled cheerfully.



"I'd like to know how." It might have been your neck."



"An' a good job. I tell you, Saxon, you gotta show me anything

worse."



"I can," she said confidently.



"Well?"



"Well, wouldn't it be worse if you intended staying on in Oakland

where it might happen again?"



"I can see myself becomin' a farmer an' plowin' with a pair of

pipe-stems like these," he persisted.



"Doctor Hentley says they'll be stronger at the break than ever

before. And you know yourself that's true of clean-broken bones.

Now you close your eyes and go to sleep. You're all done up, and

you need to keep your brain quiet and stop thinking."



He closed his eyes obediently. She slipped a cool hand under the

nape of his neck and let it rest.



"That feels good," he murmured. "You're so cool, Saxon. Your

hand, and you, all of you. Bein' with you is like comin' out into

the cool night after dancin' in a hot room."



After several minutes of quiet, he began to giggle.



"What is it?" she asked.



"Oh, nothin'. I was just thinkin'--thinking of them mutts doin'

me up--me, that's done up more scabs than I can remember."



Next morning Billy awoke with his blues dissipated. From the

kitchen Saxon heard him painfully wrestling strange vocal

acrobatics.



"I got a new song you never heard," he told her when she came in

with a cup of coffee. "I only remember the chorus though. It's

the old man talkin' to some hobo of a hired man that wants to

marry his daughter. Mamie, that Billy Murphy used to run with

before he got married, used to sing it. It's a kind of a sobby

song. It used to always give Mamie the weeps. Here's the way the

chorus goes--an' remember, it's the old man spielin'."



And with great solemnity and excruciating Batting, Billy sang:



"O treat my daughter kind-i-ly;

An' say you'll do no harm,

An' when I die I'll will to you

My little house an' farm--

My horse, my plow, my sheep, my cow,

An' all them little chickens in the ga-a-rden.



"It's them little chickens in the garden that gets me," he

explained. "That's how I remembered it--from the chickens in the

movin' pictures yesterday. An' some day we'll have little

chickens in the garden, won't we, old girl?"



"And a daughter, too," Saxon amplified.



"An' I'll be the old geezer sayin' them same words to the hired

man," Billy carried the fancy along. "It don't take long to raise

a daughter if you ain't in a hurry."



Saxon took her long-neglected ukulele from its case and strummed

it into tune.



"And I've a song you never heard, Billy. Tom's always singing it.

He's crazy about taking up government land and going farming,

only Sarah won't think of it. He sings it something like this:



"We'll have a little farm,

A pig, a horse, a cow,

And you will drive the wagon,

And I will drive the plow."



"Only in this case I guess it's me that'll do the plowin'," Billy

approved. "Say, Saxon, sing 'Harvest Days.' That's a farmer's

song, too."



After that she feared the coffee was growing cold and compelled

Billy to take it. In the helplessness of two broken arms, he had

to be fed like a baby, and as she fed him they talked.



"I'll tell you one thing," Billy said, between mouthfuls. "Once

we get settled down in the country you'll have that horse you've

been wishin' for all your life. An' it'll be all your own, to

ride, drive, sell, or do anything you want with."



And, again, he ruminated: "One thing that'll come handy in the

country is that I know horses; that's a big start. I can always

get a job at that--if it ain't at union wages. An' the other

things about farmin' I can learn fast enough.--Say, d'ye remember

that day you first told me about wantin' a horse to ride all your

life?"



Saxon remembered, and it was only by a severe struggle that she

was able to keep the tears from welling into her eyes. She seemed

bursting with happiness, and she was remembering many things--all

the warm promise of life with Billy that had been hers in the

days before hard times. And now the promise was renewed again.

Since its fulfillment had not come to them, they were going away

to fulfill it for themselves and make the moving pictures come

true.



Impelled by a half-feigned fear, she stole away into the kitchen

bedroom where Bert had died, to study her face in the bureau

mirror. No, she decided; she was little changed. She was still

equipped for the battlefield of love. Beautiful she was not. She

knew that. But had not Mercedes said that the great women of

history who had won men had not been beautiful? And yet, Saxon

insisted, as she gazed at her reflection, she was anything but

unlovely. She studied her wide gray eyes that were so very gray,

that were always alive with light and vivacities, where, in the

surface and depths, always swam thoughts unuttered, thoughts that

sank down and dissolved to give place to other thoughts. The

brows were excellent--she realized that. Slenderly penciled, a

little darker than her light brown hair, they just fitted her

irregular nose that was feminine but not weak, that if anything

was piquant and that picturesquely might be declared impudent.



She could see that her face was slightly thin, that the red of

her lips was not quite so red, and that she had lost some of her

quick coloring. But all that would come back again. Her mouth was

not of the rosebud type she saw in the magazines. She paid

particular attention to it. A pleasant mouth it was, a mouth to

be joyous with, a mouth for laughter and to make laughter in

others. She deliberately experimented with it, smiled till the

corners dented deeper. And she knew that when she smiled her

smile was provocative of smiles. She laughed with her eyes

alone--a trick of hers. She threw back her head and laughed with

eyes and mouth together, between her spread lips showing the even

rows of strong white teeth.



And she remembered Billy's praise of her teeth, the night at

Germanic Hall after he had told Charley Long he was standing on

his foot. "Not big, and not little dinky baby's teeth either,"

Billy had said, ".. . just right, and they fit you." Also, he had

said that to look at them made him hungry, and that they were

good enough to eat.



She recollected all the compliments he had ever paid her. Beyond

all treasures, these were treasures to her--the love phrases,

praises, and admirations. He had said her skin was cool--soft as

velvet, too, and smooth as silk. She rolled up her sleeve to the

shoulder, brushed her cheek with the white skin for a test, with

deep scrutiny examined the fineness of its texture. And he had

told her that she was sweet; that he hadn't known what it meant

when they said a girl was sweet, not until he had known her. And

he had told her that her voice was cool, that it gave him the

feeling her hand did when it rested on his forehead. Her voice

went all through him, he had said, cool and fine, like a wind of

coolness. And he had likened it to the first of the sea breeze

setting in the afternoon after a scorching hot morning. And,

also, when she talked low, that it was round and sweet, like the

'cello in the Macdonough Theater orchestra.



He had called her his Tonic Kid. He had called her a

thoroughbred, clean-cut and spirited, all fine nerves and

delicate and sensitive. He had liked the way she carried her

clothes. She carried them like a dream, had been his way of

putting it. They were part of her, just as much as the cool of

her voice and skin and the scent of her hair.



And her figure! She got upon a chair and tilted the mirror so

that she could see herself from hips to feet. She drew her skirt

back and up. The slender ankle was just as slender. The calf had

lost none of its delicately mature swell. She studied her hips,

her waist, her bosom, her neck, the poise of her head, and sighed

contentedly. Billy must be right, and he had said that she was

built like a French woman, and that in the matter of lines and

form she could give Annette Kellerman cards and spades.



He had said so many things, now that she recalled them all at one

time. Her lips! The Sunday he proposed he had said: "I like to

watch your lips talking. It's funny, but every move they make

looks like a tickly kiss." And afterward, that same day: "You

looked good to me from the first moment I spotted you." He had

praised her housekeeping. He had said he fed better, lived more

comfortably, held up his end with the fellows, and saved money.

And she remembered that day when he had crushed her in his arms

and declared she was the greatest little bit of a woman that had

ever come down the pike.



She ran her eyes over all herself in the mirror again, gathered

herself together into a whole, compact and good to look

upon--delicious, she knew. Yes, she would do. Magnificent as

Billy was in his man way, in her own way she was a match for him.

Yes, she had done well by Billy. She deserved much--all he could

give her, the best he could give her. But she made no blunder of

egotism. Frankly valuing herself, she as frankly valued him. When

he was himself, his real self, not harassed by trouble, not

pinched by the trap, not maddened by drink, her man-boy and

lover, he was well worth all she gave him or could give him.



Saxon gave herself a farewell look. No. She was not dead, any

more than was Billy's love dead, than was her love dead. All that

was needed was the proper soil, and their love would grow and

blossom. And they were turning their backs upon Oakland to go and

seek that proper soil.



"Oh, Billy!" she called through the partition, still standing on

the chair, one hand tipping the mirror forward and back, so that

she was able to run her eyes from the reflection of her ankles

and calves to her face, warm with color and roguishly alive.



"Yes?" she heard him answer.



"I'm loving myself," she called back.



"What's the game?" came his puzzled query. "What are you so stuck

on yourself for!"



"Because you love me," she answered. "I love every bit of me,

Billy, because. .. because. .. well, because you love every bit

of me."







CHAPTER XIX



Between feeding and caring for Billy, doing the housework, making

plans, and selling her store of pretty needlework, the days flew

happily for Saxon. Billy's consent to sell her pretties had been

hard to get, but at last she succeeded in coaxing it out of him.



"It's only the ones I haven't used," she urged; "and I can always

make more when we get settled somewhere."



What she did not sell, along with the household linen and hers

and Billy's spare clothing, she arranged to store with Tom.



"Go ahead," Billy said. "This is your picnic. What you say goes.

You're Robinson Crusoe an' I'm your man Friday. Make up your mind

yet which way you're goin' to travel?"



Saxon shook her head.



"Or how?"



She held up one foot and then the other, encased in stout walking

shoes which she had begun that morning to break in about the

house. Shank's mare, eh?"



"It's the way our people came into the West," she said proudly.



"It'll be regular trampin', though," he argued. "An' I never

heard of a woman tramp."



"Then here's one. Why, Billy, there's no shame in tramping. My

mother tramped most of the way across the Plains. And 'most

everybody else's mother tramped across in those days. I don't

care what people will think. I guess our race has been on the

tramp since the beginning of creation, just like we'll be,

looking for a piece of land that looked good to settle down on."



After a few days, when his scalp was sufficiently healed and the

bone-knitting was nicely in process, Billy was able to be up and

about. He was still quite helpless, however, with both his arms

in splints.



Doctor Hentley not only agreed, but himself suggested, that his

bill should wait against better times for settlement. Of

government land, in response to Saxon's eager questioning, he

knew nothing, except that he had a hazy idea that the days of

government land were over.



Tom, on the contrary, was confident that there was plenty of

government hand. He talked of Honey Lake, of Shasta County, and

of Humboldt.



"But you can't tackle it at this time of year, with winter comin'

on," he advised Saxon. "The thing for you to do is head south for

warmer weather--say along the coast. It don't snow down there. I

tell you what you do. Go down by San Jose and Salinas an' come

out on the coast at Monterey. South of that you'll find

government land mixed up with forest reserves and Mexican

rancheros. It's pretty wild, without any roads to speak of. All

they do is handle cattle. But there's some fine redwood canyons,

with good patches of farming ground that run right down to the

ocean. I was talkin' last year with a fellow that's been all

through there. An' I'd a-gone, like you an' Billy, only Sarah

wouldn't hear of it. There's gold down there, too. Quite a bunch

is in there prospectin', an' two or three good mines have opened.

But that's farther along and in a ways from the coast. You might

take a look."



Saxon shook her head. "We're not looking for gold but for

chickens and a place to grow vegetables. Our folks had all the

chance for gold in the early days, and what have they got to show

for it?"



"I guess you're right," Tom conceded. "They always played too big

a game, an' missed the thousand little chances right under their

nose. Look at your pa. I've heard him tell of selling three

Market street lots in San Francisco for fifty dollars each.

They're worth five  hundred thousand right now. An' look at Uncle

Will. He had ranches till the cows come home. Satisfied? No. He

wanted to be a cattle king, a regular Miller and Lux. An' when he

died he was a night watchman in Los Angeles at forty dollars a

month. There's a spirit of the times, an' the spirit of the times

has changed. It's all big business now, an' we're the small

potatoes. Why, I've heard our folks talk of livin' in the Western

Reserve. That was all around what's Ohio now. Anybody could get a

farm them days. All they had to do was yoke their oxen an' go

after it, an' the Pacific Ocean thousands of miles to the west,

an' all them thousands of miles an' millions of farms just

waitin' to be took up. A hundred an' sixty acres? Shucks. In the

early days in Oregon they talked six hundred an' forty acres.

That was the spirit of them times--free land, an' plenty of it.

But when we reached the Pacific Ocean them times was ended. Big

business begun; an' big business means big business men; an'

every big business man means thousands of little men without any

business at all except to work for the big ones. They're the

losers, don't you see? An' if they don't like it they can lump

it, but it won't do them no good. They can't yoke up their oxen

an' pull on. There's no place to pull on. China's over there, an'

in between's a mighty lot of salt water that's no good for

farmin' purposes."



"That's all clear enough," Saxon commented.



"Yes," her brother went on. "We can all see it after it's

happened, when it's too late."



"But the big men were smarter," Saxon remarked.



"They were luckier," Tom contended. "Some won, but most lost, an'

just as good men lost. It was almost like a lot of boys

scramblin' on the sidewalk for a handful of small change. Not

that some didn't have far-seein'. But just take your pa, for

example. He come of good Down East stock that's got business

instinct an' can add to what it's got. Now suppose your pa had

developed a weak heart, or got kidney disease, or caught

rheumatism, so he couldn't go gallivantin' an' rainbow chasin',

an' fightin' an' explorin' all over the West. Why, most likely

he'd a settled down in San Francisco--he'd a-had to--an' held

onto them three Market street lots, an' bought more lots, of

course, an' gone into steamboat companies, an' stock gamblin',

an' railroad buildin', an' Comstock-tunnelin'.



"Why, he'd a-become big business himself. I know 'm. He was the

most energetic man I ever saw, think quick as a wink, as cool as

an icicle an' as wild as a Comanche. Why, he'd a-cut a swath

through the free an' easy big business gamblers an' pirates of

them days; just as he cut a swath through the hearts of the

ladies when he went gallopin' past on that big horse of his,

sword clatterin', spurs jinglin', his long hair fiyin', straight

as an Indian, clean-built an' graceful as a blue-eyed prince out

of a fairy book an' a Mexican caballero all rolled into one; just

as he cut a swath through the Johnny Rebs in Civil War days,

chargin' with his men all the way through an' back again, an'

yellin' like a wild Indian for more. Cady, that helped raise you,

told me about that. Cady rode with your pa.



"Why, if your pa'd only got laid up in San Francisco, he would

a-ben one of the big men of the West. An' in that case, right

now, you'd be a rich young woman, travelin' in Europe, with a

mansion on Nob Hill along with the Floods and Crockers, an'

holdin' majority stock most likely in the Fairmount Hotel an' a

few little concerns like it. An' why ain't you? Because your pa

wasn't smart? No. His mind was like a steel trap. It's because he

was filled to burstin' an' spillin' over with the spirit of the

times; because he was full of fire an' vinegar an' couldn't set

down in one place. That's all the difference between you an' the

young women right now in the Flood and Crocker families. Your

father didn't catch rheumatism at the right time, that's all."



Saxon sighed, then smiled.



"Just the same, I've got them beaten," she said. "The Miss Floods

and Miss Crockers can't marry prize-fighters, and I did."



Tom looked at her, taken aback for the moment, with admiration,

slowly at first, growing in his face.



"Well, all I got to say," he enunciated solemnly, "is that

Billy's so lucky he don't know how lucky he is."





Not until Doctor Hentley gave the word did the splints come off

Billy's arms, and Saxon insisted upon an additional two weeks'

delay so that no risk would be run. These two weeks would

complete another month's rent, and the landlord had agreed to

wait payment for the last two months until Billy was on his feet

again.



Salinger's awaited the day set by Saxon for taking back their

furniture. Also, they had returned to Billy seventy-five dollars.



"The rest you've paid will be rent," the collector told Saxon.

"And the furniture's second hand now, too. The deal will be a

loss to Salinger's' and they didn't have to do it, either; you

know that. So just remember they've been pretty square with you,

and if you start over again don't forget them."



Out of this sum, and out of what was realized from Saxon's

pretties, they were able to pay all their small bills and yet

have a few dollars remaining in pocket.



"I hate owin' things worse 'n poison," Billy said to Saxon. "An'

now we don't owe a soul in this world except the landlord an' Doc

Hentley."



"And neither of them can afford to wait longer than they have

to," she said.



"And they won't," Billy answered quietly.



She smiled her approval, for she shared with Billy his horror of

debt, just as both shared it with that early tide of pioneers

with a Puritan ethic, which had settled the West.



Saxon timed her opportunity when Billy was out of the house to

pack the chest of drawers which had crossed the Atlantic by

sailing ship and the Plains by ox team. She kissed the bullet

hole in it, made in the fight at Little Meadow, as she kissed her

father's sword, the while she visioned him, as she always did,

astride his roan warhorse. With the old religious awe, she pored

over her mother's poems in the scrap-book, and clasped her

mother's red satin Spanish girdle about her in a farewell

embrace. She unpacked the scrap-book in order to gaze a last time

at the wood engraving of the Vikings, sword in hand, leaping upon

the English sands. Again she identified Billy as one of the

Vikings, and pondered for a space on the strange wanderings of

the seed from which she sprang. Always had her race been

land-hungry, and she took delight in believing she had bred true;

for had not she, despite her life passed in a city, found this

same land-hunger in her? And was she not going forth to satisfy

that hunger, just as her people of old time had done, as her

father and mother before her? She remembered her mother's tale of

how the promised land looked to them as their battered wagons and

weary oxen dropped down through the early winter snows of the

Sierras to the vast and flowering sun-land of California: In

fancy, herself a child of nine, she looked down from the snowy

heights as her mother must have looked down. She recalled and

repeated aloud one of her mother's stanzas:



"'Sweet as a wind-lute's airy strains

Your gentle muse has learned to sing

And California's boundless plains

Prolong the soft notes echoing.'"



She sighed happily and dried her eyes. Perhaps the hard times

were past. Perhaps they had constituted HER Plains, and she and

Billy had won safely across and were even then climbing the

Sierras ere they dropped down into the pleasant valley land.



Salinger's wagon was at the house, taking out the furniture, the

morning they left. The landlord, standing at the gate, received

the keys, shook hands with them, and wished them luck. "You're

goin' at it right," he congratulated them. "Sure an' wasn't it

under me roll of blankets I tramped into Oakland meself forty

year ago! Buy land, like me, when it's cheap. It'll keep you from

the poorhouse in your old age. There's plenty of new towns

springin' up. Get in on the ground floor. The work of your

hands'll keep you in food an' under a roof, an' the lend 'll make

you well to do. An' you know me address. When you can spare send

me along that small bit of rent. An' good luck. An' don't mind

what people think. 'Tis them that looks that finds."



Curious neighbors peeped from behind the blinds as Billy and

Saxon strode up the street, while the children gazed at them in

gaping astonishment. On Billy's back, inside a painted canvas

tarpaulin, was slung the roll of bedding. Inside the roll were

changes of underclothing and odds and ends of necessaries.

Outside, from the lashings, depended a frying pan and cooking

pail. In his hand he carried the coffee pot. Saxon carried a

small telescope basket protected by black oilcloth, and across

her back was the tiny ukulele case.



"We must look like holy frights," Billy grumbled, shrinking from

every gaze that was bent upon him.



"It'd be all right, if we were going camping," Saxon consoled.

"Only we're not."



"But they don't know that," she continued. "It's only you know

that, and what you think they're thinking isn't what they're

thinking at all. Most probably they think we're going camping.

And the best of it is we are going camping. We are! We are!"



At this Billy cheered up, though he muttered his firm intention

to knock the block off of any guy that got fresh. He stole a

glance at Saxon. Her cheeks were red, her eyes glowing.



"Say," he said suddenly. "I seen an opera once, where fellows

wandered over the country with guitars slung on their backs just

like you with that strummy-strum. You made me think of them. They

was always singin' songs."



"That's what I brought it along for," Saxon answered.



"And when we go down country roads we'll sing as we go along, and

we'll sing by the campfires, too. We're going camping, that's

all. Taking a vacation and seeing the country. So why shouldn't

we have a good time? Why, we don't even know where we're going to

sleep to-night, or any night. Think of the fun!"



"It's a sporting proposition all right, all right," Billy

considered. "But, just the same, let's turn off an' go around the

block. There's some fellows I know, standin' up there on the next

corner, an' I don't want to knock THEIR blocks off."

