



CHAPTER 33

BLISSFUL





All this time, I had gone on loving Dora, harder than ever.  Her

idea was my refuge in disappointment and distress, and made some

amends to me, even for the loss of my friend.  The more I pitied

myself, or pitied others, the more I sought for consolation in the

image of Dora.  The greater the accumulation of deceit and trouble

in the world, the brighter and the purer shone the star of Dora

high above the world.  I don't think I had any definite idea where

Dora came from, or in what degree she was related to a higher order

of beings; but I am quite sure I should hif the light were ebbing out of the world.

Have you ever watched the ebbing sea on an open

stretch of sands withdrawing farther and farther away

from you?  It is like this--only there will be no flood

to follow.  Never.  It is as if the sun were growing

smaller, the stars going out one by one.  There can't be

many left that I can see by this.  But I haven't had the

courage to look of late . . ."  He must have been able

to make out Mr. Van Wyk, because he checked him by

an authoritative gesture and a stoical--



"I can get about alone yet."



It was as if he had taken his line, and would accept no

help from men, after having been cast out, like a pre-

sumptuous Titan, from his heaven.  Mr. Van Wyk, ar-

rested, seemed to count the footsteps right out of ear-

shot.  He walked between the tables, tapping smartly

with his heels, took up a paper-knife, dropped it after

a vague glance along the blade; then happening upon

the piano, struck a few chords again and again, vigor-

ously, standing up before the keyboard with an atten-

tive poise of the head like a piano-tuner; closing it, he

pivoted on his heels brusquely, avoided the little terrier

sleeping trustfully on crossed forepaws, came upon the

stairs next, and, as though he had lost his balance on

the top step, ran down headlong out of the house.  His

servants, beginning to clear the table, heard him mutter

to himself (evil words no doubt) down there, and then

after a pause go away with a strolling gait in the direc-

tion of the wharf.



The bulwarks of the Sofala lying alongside the bank

made a low, black wall on the undulating contour of the

shore.  Two masts and a funnel uprose from behind it

with a great rake, as if about to fall: a solid, square

elevation in the middle bore the ghostly shapes of white

boats, the curves of davits, lines of rail and stanchions,

all confused and mingling darkly everywhere; but low

down, amidships, a single lighted port stared out on

the night, perfectly round, like a small, full moon,

whose yellow beam caught a patch of wet mud, the

edge of trodden grass, two turns of heavy cable

wound round the foot of a thick wooden post in the

ground.



Mr. Van Wyk, peering alongside, heard a muzzy

boastful voice apparently jeering at a person called

Prendergast.  It mouthed abuse thickly, choked; then

pronounced very distinctly the word "Murphy," and

chuckled.  Glass tinkled tremulously.  All these sounds

came from the lighted port.  Mr. Van Wyk hesitated,

stooped; it was impossible to look through unless he

went down into the mud.



"Sterne," he said, half aloud.



The drunken voice within said gladly--



"Sterne--of course.  Look at him blink.  Look at

him!  Sterne, Whalley, Massy.  Massy, Whalley,

Sterne.  But Massy's the best.  You can't come over

him.  He would just love to see you starve."



Mr. Van Wyk moved away, made out farther forward

a shadowy head stuck out from under the awnings as

if on the watch, and spoke quietly in Malay, "Is the

mate asleep?"



"No.  Here, at your service."



In a moment Sterne appeared, walking as noiselessly

as a cat on the wharf.



"It's so jolly dark, and I had no idea you would be

down to-night."



"What's this horrible raving?" asked Mr. Van Wyk,

as if to explain the cause of a shudder than ran over

him audibly.



"Jack's broken out on a drunk.  That's our second.

It's his way.  He will be right enough by to-morrow

afternoon, only Mr. Massy will keep on worrying up

and down the deck.  We had better get away."



He muttered suggestively of a talk "up at the house."

He had long desired to effect an entrance there, but Mr.

Van Wyk nonchalantly demurred: it would not, he

feared, be quite prudent, perhaps; and the opaque

black shadow under one of the two big trees left at the

landing-place swallowed them up, impenetrably dense,

by the side of the wide river, that seemed to spin into

threads of glitter the light of a few big stars dropped

here and there upon its outspread and flowing stillness.



"The situation is grave beyond doubt," Mr. Van Wyk

said.  Ghost-like in their white clothes they could not

distinguish each others' features, and their feet made

no sound on the soft earth.  A sort of purring was

heard.  Mr. Sterne felt gratified by such a beginning.



"I thought, Mr. Van Wyk, a gentleman of your sort

would see at once how awkwardly I was situated."



"Yes, very.  Obviously his health is bad.  Perhaps

he's breaking up.  I see, and he himself is well aware--

I assume I am speaking to a man of sense--he is well

aware that his legs are giving out."



"His legs--ah!"  Mr. Sterne was disconcerted, and

then turned sulky.  "You may call it his legs if you

like; what I want to know is whether he intends to clear

out quietly.  That's a good one, too!  His legs!

Pooh!"



"Why, yes.  Only look at the way he walks."  Mr.

Van Wyk took him up in a perfectly cool and undoubt-

ing tone.  "The question, however, is whether your

sense of duty does not carry you too far from your true

interest.  After all, I too could do something to serve

you.  You know who I am."



"Everybody along the Straits has heard of you, sir."



Mr. Van Wyk presumed that this meant something

favorable.  Sterne had a soft laugh at this pleasantry.

He should think so!  To the opening statement, that

the partnership agreement was to expire at the end of

this very trip, he gave an attentive assent.  He was

aware.  One heard of nothing else on board all the

blessed day long.  As to Massy, it was no secret that he

was in a jolly deep hole with these worn-out boilers.

He would have to borrow somewhere a couple of hun-

dred first of all to pay off the captain; and then he

would have to raise money on mortgage upon the ship

for the new boilers--that is, if he could find a lender at

all.  At best it meant loss of time, a break in the trade,

short earnings for the year--and there was always the

danger of having his connection filched away from him

by the Germans.  It was whispered about that he had

already tried two firms.  Neither would have anything

to do with him.  Ship too old, and the man too well

known in the place. . . .  Mr. Sterne's final rapid wink-

ing remained buried in the deep darkness sibilating with

his whispers.



"Supposing, then, he got the loan," Mr. Van Wyk

resumed in a deliberate undertone, "on your own show-

ing he's more than likely to get a mortgagee's man

thrust upon him as captain.  For my part, I know that

I would make that very stipulation myself if I had to

find the money.  And as a matter of fact I am thinking

of doing so.  It would be worth my while in many ways.

Do you see how this would bear on the case under dis-

cussion?"



"Thank you, sir.  I am sure you couldn't get any-

body that would care more for your interests."



"Well, it suits my interest that Captain Whalley

should finish his time.  I shall probably take a passage

with you down the Straits.  If that can be done, I'll be

on the spot when all these changes take place, and in a

position to look after YOUR interests."



"Mr. Van Wyk, I want nothing better.  I am sure

I am infinitely . . ."



"I take it, then, that this may be done without any

trouble."



"Well, sir, what risk there is can't be helped; but

(speaking to you as my employer now) the thing is

more safe than it looks.  If anybody had told me of it

I wouldn't have believed it, but I have been looking on

myself.  That old Serang has been trained up to the

game.  There's nothing the matter with his--his--

limbs, sir.  He's got used to doing things himself in a

remarkable way.  And let me tell you, sir, that Cap-

tain Whalley, poor man, is by no means useless.  Fact.

Let me explain to you, sir.  He stiffens up that old

monkey of a Malay, who knows well enough what to do.

Why, he must have kept captain's watches in all sorts of

country ships off and on for the last five-and-twenty

years.  Thes

it, before Mr. Spenlow and the clerks.



Mr. Spenlow did not appear to know what the connexion between Mr.

Murdstone and myself was; which I was glad of, for I could not bear

to acknowledge him, even in my own breast, remembering what I did

of the history of my poor mother.  Mr. Spenlow seemed to think, if

he thought anything about the matter, that my aunt was the leader

of the state party in our family, and that there was a rebel party

commanded by somebody else - so I gathered at least from what he

said, while we were waiting for Mr. Tiffey to make out Peggotty's

bill of costs.



'Miss Trotwood,' he remarked, 'is very firm, no doubt, and not

likely to give way to opposition.  I have an admiration for her

character, and I may congratulate you, Copperfield, on being on the

right side.  Differences between relations are much to be deplored

- but they are extremely general - and the great thing is, to be on

the right side': meaning, I take it, on the side of the moneyed

interest.



'Rather a good marriage this, I believe?' said Mr. Spenlow.



I explained that I knew nothing about it.



'Indeed!' he said.  'Speaking from the few words Mr. Murdstone

dropped - as a man frequently does on these occasions - and from

what Miss Murdstone let fall, I should say it was rather a good

marriage.'



'Do you mean that there is money, sir?' I asked.



'Yes,' said Mr. Spenlow, 'I understand there's money.  Beauty too,

I am told.'



'Indeed!  Is his new wife young?'



'Just of age,' said Mr. Spenlow.  'So lately, that I should think

they had been waiting for that.'



'Lord deliver her!' said Peggotty.  So very emphatically and

unexpectedly, that we were all three discomposed; until Tiffey came

in with the bill.



Old Tiffey soon appeared, however, and handed it to Mr. Spenlow, to

look over.  Mr. Spenlow, settling his chin in his cravat and

rubbing it softly, went over the items with a deprecatory air - as

if it were all Jorkins's doing - and handed it back to Tiffey with

a bland sigh.



'Yes,' he said.  'That's right.  Quite right.  I should have been

extremely happy, Copperfield, to have limited these charges to the

actual expenditure out of pocket, but it is an irksome incident in

my professional life, that I am not at liberty to consult my own

wishes.  I have a partner - Mr. Jorkins.'



As he said this with a gentle melancholy, which was the next thing

to making no charge at all, I expressed my acknowledgements on

Peggotty's behalf, and paid Tiffey in banknotes.  Peggotty then

retired to her lodging, and Mr. Spenlow and I went into Court,

where we had a divorce-suit coming on, under an ingenious little

statute (repealed now, I believe, but in virtue of which I have

seen several marriages annulled), of which the merits were these. 

The husband, whose name was Thomas Benjamin, had taken out his

marriage licence as Thomas only; suppressing the Benjamin, in case

he should not find himself as comfortable as he expected.  NOT

finding himself as comfortable as he expected, or being a little

fatigued with his wife, poor fellow, he now came forward, by a

friend, after being married a year or two, and declared that his

name was Thomas Benjamin, and therefore he was not married at all. 

Which the Court confirmed, to his great satisfaction.



I must say that I had my doubts about the strict justice of this,

and was not even frightened out of them by the bushel of wheat

which reconciles all anomalies.  But Mr. Spenlow argued the matter

with me.  He said, Look at the world, there was good and evil in

that; look at the ecclesiastical law, there was good and evil in

THAT.  It was all part of a system.  Very good.  There you were!



I had not the hardihood to suggest to Dora's father that possibly

we might even improve the world a little, if we got up early in the

morning, and took off our coats to the work; but I confessed that

I thought we might improve the Commons.  Mr. Spenlow replied that

he would particularly advise me to dismiss that idea from my mind,

as not being worthy of my gentlemanly character; but that he would

be glad to hear from me of what improvement I thought the Commons

susceptible?



Taking that part of the Commons which happened to be nearest to us

- for our man was unmarried by this time, and we were out of Court,

and strolling past the Prerogative Office - I submitted that I

thought the Prerogative Office rather a queerly managed

institution.  Mr. Spenlow inquired in what respect?  I replied,

with all due deference to his experience (but with more deference,

I am afraid, to his being Dora's father), that perhaps it was a

little nonsensical that the Registry of that Court, containing the

original wills of all persons leaving effects within the immense

province of Canterbury, for three whole centuries, should be an

accidental building, never designed for the purpose, leased by the

registrars for their Own private emolument, unsafe, not even

ascertained to be fire-proof, choked with the important documents

it held, and positively, from the roof to the basement, a mercenary

speculation of the registrars, who took great fees from the public,

and crammed the public's wills away anyhow and anywhere, having no

other object than to get rid of them cheaply.  That, perhaps, it

was a little unreasonable that these registrars in the receipt of

profits amounting to eight or nine thousand pounds a year (to say

nothing of the profits of the deputy registrars, and clerks of

seats), should not be obliged to spend a little of that money, in

finding a reasonably safe place for the important documents which

all classes of people were compelled to hand over to them, whether

they would or no.  That, perhaps, it was a little unjust, that all

the great offices in this great office should be magnificent

sinecures, while the unfortunate working-clerks in the cold dark

room upstairs were the worst rewarded, and the least considered

men, doing important services, in London.  That perhaps it was a

little indecent that the principal registrar of all, whose duty it

was to find the public, constantly resorting to this place, all

needful accommodation, should be an enormous sinecurist in virtue

of that post (and might be, besides, a clergyman, a pluralist, the

holder of a staff in a cathedral, and what not), - while the public

was put to the inconvenience of which we had a specimen every

afternoon when the office was busy, and which we knew to be quite

monstrous.  That, perhaps, in short, this Prerogative Office of the

diocese of Canterbury was altogether such a pestilent job, and such

a pernicious absurdity, that but for its being squeezed away in a

corner of St. Paul's Churchyard, which few people knew, it must

have been turned completely inside out, and upside down, long ago.



Mr. Spenlow smiled as I became modestly warm on the subject, and

then argued this question with me as he had argued the other.  He

said, what was it after all?  It was a question of feeling.  If the

public felt that their wills were in safe keeping, and took it for

granted that the office was not to be made better, who was the

worse for it?  Nobody.  Who was the better for it?  All the

Sinecurists.  Very well.  Then the good predominated.  It might not

be a perfect system; nothing was perfect; but what he objected to,

was, the insertion of the wedge.  Under the Prerogative Office, the

country had been glorious.  Insert the wedge into the Prerogative

Office, and the country would cease to be glorious.  He considered

it the principle of a gentleman to take things as he found them;

and he had no doubt the Prerogative Office would last our time.  I

deferred to his opinion, though I had great doubts of it myself. 

I find he was right, however; for it has not only lasted to the

present moment, but has done so in the teeth of a great

parliamentary report made (not too willingly) eighteen years ago,

when all these objections of mine were set forth in detail, and

when the existing stowage for wills was described as equal to the

accumulation of only two years and a half more.  What they have

done with them since; whether they have lost many, or whether they

sell any, now and then, to the butter shops; I don't know.  I am

glad mine is not there, and I hope it may not go there, yet awhile.



I have set all this down, in my present blissful chapter, because

here it comes into its natural place.  Mr. Spenlow and I falling

into this conversation, prolonged it and our saunter to and fro,

until we diverged into general topics.  And so it came about, in

the end, that Mr. Spenlow told me this day week was Dora's

birthday, and he would be glad if I would come down and join a

little picnic on the occasion.  I went out of my senses

immediately; became a mere driveller next day, on receipt of a

little lace-edged sheet of note-paper, 'Favoured by papa.  To

remind'; and passed the intervening period in a state of dotage.



I think I committed every possible absurdity in the way of

preparation for this blessed event.  I turn hot when I remember the

cravat I bought.  My boots might be placed in any collection of

instruments of torture.  I provided, and sent down by the Norwood

coach the night before, a delicate little hamper, amounting in

itself, I thought, almost to a declaration.  There were crackers in

it with the tenderest mottoes that could be got for money.  At six

in the morning, I was in Covent Garden Market, buying a bouquet for

Dora.  At ten I was on horseback (I hired a gallant grey, for the

occasion), with the bouquet in my hat, to keep it fresh, trotting

down to Norwood.



I suppose that when I saw Dora in the garden and pretended not to

see her, and rode past the house pretending to be anxiously looking

for it, I committed two small fooleries which other young gentlemen

in my circumstances might have committed - because they came so

very natural to me.  But oh! when I DID find the house, and DID

dismount at the garden-gate, and drag those stony-hearted boots

across the lawn to Dora sitting on a garden-seat under a lilac

tree, what a spectacle she was, upon that beautiful morning, among

the butterflies, in a white chip bonnet and a dress of celestial

blue!  There was a young lady with her - comparatively stricken in

years - almost twenty, I should say.  Her name was Miss Mills.  and

Dora called her Julia.  She was the bosom friend of Dora.  Happy

Miss Mills!



Jip was there, and Jip WOULD bark at me again.  When I presented my

bouquet, he gnashed his teeth with jealousy.  Well he might.  If he

had the least idea how I adored his mistress, well he might!



'Oh, thank you, Mr. Copperfield!  What dear flowers!' said Dora.



I had had an intention of saying (and had been studying the best

form of words for three miles) that I thought them beautiful before

I saw them so near HER.  But I couldn't manage it.  She was too

bewildering.  To see her lay the flowers against her little dimpled

chin, was to lose all presence of mind and power of language in a

feeble ecstasy.  I wonder I didn't say, 'Kill me, if you have a

heart, Miss Mills.  Let me die here!'



Then Dora held my flowers to Jip to smell.  Then Jip growled, and

wouldn't smell them.  Then Dora laughed, and held them a little

closer to Jip, to make him.  Then Jip laid hold of a bit of

geranium with his teeth, and worried imaginary cats in it.  Then

Dora beat him, and pouted, and said, 'My poor beautiful flowers!'

as compassionately, I thought, as if Jip had laid hold of me.  I

wished he had!



'You'll be so glad to hear, Mr. Copperfield,' said Dora, 'that that

cross Miss Murdstone is not here.  She has gone to her brother's

marriage, and will be away at least three weeks.  Isn't that

delightful?'



I said I was sure it must be delightful to her, and all that was

delightful to her was delightful to me.  Miss Mills, with an air of

superior wisdom and benevolence, smiled upon us.



'She is the most disagreeable thing I ever saw,' said Dora.  'You

can't believe how ill-tempered and shocking she is, Julia.'



'Yes, I can, my dear!' said Julia.



'YOU can, perhaps, love,' returned Dora, with her hand on julia's. 

'Forgive my not excepting you, my dear, at first.'



I learnt, from this, that Miss Mills had had her trials in the

course of a chequered existence; and that to these, perhaps, I

might refer that wise benignity of manner which I had already

noticed.  i found, in the course of the day, that this was the

case: Miss Mills having been unhappy in a misplaced affection, and

being understood to have retired from the world on her awful stock

of experience, but still to take a calm interest in the unblighted

hopes and loves of youth.



But now Mr. Spenlow came out of the house, and Dora went to him,

saying, 'Look, papa, what beautiful flowers!' And Miss Mills smiled

thoughtfully, as who should say, 'Ye Mayflies, enjoy your brief

existence in the bright morning of life!' And we all walked from

the lawn towards the carriage, which was getting ready.



I shall never have such a ride again.  I have never had such

another.  There were only those three, their hamper, my hamper, and

the guitar-case, in the phaeton; and, of course, the phaeton was

open; and I rode behind it, and Dora sat with her back to the

horses, looking towards me.  She kept the bouquet close to her on

the cushion, and wouldn't allow Jip to sit on that side of her at

all, for fear he should crush it.  She often carried it in her

hand, often refreshed herself with its fragrance.  Our eyes at

those times often met; and my great astonishment is that I didn't

go over the head of my gallant grey into the carriage.



There was dust, I believe.  There was a good deal of dust, I

believe.  I have a faint impression that Mr. Spenlow remonstrated

with me for riding in it; but I knew of none.  I was sensible of a

mist of love and beauty about Dora, but of nothing else.  He stood

up sometimes, and asked me what I thought of the prospect.  I said

it was delightful, and I dare say it was; but it was all Dora to

me.  The sun shone Dora, and the birds sang Dora.  The south wind

blew Dora, and the wild flowers in the hedges were all Doras, to a

bud.  My comfort is, Miss Mills understood me.  Miss Mills alone

could enter into my feelings thoroughly.



I don't know how long we were going, and to this hour I know as

little where we went.  Perhaps it was near Guildford.  Perhaps some

Arabian-night magician, opened up the place for the day, and shut

it up for ever when we came away.  It was a green spot, on a hill,

carpeted with soft turf.  There were shady trees, and heather, and,

as far as the eye could see, a rich landscape.



It was a trying thing to find people here, waiting for us; and my

jealousy, even of the ladies, knew no bounds.  But all of my own

sex - especially one impostor, three or four years my elder, with

a red whisker, on which he established an amount of presumption not

to be endured - were my mortal foes.



We all unpacked our baskets, and employed ourselves in getting

dinner ready.  Red Whisker pretended he could make a salad (which

I don't believe), and obtruded himself on public notice.  Some of

the young ladies washed the lettuces for him, and sliced them under

his directions.  Dora was among these.  I felt that fate had pitted

me against this man, and one of us must fall.



Red Whisker made his salad (I wondered how they could eat it. 

Nothing should have induced ME to touch it!) and voted himself into

the charge of the wine-cellar, which he constructed, being an

ingenious beast, in the hollow trunk of a tree.  By and by, I saw

him, with the majority of a lobster on his plate, eating his dinner

at the feet of Dora!



I have but an indistinct idea of what happened for some time after

this baleful object presented itself to my view.  I was very merry,

I know; but it was hollow merriment.  I attached myself to a young

creature in pink, with little eyes, and flirted with her

desperately.  She received my attentions with favour; but whether

on my account solely, or because she had any designs on Red

Whisker, I can't say.  Dora's health was drunk.  When I drank it,

I affected to interrupt my conversation for that purpose, and to

resume it immediately afterwards.  I caught Dora's eye as I bowed

to her, and I thought it looked appealing.  But it looked at me

over the head of Red Whisker, and I was adamant.



The young creature in pink had a mother in green; and I rather

think the latter separated us from motives of policy.  Howbeit,

there was a general breaking up of the party, while the remnants of

the dinner were being put away; and I strolled off by myself among

the trees, in a raging and remorseful state.  I was debating

whether I should pretend that I was not well, and fly - I don't

know where - upon my gallant grey, when Dora and Miss Mills met me.



'Mr. Copperfield,' said Miss Mills, 'you are dull.'



I begged her pardon.  Not at all.



'And Dora,' said Miss Mills, 'YOU are dull.'



Oh dear no!  Not in the least.



'Mr. Copperfield and Dora,' said Miss Mills, with an almost

venerable air.  'Enough of this.  Do not allow a trivial

misunderstanding to wither the blossoms of spring, which, once put

forth and blighted, cannot be renewed.  I speak,' said Miss Mills,

'from experience of the past - the remote, irrevocable past.  The

gushing fountains which sparkle in the sun, must not be stopped in

mere caprice; the oasis in the desert of Sahara must not be plucked

up idly.'



I hardly knew what I did, I was burning all over to that

extraordinary extent; but I took Dora's little hand and kissed it

- and she let me!  I kissed Miss Mills's hand; and we all seemed,

to my thinking, to go straight up to the seventh heaven.

We did not come down again.  We stayed up there all the evening. 

At first we strayed to and fro among the trees: I with Dora's shy

arm drawn through mine: and Heaven knows, folly as it all was, it

would have been a happy fate to have been struck immortal with

those foolish feelings, and have stayed among the trees for ever!



But, much too soon, we heard the others laughing and talking, and

calling 'where's Dora?' So we went back, and they wanted Dora to

sing.  Red Whisker would have got the guitar-case out of the

carriage, but Dora told him nobody knew where it was, but I.  So

Red Whisker was done for in a moment; and I got it, and I unlocked

it, and I took the guitar out, and I sat by her, and I held her

handkerchief and gloves, and I drank in every note of her dear

voice, and she sang to ME who loved her, and all the others might

applaud as much as they liked, but they had nothing to do with it!



I was intoxicated with joy.  I was afraid it was too happy to be

real, and that I should wake in Buckingham Street presently, and

hear Mrs. Crupp clinking the teacups in getting breakfast ready. 

But Dora sang, and others sang, and Miss Mills sang - about the

slumbering echoes in the caverns of Memory; as if she were a

hundred years old - and the evening came on; and we had tea, with

the kettle boiling gipsy-fashion; and I was still as happy as ever.



I was happier than ever when the party broke up, and the other

people, defeated Red Whisker and all, went their several ways, and

we went ours through the still evening and the dying light, with

sweet scents rising up around us.  Mr. Spenlow being a little

drowsy after the champagne - honour to the soil that grew the

grape, to the grape that made the wine, to the sun that ripened it,

and to the merchant who adulterated it! - and being fast asleep in

a corner of the carriage, I rode by the side and talked to Dora. 

She admired my horse and patted him - oh, what a dear little hand

it looked upon a horse! - and her shawl would not keep right, and

now and then I drew it round her with my arm; and I even fancied

that Jip began to see how it was, and to understand that he must

make up his mind to be friends with me.



That sagacious Miss Mills, too; that amiable, though quite used up,

recluse; that little patriarch of something less than twenty, who

had done with the world, and mustn't on any account have the

slumbering echoes in the caverns of Memory awakened; what a kind

thing she did!



'Mr. Copperfield,' said Miss Mills, 'come to this side of the

carriage a moment - if you can spare a moment.  I want to speak to

you.'



Behold me, on my gallant grey, bending at the side of Miss Mills,

with my hand upon the carriage door!



'Dora is coming to stay with me.  She is coming home with me the

day after tomorrow.  If you would like to call, I am sure papa

would be happy to see you.'

What could I do but invoke a silent blessing on Miss Mills's head,

and store Miss Mills's address in the securest corner of my memory!

What could I do but tell Miss Mills, with grateful looks and

fervent words, how much I appreciated her good offices, and what an

inestimable value I set upon her friendship!



Then Miss Mills benignantly dismissed me, saying, 'Go back to

Dora!' and I went; and Dora leaned out of the carriage to talk to

me, and we talked all the rest of the way; and I rode my gallant

grey so close to the wheel that I grazed his near fore leg against

it, and 'took the bark off', as his owner told me, 'to the tune of

three pun' sivin' - which I paid, and thought extremely cheap for

so much joy.  What time Miss Mills sat looking at the moon,

murmuring verses- and recalling, I suppose, the ancient days when

she and earth had anything in common.



Norwood was many miles too near, and we reached it many hours too

soon; but Mr. Spenlow came to himself a little short of it, and

said, 'You must come in, Copperfield, and rest!' and I consenting,

we had sandwiches and wine-and-water.  In the light room, Dora

blushing looked so lovely, that I could not tear myself away, but

sat there staring, in a dream, until the snoring of Mr. Spenlow

inspired me with sufficient consciousness to take my leave.  So we

parted; I riding all the way to London with the farewell touch of

Dora's hand still light on mine, recalling every incident and word

ten thousand times; lying down in my own bed at last, as enraptured

a young noodle as ever was carried out of his five wits by love.



When I awoke next morning, I was resolute to declare my passion to

Dora, and know my fate.  Happiness or misery was now the question. 

There was no other question that I knew of in the world, and only

Dora could give the answer to it.  I passed three days in a luxury

of wretchedness, torturing myself by putting every conceivable

variety of discouraging construction on all that ever had taken

place between Dora and me.  At last, arrayed for the purpose at a

vast expense, I went to Miss Mills's, fraught with a declaration.



How many times I went up and down the street, and round the square

- painfully aware of being a much better answer to the old riddle

than the original one - before I could persuade myself to go up the

steps and knock, is no matter now.  Even when, at last, I had

knocked, and was waiting at the door, I had some flurried thought

of asking if that were Mr. Blackboy's (in imitation of poor

Barkis), begging pardon, and retreating.  But I kept my ground.



Mr. Mills was not at home.  I did not expect he would be.  Nobody

wanted HIM.  Miss Mills was at home.  Miss Mills would do.



I was shown into a room upstairs, where Miss Mills and Dora were. 

Jip was there.  Miss Mills was copying music (I recollect, it was

a new song, called 'Affection's Dirge'), and Dora was painting

flowers.  What were my feelings, when I recognized my own flowers;

the identical Covent Garden Market purchase!  I cannot say that

they were very like, or that they particularly resembled any

flowers that have ever come under my observation; but I knew from

the paper round them which was accurately copied, what the

composition was.



Miss Mills was very glad to see me, and very sorry her papa was not

at home: though I thought we all bore that with fortitude.  Miss

Mills was conversational for a few minutes, and then, laying down

her pen upon 'Affection's Dirge', got up, and left the room.



I began to think I would put it off till tomorrow.



'I hope your poor horse was not tired, when he got home at night,'

said Dora, lifting up her beautiful eyes.  'It was a long way for

him.'



I began to think I would do it today.



'It was a long way for him,' said I, 'for he had nothing to uphold

him on the journey.'



'Wasn't he fed, poor thing?' asked Dora.



I began to think I would put it off till tomorrow.



'Ye-yes,' I said, 'he was well taken care of.  I mean he had not

the unutterable happiness that I had in being so near you.'



Dora bent her head over her drawing and said, after a little while

- I had sat, in the interval, in a burning fever, and with my legs

in a very rigid state -



'You didn't seem to be sensible of that happiness yourself, at one

time of the day.'



I saw now that I was in for it, and it must be done on the spot.



'You didn't care for that happiness in the least,' said Dora,

slightly raising her eyebrows, and shaking her head, 'when you were

sitting by Miss Kitt.'



Kitt, I should observe, was the name of the creature in pink, with

the little eyes.



'Though certainly I don't know why you should,' said Dora, or why

you should call it a happiness at all.  But of course you don't

mean what you say.  And I am sure no one doubts your being at

liberty to do whatever you like.  Jip, you naughty boy, come here!'



I don't know how I did it.  I did it in a moment.  I intercepted

Jip.  I had Dora in my arms.  I was full of eloquence.  I never

stopped for a word.  I told her how I loved her.  I told her I

should die without her.  I told her that I idolized and worshipped

her.  Jip barked madly all the time.



When Dora hung her head and cried, and trembled, my eloquence

increased so much the more.  If she would like me to die for her,

she had but to say the word, and I was ready.  Life without Dora's

love was not a thing to have on any terms.  I couldn't bear it, and

I wouldn't.  I had loved her every minute, day and night, since I

first saw her.  I loved her at that minute to distraction.  I

should always love her, every minute, to distraction.  Lovers had

loved before, and lovers would love again; but no lover had loved,

might, could, would, or should ever love, as I loved Dora.  The

more I raved, the more Jip barked.  Each of us, in his own way, got

more mad every moment.



Well, well!  Dora and I were sitting on the sofa by and by, quiet

enough, and Jip was lying in her lap, winking peacefully at me.  It

was off my mind.  I was in a state of perfect rapture.  Dora and I

were engaged.



I suppose we had some notion that this was to end in marriage.  We

must have had some, because Dora stipulated that we were never to

be married without her papa's consent.  But, in our youthful

ecstasy, I don't think that we really looked before us or behind

us; or had any aspiration beyond the ignorant present.  We were to

keep our secret from Mr. Spenlow; but I am sure the idea never

entered my head, then, that there was anything dishonourable in

that.



Miss Mills was more than usually pensive when Dora, going to find

her, brought her back; - I apprehend, because there was a tendency

in what had passed to awaken the slumbering echoes in the caverns

of Memory.  But she gave us her blessing, and the assurance of her

lasting friendship, and spoke to us, generally, as became a Voice

from the Cloister.



What an idle time it was!  What an insubstantial, happy, foolish

time it was!



When I measured Dora's finger for a ring that was to be made of

Forget-me-nots, and when the jeweller, to whom I took the measure,

found me out, and laughed over his order-book, and charged me

anything he liked for the pretty little toy, with its blue stones

- so associated in my remembrance with Dora's hand, that yesterday,

when I saw such another, by chance, on the finger of my own

daughter, there was a momentary stirring in my heart, like pain!



When I walked about, exalted with my secret, and full of my own

interest, and felt the dignity of loving Dora, and of being

beloved, so much, that if I had walked the air, I could not have

been more above the people not so situated, who were creeping on

the earth!



When we had those meetings in the garden of the square, and sat

within the dingy summer-house, so happy, that I love the London

sparrows to this hour, for nothing else, and see the plumage of the

tropics in their smoky feathers!

When we had our first great quarrel (within a week of our

betrothal), and when Dora sent me back the ring, enclosed in a

despairing cocked-hat note, wherein she used the terrible

expression that 'our love had begun in folly, and ended in

madness!' which dreadful words occasioned me to tear my hair, and

cry that all was over!



When, under cover of the night, I flew to Miss Mills, whom I saw by

stealth in a back kitchen where there was a mangle, and implored

Miss Mills to interpose between us and avert insanity.  When Miss

Mills undertook the office and returned with Dora, exhorting us,

from the pulpit of her own bitter youth, to mutual concession, and

the avoidance of the Desert of Sahara!



When we cried, and made it up, and were so blest again, that the

back kitchen, mangle and all, changed to Love's own temple, where

we arranged a plan of correspondence through Miss Mills, always to

comprehend at least one letter on each side every day!



What an idle time!  What an insubstantial, happy, foolish time!  Of

all the times of mine that Time has in his grip, there is none that

in one retrospect I can smile at half so much, and think of half so

tenderly.

