




A CENTURION OF THE THIRTIETH




Cities and Thrones and Powers

Stand in Time's eye,

Almost as long as flowers,

Which daily die.

But, as new buds put forth

To glad new men,

Out of the spent and unconsidered Earth

The Cities rise again.



This season's Daffodil,

She never hears

What change, what chance, what chill,

Cut down last year's:

But with bold countenance,

And knowledge small,

Esteems her seven days' continuance

To be perpetual.



So Time that is o'er-kind

To all that be,

Ordains us e'en as blind,

As bold as she:

That in our very death,

And burial sure,

Shadow to shadow, well persuaded, saith,

'See how our works endure!'









Dan had come to grief over his Latin, and was kept in; so

Una went alone to Far Wood.  Dan's big catapult and the

lead bullets that Hobden had made for him were hidden

in an old hollow beech-stub on the west of the wood.

They had named the place out of the verse in Lays of

Ancient Rome:



     From lordly Volaterrae,

     Where scowls the far-famed hold

     Piled by the hands of giants

     For Godlike Kings of old.



They were the 'Godlike Kings', and when old Hobden

piled some comfortable brushwood between the big wooden

knees of Volaterrae, they called him 'Hands of Giants'.



Una slipped through their private gap in the fence, and

sat still awhile, scowling as scowlily and lordlily as she

knew how; for Volaterrae is an important watch-tower

that juts out of Far Wood just as Far Wood juts out of the

hillside.  Pook's Hill lay below her and all the turns of the

brook as it wanders out of the Willingford Woods, between

hop-gardens, to old Hobden's cottage at the

Forge.  The sou'-west wind (there is always a wind by

Volaterrae) blew from the bare ridge where Cherry Clack

Windmill stands.



Now wind prowling through woods sounds like exciting

things going to happen, and that is why on blowy

days you stand up in Volaterrae and shout bits of the Lays

to suit its noises.



Una took Dan's catapult from its secret place, and

made ready to meet Lars Porsena's army stealing

through the wind-whitened aspens by the brook.  A gust

boomed up the valley, and Una chanted sorrowfully:



     'Verbenna down to Ostia

     Hath wasted all the plain:

     Astur hath stormed Janiculum,

     And the stout guards are slain.'



But the wind, not charging fair to the wood, started

aside and shook a single oak in Gleason's pasture.  Here it

made itself all small and crouched among the grasses,

waving the tips of them as a cat waves the tip of her tail

before she springs.



     'Now welcome - welcome, Sextus,' sang Una, loading

the catapult -



     'Now welcome to thy home!

     Why dost thou stay, and turn away?

     Here lies the road to Rome.'



She fired into the face of the lull, to wake up the

cowardly wind, and heard a grunt from behind a thorn in

the pasture.



'Oh, my Winkie!' she said aloud, and that was something

she had picked up from Dan.  'I b'lieve I've tickled

up a Gleason cow.'



'You little painted beast!' a voice cried.  'I'll teach you to

sling your masters!'



She looked down most cautiously, and saw a young

man covered with hoopy bronze armour all glowing

among the late broom.  But what Una admired beyond all

was his great bronze helmet with a red horse-tail that

flicked in the wind.  She could hear the long hairs rasp on

his shimmery shoulder-plates.



'What does the Faun mean,' he said, half aloud to

himself, 'by telling me that the Painted People have

changed?'  He caught sight of Una's yellow head.  'Have

you seen a painted lead-slinger?' he called.



'No-o,' said Una.  'But if you've seen a bullet -'



'Seen?' cried the man.  'It passed within a hair's- breadth

of my ear.'



'Well, that was me.  I'm most awfully sorry.'



'Didn't the Faun tell you I was coming?'  He smiled.



'Not if you mean Puck.  I thought you were a Gleason

cow.  I - I didn't know you were a - a - What are you?'



He laughed outright, showing a set of splendid teeth.

His face and eyes were dark, and his eyebrows met above

his big nose in one bushy black bar.



'They call me Parnesius.  I have been a Centurion of the

Seventh Cohort of the Thirtieth Legion - the Ulpia Victrix.

Did you sling that bullet?'



'I did.  I was using Dan's catapult,' said Una.



'Catapults!' said he.  'I ought to know something about

them.  Show me!'



He leaped the rough fence with a rattle of spear, shield,

and armour, and hoisted himself into Volaterrae as

quickly as a shadow.



'A sling on a forked stick.  I understand!' he cried, and

pulled at the elastic.  'But what wonderful beast yields

this stretching leather?'



'It's laccy - elastic.  You put the bullet into that loop,

and then you pull hard.'



The man pulled, and hit himself square on his thumbnail.



'Each to his own weapon,' he said gravely, handing it

back.  'I am better with the bigger machine, little maiden.

But it's a pretty toy.  A wolf would laugh at it.  Aren't you

afraid of wolves?'



'There aren't any,' said Una.



'Never believe it!  A wolf's like a Winged Hat.  He comes

when he isn't expected.  Don't they hunt wolves here?'



'We don't hunt,'said Una, remembering what she had

heard from grown-ups.  'We preserve - pheasants.  Do

you know them?'



'I ought to,' said the young man, smiling again, and he

imitated the cry of the cock-pheasant so perfectly that a

bird answered out of the wood.



'What a big painted clucking fool is a pheasant!' he

said.  'Just like some Romans.'



'But you're a Roman yourself, aren't you?' said Una.



'Ye-es and no.  I'm one of a good few thousands who

have never seen Rome except in a picture.  My people

have lived at Vectis for generations.  Vectis - that island

West yonder that you can see from so far in clear weather.'



'Do you mean the Isle of Wight?  It lifts up just before

rain, and you see it from the Downs.'



'Very likely.  Our villa's on the south edge of the Island,

by the Broken Cliffs.  Most of it is three hundred years

old, but the cow-stables, where our first ancestor lived,

must be a hundred years older.  Oh, quite that, because

the founder of our family had his land given him by

Agricola at the Settlement.  It's not a bad little place for its

size.  In springtime violets grow down to the very beach.

I've gathered sea-weeds for myself and violets for my

Mother many a time with our old nurse.'



'Was your nurse a - a Romaness too?'



'No, a Numidian.  Gods be good to her!  A dear, fat,

brown thing with a tongue like a cowbell.  She was a free

woman.  By the way, are you free, maiden?'



'Oh, quite,' said Una.  'At least, till tea-time; and in

summer our governess doesn't say much if we're late.'



The young man laughed again - a proper

understanding laugh.



'I see,' said he.  'That accounts for your being in the

wood.  We hid among the cliffs.'



'Did you have a governess, then?'



'Did we not?  A Greek, too.  She had a way of clutching

her dress when she hunted us among the gorse-bushes

that made us laugh.  Then she'd say she'd get us

whipped.  She never did, though, bless her!  Aglaia was a

thorough sportswoman, for all her learning.'



'But what lessons did you do - when - when you

were little?'

'Ancient history, the Classics, arithmetic and so on,'he

answered.  'My sister and I were thickheads, but my two

brothers (I'm the middle one) liked those things, and, of

course, Mother was clever enough for any six.  She was

nearly as tall as I am, and she looked like the new statue

on the Western Road - the Demeter of the Baskets, you

know.  And funny!  Roma Dea!  How Mother could make

us laugh!'



'What at?'



'Little jokes and sayings that every family has.  Don't

you know?'



'I know we have, but I didn't know other people had

them too,' said Una.  'Tell me about all your family, please.'



'Good families are very much alike.  Mother would sit

spinning of evenings while Aglaia read in her corner, and

Father did accounts, and we four romped about the

passages.  When our noise grew too loud the Pater would

say, "Less tumult!  Less tumult!  Have you never heard of

a Father's right over his children?  He can slay them, my

loves - slay them dead, and the Gods highly approve of

the action!" Then Mother would prim up her dear mouth

over the wheel and answer:  "H'm!  I'm afraid there can't

be much of the Roman Father about you!" Then the Pater

would roll up his accounts, and say, "I'll show you!" and

then - then, he'd be worse than any of us!'



'Fathers can - if they like,' said Una, her eyes dancing.



'Didn't I say all good families are very much the same?'



'What did you do in summer?' said Una.  'Play about, like us?'



'Yes, and we visited our friends.  There are no wolves in

Vectis.  We had many friends, and as many ponies as we wished.'



'It must have been lovely,' said Una.  'I hope it lasted for ever.'



'Not quite, little maid.  When I was about sixteen or

seventeen, the Father felt gouty, and we all went to the Waters.'



'What waters?'



'At Aquae Sulis.  Every one goes there.  You ought to

get your Father to take you some day.'



'But where?  I don't know,' said Una.



The young man looked astonished for a moment.

'Aquae Sulis,' he repeated.  'The best baths in Britain.  just

as good, I'm told, as Rome.  All the old gluttons sit in hot

water, and talk scandal and politics.  And the Generals

come through the streets with their guards behind them;

and the magistrates come in their chairs with their stiff

guards behind them; and you meet fortune-tellers, and

goldsmiths, and merchants, and philosophers, and

feather-sellers, and ultra-Roman Britons, and ultra-

British Romans, and tame tribesmen pretending to be 

civilised, and Jew lecturers, and - oh, everybody interesting.

We young people, of course, took no interest in

politics.  We had not the gout.  There were many of our

age like us.  We did not find life sad.



'But while we were enjoying ourselves without thinking,

my sister met the son of a magistrate in the West -

and a year afterwards she was married to him.  My young

brother, who was always interested in plants and roots,

met the First Doctor of a Legion from the City of the

Legions, and he decided that he would be an Army

doctor.  I do not think it is a profession for a well-born

man, but then - I'm not my brother.  He went to Rome to

study medicine, and now he's First Doctor of a Legion in

Egypt - at Antinoe, I think, but I have not heard from him

for some time.



'My eldest brother came across a Greek philosopher,

and told my Father that he intended to settle down on the

estate as a farmer and a philosopher.  You see,' - the

young man's eyes twinkled - 'his philosopher was a

long-haired one!'



'I thought philosophers were bald,' said Una.



'Not all.  She was very pretty.  I don't blame him.

Nothing could have suited me better than my eldest

brother's doing this, for I was only too keen to join the

Army.  I had always feared I should have to stay at home

and look after the estate while my brother took this.'



He rapped on his great glistening shield that never

seemed to be in his way.



'So we were well contented - we young people - and

we rode back to Clausentum along the Wood Road very

quietly.  But when we reached home, Aglaia, our governess,

saw what had come to us.  I remember her at the

door, the torch over her head, watching us climb the

cliff-path from the boat.  "Aie!  Aie!" she said.  "Children

you went away.  Men and a woman you return!" Then

she kissed Mother, and Mother wept.  Thus our visit to

the Waters settled our fates for each of us, maiden.'

He rose to his feet and listened, leaning on the shield-rim.



'I think that's Dan - my brother,' said Una.



'Yes; and the Faun is with him,'he replied, as Dan with

Puck stumbled through the copse.



'We should have come sooner,' Puck called, 'but

the beauties of your native tongue, O Parnesius, have

enthralled this young citizen.'



Parnesius looked bewildered, even when

Una explained.



'Dan said the plural of "dominus" was "dominoes",

and when Miss Blake said it wasn't he said he supposed it

was "backgammon", and so he had to write it out twice -

for cheek, you know.'

Dan had climbed into Volaterrae, hot and panting.



'I've run nearly all the way,'he gasped, 'and then Puck

met me.  How do you do, sir?'



'I am in good health,' Parnesius answered.  'See!  I have

tried to bend the bow of Ulysses, but -' He held up his thumb.



'I'm sorry.  You must have pulled off too soon,' said

Dan.  'But Puck said you were telling Una a story.'



'Continue, O Parnesius,' said Puck, who had perched

himself on a dead branch above them.  'I will be chorus.

Has he puzzled you much, Una?'

'Not a bit, except - I didn't know where Ak- Ak

something was,' she answered.



'Oh, Aquae Sulis.  That's Bath, where the buns come

from.  Let the hero tell his own tale.'



Parnesius pretended to thrust his spear at Puck's legs,

but Puck reached down, caught at the horse-tail plume,

and pulled off the tall helmet.



'Thanks, jester,' said Parnesius, shaking his curly dark

head.  'That is cooler.  Now hang it up for me .



'I was telling your sister how I joined the Army,' he

said to Dan.



'Did you have to pass an Exam?' Dan asked eagerly.



'No.  I went to my Father, and said I should like to enter

the Dacian Horse (I had seen some at Aquae Sulis); but he

said I had better begin service in a regular Legion from

Rome.  Now, like many of our youngsters, I was not too

fond of anything Roman.  The Roman-born officers and

magistrates looked down on us British-born as though

we were barbarians.  I told my Father so.



"'I know they do," he said; "but remember, after all,

we are the people of the Old Stock, and our duty is to

the Empire."



"'To which Empire?" I asked.  "We split the Eagle

before I was born."



"'What thieves' talk is that?" said my Father.  He hated slang.



"'Well, sir," I said, "we've one Emperor in Rome, and I

don't know how many Emperors the outlying Provinces

have set up from time to time.  Which am I to follow?"



"'Gratian," said he.  "At least he's a sportsman."



"'He's all that," I said.  "Hasn't he turned himself into a

raw-beef-eating Scythian?"



"'Where did you hear of it?" said the Pater.



"'At Aquae Sulis," I said.  It was perfectly true.  This

precious Emperor Gratian of ours had a bodyguard of

fur-cloaked Scythians, and he was so crazy about them

that he dressed like them.  In Rome of all places in the

world!  It was as bad as if my own Father had painted

himself blue!



"'No matter for the clothes," said the Pater.  "They are

only the fringe of the trouble.  It began before your time or

mine.  Rome has forsaken her Gods, and must be

punished.  The great war with the Painted People broke

out in the very year the temples of our Gods were

destroyed.  We beat the Painted People in the very year

our temples were rebuilt.  Go back further still." He

went back to the time of Diocletian; and to listen to him

you would have thought Eternal Rome herself was on

the edge of destruction, just because a few people had

become a little large-minded.



'I knew nothing about it.  Aglaia never taught us the

history of our own country.  She was so full of her ancient Greeks.



"'There is no hope for Rome," said the Pater, at last.

"She has forsaken her Gods, but if the Gods forgive us

here, we may save Britain.  To do that, we must keep the

Painted People back.  Therefore, I tell you, Parnesius, as a

Father, that if your heart is set on service, your place is

among men on the Wall - and not with women among

the cities."'



'What Wall?' asked Dan and Una at once.



'Father meant the one we call Hadrian's Wall.  I'll tell

you about it later.  It was built long ago, across North

Britain, to keep out the Painted People - Picts, you call

them.  Father had fought in the great Pict War that lasted

more than twenty years, and he knew what fighting

meant.  Theodosius, one of our great Generals, had

chased the little beasts back far into the North before I

was born.  Down at Vectis, of course, we never troubled

our heads about them.  But when my Father spoke as he

did, I kissed his hand, and waited for orders.  We British-

born Romans know what is due to our parents.'



'If I kissed my Father's hand, he'd laugh,' said Dan.



'Customs change; but if you do not obey your Father,

the Gods remember it.  You may be quite sure of that.



'After our talk, seeing I was in earnest, the Pater sent

me over to Clausentum to learn my foot-drill in a barrack

full of foreign Auxiliaries - as unwashed and unshaved a

mob of mixed barbarians as ever scrubbed a breastplate.

It was your stick in their stomachs and your shield in their

faces to push them into any sort of formation.  When I had

learned my work the Instructor gave me a handful - and

they were a handful!  - of Gauls and Iberians to polish up

till they were sent to their stations up-country.  I did my

best, and one night a villa in the suburbs caught fire, and I

had my handful out and at work before any of the other

troops.  I noticed a quiet-looking man on the lawn, leaning

on a stick.  He watched us passing buckets from the

pond, and at last he said to me:  "Who are you?"



"'A probationer, waiting for a command," I answered.

I didn't know who he was from Deucalion!



"'Born in Britain?" he said.



"'Yes, if you were born in Spain," I said, for he

neighed his words like an Iberian mule.



"'And what might you call yourself when you are at

home?" he said, laughing.



"'That depends," I answered; "sometimes one thing

and sometimes another.  But now I'm busy."



'He said no more till we had saved the family Gods

(they were respectable householders), and then he

grunted across the laurels:  "Listen, young sometimes-

one-thing-and-sometimes-another.  In future call yourself

Centurion of the Seventh Cohort of the Thirtieth, the

Ulpia Victrix.  That will help me to remember you.  Your

Father and a few other people call me Maximus."



'He tossed me the polished stick he was leaning on,

and went away.  You might have knocked me down with it!'

'Who was he?' said Dan.



'Maximus himself, our great General!  The General of

Britain who had been Theodosius's right hand in the Pict

War!  Not only had he given me my Centurion's stick

direct, but three steps in a good Legion as well!  A new

man generally begins in the Tenth Cohort of his Legion,

and works up.'



'And were you pleased?' said Una.



'Very.  I thought Maximus had chosen me for my good

looks and fine style in marching, but, when I went home,

the Pater told me he had served under Maximus in the

great Pict War, and had asked him to befriend me.'



'A child you were!' said Puck, from above.



'I was,' said Parnesius.  'Don't begrudge it me, Faun.

Afterwards - the Gods know I put aside the games!'  And

Puck nodded, brown chin on brown hand, his big eyes still.



'The night before I left we sacrificed to our ancestors -

the usual little Home Sacrifice - but I never prayed so

earnestly to all the Good Shades, and then I went with



my Father by boat to Regnum, and across the chalk

eastwards to Anderida yonder.'



'Regnum?  Anderida?'  The children turned their faces

to Puck.



'Regnum's Chichester,' he said, pointing towards

Cherry Clack, 'and'- he threw his arm South behind him

-'Anderida's Pevensey.'



'Pevensey again!' said Dan.  'Where Weland landed?'



'Weland and a few others,' said Puck.  'Pevensey isn't

young - even compared to me!'



'The headquarters of the Thirtieth lay at Anderida in

summer, but my own Cohort, the Seventh, was on the

Wall up North.  Maximus was inspecting Auxiliaries - the

Abulci, I think - at Anderida, and we stayed with him, for

he and my Father were very old friends.  I was only there

ten days when I was ordered to go up with thirty men to

my Cohort.'  He laughed merrily.  'A man never forgets

his first march.  I was happier than any Emperor when I

led my handful through the North Gate of the Camp, and

we saluted the guard and the Altar of Victory there.'



'How?  How?' said Dan and Una.



Parnesius smiled, and stood up, flashing in his armour.



'So!' said he; and he moved slowly through the beautiful

movements of the Roman Salute, that ends with a

hollow clang of the shield coming into its place between

the shoulders.



'Hai!' said Puck.  'That sets one thinking!'



'We went out fully armed,' said Parnesius, sitting

down; 'but as soon as the road entered the Great Forest,

my men expected the pack-horses to hang their shields

on.  "No!" I said; you can dress like women in Anderida,

but while you're with me you will carry your own

weapons and armour."



"'But it's hot," said one of them, "and we haven't a

doctor.  Suppose we get sunstroke, or a fever?"



"'Then die," I said, "and a good riddance to Rome!  Up

shield - up spears, and tighten your foot-wear!"



"'Don't think yourself Emperor of Britain already," a

fellow shouted.  I knocked him over with the butt of my

spear, and explained to these Roman-born Romans that,

if there were any further trouble, we should go on with

one man short.  And, by the Light of the Sun, I meant it

too!  My raw Gauls at Clausentum had never treated me so.



'Then, quietly as a cloud, Maximus rode out of the

fern (my Father behind him), and reined up across the

road.  He wore the Purple, as though he were already

Emperor; his leggings were of white buckskin laced

with gold.



'My men dropped like - like partridges.



'He said nothing for some time, only looked, with his

eyes puckered.  Then he crooked his forefinger, and my

men walked - crawled, I mean - to one side.



"'Stand in the sun, children," he said, and they

formed up on the hard road.



"'What would you have done," he said to me, "if I had

not been here?"



"'I should have killed that man," I answered.



"'Kill him now," he said.  "He will not move a limb."



"'No," I said.  "You've taken my men out of my

command.  I should only be your butcher if I killed him

now." Do you see what I meant?'  Parnesius turned to Dan.

'Yes,'said Dan.  'It wouldn't have been fair, somehow.'



'That was what I thought,' said Parnesius.  'But

Maximus frowned.  "You'll never be an Emperor," he

said.  "Not even a General will you be."



'I was silent, but my Father seemed pleased.

"'I came here to see the last of you," he said.



"'You have seen it," said Maximus.  "I shall never need

your son any more.  He will live and he will die an officer

of a Legion - and he might have been Prefect of one of my

Provinces.  Now eat and drink with us," he said.  "Your

men will wait till you have finished."



'My miserable thirty stood like wine-skins glistening in

the hot sun, and Maximus led us to where his people had

set a meal.  Himself he mixed the wine.



"'A year from now," he said, "you will remember that

you have sat with the Emperor of Britain - and Gaul."



"'Yes," said the Pater, "you can drive two mules -

Gaul and Britain."



"'Five years hence you will remember that you have

drunk" - he passed me the cup and there was blue borage

in it - "with the Emperor of Rome!"



"'No; you can't drive three mules.  They will tear YOU

in pieces," said my Father.



"'And you on the Wall, among the heather, will weep

because your notion of justice was more to you than the

favour of the Emperor of Rome."



'I sat quite still.  One does not answer a General who

wears the Purple.



"'I am not angry with you," he went on; "I owe too

much to your Father -"



"'You owe me nothing but advice that you never

took," said the Pater.



"'- to be unjust to any of your family.  Indeed, I say you


may make a good Tribune, but, so far as I am concerned,

on the Wall you will live, and on the Wall you will die,"

said Maximus.



"'Very like," said my Father.  "But we shall have the

Picts and their friends breaking through before long.

You cannot move all troops out of Britain to make you

Emperor, and expect the North to sit quiet."

"'I follow my destiny," said Maximus.



"'Follow it, then," said my Father, pulling up a fern

root; "and die as Theodosius died."



"'Ah!" said Maximus.  "My old General was killed

because he served the Empire too well.  I may be killed,

but not for that reason," and he smiled a little pale grey

smile that made my blood run cold.



"'Then I had better follow my destiny," I said, "and

take my men to the Wall."



'He looked at me a long time, and bowed his head

slanting like a Spaniard.  "Follow it, boy," he said.  That

was all.  I was only too glad to get away, though I had

many messages for home.  I found my men standing as

they had been put - they had not even shifted their feet in

the dust, and off I marched, still feeling that terrific smile

like an east wind up my back.  I never halted them till

sunset, and' - he turned about and looked at Pook's Hill

below him - 'then I halted yonder.'  He pointed to the

broken, bracken-covered shoulder of the Forge Hill

behind old Hobden's cottage.



'There?  Why, that's only the old Forge - where they

made iron once,' said Dan.



'Very good stuff it was too,' said Parnesius calmly.  'We

mended three shoulder-straps here and had a spear-head

riveted.  The Forge was rented from the Government by a

one-eyed smith from Carthage.  I remember we called

him Cyclops.  He sold me a beaver-skin rug for my sister's room.'



'But it couldn't have been here,' Dan insisted.



'But it was!  From the Altar of Victory at Anderida to the

First Forge in the Forest here is twelve miles seven

hundred paces.  It is all in the Road Book.  A man doesn't

forget his first march.  I think I could tell you every station

between this and -!  He leaned forward, but his eye was

caught by the setting sun.



It had come down to the top of Cherry Clack Hill, and

the light poured in between the tree trunks so that you

could see red and gold and black deep into the heart of

Far Wood; and Parnesius in his armour shone as though

he had been afire.



'Wait!' he said, lifting a hand, and the sunlight jinked

on his glass bracelet.  'Wait!  I pray to Mithras!'



He rose and stretched his arms westward, with deep,

splendid-sounding words.

Then Puck began to sing too, in a voice like bells

tolling, and as he sang he slipped from Volaterrae to the

ground, and beckoned the children to follow.  They

obeyed; it seemed as though the voices were pushing

them along; and through the goldy-brown light on the

beech leaves they walked, while Puck between them

chanted something like this:



     'Cur mundus militat sub vana gloria

     Cujus prosperitas est transitoria?

     Tam cito labitur ejus potentia

     Quam vasa figuli quae sunt fragilia.'



They found themselves at the little locked gates of the wood.



     'Quo Caesar abiit celsus imperio?

     Vel Dives splendidus totus in prandio?

     Dic ubi Tullius -'



Still singing, he took Dan's hand and wheeled him

round to face Una as she came out of the gate.  It shut

behind her, at the same time as Puck threw the memory-

magicking Oak, Ash and Thorn leaves over their heads.



'Well, you are jolly late,' said Una.  'Couldn't you get

away before?'



'I did,' said Dan.  'I got away in lots of time, but - but I

didn't know it was so late.  Where've you been?'



'In Volaterrae - waiting for you.'



'Sorry,' said Dan.  'It was all that beastly Latin.'







A British-Roman Song

(A.D.  406)





My father's father saw it not,

And I, belike, shall never come

To look on that so-holy spot -

The very Rome -



Crowned by all Time, all Art, all Might,

The equal work of Gods and Man,

City beneath whose oldest height -

The Race began!



Soon to send forth again a brood,

Unshakeable, we pray, that clings

To Rome's thrice-hammered hardihood -

In arduous things.

Strong heart with triple armour bound,

Beat strongly, for Thy life-blood runs,

Age after Age, the Empire round -

In us Thy Sons,

Who, distant from the Seven Hills,

Loving and serving much, require

Thee - Thee to guard 'gainst home-born ills

The Imperial Fire!









ON THE GREAT WALL







'When I left Rome for Lalage's sake

By the Legions' Road to Rimini,

She vowed her heart was mine to take

With me and my shield to Rimini -

(Till the Eagles flew from Rimini!)

And I've tramped Britain, and I've tramped Gaul,

And the Pontic shore where the snow-flakes fall

As white as the neck of Lalage -

(As cold as the heart of Lalage!)

And I've lost Britain, and I've lost Gaul,'



(the voice seemed very cheerful about it),



'And I've lost Rome, and, worst of all,

I've lost Lalage!'



They were standing by the gate to Far Wood when they

heard this song.  Without a word they hurried to their

private gap and wriggled through the hedge almost atop

of a jay that was feeding from Puck's hand.

'Gently!' said Puck.  'What are you looking for?'



'Parnesius, of course,' Dan answered.  'We've only just

remembered yesterday.  It isn't fair.'



Puck chuckled as he rose.  'I'm sorry, but children who

spend the afternoon with me and a Roman Centurion

need a little settling dose of Magic before they go to tea

with their governess.  Ohe, Parnesius!' he called.



'Here, Faun!' came the answer from Volaterrae.  They

could see the shimmer of bronze armour in the beech-

crotch, and the friendly flash of the great shield uplifted.



'I have driven out the Britons.'  Parnesius laughed like a

boy.  'I occupy their high forts.  But Rome is merciful!  You

may come up.'And up they three all scrambled.



'What was the song you were singing just now?' said

Una, as soon as she had settled herself.



'That?  Oh, Rimini.  It's one of the tunes that are always

being born somewhere in the Empire.  They run like a

pestilence for six months or a year, till another one

pleases the Legions, and then they march to that.'



'Tell them about the marching, Parnesius.  Few people

nowadays walk from end to end of this country,' said Puck.



'The greater their loss.  I know nothing better than the

Long March when your feet are hardened.  You begin

after the mists have risen, and you end, perhaps, an hour

after sundown.'



'And what do you have to eat?' Dan asked promptly.



'Fat bacon, beans, and bread, and whatever wine

happens to be in the rest-houses.  But soldiers are born

grumblers.  Their very first day out, my men complained

of our water-ground British corn.  They said it wasn't so

filling as the rough stuff that is ground in the Roman

ox-mills.  However, they had to fetch and eat it.'



'Fetch it?  Where from?' said Una.



'From that newly invented water-mill below the Forge.'



'That's Forge Mill - our Mill!'  Una looked at Puck.



'Yes; yours,' Puck put in.  'How old did you think it was?'



'I don't know.  Didn't Sir Richard Dalyngridge talk

about it?'



'He did, and it was old in his day,' Puck answered.

'Hundreds of years old.'



'It was new in mine,' said Parnesius.  'My men looked

at the flour in their helmets as though it had been a nest of

adders.  They did it to try my patience.  But I - addressed

them, and we became friends.  To tell the truth, they

taught me the Roman Step.  You see, I'd only served with

quick-marching Auxiliaries.  A Legion's pace is altogether

different.  It is a long, slow stride, that never varies from

sunrise to sunset.  "Rome's Race - Rome's Pace," as the

proverb says.  Twenty-four miles in eight hours, neither

more nor less.  Head and spear up, shield on your back,

cuirass-collar open one handsbreadth - and that's how

you take the Eagles through Britain.'



'And did you meet any adventures?' said Dan.



'There are no adventures South the Wall,' said

Parnesius.  'The worst thing that happened me was

having to appear before a magistrate up North, where a

wandering philosopher had jeered at the Eagles.  I was

able to show that the old man had deliberately blocked

our road; and the magistrate told him, out of his own

Book, I believe, that, whatever his Gods might be, he

should pay proper respect to Caesar.'



'What did you do?' said Dan.



'Went on.  Why should I care for such things, my

business being to reach my station?  It took me twenty days.



'Of course, the farther North you go the emptier are the

roads.  At last you fetch clear of the forests and climb bare

hills, where wolves howl in the ruins of our cities that

have been.  No more pretty girls; no more jolly magistrates

who knew your Father when he was young, and

invite you to stay with them; no news at the temples and

way-stations except bad news of wild beasts.  There's

where you meet hunters, and trappers for the Circuses,

prodding along chained bears and muzzled wolves.  Your

pony shies at them, and your men laugh.



'The houses change from gardened villas to shut forts

with watch-towers of grey stone, and great stone-walled

sheepfolds, guarded by armed Britons of the North

Shore.  In the naked hills beyond the naked houses,

where the shadows of the clouds play like cavalry charging,

you see puffs of black smoke from the mines.  The

hard road goes on and on - and the wind sings through

your helmet-plume - past altars to Legions and Generals

forgotten, and broken statues of Gods and Heroes, and

thousands of graves where the mountain foxes and hares

peep at you.  Red-hot in summer, freezing in winter, is

that big, purple heather country of broken stone.



'Just when you think you are at the world's end, you

see a smoke from East to West as far as the eye can turn,

and then, under it, also as far as the eye can stretch,

houses and temples, shops and theatres, barracks and

granaries, trickling along like dice behind - always behind

- one long, low, rising and falling, and hiding and

showing line of towers.  And that is the Wall!'



'Ah!' said the children, taking breath.



'You may well,' said Parnesius.  'Old men who have

followed the Eagles since boyhood say nothing in the

Empire is more wonderful than first sight of the Wall!'



'Is it just a Wall?  Like the one round the kitchen-

garden?' said Dan.

'No, no!  It is the Wall.  Along the top are towers with

guard-houses, small towers, between.  Even on the narrowest

part of it three men with shields can walk abreast,

from guard-house to guard-house.  A little curtain wall,

no higher than a man's neck, runs along the top of the

thick wall, so that from a distance you see the helmets of

the sentries sliding back and forth like beads.  Thirty feet

high is the Wall, and on the Picts' side, the North, is a

ditch, strewn with blades of old swords and spear-heads

set in wood, and tyres of wheels joined by chains.  The

Little People come there to steal iron for their arrow-heads.



'But the Wall itself is not more wonderful than the

town behind it.  Long ago there were great ramparts and

ditches on the South side, and no one was allowed to

build there.  Now the ramparts are partly pulled down

and built over, from end to end of the Wall; making a thin

town eighty miles long.  Think of it!  One roaring, rioting,

cock-fighting, wolf-baiting, horse-racing town, from

Ituna on the West to Segedunum on the cold eastern

beach!  On one side heather, woods and ruins where Picts

hide, and on the other, a vast town - long like a snake,

and wicked like a snake.  Yes, a snake basking beside a

warm wall!



'My Cohort, I was told, lay at Hunno, where the Great

North Road runs through the Wall into the Province of

Valentia.'Parnesius laughed scornfully.  'The Province of

Valentia!  We followed the road, therefore, into Hunno

town, and stood astonished.  The place was a fair - a fair

of peoples from every corner of the Empire.  Some were

racing horses:  some sat in wine-shops:  some watched

dogs baiting bears, and many gathered in a ditch to see

cocks fight.  A boy not much older than myself, but I

could see he was an officer, reined up before me and

asked what I wanted.



"'My station," I said, and showed him my shield.'

Parnesius held up his broad shield with its three X's like

letters on a beer-cask.



"'Lucky omen!" said he.  "Your Cohort's the next

tower to us, but they're all at the cock-fight.  This is a

happy place.  Come and wet the Eagles." He meant to

offer me a drink.



"'When I've handed over my men," I said.  I felt angry

and ashamed.



"'Oh, you'll soon outgrow that sort of nonsense," he

answered.  "But don't let me interfere with your hopes.

Go on to the Statue of Roma Dea.  You can't miss it.  The

main road into Valentia!" and he laughed and rode off.  I

could see the statue not a quarter of a mile away, and

there I went.  At some time or other the Great North Road

ran under it into Valentia; but the far end had been

blocked up because of the Picts, and on the plaster a man

had scratched, "Finish!" It was like marching into a cave.

We grounded spears together, my little thirty, and it

echoed in the barrel of the arch, but none came.  There

was a door at one side painted with our number.  We

prowled in, and I found a cook asleep, and ordered him

to give us food.  Then I climbed to the top of the Wall, and

looked out over the Pict country, and I - thought,' said

Parnesius.  'The bricked-up arch with "Finish!" on the

plaster was what shook me, for I was not much more than a boy.'



'What a shame!'said Una.  'But did you feel happy after

you'd had a good -'Dan stopped her with a nudge.



'Happy?' said Parnesius.  'When the men of the Cohort

I was to command came back unhelmeted from the

cock-fight, their birds under their arms, and asked me

who I was?  No, I was not happy; but I made my new

Cohort unhappy too ...  I wrote my Mother I was happy,

but, oh, my friends'- he stretched arms over bare knees -

'I would not wish my worst enemy to suffer as I suffered

through my first months on the Wall.  Remember this:

among the officers was scarcely one, except myself (and I

thought I had lost the favour of Maximus, my General),

scarcely one who had not done something of wrong or

folly.  Either he had killed a man, or taken money, or

insulted the magistrates, or blasphemed the Gods, and

so had been sent to the Wall as a hiding-place from shame

or fear.  And the men were as the officers.  Remember,

also, that the Wall was manned by every breed and race

in the Empire.  No two towers spoke the same tongue, or

worshipped the same Gods.  In one thing only we were all

equal.  No matter what arms we had used before we came

to the Wall, on the Wall we were all archers, like the

Scythians.  The Pict cannot run away from the arrow, or

crawl under it.  He is a bowman himself.  He knows!'



'I suppose you were fighting Picts all the time,' said Dan.



'Picts seldom fight.  I never saw a fighting Pict for half a

year.  The tame Picts told us they had all gone North.'



'What is a tame Pict?' said Dan.



'A Pict - there were many such - who speaks a few

words of our tongue, and slips across the Wall to sell

ponies and wolf-hounds.  Without a horse and a dog, and

a friend, man would perish.  The Gods gave me all three,

and there is no gift like friendship.  Remember this' -

Parnesius turned to Dan -'when you become a young

man.  For your fate will turn on the first true friend you make.'



'He means,' said Puck, grinning, 'that if you try to

make yourself a decent chap when you're young, you'll

make rather decent friends when you grow up.  If you're a

beast, you'll have beastly friends.  Listen to the Pious

Parnesius on Friendship!'



'I am not pious,'Parnesius answered, 'but I know what

goodness means; and my friend, though he was without

hope, was ten thousand times better than I.  Stop

laughing, Faun!'



'Oh, Youth Eternal and All-believing,' cried Puck, as

he rocked on the branch above.  'Tell them about your Pertinax.'



'He was that friend the Gods sent me - the boy who

spoke to me when I first came.  Little older than myself,

commanding the Augusta Victoria Cohort on the tower

next to us and the Numidians.  In virtue he was far my superior.'



'Then why was he on the Wall?' Una asked, quickly.

'They'd all done something bad.  You said so yourself.'



'He was the nephew, his father had died, of a great rich

man in Gaul who was not always kind to his mother.

When Pertinax grew up, he discovered this, and so his

uncle shipped him off, by trickery and force, to the Wall.

We came to know each other at a ceremony in our Temple

in the dark.  It was the Bull-Killing,'Parnesius explained to Puck.



'I see, said Puck, and turned to the children.  'That's

something you wouldn't quite understand.  Parnesius

means he met Pertinax in church.'



'Yes - in the Cave we first met, and we were both raised

to the Degree of Gryphons together.'  Parnesius lifted his

hand towards his neck for an instant.  'He had been on the

Wall two years, and knew the Picts well.  He taught me

first how to take Heather.'



'What's that?' said Dan.



'Going out hunting in the Pict country with a tame Pict.

You are quite safe so long as you are his guest, and wear a

sprig of heather where it can be seen.  If you went alone

you would surely be killed, if you were not smothered

first in the bogs.  Only the Picts know their way about

those black and hidden bogs.  Old Allo, the one-eyed,

withered little Pict from whom we bought our ponies,

was our special friend.  At first we went only to escape

from the terrible town, and to talk together about our

homes.  Then he showed us how to hunt wolves and

those great red deer with horns like Jewish candlesticks.

The Roman-born officers rather looked down on us for

doing this, but we preferred the heather to their amusements.

Believe me,' Parnesius turned again to Dan, 'a

boy is safe from all things that really harm when he is

astride a pony or after a deer.  Do you remember,

O Faun,' - he turned to Puck - 'the little altar I built

to the Sylvan Pan by the pine-forest beyond the brook?'



'Which?  The stone one with the line from Xenophon?'

said Puck, in quite a new voice.



'No!  What do I know of Xenophon?  That was Pertinax -

after he had shot his first mountain-hare with an arrow -

by chance!  Mine I made of round pebbles, in memory

of my first bear.  It took me one happy day to build.'

Parnesius faced the children quickly.



'And that was how we lived on the Wall for two years -

a little scuffling with the Picts, and a great deal of hunting

with old Allo in the Pict country.  He called us his children

sometimes, and we were fond of him and his barbarians,

though we never let them paint us Pict-fashion.  The

marks endure till you die.'



'How's it done?' said Dan.  'Anything like tattooing?'



'They prick the skin till the blood runs, and rub in

coloured juices.  Allo was painted blue, green, and red

from his forehead to his ankles.  He said it was part of his

religion.  He told us about his religion (Pertinax was

always interested in such things), and as we came to

know him well, he told us what was happening in Britain

behind the Wall.  Many things took place behind us in

those days.  And by the Light of the Sun,' said Parnesius,

earnestly, 'there was not much that those little people did

not know!  He told me when Maximus crossed over to

Gaul, after he had made himself Emperor of Britain, and

what troops and emigrants he had taken with him.  We

did not get the news on the Wall till fifteen days later.  He

told me what troops Maximus was taking out of Britain

every month to help him to conquer Gaul; and I always

found the numbers were as he said.  Wonderful!  And I tell

another strange thing!'



He joined his hands across his knees, and leaned his

head on the curve of the shield behind him.



'Late in the summer, when the first frosts begin and the

Picts kill their bees, we three rode out after wolf with

some new hounds.  Rutilianus, our General, had given us

ten days' leave, and we had pushed beyond the Second

Wall - beyond the Province of Valentia - into the higher

hills, where there are not even any of old Rome's ruins.

We killed a she-wolf before noon, and while Allo was

skinning her he looked up and said to me, "When you are

Captain of the Wall, my child, you won't be able to do this

any more!"



'I might as well have been made Prefect of Lower Gaul,

so I laughed and said, "Wait till I am Captain."



"'No, don't wait," said Allo.  "Take my advice and go home -

both of you."



"'We have no homes," said Pertinax.  "You

know that as well as we do .  We're finished men - thumbs

down against both of us.  Only men without hope would

risk their necks on your ponies."



The old man laughed one of those short Pict laughs - like

a fox barking on a frosty night.  "I'm fond of you two," he said.  

"Besides, I've taught you what little you know about hunting.  Take

my advice and go home."



"'We can't," I said.  "I'm out of favour with my

General, for one thing; and for another, Pertinax has an uncle."



"'I don't know about his uncle," said Allo, "but the

trouble with you, Parnesius, is that your General thinks

well of you."



"'Roma Dea!" said Pertinax, sitting up.  "What can you

guess what Maximus thinks, you old horse-coper?"



'Just then (you know how near the brutes creep when

one is eating?) a great dog-wolf jumped out behind us,

and away our rested hounds tore after him, with us at

their tails.  He ran us far out of any country we'd ever

heard of, straight as an arrow till sunset, towards the

sunset.  We came at last to long capes stretching into

winding waters, and on a grey beach below us we saw

ships drawn up.  Forty-seven we counted - not Roman

galleys but the raven-winged ships from the North where

Rome does not rule.  Men moved in the ships, and the sun

flashed on their helmets - winged helmets of the red-haired

men from the North where Rome does not rule.  We watched, and we

counted, and we wondered, for though we had heard rumours

concerning these Winged Hats, as the Picts called them, never

before had we looked upon them.



"'Come away!  come away!" said Allo.  "My Heather

won't protect you here.  We shall all be killed!" His legs

trembled like his voice.  Back we went - back across the

heather under the moon, till it was nearly morning, and

our poor beasts stumbled on some ruins.



'When we woke, very stiff and cold, Allo was mixing

the meal and water.  One does not light fires in the Pict

country except near a village.  The little men are always

signalling to each other with smokes, and a strange

smoke brings them out buzzing like bees.  They can sting, too!



"'What we saw last night was a trading-station," said

Allo.  "Nothing but a trading-station.  "



"'I do not like lies on an empty stomach," said

Pertinax.  "I suppose" (he had eyes like an eagle's) - "I

suppose that is a trading-station also?"  He pointed to a

smoke far off on a hill-top, ascending in what we call the

Picts' Call:  - Puff - double-puff:  double-puff - puff!  They

make it by raising and dropping a wet hide on a fire.



"'No," said Allo, pushing the platter back into the bag.

"That is for you and me.  Your fate is fixed.  Come."



'We came.  When one takes Heather, one must obey

one's Pict - but that wretched smoke was twenty miles

distant, well over on the East coast, and the day was as

hot as a bath.



"'Whatever happens," said Allo, while our ponies

grunted along, "I want you to remember me."

"'I shall not forget," said Pertinax.  "You have cheated

me out of my breakfast."



"What is a handful of crushed oats to a Roman?" he

said.  Then he laughed his laugh that was not a laugh.



"What would you do if you were a handful of oats being

crushed between the upper and lower stones of a mill?"



"'I'm Pertinax, not a riddle-guesser," said Pertinax.



"'You're a fool," said Allo.  "Your Gods and my Gods

are threatened by strange Gods, and all you can do is to laugh."



"'Threatened men live long," I said.



"'I pray the Gods that may be true," he said.  "But I ask

you again not to forget me."



'We climbed the last hot hill and looked out on the

eastern sea, three or four miles off.  There was a small

sailing-galley of the North Gaul pattern at anchor, her

landing-plank down and her sail half up; and below us,

alone in a hollow, holding his pony, sat Maximus,

Emperor of Britain!  He was dressed like a hunter, and he

leaned on his little stick; but I knew that back as far as I

could see it, and I told Pertinax.



"'You're madder than Allo!" he said.  "It must be the sun!"



'Maximus never stirred till we stood before him.  Then

he looked me up and down, and said:  "Hungry again?  It

seems to be my destiny to feed you whenever we meet.  I

have food here.  Allo shall cook it."



"'No," said Allo.  "A Prince in his own land does not

wait on wandering Emperors.  I feed my two children

without asking your leave." He began to blow up the ashes.



"'I was wrong," said Pertinax.  "We are all mad.  Speak

up, O Madman called Emperor!"



'Maximus smiled his terrible tight-lipped smile, but

two years on the Wall do not make a man afraid of mere

looks.  So I was not afraid.



"'I meant you, Parnesius, to live and die a Centurion of

the Wall," said Maximus.  "But it seems from these," - he

fumbled in his breast - "you can think as well as draw."

He pulled out a roll of letters I had written to my people,

full of drawings of Picts, and bears, and men I had met on

the Wall.  Mother and my sister always liked my pictures.



'He handed me one that I had called "Maximus's

Soldiers".  It showed a row of fat wine-skins, and our old

Doctor of the Hunno hospital snuffing at them.  Each time

that Maximus had taken troops out of Britain to help him

to conquer Gaul, he used to send the garrisons more wine

- to keep them quiet, I suppose.  On the Wall, we always

called a wine-skin a "Maximus".  Oh, yes; and I had

drawn them in Imperial helmets.



"'Not long since," he went on, "men's names were

sent up to Caesar for smaller jokes than this."



"'True, Caesar," said Pertinax; "but you forget that

was before I, your friend's friend, became such a

good spear-thrower."



'He did not actually point his hunting-spear at

Maximus, but balanced it on his palm - so!



"'I was speaking of time past," said Maximus, never

fluttering an eyelid.  "Nowadays one is only too pleased

to find boys who can think for themselves, and their

friends." He nodded at Pertinax.  "Your Father lent me

the letters, Parnesius, so you run no risk from me."



"'None whatever," said Pertinax, and rubbed the

spear-point on his sleeve.



"'I have been forced to reduce the garrisons in Britain,

because I need troops in Gaul.  Now I come to take troops

from the Wall itself," said he.



"'I wish you joy of us," said Pertinax.  "We're the last

sweepings of the Empire - the men without hope.

Myself, I'd sooner trust condemned criminals."



"'You think so?" he said, quite seriously.  "But it will

only be till I win Gaul.  One must always risk one's life, or

one's soul, or one's peace - or some little thing."



'Allo passed round the fire with the sizzling deer's

meat.  He served us two first.



"'Ah!" said Maximus, waiting his turn.  "I perceive

you are in your own country.  Well, you deserve it.  They

tell me you have quite a following among the Picts, Parnesius."



"'I have hunted with them," I said.  "Maybe I have a

few friends among the heather."



"'He is the only armoured man of you all who understands

us," said Allo, and he began a long speech about

our virtues, and how we had saved one of his grandchildren

from a wolf the year before.'



'Had you?' said Una.



'Yes; but that was neither here nor there.  The little

green man orated like a - like Cicero.  He made us out to

be magnificent fellows.  Maximus never took his eyes off

our faces.



"'Enough," he said.  "I have heard Allo on you.  I wish

to hear you on the Picts."



'I told him as much as I knew, and Pertinax helped me

out.  There is never harm in a Pict if you but take the

trouble to find out what he wants.  Their real grievance

against us came from our burning their heather.  The

whole garrison of the Wall moved out twice a year, and

solemnly burned the heather for ten miles North.

Rutilianus, our General, called it clearing the country.

The Picts, of course, scampered away, and all we did was

to destroy their bee-bloom in the summer, and ruin their

sheep-food in the spring.



"'True, quite true," said Allo.  "How can we make our

holy heather-wine, if you burn our bee-pasture?"



'We talked long, Maximus asking keen questions that

showed he knew much and had thought more about the

Picts.  He said presently to me:  "If I gave you the old

Province of Valentia to govern, could you keep the Picts

contented till I won Gaul?  Stand away, so that you do not

see Allo's face; and speak your own thoughts."



"'No," I said.  "You cannot remake that Province.  The

Picts have been free too long."



"'Leave them their village councils, and let them

furnish their own soldiers," he said.  "You, I am sure,

would hold the reins very lightly."



"Even then, no," I said.  "At least not now.  They have

been too oppressed by us to trust anything with a Roman

name for years and years."



'I heard old Allo behind me mutter:  "Good child!"



"'Then what do you recommend," said Maximus, "to

keep the North quiet till I win Gaul?"



"'Leave the Picts alone," I said.  "Stop the heather-

burning at once, and - they are improvident little animals -

send them a shipload or two of corn now and then."



"'Their own men must distribute it - not some

cheating Greek accountant," said Pertinax.



"'Yes, and allow them to come to our hospitals when

they are sick," I said.



"'Surely they would die first," said Maximus.



"'Not if Parnesius brought them in," said Allo.  "I

could show you twenty wolf-bitten, bear-clawed Picts

within twenty miles of here.  But Parnesius must stay

with them in hospital, else they would go mad with fear.  "



"'I see," said Maximus.  "Like everything else in the

world, it is one man's work.  You, I think, are that one man."



"'Pertinax and I are one," I said.



"'As you please, so long as you work.  Now, Allo, you

know that I mean your people no harm.  Leave us to talk

together," said Maximus.



"'No need!" said Allo.  "I am the corn between the

upper and lower millstones.  I must know what the lower

millstone means to do.  These boys have spoken the truth

as far as they know it.  I, a Prince, will tell you the rest.  I

am troubled about the Men of the North." He squatted

like a hare in the heather, and looked over his shoulder.



"'I also," said Maximus, "or I should not be here."



"'Listen," said Allo.  "Long and long ago the Winged

Hats" - he meant the Northmen - "came to our beaches

and said, 'Rome falls!  Push her down!'  We fought you.

You sent men.  We were beaten.  After that we said to the

Winged Hats, 'You are liars!  Make our men alive that

Rome killed, and we will believe you.'  They went away

ashamed.  Now they come back bold, and they tell the old

tale, which we begin to believe - that Rome falls!"



"'Give me three years' peace on the Wall," cried

Maximus, "and I will show you and all the ravens how

they lie!"



"'Ah, I wish it too!  I wish to save what is left of the corn

from the millstones.  But you shoot us Picts when we

come to borrow a little iron from the Iron Ditch; you burn

our heather, which is all our crop; you trouble us with

your great catapults.  Then you hide behind the Wall, and

scorch us with Greek fire.  How can I keep my young men

from listening to the Winged Hats - in winter especially,

when we are hungry?  My young men will say, 'Rome can

neither fight nor rule.  She is taking her men out of

Britain.  The Winged Hats will help us to push down the

Wall.  Let us show them the secret roads across the bogs.'

Do I want that?  No!" He spat like an adder.  "I would keep

the secrets of my people though I were burned alive.  My

two children here have spoken truth.  Leave us Picts

alone.  Comfort us, and cherish us, and feed us from far

off - with the hand behind the back.  Parnesius understands

us.  Let him have rule on the Wall, and I will hold

my young men quiet for" - he ticked it off on his fingers -

"one year easily:  the next year not so easily:  the third

year, perhaps!  See, I give you three years.  If then you do

not show us that Rome is strong in men and terrible in

arms, the Winged Hats, I tell you, will sweep down the

Wall from either sea till they meet in the middle, and you

will go.  I shall not grieve over that, but well I know tribe

never helps tribe except for one price.  We Picts will go

too.  The Winged Hats will grind us to this!" He tossed a

handful of dust in the air.



"'Oh, Roma Dea!" said Maximus, half aloud.  "It is

always one man's work- always and everywhere!"



"And one man's life," said Allo.  "You are Emperor,

but not a God.  You may die."



"'I have thought of that too," said he.  "Very good.  If

this wind holds, I shall be at the East end of the Wall by

morning.  Tomorrow, then, I shall see you two when I

inspect, and I will make you Captains of the Wall for this work."



"'One instant, Caesar," said Pertinax.  "All men have

their price.  I am not bought yet."



"'Do you also begin to bargain so early?" said

Maximus.  "Well?"



"'Give me justice against my uncle Icenus, the

Duumvir of Divio in Gaul," he said.



"'Only a life?  I thought it would be money or an office.

Certainly you shall have him.  Write his name on these

tablets - on the red side; the other is for the living!" and

Maximus held out his tablets.



"'He is of no use to me dead," said Pertinax.  "My

mother is a widow.  I am far off.  I am not sure he pays her

all her dowry."



"'No matter.  My arm is reasonably long.  We will look

through your uncle's accounts in due time.  Now,

farewell till tomorrow, O Captains of the Wall!"



'We saw him grow small across the heather as he

walked to the galley.  There were Picts, scores, each side

of him, hidden behind stones.  He never looked left or

right.  He sailed away southerly, full spread before the

evening breeze, and when we had watched him out to

sea, we were silent.  We understood that Earth bred few

men like to this man.



'Presently Allo brought the ponies and held them for

us to mount - a thing he had never done before.



"'Wait awhile," said Pertinax, and he made a little altar

of cut turf, and strewed heather-bloom atop, and laid

upon it a letter from a girl in Gaul.



"'What do you do, O my friend?" I said.



"'I sacrifice to my dead youth," he answered, and,

when the flames had consumed the letter, he ground

them out with his heel.  Then we rode back to that Wall of

which we were to be Captains.'



Parnesius stopped.  The children sat still, not even

asking if that were all the tale.  Puck beckoned, and

pointed the way out of the wood.  'Sorry,' he whispered,

'but you must go now.'



'We haven't made him angry, have we?' said Una.  'He

looks so far off, and - and - thinky.'



'Bless your heart, no.  Wait till tomorrow.  It won't be

long.  Remember, you've been playing Lays of Ancient Rome.'



And as soon as they had scrambled through their gap

where Oak, Ash and Thorn grew, that was all they remembered.







A Song to Mithras





Mithras, God of the Morning, our trumpets waken the Wall!

'Rome is above the Nations, but Thou art over all!'

Now as the names are answered, and the guards are marched away,

Mithras, also a soldier, give us strength for the day!



Mithras, God of the Noontide, the heather swims in the heat,

Our helmets scorch our foreheads, our sandals burn our feet.

Now in the ungirt hour, now ere we blink and drowse,

Mithras, also a soldier, keep us true to our vows!



Mithras, God of the Sunset, low on the Western main,

Thou descending immortal, immortal to rise again!

Now when the watch is ended, now when the wine is drawn,

Mithras, also a soldier, keep us pure till the dawn!



Mithras, God of the Midnight, here where the great bull dies,

Look on Thy children in darkness.  Oh, take our sacrifice!

Many roads Thou hast fashioned:  all of them lead to the Light!

Mithras, also a soldier, teach us to die aright!


