




Puck of Pook's Hill



	by Rudyard Kipling






CONTENTS



Weland's Sword

   Puck's Song

   A Tree Song

Young Men at the Manor

   Sir Richard's Song

The Knights of the Joyous Venture

   Harp Song of the Dane Women

   Thorkild's Song

Old Men at Pevensey

   The Runes on Weland's Sword

A Centurion of the Thirtieth

   'Cities and Thrones and Powers'

   A British-Roman Song

On the Great Wall

   A Song to Mithras

The Winged Hats

   A Pict Song

Hal o' the Draft

   'Prophets have honour all over the Earth'

   A Smugglers' Song

'Dymchurch Flit'

   The Bee Boy's Song

   A Three-Part Song

The Treasure and the Law

   Song of the Fifth River

   The Children's Song









WELAND'S SWORD







Puck's Song





See you the dimpled track that runs,

All hollow through the wheat?

O that was where they hauled the guns

That smote King Philip's fleet!



See you our little mill that clacks,

So busy by the brook?

She has ground her corn and paid her tax

Ever since Domesday Book.



See you our stilly woods of oak,

And the dread ditch beside?

O that was where the Saxons broke,

On the day that Harold died!



See you the windy levels spread

About the gates of Rye?

O that was where the Northmen fled,

When Alfred's ships came by!



See you our pastures wide and lone,

Where the red oxen browse?

O there was a City thronged and known,

Ere London boasted a house!



And see you, after rain, the trace

Of mound and ditch and wall?

O that was a Legion's camping-place,

When Caesar sailed from Gaul!



And see you marks that show and fade,

Like shadows on the Downs?

O they are the lines the Flint Men made,

To guard their wondrous towns!



Trackway and Camp and City lost,

Salt Marsh where now is corn;

Old Wars, old Peace, old Arts that cease,

And so was England born!



She is not any common Earth,

Water or Wood or Air,

But Merlin's Isle of Gramarye,

Where you and I will fare.







The children were at the Theatre, acting to Three Cows as

much as they could remember of Midsummer Night's

Dream.  Their father had made them a small play out of the

big Shakespeare one, and they had rehearsed it with him

and with their mother till they could say it by heart.  They

began when Nick Bottom the weaver comes out of the

bushes with a donkey's head on his shoulders, and finds

Titania, Queen of the Fairies, asleep.  Then they skipped

to the part where Bottom asks three little fairies to scratch

his head and bring him honey, and they ended where he

falls asleep in Titania's arms.  Dan was Puck and Nick

Bottom, as well as all three Fairies.  He wore a pointy-

cloth cap for Puck, and a paper donkey's head out

of a Christmas cracker - but it tore if you were not careful

- for Bottom.  Una was Titania, with a wreath of

columbines and a foxglove wand.



The Theatre lay in a meadow called the Long Slip.  A

little mill-stream, carrying water to a mill two or three

fields away, bent round one corner of it, and in the

middle of the bend lay a large old Fairy Ring of darkened

grass, which was the stage.  The millstream banks, overgrown

with willow, hazel, and guelder-rose, made convenient

places to wait in till your turn came; and a

grown-up who had seen it said that Shakespeare himself

could not have imagined a more suitable setting for his

play.  They were not, of course, allowed to act on

Midsummer Night itself, but they went down after tea on

Midsummer Eve, when the shadows were growing, and

they took their supper - hard-boiled eggs, Bath Oliver

biscuits, and salt in an envelope - with them.  Three Cows

had been milked and were grazing steadily with a tearing

noise that one could hear all down the meadow; and the

noise of the Mill at work sounded like bare feet running

on hard ground.  A cuckoo sat on a gate-post singing his

broken June tune, 'cuckoo-cuck', while a busy kingfisher

crossed from the mill-stream, to the brook which ran on

the other side of the meadow.  Everything else was a sort

of thick, sleepy stillness smelling of meadow-sweet and

dry grass.



Their play went beautifully.  Dan remembered all his

parts - Puck, Bottom, and the three Fairies - and Una

never forgot a word of Titania - not even the difficult

piece where she tells the Fairies how to feed Bottom with

'apricocks, green figs, and dewberries', and all the lines

end in 'ies'.  They were both so pleased that they acted it

three times over from beginning to end before they sat

down in the unthistly centre of the Ring to eat eggs and

Bath Olivers.  This was when they heard a whistle among

the alders on the bank, and they jumped.



The bushes parted.  In the very spot where Dan had

stood as Puck they saw a small, brown, broad-

shouldered, pointy-eared person with a snub nose, slanting

blue eyes, and a grin that ran right across his freckled

face.  He shaded his forehead as though he were watching

Quince, Snout, Bottom, and the others rehearsing

Pyramus and Thisbe, and, in a voice as deep as Three Cows

asking to be milked, he began:



     'What hempen homespuns have we swaggering here,

     So near the cradle of the fairy Queen?'



He stopped, hollowed one hand round his ear, and,

with a wicked twinkle in his eye, went on:



     'What, a play toward?  I'll be an auditor;

     An actor, too, perhaps, if I see cause.'



The children looked and gasped.  The small thing - he was

no taller than Dan's shoulder - stepped quietly into the Ring.



'I'm rather out of practice,' said he; 'but that's the way

my part ought to be played.'



Still the children stared at him - from his dark-blue cap, like

a big columbine flower, to his bare, hairy feet.  At last he laughed.



'Please don't look like that.  It isn't my fault.  What else

could you expect?' he said.



'We didn't expect any one,' Dan answered slowly.

'This is our field.'



'Is it?' said their visitor, sitting down.  'Then what on

Human Earth made you act Midsummer Night's Dream

three times over, on Midsummer Eve, in the middle of a

Ring, and under - right under one of my oldest hills in Old

England?  Pook's Hill - Puck's Hill - Puck's Hill - Pook's

Hill!  It's as plain as the nose on my face.'



He pointed to the bare, fern-covered slope of Pook's

Hill that runs up from the far side of the mill-stream to a

dark wood.  Beyond that wood the ground rises and rises

for five hundred feet, till at last you climb out on the bare

top of Beacon Hill, to look over the Pevensey Levels and

the Channel and half the naked South Downs.



'By Oak, Ash, and Thorn!' he cried, still laughing.  'If

this had happened a few hundred years ago you'd have

had all the People of the Hills out like bees in June!'



'We didn't know it was wrong,' said Dan.



'Wrong!'  The little fellow shook with laughter.  'Indeed,

it isn't wrong.  You've done something that Kings

and Knights and Scholars in old days would have given

their crowns and spurs and books to find out.  If Merlin

himself had helped you, you couldn't have managed

better!  You've broken the Hills - you've broken the Hills!

It hasn't happened in a thousand years.'



'We - we didn't mean to,' said Una.



'Of course you didn't!  That's just why you did it.

Unluckily the Hills are empty now, and all the People of

the Hills are gone.  I'm the only one left.  I'm Puck, the

oldest Old Thing in England, very much at your service if

- if you care to have anything to do with me.  If you don't,

of course you've only to say so, and I'll go.'



He looked at the children, and the children looked at

him for quite half a minute.  His eyes did not twinkle any

more.  They were very kind, and there was the beginning

of a good smile on his lips.



Una put out her hand.  'Don't go,' she said.  'We like you.'

'Have a Bath Oliver,' said Dan, and he passed over the

squashy envelope with the eggs.



'By Oak, Ash and Thorn,' cried Puck, taking off his

blue cap, 'I like you too.  Sprinkle a plenty salt on the

biscuit, Dan, and I'll eat it with you.  That'll show you the

sort of person I am.  Some of us' - he went on, with his

mouth full - 'couldn't abide Salt, or Horse-shoes over a

door, or Mountain-ash berries, or Running Water, or

Cold Iron, or the sound of Church Bells.  But I'm Puck!'



He brushed the crumbs carefully from his doublet and

shook hands.



'We always said, Dan and I,' Una stammered, 'that if it

ever happened we'd know ex-actly what to do; but - but

now it seems all different somehow.'



'She means meeting a fairy,'said Dan.  'I never believed

in 'em - not after I was six, anyhow.'



'I did,' said Una.  'At least, I sort of half believed till we

learned "Farewell, Rewards".  Do you know "Farewell,

Rewards and Fairies"?'



'Do you mean this?' said Puck.  He threw his big head

back and began at the second line:



     'Good housewives now may say,

     For now foul sluts in dairies

     Do fare as well as they;

     And though they sweep their hearths no less



('Join in, Una!')



     Than maids were wont to do,

     Yet who of late for cleanliness

     Finds sixpence in her shoe?'



The echoes flapped all along the flat meadow.

'Of course I know it,' he said.



'And then there's the verse about the rings,' said Dan.

'When I was little it always made me feel unhappy in my

inside.'



"'Witness those rings and roundelays", do you mean?'

boomed Puck, with a voice like a great church organ.



     'Of theirs which yet remain,

     Were footed in Queen Mary's days

     On many a grassy plain,

     But since of late Elizabeth,

     And, later, James came in,

     Are never seen on any heath

     As when the time hath been.



'It's some time since I heard that sung, but there's no

good beating about the bush:  it's true.  The People of the

Hills have all left.  I saw them come into Old England and

I saw them go.  Giants, trolls, kelpies, brownies, goblins,

imps; wood, tree, mound, and water spirits; heath-

people, hill-watchers, treasure-guards, good people,

little people, pishogues, leprechauns, night-riders,

pixies, nixies, gnomes, and the rest - gone, all gone!  I

came into England with Oak, Ash and Thorn, and when

Oak, Ash and Thorn are gone I shall go too.'



Dan looked round the meadow - at Una's Oak by the

lower gate; at the line of ash trees that overhang Otter

Pool where the millstream spills over when the Mill does

not need it, and at the gnarled old white-thorn where

Three Cows scratched their necks.



'It's all right,' he said; and added, 'I'm planting a lot of

acorns this autumn too.'



'Then aren't you most awfully old?' said Una.



'Not old - fairly long-lived, as folk say hereabouts.  Let

me see - my friends used to set my dish of cream for me o'

nights when Stonehenge was new.  Yes, before the Flint

Men made the Dewpond under Chanctonbury Ring.'

Una clasped her hands, cried 'Oh!' and nodded her head.



'She's thought a plan,' Dan explained.  'She always

does like that when she thinks a plan.'



'I was thinking - suppose we saved some of our

porridge and put it in the attic for you?  They'd notice if

we left it in the nursery.'



'Schoolroom,' said Dan quickly, and Una flushed,

because they had made a solemn treaty that summer not

to call the schoolroom the nursery any more.



'Bless your heart o' gold!' said Puck.  'You'll make a fine

considering wench some market-day.  I really don't want

you to put out a bowl for me; but if ever I need a bite, be

sure I'll tell you.'



He stretched himself at length on the dry grass, and the

children stretched out beside him, their bare legs waving

happily in the air.  They felt they could not be afraid of

him any more than of their particular friend old Hobden

the hedger.  He did not bother them with grown-up

questions, or laugh at the donkey's head, but lay and

smiled to himself in the most sensible way.

'Have you a knife on you?' he said at last.



Dan handed over his big one-bladed outdoor knife,

and Puck began to carve out a piece of turf from the centre

of the Ring.



'What's that for - Magic?' said Una, as he pressed up

the square of chocolate loam that cut like so much cheese.



'One of my little magics,' he answered, and cut

another.  'You see, I can't let you into the Hills because the

People of the Hills have gone; but if you care to take seisin

from me, I may be able to show you something out of the

common here on Human Earth.  You certainly deserve it.'



'What's taking seisin?' said Dan, cautiously.



'It's an old custom the people had when they bought

and sold land.  They used to cut out a clod and hand it

over to the buyer, and you weren't lawfully seised of

your land - it didn't really belong to you - till the other

fellow had actually given you a piece of it -'like this.'  He

held out the turves.



'But it's our own meadow,' said Dan, drawing back.

'Are you going to magic it away?'



Puck laughed.  'I know it's your meadow, but there's

a great deal more in it than you or your father ever

guessed.  Try!'



He turned his eyes on Una.



'I'll do it,' she said.  Dan followed her example at once.



'Now are you two lawfully seised and possessed of all

Old England,' began Puck, in a sing-song voice.  'By right

of Oak, Ash, and Thorn are you free to come and go and

look and know where I shall show or best you please.

You shall see What you shall see and you shall hear What

you shall hear, though It shall have happened three

thousand year; and you shall know neither Doubt nor

Fear.  Fast!  Hold fast all I give you.'



The children shut their eyes, but nothing happened.



'Well?' said Una, disappointedly opening them.  'I

thought there would be dragons.'



"'Though It shall have happened three thousand

year,"' said Puck, and counted on his fingers.  'No; I'm

afraid there were no dragons three thousand years ago.'



'But there hasn't happened anything at all,' said Dan.

'Wait awhile,' said Puck.  'You don't grow an oak in a

year - and Old England's older than twenty oaks.  Let's sit

down again and think.  I can do that for a century at a time.'



'Ah, but you're a fairy,' said Dan.



'Have you ever heard me say that word yet?' said Puck quickly.



'No.  You talk about "the People of the Hills", but you

never say "fairies",' said Una.  'I was wondering at that.

Don't you like it?'



'How would you like to be called "mortal" or "human

being" all the time?' said Puck; 'or "son of Adam" or

"daughter of Eve"?'



'I shouldn't like it at all,' said Dan.  'That's how the

Djinns and Afrits talk in the Arabian Nights.'



'And that's how I feel about saying - that word that I

don't say.  Besides, what you call them are made-up things

the People of the Hills have never heard of - little

buzzflies with butterfly wings and gauze petticoats, and

shiny stars in their hair, and a wand like a schoolteacher's

cane for punishing bad boys and rewarding good ones.  I

know 'em!'



'We don't mean that sort,'said Dan.  'We hate 'em too.'



'Exactly,' said Puck.  'Can you wonder that the People

of the Hills don't care to be confused with that painty-

winged, wand-waving, sugar-and-shake-your-head set

of impostors?  Butterfly wings, indeed!  I've seen Sir Huon

and a troop of his people setting off from Tintagel Castle

for Hy-Brasil in the teeth of a sou'-westerly gale, with the

spray flying all over the Castle, and the Horses of the

Hills wild with fright.  Out they'd go in a lull, screaming

like gulls, and back they'd be driven five good miles

inland before they could come head to wind again.

Butterfly-wings!  It was Magic - Magic as black as Merlin

could make it, and the whole sea was green fire and white

foam with singing mermaids in it.  And the Horses of the

Hills picked their way from one wave to another by the

lightning flashes!  That was how it was in the old days!'



'Splendid,' said Dan, but Una shuddered.



'I'm glad they're gone, then; but what made the People

of the Hills go away?' Una asked.



'Different things.  I'll tell you one of them some day -

the thing that made the biggest flit of any,' said Puck.  'But

they didn't all flit at once.  They dropped off, one by one,

through the centuries.  Most of them were foreigners who

couldn't stand our climate.  They flitted early.'



'How early?' said Dan.



'A couple of thousand years or more.  The fact is they

began as Gods.  The Phoenicians brought some over

when they came to buy tin; and the Gauls, and the Jutes,

and the Danes, and the Frisians, and the Angles brought

more when they landed.  They were always landing in

those days, or being driven back to their ships, and they

always brought their Gods with them.  England is a bad

country for Gods.  Now, I began as I mean to go on.  A

bowl of porridge, a dish of milk, and a little quiet fun with

the country folk in the lanes was enough for me then, as it

is now.  I belong here, you see, and I have been mixed up

with people all my days.  But most of the others insisted

on being Gods, and having temples, and altars, and

priests, and sacrifices of their own.'



'People burned in wicker baskets?' said Dan.  'Like

Miss Blake tells us about?'



'All sorts of sacrifices,' said Puck.  'If it wasn't men, it

was horses, or cattle, or pigs, or metheglin - that's a

sticky, sweet sort of beer.  I never liked it.  They were a

stiff-necked, extravagant set of idols, the Old Things.  But

what was the result?  Men don't like being sacrificed at the

best of times; they don't even like sacrificing their farm-

horses.  After a while, men simply left the Old Things

alone, and the roofs of their temples fell in, and the Old

Things had to scuttle out and pick up a living as they

could.  Some of them took to hanging about trees, and

hiding in graves and groaning o' nights.  If they groaned

loud enough and long enough they might frighten a poor

countryman into sacrificing a hen, or leaving a pound

of butter for them.  I remember one Goddess called

Belisama.  She became a common wet water-spirit somewhere

in Lancashire.  And there were hundreds of other

friends of mine.  First they were Gods.  Then they were

People of the Hills, and then they flitted to other

places because they couldn't get on with the English

for one reason or another.  There was only one Old

Thing, I remember, who honestly worked for his

living after he came down in the world.  He was called

Weland, and he was a smith to some Gods.  I've

forgotten their names, but he used to make them swords

and spears.  I think he claimed kin with Thor of

the Scandinavians.'



'Heroes of Asgard Thor?' said Una.  She had been reading

the book.



'Perhaps,' answered Puck.  'None the less, when bad

times came, he didn't beg or steal.  He worked; and I was

lucky enough to be able to do him a good turn.'



'Tell us about it,' said Dan.  'I think I like hearing of Old Things.'



They rearranged themselves comfortably, each chewing

a grass stem.  Puck propped himself on one strong

arm and went on:



'Let's think!  I met Weland first on a November afternoon

in a sleet storm, on Pevensey Level.'



'Pevensey?  Over the hill, you mean?'  Dan pointed south.



'Yes; but it was all marsh in those days, right up to

Horsebridge and Hydeneye.  I was on Beacon Hill - they

called it Brunanburgh then - when I saw the pale flame

that burning thatch makes, and I went down to look.

Some pirates - I think they must have been Peor's men -

were burning a village on the Levels, and Weland's

image - a big, black wooden thing with amber beads

round his neck - lay in the bows of a black thirty-two-oar

galley that they had just beached.  Bitter cold it was!  There

were icicles hanging from her deck and the oars were

glazed over with ice, and there was ice on Weland's lips.

When he saw me he began a long chant in his own

tongue, telling me how he was going to rule England,

and how I should smell the smoke of his altars from

Lincolnshire to the Isle of Wight.  I didn't care!  I'd seen too

many Gods charging into Old England to be upset about

it.  I let him sing himself out while his men were burning

the village, and then I said (I don't know what put it into

my head), "Smith of the Gods," I said, "the time comes

when I shall meet you plying your trade for hire

by the wayside."'



'What did Weland say?' said Una.  'Was he angry?'



'He called me names and rolled his eyes, and I went

away to wake up the people inland.  But the pirates

conquered the country, and for centuries Weland was a

most important God.  He had temples everywhere - from

Lincolnshire to the Isle of Wight, as he said - and his

sacrifices were simply scandalous.  To do him justice, he

preferred horses to men; but men or horses, I knew that

presently he'd have to come down in the world - like the

other Old Things.  I gave him lots of time - I gave him

about a thousand years - and at the end of 'em I went into

one of his temples near Andover to see how he prospered.

There was his altar, and there was his image, and

there were his priests, and there were the congregation,

and everybody seemed quite happy, except Weland and

the priests.  In the old days the congregation were

unhappy until the priests had chosen their sacrifices; and so

would you have been.  When the service began a priest

rushed out, dragged a man up to the altar, pretended to

hit him on the head with a little gilt axe, and the man fell

down and pretended to die.  Then everybody shouted:

"A sacrifice to Weland!  A sacrifice to Weland!"'



'And the man wasn't really dead?' said Una.



'Not a bit.  All as much pretence as a dolls' tea-party.

Then they brought out a splendid white horse, and the

priest cut some hair from its mane and tail and burned it

on the altar, shouting, "A sacrifice!" That counted the

same as if a man and a horse had been killed.  I saw poor

Weland's face through the smoke, and I couldn't help

laughing.  He looked so disgusted and so hungry, and all

he had to satisfy himself was a horrid smell of burning

hair.  Just a dolls' tea-party!



'I judged it better not to say anything then ('twouldn't

have been fair), and the next time I came to Andover, a

few hundred years later, Weland and his temple were

gone, and there was a Christian bishop in a church there.

None of the People of the Hills could tell me anything

about him, and I supposed that he had left England.'

Puck turned, lay on his other elbow, and thought for a

long time.



'Let's see,' he said at last.  'It must have been some few

years later - a year or two before the Conquest, I think -

that I came back to Pook's Hill here, and one evening I

heard old Hobden talking about Weland's Ford.'



'If you mean old Hobden the hedger, he's only seventy-two.

He told me so himself,' said Dan.  'He's a intimate

friend of ours.'



'You're quite right,' Puck replied.  'I meant old Hobden's

ninth great-grandfather.  He was a free man and

burned charcoal hereabouts.  I've known the family,

father and son, so long that I get confused sometimes.

Hob of the Dene was my Hobden's name, and he lived at

the Forge cottage.  Of course, I pricked up my ears when I

heard Weland mentioned, and I scuttled through the

woods to the Ford just beyond Bog Wood yonder.'  He

jerked his head westward, where the valley narrows

between wooded hills and steep hop-fields.



'Why, that's Willingford Bridge,' said Una.  'We go

there for walks often.  There's a kingfisher there.'



'It was Weland's Ford then, dearie.  A road led down to

it from the Beacon on the top of the hill - a shocking bad

road it was - and all the hillside was thick, thick oak-

forest, with deer in it.  There was no trace of Weland, but

presently I saw a fat old farmer riding down from the

Beacon under the greenwood tree.  His horse had cast a

shoe in the clay, and when he came to the Ford he

dismounted, took a penny out of his purse, laid it on a

stone, tied the old horse to an oak, and called out:

"Smith, Smith, here is work for you!" Then he sat down

and went to sleep.  You can imagine how I felt when I saw

a white-bearded, bent old blacksmith in a leather apron

creep out from behind the oak and begin to shoe the

horse.  It was Weland himself.  I was so astonished that I

jumped out and said:  "What on Human Earth are you

doing here, Weland?"'



'Poor Weland!' sighed Una.



'He pushed the long hair back from his forehead (he

didn't recognize me at first).  Then he said:  "You ought to

know.  You foretold it, Old Thing.  I'm shoeing horses for

hire.  I'm not even Weland now," he said.  "They call me

Wayland-Smith."'



'Poor chap!' said Dan.  'What did you say?'



'What could I say?  He looked up, with the horse's foot

on his lap, and he said, smiling, "I remember the time

when I wouldn't have accepted this old bag of bones as a

sacrifice, and now I'm glad enough to shoe him for a penny."



"'Isn't there any way for you to get back to Valhalla, or

wherever you come from?" I said.



"'I'm afraid not, " he said, rasping away at the hoof.  He

had a wonderful touch with horses.  The old beast was

whinnying on his shoulder.  "You may remember that I

was not a gentle God in my Day and my Time and my

Power.  I shall never be released till some human being

truly wishes me well."



"'Surely," said I, "the farmer can't do less than that.

You're shoeing the horse all round for him."



"'Yes," said he, "and my nails will hold a shoe from

one full moon to the next.  But farmers and Weald clay,"

said he, "are both uncommon cold and sour."



'Would you believe it, that when that farmer woke and

found his horse shod he rode away without one word of

thanks?  I was so angry that I wheeled his horse right

round and walked him back three miles to the Beacon,

just to teach the old sinner politeness.'



'Were you invisible?' said Una.  Puck nodded, gravely.



'The Beacon was always laid in those days ready to

light, in case the French landed at Pevensey; and I walked

the horse about and about it that lee-long summer night.

The farmer thought he was bewitched - well, he was, of

course - and began to pray and shout.  I didn't care!  I was

as good a Christian as he any fair-day in the County, and

about four o'clock in the morning a young novice came

along from the monastery that used to stand on the top of

Beacon Hill.'



'What's a novice?' said Dan.



'It really means a man who is beginning to be a monk,

but in those days people sent their sons to a monastery

just the same as a school.  This young fellow had been to a

monastery in France for a few months every year, and he

was finishing his studies in the monastery close to his

home here.  Hugh was his name, and he had got up to go

fishing hereabouts.  His people owned all this valley.

Hugh heard the farmer shouting, and asked him what in

the world he meant.  The old man spun him a wonderful

tale about fairies and goblins and witches; and I know he

hadn't seen a thing except rabbits and red deer all that

night.  (The People of the Hills are like otters - they don't

show except when they choose.) But the novice wasn't a

fool.  He looked down at the horse's feet, and saw the

new shoes fastened as only Weland knew how to fasten

'em.  (Weland had a way of turning down the nails that

folks called the Smith's Clinch.)



"'H'm!" said the novice.  "Where did you get your

horse shod?"



'The farmer wouldn't tell him at first, because the

priests never liked their people to have any dealings with

the Old Things.  At last he confessed that the Smith had

done it.  "What did you pay him?" said the novice.

"Penny," said the farmer, very sulkily.  "That's less than

a Christian would have charged," said the novice.  "I

hope you threw a 'thank you' into the bargain." "No,"

said the farmer; "Wayland-Smith's a heathen." "Heathen

or no heathen," said the novice, "you took his help,

and where you get help there you must give thanks."

"What?" said the farmer - he was in a furious temper

because I was walking the old horse in circles all this time

- "What, you young jackanapes?" said he.  "Then by

your reasoning I ought to say 'Thank you' to Satan if he

helped me?"  "Don't roll about up there splitting reasons

with me," said the novice.  "Come back to the Ford and

thank the Smith, or you'll be sorry."



'Back the farmer had to go.  I led the horse, though no

one saw me, and the novice walked beside us, his gown

swishing through the shiny dew and his fishing-rod

across his shoulders, spear-wise.  When we reached the

Ford again - it was five o'clock and misty still under the

oaks - the farmer simply wouldn't say "Thank you." He

said he'd tell the Abbot that the novice wanted him to

worship heathen Gods.  Then Hugh the novice lost his

temper.  He just cried, "Out!" put his arm under the

farmer's fat leg, and heaved him from his saddle on to the

turf, and before he could rise he caught him by the back of

the neck and shook him like a rat till the farmer growled,

"Thank you, Wayland-Smith."'



'Did Weland see all this?' said Dan.



'Oh yes, and he shouted his old war-cry when the

farmer thudded on to the ground.  He was delighted.

Then the novice turned to the oak tree and said, "Ho,

Smith of the Gods!  I am ashamed of this rude farmer; but

for all you have done in kindness and charity to him and

to others of our people, I thank you and wish you well."

Then he picked up his fishing-rod - it looked more like a

tall spear than ever - and tramped off down your valley.'



'And what did poor Weland do?' said Una.



'He laughed and he cried with joy, because he had

been released at last, and could go away.  But he was an

honest Old Thing.  He had worked for his living and he

paid his debts before he left.  "I shall give that novice a

gift," said Weland.  "A gift that shall do him good the

wide world over and Old England after him.  Blow up my

fire, Old Thing, while I get the iron for my last task."

Then he made a sword - a dark-grey, wavy-lined sword -

and I blew the fire while he hammered.  By Oak, Ash and

Thorn, I tell you, Weland was a Smith of the Gods!  He

cooled that sword in running water twice, and the third

time he cooled it in the evening dew, and he laid it out in

the moonlight and said Runes (that's charms) over it, and

he carved Runes of Prophecy on the blade.  "Old Thing,"

he said to me, wiping his forehead, "this is the best blade

that Weland ever made.  Even the user will never know

how good it is.  Come to the monastery."



'We went to the dormitory where the monks slept, we

saw the novice fast asleep in his cot, and Weland put the

sword into his hand, and I remember the young fellow

gripped it in his sleep.  Then Weland strode as far as he

dared into the Chapel and threw down all his shoeing-

tools - his hammers and pincers and rasps - to show that

he had done with them for ever.  It sounded like suits of

armour falling, and the sleepy monks ran in, for they

thought the monastery had been attacked by the French.

The novice came first of all, waving his new sword and

shouting Saxon battle-cries.  When they saw the shoeing-

tools they were very bewildered, till the novice asked

leave to speak, and told what he had done to the farmer,

and what he had said to Wayland-Smith, and how,

though the dormitory light was burning, he had found

the wonderful Rune-carved sword in his cot.



'The Abbot shook his head at first, and then he laughed

and said to the novice:  "Son Hugh, it needed no sign

from a heathen God to show me that you will never be a

monk.  Take your sword, and keep your sword, and go

with your sword, and be as gentle as you are strong and

courteous.  We will hang up the Smith's tools before the

Altar," he said, "because, whatever the Smith of the

Gods may have been, in the old days, we know that he

worked honestly for his living and made gifts to Mother

Church." Then they went to bed again, all except the

novice, and he sat up in the garth playing with his sword.

Then Weland said to me by the stables:  "Farewell, Old

Thing; you had the right of it.  You saw me come to

England, and you see me go.  Farewell!"



'With that he strode down the hill to the corner of the

Great Woods - Woods Corner, you call it now - to the

very place where he had first landed - and I heard him

moving through the thickets towards Horsebridge for a

little, and then he was gone.  That was how it happened.  I

saw it.'



Both children drew a long breath.



'But what happened to Hugh the novice?' said Una.



'And the sword?' said Dan.



Puck looked down the meadow that lay all quiet and

cool in the shadow of Pook's Hill.  A corncrake jarred in a

hay-field near by, and the small trouts of the brook began

to jump.  A big white moth flew unsteadily from the

alders and flapped round the children's heads, and the

least little haze of water-mist rose from the brook.

'Do you really want to know?' Puck said.



'We do,' cried the children.  'Awfully!'



'Very good.  I promised you that you shall see What

you shall see, and you shall hear What you shall hear,

though It shall have happened three thousand year; but

just now it seems to me that, unless you go back to the

house, people will be looking for you.  I'll walk with you

as far as the gate.'



'Will you be here when we come again?' they asked.



'Surely, sure-ly,' said Puck.  'I've been here some time

already.  One minute first, please.'



He gave them each three leaves - one of Oak, one of

Ash and one of Thorn.



'Bite these,' said he.  'Otherwise you might be talking at

home of what you've seen and heard, and - if I know

human beings - they'd send for the doctor.  Bite!'



They bit hard, and found themselves walking side by

side to the lower gate.  Their father was leaning over it.



'And how did your play go?' he asked.



'Oh, splendidly,' said Dan.  'Only afterwards, I think,

we went to sleep.  it was very hot and quiet.  Don't you

remember, Una?'



Una shook her head and said nothing.



'I see,' said her father.



     'Late - late in the evening Kilmeny came home,

     For Kilmeny had been she could not tell where,

     And Kilmeny had seen what she could not declare.



But why are you chewing leaves at your time of life,

daughter?  For fun?'



'No.  It was for something, but I can't exactly remember,'

said Una.



And neither of them could till -


