





THE WINGED HATS




The next day happened to be what they called a Wild

Afternoon.  Father and Mother went out to pay calls; Miss

Blake went for a ride on her bicycle, and they were left all

alone till eight o'clock.



When they had seen their dear parents and their dear

preceptress politely off the premises they got a cabbage-

leaf full of raspberries from the gardener, and a Wild Tea

from Ellen.  They ate the raspberries to prevent their

squashing, and they meant to divide the cabbage-leaf

with Three Cows down at the Theatre, but they came

across a dead hedgehog which they simply had to bury,

and the leaf was too useful to waste.



Then they went on to the Forge and found old Hobden

the hedger at home with his son, the Bee Boy, who is not

quite right in his head, but who can pick up swarms of

bees in his naked hands; and the Bee Boy told them the

rhyme about the slow-worm:



     'If I had eyes as I could see,

     No mortal man would trouble me.'



They all had tea together by the hives, and Hobden

said the loaf-cake which Ellen had given them was almost

as good as what his wife used to make, and he showed

them how to set a wire at the right height for hares.  They

knew about rabbits already.



Then they climbed up Long Ditch into the lower end of

Far Wood.  This is sadder and darker than the Volaterrae

end because of an old marl-pit full of black water, where

weepy, hairy moss hangs round the stumps of the

willows and alders.  But the birds come to perch on the

dead branches, and Hobden says that the bitter willow-

water is a sort of medicine for sick animals.



They sat down on a felled oak-trunk in the shadows of

the beech undergrowth, and were looping the wires

Hobden had given them, when they saw Parnesius.



'How quietly you came!'said Una, moving up to make

room.  'Where's Puck?'



'The Faun and I have disputed whether it is better that I

should tell you all my tale, or leave it untold,' he replied.



'I only said that if he told it as it happened you

wouldn't understand it,' said Puck, jumping up like a

squirrel from behind the log.

'I don't understand all of it,' said Una, 'but I like

hearing about the little Picts.'



'What I can't understand,' said Dan, 'is how Maximus

knew all about the Picts when he was over in Gaul.'



'He who makes himself Emperor anywhere must

know everything, everywhere,' said Parnesius.  'We had

this much from Maximus's mouth after the Games.'



'Games?  What Games?' said Dan.



Parnesius stretched his arm out stiffly, thumb pointed

to the ground.  'Gladiators!  That sort of game,' he said.

'There were two days' Games in his honour when he

landed all unexpected at Segedunum on the East end of

the Wall.  Yes, the day after we had met him we held two

days' Games; but I think the greatest risk was run, not by

the poor wretches on the sand, but by Maximus.  In the

old days the Legions kept silence before their Emperor.

So did not we!  You could hear the solid roar run West

along the Wall as his chair was carried rocking through

the crowds.  The garrison beat round him - clamouring,

clowning, asking for pay, for change of quarters, for

anything that came into their wild heads.  That chair was

like a little boat among waves, dipping and falling,

but always rising again after one had shut the eyes.'

Parnesius shivered.

'Were they angry with him?' said Dan.



'No more angry than wolves in a cage when their

trainer walks among them.  If he had turned his back an

instant, or for an instant had ceased to hold their eyes,

there would have been another Emperor made on the

Wall that hour.  Was it not so, Faun?'



'So it was.  So it always will be,' said Puck.



'Late in the evening his messenger came for us, and we

followed to the Temple of Victory, where he lodged with

Rutilianus, the General of the Wall.  I had hardly seen the

General before, but he always gave me leave when I

wished to take Heather.  He was a great glutton, and kept

five Asian cooks, and he came of a family that believed in

oracles.  We could smell his good dinner when we

entered, but the tables were empty.  He lay snorting on a

couch.  Maximus sat apart among long rolls of accounts.

Then the doors were shut.



"'These are your men," said Maximus to the General,

who propped his eye-corners open with his gouty

fingers, and stared at us like a fish.



"'I shall know them again, Caesar," said Rutilianus.



"Very good," said Maximus.  "Now hear!  You are not

to move man or shield on the Wall except as these boys

shall tell you.  You will do nothing, except eat, without

their permission.  They are the head and arms.  You are

the belly!"



"'As Caesar pleases," the old man grunted.  "If my pay

and profits are not cut, you may make my Ancestors'

Oracle my master.  Rome has been!  Rome has been!"

Then he turned on his side to sleep.



"'He has it," said Maximus.  "We will get to what I need."



'He unrolled full copies of the number of men and

supplies on the Wall - down to the sick that very day in

Hunno Hospital.  Oh, but I groaned when his pen

marked off detachment after detachment of our best - of

our least worthless men!  He took two towers of our

Scythians, two of our North British auxiliaries, two

Numidian cohorts, the Dacians all, and half the Belgians.

It was like an eagle pecking a carcass.



"'And now, how many catapults have you?"  He

turned up a new list, but Pertinax laid his open hand there.



"'No, Caesar," said he.  "Do not tempt the Gods too

far.  Take men, or engines, but not both; else we refuse."'

'Engines?' said Una.



'The catapults of the Wall - huge things forty feet high

to the head - firing nets of raw stone or forged bolts.

Nothing can stand against them.  He left us our catapults

at last, but he took a Caesar's half of our men

without pity.  We were a shell when he rolled up the lists!



"'Hail, Caesar!  We, about to die, salute you!" said

Pertinax, laughing.  "If any enemy even leans against the

Wall now, it will tumble."



"'Give me the three years Allo spoke of," he

answered, "and you shall have twenty thousand men of

your own choosing up here.  But now it is a gamble - a

game played against the Gods, and the stakes are Britain,

Gaul, and perhaps Rome.  You play on my side?"



"'We will play, Caesar," I said, for I had never met a

man like this man.



",Good.  Tomorrow," said he, "I proclaim you

Captains of the Wall before the troops."



'So we went into the moonlight, where they were

cleaning the ground after the Games.  We saw great Roma

Dea atop of the Wall, the frost on her helmet, and her

spear pointed towards the North Star.  We saw the

twinkle of night-fires all along the guard-towers, and the

line of the black catapults growing smaller and smaller in

the distance.  All these things we knew till we were

weary; but that night they seemed very strange to us,

because the next day we knew we were to be their masters.



'The men took the news well; but when Maximus went

away with half our strength, and we had to spread

ourselves into the emptied towers, and the townspeople

complained that trade would be ruined, and the autumn

gales blew - it was dark days for us two.  Here Pertinax

was more than my right hand.  Being born and bred

among the great country houses in Gaul, he knew the

proper words to address to all - from Roman-born

Centurions to those dogs of the Third - the Libyans.

And he spoke to each as though that man were as

high-minded as himself.  Now I saw so strongly what

things were needed to be done, that I forgot things

are only accomplished by means of men.  That was a mistake.



'I feared nothing from the Picts, at least for that year,

but Allo warned me that the Winged Hats would soon

come in from the sea at each end of the Wall to prove to

the Picts how weak we were.  So I made ready in haste,

and none too soon.  I shifted our best men to the ends of

the Wall, and set up screened catapults by the beach.  The

Winged Hats would drive in before the snow-squalls -

ten or twenty boats at a time - on Segedunum or Ituna,

according as the wind blew.



'Now a ship coming in to land men must furl her sail.  If

you wait till you see her men gather up the sail's foot,

your catapults can jerk a net of loose stones (bolts only cut

through the cloth) into the bag of it.  Then she turns over,

and the sea makes everything clean again.  A few men

may come ashore, but very few ...  It was not hard work,

except the waiting on the beach in blowing sand and

snow.  And that was how we dealt with the Winged Hats

that winter.



'Early in the spring, when the East winds blow like

skinning-knives, they gathered again off Segedunum

with many ships.  Allo told me they would never rest till

they had taken a tower in open fight.  Certainly they

fought in the open.  We dealt with them thoroughly

through a long day:  and when all was finished, one man

dived clear of the wreckage of his ship, and swam

towards shore.  I waited, and a wave tumbled him at my feet.



'As I stooped, I saw he wore such a medal as I wear.'

Parnesius raised his hand to his neck.  'Therefore, when

he could speak, I addressed him a certain Question

which can only be answered in a certain manner.  He

answered with the necessary Word - the Word that

belongs to the Degree of Gryphons in the science of

Mithras my God.  I put my shield over him till he could

stand up.  You see I am not short, but he was a head taller

than I.  He said:  "What now?"  I said:  "At your pleasure,

my brother, to stay or go."



'He looked out across the surf.  There remained one

ship unhurt, beyond range of our catapults .  I checked the

catapults and he waved her in.  She came as a hound

comes to a master.  When she was yet a hundred paces

from the beach, he flung back his hair, and swam out.

They hauled him in, and went away.  I knew that those

who worship Mithras are many and of all races, so I did

not think much more upon the matter.



'A month later I saw Allo with his horses - by the

Temple of Pan, O Faun - and he gave me a great necklace

of gold studded with coral.



'At first I thought it was a bribe from some tradesman

in the town - meant for old Rutilianus.  "Nay," said Allo.

"This is a gift from Amal, that Winged Hat whom you

saved on the beach.  He says you are a Man."



"'He is a Man, too.  Tell him I can wear his gift," I answered.



"'Oh, Amal is a young fool; but ' speaking as sensible

men, your Emperor is doing such great things in Gaul

that the Winged Hats are anxious to be his friends, or,

better still, the friends of his servants.  They think you

and Pertinax could lead them to victories." Allo looked at

me like a one-eyed raven.



"'Allo," I said, "you are the corn between the two

millstones.  Be content if they grind evenly, and don't

thrust your hand between them."



"'I?" said Allo.  "I hate Rome and the Winged Hats

equally; but if the Winged Hats thought that some day

you and Pertinax might join them against Maximus, they

would leave you in peace while you considered.  Time is

what we need - you and I and Maximus.  Let me carry a

pleasant message back to the Winged Hats - something

for them to make a council over.  We barbarians are all

alike.  We sit up half the night to discuss anything a

Roman says.  Eh?"



"'We have no men.  We must fight with words," said

Pertinax.  "Leave it to Allo and me."



'So Allo carried word back to the Winged Hats that we

would not fight them if they did not fight us; and they (I

think they were a little tired of losing men in the sea)

agreed to a sort of truce.  I believe Allo, who being a

horse-dealer loved lies, also told them we might some

day rise against Maximus as Maximus had risen against Rome.



'Indeed, they permitted the corn-ships which I sent to

the Picts to pass North that season without harm.  Therefore

the Picts were well fed that winter, and since they

were in some sort my children, I was glad of it.  We had

only two thousand men on the Wall, and I wrote many

times to Maximus and begged - prayed - him to send me

only one cohort of my old North British troops.  He could

not spare them.  He needed them to win more victories in Gaul.



'Then came news that he had defeated and slain the

Emperor Gratian, and thinking he must now be secure, I

wrote again for men.  He answered:  "You will learn that I

have at last settled accounts with the pup Gratian.  There was no

need that he should have died, but he became confused and lost

his head, which is a bad thing to befall any Emperor.  Tell your

Father I am content to drive two mules only; for unless my old

General's son thinks himself destined to destroy me, I shall rest

Emperor of Gaul and Britain, and then you, my two children,

will presently get all the men you need.  just now I can spare none.  "'



'What did he mean by his General's son?' said Dan.



'He meant Theodosius Emperor of Rome, who was the

son of Theodosius the General under whom Maximus

had fought in the old Pict War.  The two men never loved

each other, and when Gratian made the younger

Theodosius Emperor of the East (at least, so I've heard),

Maximus carried on the war to the second generation.  It

was his fate, and it was his fall.  But Theodosius the

Emperor is a good man.  As I know.'  Parnesius was silent

for a moment and then continued.



'I wrote back to Maximus that, though we had peace on

the Wall, I should be happier with a few more men and

some new catapults.  He answered:  "You must live a little

longer under the shadow of my victories, till I can see what

young Theodosius intends.  He may welcome me as a brother-

Emperor, or he may be preparing an army.  In either case I

cannot spare men just now.  "



'But he was always saying that,' cried Una.



'It was true.  He did not make excuses; but thanks, as he

said, to the news of his victories, we had no trouble on

the Wall for a long, long time.  The Picts grew fat as their

own sheep among the heather, and as many of my men

as lived were well exercised in their weapons.  Yes, the

Wall looked strong.  For myself, I knew how weak we

were.  I knew that if even a false rumour of any defeat to

Maximus broke loose among the Winged Hats, they

might come down in earnest, and then - the Wall must

go!  For the Picts I never cared, but in those years I learned

something of the strength of the Winged Hats.  They

increased their strength every day, but I could not increase

my men.  Maximus had emptied Britain behind us,

and I felt myself to be a man with a rotten stick standing

before a broken fence to turn bulls.



'Thus, my friends, we lived on the Wall, waiting -

waiting - waiting for the men that Maximus never sent.



'Presently he wrote that he was preparing an army

against Theodosius.  He wrote - and Pertinax read it over

my shoulder in our quarters:  "Tell your Father that my

destiny orders me to drive three mules or be torn in pieces by

them.  I hope within a year to finish with Theodosius, son of

Theodosius, once and for all.  Then you shall have Britain to

rule, and Pertinax, if he chooses, Gaul.  Today I wish strongly

you were with me to beat my Auxiliaries into shape.  Do not, I

pray you, believe any rumour of my sickness.  I have a little

evil in my old body which I shall cure by riding swiftly into Rome.  "



'Said Pertinax:  "It is finished with Maximus.  He writes

as a man without hope.  I, a man without hope, can see

this.  What does he add at the bottom of the roll?  'Tell

Pertinax I have met his late Uncle, the Duumvir of Divio, and

that he accounted to me quite truthfully for all his Mother's

monies.  I have sent her with a fitting escort, for she is the mother

of a hero, to Nicaea, where the climate is warm.'



"'That is proof," said Pertinax.  "Nicaea is not far by sea

from Rome.  A woman there could take ship and fly to

Rome in time of war.  Yes, Maximus foresees his death,

and is fulfilling his promises one by one.  But I am glad my

uncle met him."'



"'You think blackly today?" I asked.



"'I think truth.  The Gods weary of the play we have

played against them.  Theodosius will destroy Maximus.

It is finished!"



"'Will you write him that?" I said.



"'See what I shall write," he answered, and he took

pen and wrote a letter cheerful as the light of day, tender

as a woman's and full of jests.  Even I, reading over his

shoulder, took comfort from it till - I saw his face!



"'And now," he said, sealing it, "we be two dead men,

my brother.  Let us go to the Temple."

'We prayed awhile to Mithras, where we had many

times prayed before.  After that, we lived day by day

among evil rumours till winter came again.



'It happened one morning that we rode to the East

shore, and found on the beach a fair-haired man, half

frozen, bound to some broken planks.  Turning him over,

we saw by his belt-buckle that he was a Goth of an

Eastern Legion.  Suddenly he opened his eyes and cried

loudly, "He is dead!  The letters were with me, but the

Winged Hats sank the ship." So saying, he died between

our hands.



'We asked not who was dead.  We knew!  We raced

before the driving snow to Hunno, thinking perhaps Allo

might be there.  We found him already at our stables, and

he saw by our faces what we had heard.



"'It was in a tent by the sea," he stammered.  "He was

beheaded by Theodosius.  He sent a letter to you, written

while he waited to be slain.  The Winged Hats met the

ship and took it.  The news is running through the

heather like fire.  Blame me not!  I cannot hold back my

young men any more."



"'I would we could say as much for our men," said

Pertinax, laughing.  "But, Gods be praised, they cannot

run away."



"'What do you do?" said Allo.  "I bring an order - a

message - from the Winged Hats that you join them with

your men, and march South to plunder Britain."



"'It grieves me," said Pertinax, "but we are stationed

here to stop that thing."



"'If I carry back such an answer they will kill me," said

Allo.  "I always promised the Winged Hats that you

would rise when Maximus fell.  I - I did not think he could fall."



"'Alas!  my poor barbarian," said Pertinax, still

laughing.  "Well, you have sold us too many good ponies

to be thrown back to your friends.  We will make you a

prisoner, although you are an ambassador."



"'Yes, that will be best," said Allo, holding out a

halter.  We bound him lightly, for he was an old man.



"'Presently the Winged Hats may come to look for

you, and that will give us more time.  See how the habit of

playing for time sticks to a man!" said Pertinax, as he tied

the rope.



"'No," I said.  "Time may help.  If Maximus wrote us a

letter while he was a prisoner, Theodosius must have

sent the ship that brought it.  If he can send ships, he can

send men."



"'How will that profit us?" said Pertinax.  "We serve

Maximus, not Theodosius.  Even if by some miracle of the

Gods Theodosius down South sent and saved the Wall,

we could not expect more than the death Maximus died.  "



"'It concerns us to defend the Wall, no matter what

Emperor dies, or makes die," I said.



"'That is worthy of your brother the philosopher,"

said Pertinax.  "Myself I am without hope, so I do not say

solemn and stupid things!  Rouse the Wall!"



'We armed the Wall from end to end; we told the

officers that there was a rumour of Maximus's death

which might bring down the Winged Hats, but we were

sure, even if it were true, that Theodosius, for the sake of

Britain, would send us help.  Therefore, we must stand

fast ...  My friends, it is above all things strange to see

how men bear ill news!  Often the strongest till then

become the weakest, while the weakest, as it were, reach

up and steal strength from the Gods.  So it was with us.

Yet my Pertinax by his jests and his courtesy and

his labours had put heart and training into our poor

numbers during the past years - more than I should have

thought possible.  Even our Libyan Cohort - the

Third - stood up in their padded cuirasses and did not whimper.

'In three days came seven chiefs and elders of the

Winged Hats.  Among them was that tall young man,

Amal, whom I had met on the beach, and he smiled when

he saw my necklace.  We made them welcome, for they

were ambassadors.  We showed them Allo, alive but

bound.  They thought we had killed him, and I saw it

would not have vexed them if we had.  Allo saw it too,

and it vexed him.  Then in our quarters at Hunno we came

to council.



'They said that Rome was falling, and that we must join

them.  They offered me all South Britain to govern after

they had taken a tribute out of it.



'I answered, "Patience.  This Wall is not weighed off

like plunder.  Give me proof that my General is dead."



"'Nay," said one elder, "prove to us that he lives"; and

another said cunningly, "What will you give us if we read

you his last words?"



"'We are not merchants to bargain," cried Amal.

"Moreover, I owe this man my life.  He shall have his

proof." He threw across to me a letter (well I knew the

seal) from Maximus.



"'We took this out of the ship we sank," he cried.  "I

cannot read, but I know one sign, at least, which makes

me believe.  " He showed me a dark stain on the outer roll

that my heavy heart perceived was the valiant blood of Maximus.



"'Read!" said Amal.  "Read, and then let us hear whose

servants you are!"



'Said Pertinax, very softly, after he had looked through

it:  "I will read it all.  Listen, barbarians!" He read that

which I have carried next my heart ever since.'



Parnesius drew from his neck a folded and spotted

piece of parchment, and began in a hushed voice:



"'To Parnesius and Pertinax, the not unworthy Captains of

the Wall, from Maximus, once Emperor of Gaul and Britain,

now prisoner waiting death by the sea in the camp of Theodosius

- Greeting and Goodbye!  "



"'Enough," said young Amal; "there is your proof!

You must join us now!"



'Pertinax looked long and silently at him, till that fair

man blushed like a girl.  Then read Pertinax:



"'I have joyfully done much evil in my life to those who have

wished me evil, but if ever I did any evil to you two I repent, and

I ask your forgiveness.  The three mules which I strove to drive

have torn me in pieces as your Father prophesied.  The naked

swords wait at the tent door to give me the death I gave to

Gratian.  Therefore I, your General and your emperor, send you

free and honourable dismissal from my service, which you

entered, not for money or office, but, as it makes me warm to

believe, because you loved me!"



"'By the Light of the Sun," Amal broke in.  "This was in

some sort a Man!  We may have been mistaken in his servants!"



'And Pertinax read on:  "You gave me the time for which I

asked.  If I have failed to use it, do not lament.  We have gambled

very splendidly against the Gods, but they hold weighted dice,

and I must pay the forfeit.  Remember, I have been; but Rome is;

and Rome will be.  Tell Pertinax his Mother is in safety at

Nicaea, and her monies are in charge of the Prefect at Antipolis.

Make my remembrances to your Father and to your Mother,

whose friendship was great gain to me.  Give also to my little

Picts and to the Winged Hats such messages as their thick heads

can understand.  I would have sent you three Legions this very

day if all had gone aright.  Do not forget me.  We have worked

together.  Farewell!  Farewell!  Farewell!  "

'Now, that was my Emperor's last letter.'  (The children

heard the parchment crackle as Parnesius returned it to

its place.)



"'I was mistaken," said Amal.  "The servants of such a

man will sell nothing except over the sword.  I am glad of

it." He held out his hand to me.



"'But Maximus has given you your dismissal," said an

elder.  "You are certainly free to serve - or to rule - whom

you please.  Join - do not follow - join us!"



"'We thank you," said Pertinax.  "But Maximus tells us

to give you such messages as - pardon me, but I use his

words - your thick heads can understand." He pointed

through the door to the foot of a catapult wound up.



"'We understand," said an elder.  "The Wall must be

won at a price?"



"'It grieves me," said Pertinax, laughing, "but so it

must be won," and he gave them of our best Southern wine.



'They drank, and wiped their yellow beards in silence

till they rose to go.



'Said Amal, stretching himself (for they were barbarians):

"We be a goodly company; I wonder what the

ravens and the dogfish will make of some of us before this

snow melts."



"'Think rather what Theodosius may send," I

answered; and though they laughed, I saw that my

chance shot troubled them.



'Only old Allo lingered behind a little.



"'You see," he said, winking and blinking, "I am no

more than their dog.  When I have shown their men the

secret short ways across our bogs, they will kick me like one."



"'Then I should not be in haste to show them those

ways," said Pertinax, "till I was sure that Rome could not

save the Wall."



"'You think so?  Woe is me!" said the old man.  "I only

wanted peace for my people," and he went out stumbling

through the snow behind the tall Winged Hats.



'In this fashion then, slowly, a day at a time, which is

very bad for doubting troops, the War came upon us.  At

first the Winged Hats swept in from the sea as they had

done before, and there we met them as before - with the

catapults; and they sickened of it.  Yet for a long time they

would not trust their duck-legs on land, and I think,

when it came to revealing the secrets of the tribe, the little

Picts were afraid or ashamed to show them all the roads

across the heather.  I had this from a Pict prisoner.  They

were as much our spies as our enemies, for the Winged

Hats oppressed them, and took their winter stores.  Ah,

foolish Little People!



'Then the Winged Hats began to roll us up from each

end of the Wall.  I sent runners Southward to see what the

news might be in Britain, but the wolves were very bold

that winter, among the deserted stations where the

troops had once been, and none came back.  We had

trouble, too, with the forage for the ponies along the

Wall.  I kept ten, and so did Pertinax.  We lived and slept

in the saddle, riding east or west, and we ate our worn-out

ponies.  The people of the town also made us some

trouble till I gathered them all in one quarter behind

Hunno.  We broke down the Wall on either side of it to

make as it were a citadel.  Our men fought better in close order.



'By the end of the second month we were deep in the

War as a man is deep in a snowdrift, or in a dream.  I think

we fought in our sleep.  At least I know I have gone on the

Wall and come off again, remembering nothing between,

though my throat was harsh with giving orders, and my

sword, I could see, had been used.



'The Winged Hats fought like wolves - all in a pack.

Where they had suffered most, there they charged in

most hotly.  This was hard for the defenders, but it held

them from sweeping on into Britain.



'In those days Pertinax and I wrote on the plaster of the

bricked archway into Valentia the names of the towers,

and the days on which they fell one by one.  We wished

for some record.



'And the fighting?  The fight was always hottest to left

and right of the great statue of Roma Dea, near to

Rutilianus's house.  By the Light of the Sun, that old fat

man, whom we had not considered at all, grew young

again among the trumpets!  I remember he said his sword

was an oracle!  "Let us consult the Oracle," he would say,

and put the handle against his ear, and shake his head

wisely.  "And this day is allowed Rutilianus to live," he

would say, and, tucking up his cloak, he would puff and

pant and fight well.  Oh, there were jests in plenty on the

Wall to take the place of food!



'We endured for two months and seventeen days -

always being pressed from three sides into a smaller

space.  Several times Allo sent in word that help was

at hand.  We did not believe it, but it cheered our men.

'The end came not with shootings of joy, but, like the

rest, as in a dream.  The Winged Hats suddenly left us in

peace for one night and the next day; which is too long for

spent men.  We slept at first lightly, expecting to be

roused, and then like logs, each where he lay.  May you

never need such sleep!  When I waked our towers were

full of strange, armed men, who watched us snoring.  I

roused Pertinax, and we leaped up together.



"'What?" said a young man in clean armour.  "Do you

fight against Theodosius?  Look!"



'North we looked over the red snow.  No Winged Hats

were there.  South we looked over the white snow, and

behold there were the Eagles of two strong Legions

encamped.  East and west we saw flame and fighting, but

by Hunno all was still.



"'Trouble no more," said the young man.  "Rome's

arm is long.  Where are the Captains of the Wall?"



'We said we were those men.



"'But you are old and grey-haired," he cried.

"Maximus said that they were boys."



"'Yes, that was true some years ago," said Pertinax.

"What is our fate to be, you fine and well-fed child?"



"'I am called Ambrosius, a secretary of the Emperor,"

he answered.  "Show me a certain letter which Maximus

wrote from a tent at Aquileia, and perhaps I will believe."



'I took it from my breast, and when he had read it he

saluted us, saying:  "Your fate is in your own hands.  If

you choose to serve Theodosius, he will give you a

Legion.  If it suits you to go to your homes, we will give

you a Triumph."



"'I would like better a bath, wine, food, razors, soaps,

oils, and scents," said Pertinax, laughing.



"'Oh, I see you are a boy," said Ambrosius.  "And

you?" turning to me.



"'We bear no ill-will against Theodosius, but in War-"

I began.



"'In War it is as it is in Love," said Pertinax.  "Whether

she be good or bad, one gives one's best once, to one

only.  That given, there remains no second worth giving

or taking."



"'That is true," said Ambrosius.  "I was with Maximus

before he died.  He warned Theodosius that you would

never serve him, and frankly I say I am sorry for my Emperor."



"'He has Rome to console him," said Pertinax.  "I ask

you of your kindness to let us go to our homes and get

this smell out of our nostrils."



'None the less they gave us a Triumph!'



'It was well earned,' said Puck, throwing some leaves

into the still water of the marlpit.  The black, oily circles

spread dizzily as the children watched them.



'I want to know, oh, ever so many things,' said Dan.

'What happened to old Allo?  Did the Winged Hats ever

come back?  And what did Amal do?'



'And what happened to the fat old General with the

five cooks?' said Una.  'And what did your Mother say

when you came home?  ...'



'She'd say you're settin' too long over this old pit, so

late as 'tis already,'said old Hobden's voice behind them.

'Hst!'he whispered.



He stood still, for not twenty paces away a magnificent

dog-fox sat on his haunches and looked at the children as

though he were an old friend of theirs.



'Oh, Mus' Reynolds, Mus' Reynolds!' said Hobden,

under his breath.  'If I knowed all was inside your head,

I'd know something wuth knowin'.  Mus' Dan an' Miss

Una, come along o' me while I lock up my liddle henhouse.'



