




Thorkild's Song





There's no wind along these seas,

Out oars for Stavanger!

Forward all for Stavanger!

So we must wake the white-ash breeze,

Let fall for Stavanger!

A long pull for Stavanger!



Oh, hear the benches creak and strain!

(A long pull for Stavanger!)

She thinks she smells the Northland rain!

(A long pull for Stavanger!)



She thinks she smells the Northland snow,

And she's as glad as we to go.



She thinks she smells the Northland rime,

And the dear dark nights of winter-time.



Her very bolts are sick for shore,

And we - we want it ten times more!



So all you Gods that love brave men,

Send us a three-reef gale again!



Send us a gale, and watch us come,

With close-cropped canvas slashing home!



But - there's no wind in all these seas.

  A long pull for Stavanger!

So we must wake the white-ash breeze,

  A long pull for Stavanger!









OLD MEN AT PEVENSEY







'It has naught to do with apes or Devils,'Sir Richard went

on, in an undertone.  'It concerns De Aquila, than whom

there was never bolder nor craftier, nor more hardy

knight born.  And remember he was an old, old man at

that time.'



'When?' said Dan.



'When we came back from sailing with Witta.'



'What did you do with your gold?' said Dan.



'Have patience.  Link by link is chain-mail made.  I will

tell all in its place.  We bore the gold to Pevensey on

horseback - three loads of it - and then up to the north

chamber, above the Great Hall of Pevensey Castle, where

De Aquila lay in winter.  He sat on his bed like a little

white falcon, turning his head swiftly from one to the

other as we told our tale.  Jehan the Crab, an old sour

man-at-arms, guarded the stairway, but De Aquila bade

him wait at the stair-foot, and let down both leather

curtains over the door.  It was jehan whom De Aquila had

sent to us with the horses, and only Jehan had loaded the

gold.  When our story was told, De Aquila gave us the

news of England, for we were as men waked from a

year-long sleep.  The Red King was dead - slain (ye

remember?) the day we set sail - and Henry, his younger

brother, had made himself King of England over the head

of Robert of Normandy.  This was the very thing that the

Red King had done to Robert when our Great William

died.  Then Robert of Normandy, mad, as De Aquila said,

at twice missing of this kingdom, had sent an army

against England, which army had been well beaten back

to their ships at Portsmouth.  A little earlier, and Witta's

ship would have rowed through them.



"'And now," said De Aquila, "half the great Barons of

the North and West are out against the King between

Salisbury and Shrewsbury, and half the other half wait

to see which way the game shall go.  They say Henry

is overly English for their stomachs, because he hath

married an English wife and she hath coaxed him to give

back their old laws to our Saxons.  (Better ride a horse on

the bit he knows, I say!) But that is only a cloak to their

falsehood." He cracked his finger on the table, where

the wine was spilt, and thus he spoke:



"'William crammed us Norman barons full of good

English acres after Santlache.  I had my share too," he

said, and clapped Hugh on the shoulder; "but I warned

him - I warned him before Odo rebelled - that he should

have bidden the Barons give up their lands and lordships

in Normandy if they would be English lords.  Now they

are all but princes both in England and Normandy -

trencher-fed hounds, with a foot in one trough and both

eyes on the other!  Robert of Normandy has sent them

word that if they do not fight for him in England he will

sack and harry out their lands in Normandy.  Therefore

Clare has risen, FitzOsborne has risen, Montgomery has

risen - whom our First William made an English Earl.

Even D'Arcy is out with his men, whose father I remember -

a little hedge-sparrow knight near by Caen.  If Henry

wins, the Barons can still flee to Normandy, where

Robert will welcome them.  If Henry loses, Robert, he

says, will give them more lands in England.  Oh, a pest - a

pest on Normandy, for she will be our England's curse

this many a long year!"



"'Amen," said Hugh.  "But will the war come our

ways, think you?"



"'Not from the North," said De Aquila.  "But the sea is

always open.  If the Barons gain the upper hand Robert

will send another army into England for sure, and this

time I think he will land here - where his father, the

Conqueror, landed.  Ye have brought your pigs to a pretty

market!  Half England alight, and gold enough on the

ground" - he stamped on the bars beneath the table - "to

set every sword in Christendom fighting."



"'What is to do?" said Hugh.  "I have no keep at

Dallington; and if we buried it, whom could we trust?"

"'Me," said De Aquila.  "Pevensey walls are strong.  No

man but jehan, who is my dog, knows what is between

them." He drew a curtain by the shot-window and

showed us the shaft of a well in the thickness of the wall.



"'I made it for a drinking-well," he said, "but we found

salt water, and it rises and falls with the tide.  Hark!" We

heard the water whistle and blow at the bottom.  "Will it

serve?" said he.



"'Needs must," said Hugh.  "Our lives are in thy

hands." So we lowered all the gold down except one

small chest of it by De Aquila's bed, which we kept as

much for his delight in its weight and colour as for any of

our needs.



'In the morning, ere we rode to our Manors, he said:  "I

do not say farewell; because ye will return and bide here.

Not for love nor for sorrow, but to be with the gold.  Have

a care," he said, laughing, "lest I use it to make myself

Pope.  Trust me not, but return!"'



Sir Richard paused and smiled sadly.



'In seven days, then, we returned from our Manors -

from the Manors which had been ours.'



'And were the children quite well?' said Una.



'My sons were young.  Land and governance belong by

right to young men.'  Sir Richard was talking to himself.

'It would have broken their hearts if we had taken back

our Manors.  They made us great welcome, but we could

see - Hugh and I could see - that our day was done.  I was

a cripple and he a one-armed man.  No!'  He shook his

head.  'And therefore' - he raised his voice - 'we rode

back to Pevensey.'



'I'm sorry,' said Una, for the knight seemed very sorrowful.



'Little maid, it all passed long ago.  They were young;

we were old.  We let them rule the Manors.  "Aha!" cried

De Aquila from his shot-window, when we dismounted.

"Back again to earth, old foxes?" but when we were in his

chamber above the Hall he puts his arms about us and

says, "Welcome, ghosts!  Welcome, poor ghosts!"



Thus it fell out that we were rich beyond belief, and

lonely.  And lonely!'



'What did you do?' said Dan.



'We watched for Robert of Normandy,' said the knight.

'De Aquila was like Witta.  He suffered no idleness.  In fair

weather we would ride along between Bexlei on the one

side, to Cuckmere on the other - sometimes with hawk,

sometimes with hound (there are stout hares both on the

Marsh and the Downland), but always with an eye to the

sea, for fear of fleets from Normandy.  In foul weather he

would walk on the top of his tower, frowning against the

rain - peering here and pointing there.  It always vexed

him to think how Witta's ship had come and gone

without his knowledge.  When the wind ceased and ships

anchored, to the wharf's edge he would go and, leaning

on his sword among the stinking fish, would call to the

mariners for their news from France.  His other eye he

kept landward for word of Henry's war against the Barons.



'Many brought him news - jongleurs, harpers, pedlars,

sutlers, priests and the like; and, though he was

secret enough in small things, yet, if their news misliked

him, then, regarding neither time nor place nor people,

he would curse our King Henry for a fool or a babe.  I have

heard him cry aloud by the fishing boats:  "If I were King

of England I would do thus and thus"; and when I rode

out to see that the warning-beacons were laid and dry, he

hath often called to me from the shot-window:  "Look

to it, Richard!  Do not copy our blind King, but see

with thine own eyes and feel with thine own hands."

I do not think he knew any sort of fear.  And so

we lived at Pevensey, in the little chamber above the Hall.



'One foul night came word that a messenger of the

King waited below.  We were chilled after a long riding in

the fog towards Bexlei, which is an easy place for ships to

land.  De Aquila sent word the man might either eat with

us or wait till we had fed.  Anon jehan, at the stair-head,

cried that he had called for horse, and was gone.  "Pest on

him!" said De Aquila.  "I have more to do than to shiver in

the Great Hall for every gadling the King sends.  Left he

no word?"



"'None," said Jehan, "except" - he had been with De

Aquila at Santlache - "except he said that if an old dog

could not learn new tricks it was time to sweep out the kennel."



"'Oho!" said De Aquila, rubbing his nose, "to whom

did he say that?"



"'To his beard, chiefly, but some to his horse's flank as

he was girthing up.  I followed him out," said jehan the Crab.



"'What was his shield-mark?"



"'Gold horseshoes on black," said the Crab.



"'That is one of Fulke's men," said De Aquila.'



Puck broke in very gently, 'Gold horseshoes on black is

not the Fulkes' shield.  The Fulkes' arms are -'



The knight waved one hand statelily.



'Thou knowest that evil man's true name,' he replied,

'but I have chosen to call him Fulke because I promised

him I would not tell the story of his wickedness so

that any man might guess it.  I have changed all the

names in my tale.  His children's children may be still alive.'



'True - true,' said Puck, smiling softly.  'It is knightly to

keep faith - even after a thousand years.'



Sir Richard bowed a little and went on:



"'Gold horseshoes on black?" said De Aquila.  "I had

heard Fulke had joined the Barons/ but if this is true our

King must be of the upper hand.  No matter, all Fulkes are

faithless.  Still, I would not have sent the man away empty."



"'He fed," said jehan.  "Gilbert the Clerk fetched him

meat and wine from the kitchens.  He ate at Gilbert's table."



'This Gilbert was a clerk from Battle Abbey, who kept

the accounts of the Manor of Pevensey.  He was tall and

pale-coloured, and carried those new-fashioned beads

for counting of prayers.  They were large brown nuts or

seeds, and hanging from his girdle with his pen and

ink-horn they clashed when he walked.  His place was in

the great fireplace.  There was his table of accounts, and

there he lay o' nights.  He feared the hounds in the Hall

that came nosing after bones or to sleep on the warm

ashes, and would slash at them with his beads - like a

woman.  When De Aquila sat in Hall to do justice, take

fines, or grant lands, Gilbert would so write it in the

Manor-roll.  But it was none of his work to feed our

guests, or to let them depart without his lord's knowledge.



'Said De Aquila, after jehan was gone down the stair:

"Hugh, hast thou ever told my Gilbert thou canst read

Latin hand-of-write?"



"'No," said Hugh.  "He is no friend to me, or to Odo

my hound either."



"'No matter," said De Aquila.  "Let him never know thou canst

tell one letter from its fellow, and" - there he yerked us in the

ribs with his scabbard - "watch him, both of ye.  There be devils

in Africa, as I have heard, but by the Saints, there be greater

devils in Pevensey!" And that was all he would say.



'It chanced, some small while afterwards, a Norman

man-at-arms would wed a Saxon wench of the Manor,

and Gilbert (we had watched him well since De Aquila

spoke) doubted whether her folk were free or slave.  Since

De Aquila would give them a field of good land, if she

were free, the matter came up at the justice in Great Hall

before De Aquila.  First the wench's father spoke; then

her mother; then all together, till the Hall rang and the

hounds bayed.  De Aquila held up his hands.  "Write her

free," he called to Gilbert by the fireplace.  "A' God's

name write her free, before she deafens me!  Yes, yes," he

said to the wench that was on her knees at him; "thou art

Cerdic's sister, and own cousin to the Lady of Mercia, if

thou wilt be silent.  In fifty years there will be neither

Norman nor Saxon, but all English," said he, "and these

are the men that do our work!" He clapped the man-at-arms

that was Jehan's nephew on the shoulder, and

kissed the wench, and fretted with his feet among the

rushes to show it was finished.  (The Great Hall is always

bitter cold.) I stood at his side; Hugh was behind Gilbert

in the fireplace making to play with wise rough Odo.  He

signed to De Aquila, who bade Gilbert measure the new

field for the new couple.  Out then runs our Gilbert

between man and maid, his beads clashing at his waist,

and the Hall being empty, we three sit by the fire.



'Said Hugh, leaning down to the hearthstones, "I saw

this stone move under Gilbert's foot when Odo snuffed

at it.  Look!" De Aquila digged in the ashes with his

sword; the stone tilted; beneath it lay a parchment folden,

and the writing atop was:  "Words spoken against

the King by our Lord of Pevensey - the second part."



'Here was set out (Hugh read it us whispering) every

jest De Aquila had made to us touching the King; every

time he had called out to me from the shot-window, and

every time he had said what he would do if he were King

of England.  Yes, day by day had his daily speech, which

he never stinted, been set down by Gilbert, tricked out

and twisted from its true meaning, yet withal so cunningly

that none could deny who knew him that De Aquila

had in some sort spoken those words.  Ye see?'



Dan and Una nodded.



'Yes,' said Una gravely.  'It isn't what you say so much.

It's what you mean when you say it.  Like calling Dan a

beast in fun.  Only grown-ups don't always understand.'



"'He hath done this day by day before our very face?"

said De Aquila.



"'Nay, hour by hour," said Hugh.  "When De Aquila

spoke even now, in the Hall, of Saxons and Normans, I

saw Gilbert write on a parchment, which he kept beside

the Manor-roll, that De Aquila said soon there would be

no Normans left in England if his men-at-arms did their

work aright.  "



"'Bones of the Saints!" said De Aquila.  "What avail is

honour or a sword against a pen?  Where did Gilbert hide

that writing?  He shall eat it."



"'In his breast when he ran out," said Hugh.  "Which

made me look to see where he kept his finished stuff.

When Odo scratched at this stone here, I saw his face

change.  So I was sure."



"'He is bold," said De Aquila.  "Do him justice.  In his

own fashion, my Gilbert is bold."



"'Overbold," said Hugh.  "Hearken here," and he

read:  "Upon the Feast of St Agatha, our Lord of Pevensey,

lying in his upper chamber, being clothed in his

second fur gown reversed with rabbit -"



"'Pest on him!  He is not my tire-woman!" said

De Aquila, and Hugh and I laughed.

"'Reversed with rabbit, seeing a fog over the marshes,

did wake Sir Richard Dalyngridge, his drunken cup-

mate" (here they laughed at me) "and said, 'Peer out, old

fox, for God is on the Duke of Normandy's side."'



"'So did I.  It was a black fog.  Robert could have landed

ten thousand men, and we none the wiser.  Does he tell

how we were out all day riding the Marsh, and how I near

perished in a quicksand, and coughed like a sick ewe for

ten days after?" cried De Aquila.



"'No," said Hugh.  "But here is the prayer of Gilbert

himself to his master Fulke."



"'Ah," said De Aquila.  "Well I knew it was Fulke.

What is the price of my blood?"



"'Gilbert prayeth that when our Lord of Pevensey is

stripped of his lands on this evidence which Gilbert hath,

with fear and pains, collected -"



"'Fear and pains is a true word," said De Aquila, and

sucked in his cheeks.  "But how excellent a weapon is a

pen!  I must learn it."



"'He prays that Fulke will advance him from his

present service to that honour in the Church which Fulke

promised him.  And lest Fulke should forget, he has

written below, 'To be Sacristan of Battle'."



'At this De Aquila whistled.  "A man who can plot

against one lord can plot against another.  When I am

stripped of my lands Fulke will whip off my Gilbert's

foolish head.  None the less Battle needs a new Sacristan.

They tell me the Abbot Henry keeps no sort of rule there."



"'Let the Abbot wait," said Hugh.  "It is our heads and

our lands that are in danger.  This parchment is the

second part of the tale.  The first has gone to Fulke, and so

to the King, who will hold us traitors."



"Assuredly," said De Aquila.  "Fulke's man took the

first part that evening when Gilbert fed him, and our

King is so beset by his brother and his Barons (small

blame, too!) that he is mad with mistrust.  Fulke has his

ear, and pours poison into it.  Presently the King gives

him my land and yours.  This is old," and he leaned back

and yawned.



"'And thou wilt surrender Pevensey without word or

blow?" said Hugh.  "We Saxons will fight your King then.

I will go warn my nephew at Dallington.  Give me a horse!"



"'Give thee a toy and a rattle," said De Aquila.  "Put

back the parchment, and rake over the ashes.  If Fulke is

given my Pevensey, which is England's gate, what will

he do with it?  He is Norman at heart, and his heart is in

Normandy, where he can kill peasants at his pleasure.

He will open England's gate to our sleepy Robert, as Odo

and Mortain tried to do, and then there will be another

landing and another Santlache.  Therefore I cannot give

up Pevensey."



"'Good," said we two.



"'Ah, but wait!  If my King be made, on Gilbert's

evidence, to mistrust me, he will send his men against

me here, and while we fight, England's gate is left

unguarded.  Who will be the first to come through thereby?

Even Robert of Normandy.  Therefore I cannot fight my

King." He nursed his sword - thus.



"'This is saying and unsaying like a Norman," said

Hugh.  "What of our Manors?"



"'I do not think for myself," said De Aquila, "nor for

our King, nor for your lands.  I think for England, for

whom neither King nor Baron thinks.  I am not Norman,

Sir Richard, nor Saxon, Sir Hugh.  English am I."



"'Saxon, Norman or English," said Hugh, "our lives

are thine, however the game goes.  When do we hang Gilbert?"



"'Never," said De Aquila.  "Who knows, he may yet be

Sacristan of Battle, for, to do him justice, he is a good

writer.  Dead men make dumb witnesses.  Wait."



"'But the King may give Pevensey to Fulke.  And our

Manors go with it," said I.  "Shall we tell our sons?"



"'No.  The King will not wake up a hornets' nest in the

South till he has smoked out the bees in the North.  He

may hold me a traitor; but at least he sees I am not

fighting against him; and every day that I lie still is so

much gain to him while he fights the Barons.  If he were

wise he would wait till that war were over before he made

new enemies.  But I think Fulke will play upon him to

send for me, and if I do not obey the summons, that will,

to Henry's mind, be proof of my treason.  But mere talk,

such as Gilbert sends, is no proof nowadays.  We Barons

follow the Church, and, like Anselm, we speak what we

please.  Let us go about our day's dealings, and say

naught to Gilbert."



"'Then we do nothing?" said Hugh.



"'We wait," said De Aquila.  "I am old, but still I find

that the most grievous work I know."

'And so we found it, but in the end De Aquila was right.



'A little later in the year, armed men rode over the hill,

the Golden Horseshoes flying behind the King's banner.

Said De Aquila, at the window of our chamber:  "How did

I tell you?  Here comes Fulke himself to spy out his new

lands which our King hath promised him if he can bring

proof of my treason."



"'How dost thou know?" said Hugh.



"'Because that is what I would do if I were Fulke, but I

should have brought more men.  My roan horse to your

old shoes," said he, "Fulke brings me the King's Summons

to leave Pevensey and join the war." He sucked in

his cheeks and drummed on the edge of the well-shaft,

where the water sounded all hollow.



"'Shall we go?" said I.



"'Go!  At this time of year?  Stark madness," said he.

"Take me from Pevensey to fisk and flyte through fern

and forest, and in three days Robert's keels would be

lying on Pevensey mud with ten thousand men!  Who

would stop them - Fulke?"



'The horns blew without, and anon Fulke cried the

King's Summons at the great door, that De Aquila with

all men and horse should join the King's camp

at Salisbury.

"'How did I tell you?" said De Aquila.  "There are

twenty Barons 'twixt here and Salisbury could give King

Henry good land service, but he has been worked upon

by Fulke to send South and call me - me!  - off the Gate of

England, when his enemies stand about to batter it in.

See that Fulke's men lie in the big south barn," said he.

"Give them drink, and when Fulke has eaten we will

drink in my chamber.  The Great Hall is too cold for old bones."



'As soon as he was off-horse Fulke went to the chapel

with Gilbert to give thanks for his safe coming, and when

he had eaten - he was a fat man, and rolled his eyes

greedily at our good roast Sussex wheat-ears - we led him

to the little upper chamber, whither Gilbert had already

gone with the Manor-roll.  I remember when Fulke heard

the tide blow and whistle in the shaft he leaped back, and

his long down-turned stirrup-shoes caught in the rushes

and he stumbled, so that Jehan behind him found it easy

to knock his head against the wall.'



'Did you know it was going to happen?' said Dan.



'Assuredly,' said Sir Richard, with a sweet smile.  'I put

my foot on his sword and plucked away his dagger, but

he knew not whether it was day or night for awhile.  He

lay rolling his eyes and bubbling with his mouth, and

jehan roped him like a calf.  He was cased all in that

newfangled armour which we call lizard-mail.  Not rings

like my hauberk here'- Sir Richard tapped his chest -but

little pieces of dagger-proof steel overlapping on stout

leather.  We stripped it off (no need to spoil good harness

by wetting it), and in the neck-piece De Aquila found the

same folden piece of parchment which we had put back

under the hearth-stone.



'At this Gilbert would have run out.  I laid my hand on

his shoulder.  It sufficed.  He fell to trembling and praying

on his beads.



"'Gilbert," said De Aquila, "here be more notable

sayings and doings of our Lord of Pevensey for thee to

write down.  Take pen and ink-horn, Gilbert.  We cannot

all be Sacristans of Battle."



'Said Fulke from the floor, "Ye have bound a King's

messenger.  Pevensey shall burn for this."



"'Maybe.  I have seen it besieged once," said

De Aquila, "but heart up, Fulke.  I promise thee that thou

shalt be hanged in the middle of the flames at the end of

that siege, if I have to share my last loaf with thee; and

that is more than Odo would have done when we starved

out him and Mortain."



'Then Fulke sat up and looked long and cunningly at De Aquila.



"'By the Saints," said he, "why didst thou not say thou

wast on the Duke Robert's side at the first?"



"'Am I?" said De Aquila.



'Fulke laughed and said, "No man who serves King

Henry dare do this much to his messenger.  When didst

thou come over to the Duke?  Let me up and we can

smooth it out together." And he smiled and becked and winked.



"'Yes, we will smooth it out," said De Aquila.  He

nodded to me, and jehan and I heaved up Fulke - he

was a heavy man - and lowered him into the shaft by a

rope, not so as to stand on our gold, but dangling by

his shoulders a little above.  It was turn of ebb, and the

water came to his knees.  He said nothing, but shivered somewhat.



'Then jehan of a sudden beat down Gilbert's wrist with

his sheathed dagger.  "Stop!" he said.  "He swallows his beads."



"'Poison, belike," said De Aquila.  "It is good for men

who know too much.  I have carried it these thirty years.

Give me!"



'Then Gilbert wept and howled.  De Aquila ran the

beads through his fingers.  The last one - I have said they

were large nuts - opened in two halves on a pin, and there

was a small folded parchment within.  On it was written:

"The Old Dog goes to Salisbury to be beaten.  I have his Kennel.

Come quickly.



"'This is worse than poison," said De Aquila very

softly, and sucked in his cheeks.  Then Gilbert grovelled

in the rushes, and told us all he knew.  The letter, as we

guessed, was from Fulke to the Duke (and not the first

that had passed between them); Fulke had given it to

Gilbert in the chapel, and Gilbert thought to have taken it

by morning to a certain fishing boat at the wharf, which

trafficked between Pevensey and the French shore.  Gilbert

was a false fellow, but he found time between his

quakings and shakings to swear that the master of the

boat knew nothing of the matter.



"'He hath called me shaved-head," said Gilbert, "and he hath

thrown haddock-guts at me; but for all that, he is no traitor."



"'I will have no clerk of mine mishandled or miscalled,"

said De Aquila.  "That seaman shall be whipped

at his own mast.  Write me first a letter, and thou shalt

bear it, with the order for the whipping, tomorrow to the boat."



'At this Gilbert would have kissed De Aquila's hand -

he had not hoped to live until the morning - and when he

trembled less he wrote a letter as from Fulke to the Duke,

saying that the Kennel, which signified Pevensey, was shut, and

that the Old Dog (which was De Aquila) sat outside it, and,

moreover, that all had been betrayed.



"'Write to any man that all is betrayed," said

De Aquila, "and even the Pope himself would sleep

uneasily.  Eh, Jehan?  If one told thee all was betrayed, what

wouldst thou do?"



"'I would run away," said Jehan.  "it might be true."



"'Well said," quoth De Aquila.  "Write, Gilbert, that

Montgomery, the great Earl, hath made his peace with

the King, and that little D'Arcy, whom I hate, hath been

hanged by the heels.  We will give Robert full measure to

chew upon.  Write also that Fulke himself is sick to death

of a dropsy."



"'Nay!" cried Fulke, hanging in the well-shaft.

"Drown me out of hand, but do not make a jest of me."



"'Jest?  I?" said De Aquila.  "I am but fighting for life

and lands with a pen, as thou hast shown me, Fulke."



'Then Fulke groaned, for he was cold, and, "Let me

confess," said he.



"'Now, this is right neighbourly," said De Aquila,

leaning over the shaft.  "Thou hast read my sayings and

doings - or at least the first part of them - and thou art

minded to repay me with thy own doings and sayings.  Take

pen and inkhorn, Gilbert.  Here is work that will not irk thee."



"'Let my men go without hurt, and I will confess my

treason against the King," said Fulke.



"'Now, why has he grown so tender of his men of a

sudden?" said Hugh to me; for Fulke had no name for

mercy to his men.  Plunder he gave them, but pity, none.



"'Te!  Te!" said De Aquila.  "Thy treason was all confessed

long ago by Gilbert.  It would be enough to hang

Montgomery himself."



"'Nay; but spare my men," said Fulke; and we heard

him splash like a fish in a pond, for the tide was rising.



"'All in good time," said De Aquila.  "The night is

young; the wine is old; and we need only the merry tale.

Begin the story of thy life since when thou wast a lad at

Tours.  Tell it nimbly!"



"'Ye shame me to my soul," said Fulke.



"'Then I have done what neither King nor Duke could

do," said De Aquila.  "But begin, and forget nothing."



"'Send thy man away," said Fulke.



"'That much can I do," said De Aquila.  'But, remember,

I am like the Danes' King.  I cannot turn the tide."



"'How long will it rise?" said Fulke, and splashed anew.



"'For three hours," said De Aquila.  "Time to tell all thy

good deeds.  Begin, and, Gilbert, - I have heard thou art

somewhat careless - do not twist his words from his true

meaning."



'So - fear of death in the dark being upon him - Fulke

began, and Gilbert, not knowing what his fate might be,

wrote it word by word.  I have heard many tales, but

never heard I aught to match the tale of Fulke his

black life, as Fulke told it hollowly, hanging in the shaft.'



'Was it bad?' said Dan, awestruck.

'Beyond belief,' Sir Richard answered.  'None the less,

there was that in it which forced even Gilbert to laugh.

We three laughed till we ached.  At one place his teeth so

chattered that we could not well hear, and we reached

him down a cup of wine.  Then he warmed to it, and

smoothly set out all his shifts, malices, and treacheries,

his extreme boldnesses (he was desperate bold); his

retreats, shufflings, and counterfeitings (he was also

inconceivably a coward); his lack of gear and honour; his

despair at their loss; his remedies, and well-coloured

contrivances.  Yes, he waved the filthy rags of his life

before us, as though they had been some proud banner.

When he ceased, we saw by torches that the tide stood at

the corners of his mouth, and he breathed strongly

through his nose.



'We had him out, and rubbed him; we wrapped him in

a cloak, and gave him wine, and we leaned and looked

upon him, the while he drank.  He was shivering,

but shameless.



'Of a sudden we heard jehan at the stairway wake, but

a boy pushed past him, and stood before us, the Hall-

rushes in his hair, all slubbered with sleep.  "My father!

My father!  I dreamed of treachery," he cried, and babbled thickly.



"'There is no treachery here," said Fulke.  "Go!" and

the boy turned, even then not fully awake, and jehan led

him by the hand to the Great Hall.

"'Thy only son!" said De Aquila.  "Why didst thou

bring the child here?"



"'He is my heir.  I dared not trust him to my brother,"

said Fulke, and now he was ashamed.  De Aquila said

nothing, but sat weighing a wine-cup in his two hands -

thus.  Anon, Fulke touched him on the knee.



"'Let the boy escape to Normandy," said he, "and do

with me at thy pleasure.  Yea, hang me tomorrow, with

my letter to Robert round my neck, but let the boy go."



"'Be still," said De Aquila.  "I think for England."



'So we waited what our Lord of Pevensey should

devise; and the sweat ran down Fulke's forehead.



'At last said De Aquila:  "I am too old to judge, or to

trust any man.  I do not covet thy lands, as thou hast

coveted mine; and whether thou art any better or any

worse than any other black Angevin thief, it is for thy

King to find out.  Therefore, go back to thy King, Fulke."



"'And thou wilt say nothing of what has passed?" said Fulke.



"'Why should I?  Thy son will stay with me.  If the King

calls me again to leave Pevensey, which I must guard

against England's enemies; if the King sends his men

against me for a traitor; or if I hear that the King in his bed

thinks any evil of me or my two knights, thy son will be

hanged from out this window, Fulke."'



'But it hadn't anything to do with his son,' cried Una, startled.



'How could we have hanged Fulke?' said Sir Richard.

'We needed him to make our peace with the King.  He

would have betrayed half England for the boy's sake.  Of

that we were sure.'



'I don't understand,' said Una.  'But I think it was

simply awful.'



'So did not Fulke.  He was well pleased.'



'What?  Because his son was going to be killed?'



'Nay.  Because De Aquila had shown him how he might

save the boy's life and his own lands and honours.  "I will

do it, " he said.  "I swear I will do it.  I will tell the King thou

art no traitor, but the most excellent, valiant, and perfect

of us all.  Yes, I will save thee."



'De Aquila looked still into the bottom of the cup,

rolling the wine-dregs to and fro.

"'Ay," he said.  "If I had a son, I would, I think, save

him.  But do not by any means tell me how thou wilt go

about it."



"'Nay, nay," said Fulke, nodding his bald head wisely.

"That is my secret.  But rest at ease, De Aquila, no hair

of thy head nor rood of thy land shall be forfeited," and

he smiled like one planning great good deeds.



"'And henceforward," said De Aquila, "I counsel thee

to serve one master - not two."



"'What?" said Fulke.  "Can I work no more honest

trading between the two sides these troublous times?"



"'Serve Robert or the King - England or Normandy,"

said De Aquila.  "I care not which it is, but make thy

choice here and now."



"'The King, then," said Fulke, "for I see he is better

served than Robert.  Shall I swear it?"



"'No need," said De Aquila, and he laid his hand on

the parchments which Gilbert had written.  "It shall be

some part of my Gilbert's penance to copy out the

savoury tale of thy life, till we have made ten, twenty, an

hundred, maybe, copies.  How many cattle, think you,

would the Bishop of Tours give for that tale?  Or thy

brother?  Or the Monks of Blois?  Minstrels will turn it into

songs which thy own Saxon serfs shall sing behind their

plough-stilts, and men-at-arms riding through thy Norman

towns.  From here to Rome, Fulke, men will make

very merry over that tale, and how Fulke told it, hanging

in a well, like a drowned puppy.  This shall be thy

punishment, if ever I find thee double-dealing with thy

King any more.  Meantime, the parchments stay here

with thy son.  Him I will return to thee when thou hast

made my peace with the King.  The parchments never."



'Fulke hid his face and groaned.



"'Bones of the Saints!" said De Aquila, laughing.  "The

pen cuts deep.  I could never have fetched that grunt out

of thee with any sword."



"'But so long as I do not anger thee, my tale will be

secret?" said Fulke.



"'Just so long.  Does that comfort thee, Fulke?" said De Aquila.



"'What other comfort have ye left me?" he said, and of

a sudden he wept hopelessly like a child, dropping his

face on his knees.'



'Poor Fulke,' said Una.



'I pitied him also,' said Sir Richard.



"'After the spur, corn," said De Aquila, and he threw

Fulke three wedges of gold that he had taken from our

little chest by the bedplace.



"'If I had known this," said Fulke, catching his breath,

"I would never have lifted hand against Pevensey.  Only

lack of this yellow stuff has made me so unlucky in my dealings."



'It was dawn then, and they stirred in the Great Hall

below.  We sent down Fulke's mail to be scoured, and

when he rode away at noon under his own and the King's

banner, very splendid and stately did he show.  He

smoothed his long beard, and called his son to his stirrup

and kissed him.  De Aquila rode with him as far as the

New Mill landward.  We thought the night had been all a dream.'



'But did he make it right with the King?' Dan asked.

'About your not being traitors, I mean.'



Sir Richard smiled.  'The King sent no second summons

to Pevensey, nor did he ask why De Aquila had not

obeyed the first.  Yes, that was Fulke's work.  I know not

how he did it, but it was well and swiftly done.'



'Then you didn't do anything to his son?' said Una.



'The boy?  Oh, he was an imp!  He turned the keep

doors out of dortoirs while we had him.  He sang foul

songs, learned in the Barons' camps - poor fool; he set the

hounds fighting in Hall; he lit the rushes to drive out, as

he said, the fleas; he drew his dagger on jehan, who

threw him down the stairway for it; and he rode his horse

through crops and among sheep.  But when we had

beaten him, and showed him wolf and deer, he followed

us old men like a young, eager hound, and called us

"uncle".  His father came the summer's end to take him

away, but the boy had no lust to go, because of the

otter-hunting, and he stayed on till the fox-hunting.  I

gave him a bittern's claw to bring him good luck at

shooting.  An imp, if ever there was!'



'And what happened to Gilbert?' said Dan.



'Not even a whipping.  De Aquila said he would sooner

a clerk, however false, that knew the Manor-roll than a

fool, however true, that must be taught his work afresh.

Moreover, after that night I think Gilbert loved as much

as he feared De Aquila.  At least he would not leave us -

not even when Vivian, the King's Clerk, would have

made him Sacristan of Battle Abbey.  A false fellow, but,

in his fashion, bold.'



'Did Robert ever land in Pevensey after all?' Dan went on.



'We guarded the coast too well while Henry was

fighting his Barons; and three or four years later, when

England had peace, Henry crossed to Normandy and

showed his brother some work at Tenchebrai that cured

Robert of fighting.  Many of Henry's men sailed from

Pevensey to that war.  Fulke came, I remember, and we all

four lay in the little chamber once again, and drank

together.  De Aquila was right.  One should not judge

men.  Fulke was merry.  Yes, always merry - with a catch

in his breath.'



'And what did you do afterwards?' said Una.



'We talked together of times past.  That is all men can

do when they grow old, little maid.'





The bell for tea rang faintly across the meadows.  Dan

lay in the bows of the Golden Hind; Una in the stern, the

book of verses open in her lap, was reading from 'The

Slave's Dream':

     'Again, in the mist and shadow of sleep,

     He saw his native land.'



'I don't know when you began that,' said Dan, sleepily.



On the middle thwart of the boat, beside Una's sun-

bonnet, lay an Oak leaf, an Ash leaf, and a Thorn leaf,

that must have dropped down from the trees above; and

the brook giggled as though it had just seen some joke.







The Runes on Weland's Sword





A Smith makes me

To betray my Man

In my first fight.



To gather Gold

At the world's end

I am sent.



The Gold I gather

Comes into England

Out of deep Water.



Like a shining Fish

Then it descends

Into deep Water.



It is not given

For goods or gear,

But for The Thing.



The Gold I gather

A King covets

For an ill use.



The Gold I gather

Is drawn up

Out of deep Water.



Like a shining Fish

Then it descends

Into deep Water.



It is not given

For goods or gear,

But for The Thing.

