





A Pict Song





Rome never looks where she treads,

Always her heavy hooves fall

On our stomachs, our hearts or our heads;

And Rome never heeds when we bawl.

Her sentries pass on - that is all,

And we gather behind them in hordes,

And plot to reconquer the Wall,

With only our tongues for our swords.



We are the Little Folk - we!

Too little to love or to hate.

Leave us alone and you'll see

How we can drag down the Great!

We are the worm in the wood!

We are the rot in the root!

We are the germ in the blood!

We are the thorn in the foot!



Mistletoe killing an oak -

Rats gnawing cables in two -

Moths making holes in a cloak -

How they must love what they do!

Yes - and we Little Folk too,

We are as busy as they -

Working our works out of view -

Watch, and you'll see it some day!



No indeed!  We are not strong,

But we know Peoples that are.

Yes, and we'll guide them along,

To smash and destroy you in War!

We shall be slaves just the same?

Yes, we have always been slaves,

But you - you will die of the shame,

And then we shall dance on your graves!





We are the Little Folk, we, etc.









HAL O' THE DRAFT







Prophets have honour all over the Earth,

Except in the village where they were born,

Where such as knew them boys from birth

Nature-ally hold 'em in scorn.



When Prophets are naughty and young and vain,

They make a won'erful grievance of it;

(You can see by their writings how they complain),

But Oh, 'tis won'erful good for the Prophet!



There's nothing Nineveh Town can give

(Nor being swallowed by whales between),

Makes up for the place where a man's folk live,

That don't care nothing what he has been.

He might ha' been that, or he might ha' been this,

But they love and they hate him for what he is.







A rainy afternoon drove Dan and Una over to play pirates

in the Little Mill.  If you don't mind rats on the rafters and

oats in your shoes, the mill-attic, with its trap-doors

and inscriptions on beams about floods and sweethearts,

is a splendid place.  It is lighted by a foot-square window,

called Duck Window, that looks across to Little Lindens

Farm, and the spot where Jack Cade was killed.



When they had climbed the attic ladder (they called it

'the mainmast tree', out of the ballad of Sir Andrew

Barton, and Dan 'swarved it with might and main', as the

ballad says) they saw a man sitting on Duck Window-sill.

He was dressed in a plum-coloured doublet and tight

plum-coloured hose, and he drew busily in a red-edged book.



'Sit ye!  Sit ye!' Puck cried from a rafter overhead.  'See

what it is to be beautiful!  Sir Harry Dawe - pardon, Hal -

says I am the very image of a head for a gargoyle.'



The man laughed and raised his dark velvet cap to the

children, and his grizzled hair bristled out in a stormy

fringe.  He was old - forty at least - but his eyes were

young, with funny little wrinkles all round them.  A

satchel of embroidered leather hung from his broad belt,

which looked interesting.



'May we see?' said Una, coming forward.



'Surely - sure-ly!' he said, moving up on the window-

seat, and returned to his work with a silver-pointed

pencil.  Puck sat as though the grin were fixed for ever on

his broad face, while they watched the quick, certain

fingers that copied it.  Presently the man took a reed pen

from his satchel, and trimmed it with a little ivory knife,

carved in the semblance of a fish.

'Oh, what a beauty!' cried Dan.



''Ware fingers!  That blade is perilous sharp.  I made it

myself of the best Low Country cross-bow steel.  And so,

too, this fish.  When his back-fin travels to his tail - so - he

swallows up the blade, even as the whale swallowed

Gaffer Jonah ...  Yes, and that's my inkhorn.  I made the

four silver saints round it.  Press Barnabas's head.  It

opens, and then -'He dipped the trimmed pen, and with

careful boldness began to put in the essential lines of

Puck's rugged face, that had been but faintly revealed by

the silver-point.



The children gasped, for it fairly leaped from the page.



As he worked, and the rain fell on the tiles, he talked -

now clearly, now muttering, now breaking off to frown

or smile at his work.  He told them he was born at Little

Lindens Farm, and his father used to beat him for drawing

things instead of doing things, till an old priest called

Father Roger, who drew illuminated letters in rich

people's books, coaxed the parents to let him take the boy

as a sort of painter's apprentice.  Then he went with

Father Roger to Oxford, where he cleaned plates and

carried cloaks and shoes for the scholars of a College

called Merton.



'Didn't you hate that?' said Dan after a great many

other questions.



'I never thought on't.  Half Oxford was building new

colleges or beautifying the old, and she had called to her

aid the master-craftsmen of all Christendie - kings in

their trade and honoured of Kings.  I knew them.  I

worked for them:  that was enough.  No wonder -' He stopped

and laughed.



'You became a great man, Hal,' said Puck.



'They said so, Robin.  Even Bramante said so.'



'Why?  What did you do?' Dan asked.



The artist looked at him queerly.  'Things in stone and

such, up and down England.  You would not have heard

of 'em.  To come nearer home, I rebuilded this little St

Barnabas' church of ours.  It cost me more trouble and

sorrow than aught I've touched in my life.  But 'twas a

sound lesson.'



'Um,' said Dan.  'We've had lessons this morning.'



'I'll not afflict ye, lad,' said Hal, while Puck roared.

'Only 'tis strange to think how that little church was

rebuilt, re-roofed, and made glorious, thanks to some

few godly Sussex ironmasters, a Bristow sailor lad, a

proud ass called Hal o' the Draft because, d'you see, he

was always drawing and drafting; and'- he dragged the

words slowly -'and a Scotch pirate.'



'Pirate?' said Dan.  He wriggled like a hooked fish.



'Even that Andrew Barton you were singing of on

the stair just now.'  He dipped again in the inkwell, and

held his breath over a sweeping line, as though he had

forgotten everything else.



'Pirates don't build churches, do they?' said Dan.  'Or

do they?'



'They help mightily,' Hal laughed.  'But you were at

your lessons this morn, Jack Scholar.'



'Oh, pirates aren't lessons.  It was only Bruce and his

silly old spider,' said Una.  'Why did Sir Andrew Barton

help you?'

'I question if he ever knew it,' said Hal, twinkling.

'Robin, how a' mischief's name am I to tell these

innocents what comes of sinful pride?'



'Oh, we know all about that,' said Una pertly.  'If you

get too beany - that's cheeky - you get sat upon, of course.'



Hal considered a moment, pen in air, and Puck said

some long words.



'A,ha!  that was my case too,' he cried.  'Beany - you say

- but certainly I did not conduct myself well.  I was proud

of - of such things as porches - a Galilee porch at Lincoln

for choice - proud of one Torrigiano's arm on my

shoulder, proud of my knighthood when I made the gilt

scroll-work for the Sovereign - our King's ship.  But Father

Roger sitting in Merton College Library, he did not forget

me.  At the top of my pride, when I and no other should

have builded the porch at Lincoln, he laid it on me with a

terrible forefinger to go back to my Sussex clays and

rebuild, at my own charges, my own church, where us

Dawes have been buried for six generations.  "Out!  Son of

my Art!" said he.  "Fight the Devil at home ere you call

yourself a man and a craftsman." And I quaked, and I

went ...  How's yon, Robin?'  He flourished the finished

sketch before Puck.



'Me!  Me past peradventure,' said Puck, smirking like a

man at a mirror.  'Ah, see!  The rain has took off!  I hate

housen in daylight.'



'Whoop!  Holiday!' cried Hal, leaping up.  'Who's for

my Little Lindens?  We can talk there.'



They tumbled downstairs, and turned past the

dripping willows by the sunny mill-dam.



'Body o' me,' said Hal, staring at the hop-garden,

where the hops were just ready to blossom.  'What are

these?  Vines?  No, not vines, and they twine the wrong

way to beans.'  He began to draw in his ready book.



'Hops.  New since your day,' said Puck.  'They're an

herb of Mars, and their flowers dried flavour ale.  We

say -



     'Turkeys, Heresy, Hops, and Beer

     Came into England all in one year.'



'Heresy I know.  I've seen Hops - God be praised for

their beauty!  What is your Turkis?'



The children laughed.  They knew the Lindens turkeys,

and as soon as they reached Lindens orchard on the hill

the full flock charged at them.



Out came Hal's book at once.  'Hoity-toity!' he cried.

'Here's Pride in purple feathers!  Here's wrathy contempt

and the Pomps of the Flesh!  How d'you call them?'



'Turkeys!  Turkeys!' the children shouted, as the old

gobbler raved and flamed against Hal's plum-coloured hose.



"Save Your Magnificence!' he said.  'I've drafted two

good new things today.'  And he doffed his cap to the

bubbling bird.



Then they walked through the grass to the knoll where

Little Lindens stands.  The old farmhouse, weather-tiled

to the ground, took almost the colour of a blood-ruby in

the afternoon light.  The pigeons pecked at the mortar in

the chimney-stacks; the bees that had lived under the

tiles since it was built filled the hot August air with their

booming; and the smell of the box-tree by the dairy-

window mixed with the smell of earth after rain, bread

after baking, and a tickle of wood-smoke.



The farmer's wife came to the door, baby on arm,

shaded her brows against the sun, stooped to pluck a

sprig of rosemary, and turned down the orchard.  The old

spaniel in his barrel barked once or twice to show he was

in charge of the empty house.  Puck clicked back the

garden-gate.



'D'you marvel that I love it?' said Hal, in a whisper.

'What can town folk know of the nature of housen - or land?'

They perched themselves arow on the old hacked oak

bench in Lindens garden, looking across the valley of the

brook at the fern-covered dimples and hollows of the

Forge behind Hobden's cottage.  The old man was cutting

a faggot in his garden by the hives.  It was quite a second

after his chopper fell that the chump of the blow reached

their lazy ears.



'Eh - yeh!' said Hal.  'I mind when where that old gaffer

stands was Nether Forge - Master John Collins's

foundry.  Many a night has his big trip-hammer shook me

in my bed here.  Boom-bitty!  Boom-bitty!  If the wind was

east, I could hear Master Tom Collins's forge at Stockens

answering his brother, Boom-oop!  Boom-oop!  and midway

between, Sir John Pelham's sledgehammers at Brightling

would strike in like a pack o' scholars, and "Hic-haec-hoc"

they'd say, "Hic-haec-hoc, " till I fell asleep.  Yes.  The valley

was as full o' forges and fineries as a May shaw o'

cuckoos.  All gone to grass now!'



'What did they make?' said Dan.

'Guns for the King's ships - and for others.  Serpentines

and cannon mostly.  When the guns were cast, down

would come the King's Officers, and take our plough-

oxen to haul them to the coast.  Look!  Here's one of the

first and finest craftsmen of the Sea!'



He fluttered back a page of his book, and showed

them a young man's head.  Underneath was written:

'Sebastianus.'



'He came down with a King's Order on Master John

Collins for twenty serpentines (wicked little cannon they

be!) to furnish a venture of ships.  I drafted him thus

sitting by our fire telling Mother of the new lands he'd

find the far side the world.  And he found them, too!

There's a nose to cleave through unknown seas!  Cabot

was his name - a Bristol lad - half a foreigner.  I set a heap

by him.  He helped me to my church-building.'



'I thought that was Sir Andrew Barton,' said Dan.



'Ay, but foundations before roofs,' Hal answered.

'Sebastian first put me in the way of it.  I had come down

here, not to serve God as a craftsman should, but to show

my people how great a craftsman I was.  They cared not,

and it served me right, one split straw for my craft or my

greatness.  What a murrain call had I, they said, to mell

with old St Barnabas'?  Ruinous the church had been since

the Black Death, and ruinous she would remain; and I

could hang myself in my new scaffold-ropes!  Gentle and

simple, high and low - the Hayes, the Fowles, the

Fenners, the Collinses - they were all in a tale against me.

Only Sir John Pelham up yonder at Brightling bade me

heart-up and go on.  Yet how could I?  Did I ask Master

Collins for his timber-tug to haul beams?  The oxen had

gone to Lewes after lime.  Did he promise me a set of iron

cramps or ties for the roof?  They never came to hand, or

else they were spaulty or cracked.  So with everything.

Nothing said, but naught done except I stood by them,

and then done amiss.  I thought the countryside was fair bewitched.'



'It was, sure-ly,' said Puck, knees under chin.  'Did you

never suspect ary one?'



'Not till Sebastian came for his guns, and John Collins

played him the same dog's tricks as he'd played me with

my ironwork.  Week in, week out, two of three serpentines

would be flawed in the casting, and only fit, they

said, to be re-melted.  Then John Collins would shake his

head, and vow he could pass no cannon for the King's

service that were not perfect.  Saints!  How Sebastian

stormed!  I know, for we sat on this bench sharing our

sorrows inter-common.



'When Sebastian had fumed away six weeks at Lindens

and gotten just six serpentines, Dirk Brenzett, Master of

the Cygnet hoy, sends me word that the block of stone he

was fetching me from France for our new font he'd hove

overboard to lighten his ship, chased by Andrew Barton

up to Rye Port.'



'Ah!  The pirate!' said Dan.



'Yes.  And while I am tearing my hair over this,

Ticehurst Will, my best mason, comes to me shaking, and

vowing that the Devil, horned, tailed, and chained, has

run out on him from the church-tower, and the men

would work there no more.  So I took 'em off the foundations,

which we were strengthening, and went into the

Bell Tavern for a cup of ale.  Says Master John Collins:

"Have it your own way, lad; but if I was you, I'd take the

sinnification o' the sign, and leave old Barnabas' Church

alone!" And they all wagged their sinful heads, and

agreed.  Less afraid of the Devil than of me - as I saw later.



'When I brought my sweet news to Lindens, Sebastian

was limewashing the kitchen-beams for Mother.  He

loved her like a son.



"'Cheer up, lad," he says.  "God's where He was.  Only

you and I chance to be pure pute asses.  We've been

tricked, Hal, and more shame to me, a sailor, that I did

not guess it before!  You must leave your belfry alone,

forsooth, because the Devil is adrift there; and I cannot

get my serpentines because John Collins cannot cast

them aright.  Meantime Andrew Barton hawks off the

Port of Rye.  And why?  To take those very serpentines

which poor Cabot must whistle for; the said serpentines,

I'll wager my share of new continents, being now hid

away in St Barnabas' church-tower.  Clear as the Irish

coast at noonday!"



"They'd sure never dare to do it," I said; "and, for

another thing, selling cannon to the King's enemies is

black treason - hanging and fine."



"'It is sure, large profit.  Men'll dare any gallows for

that.  I have been a trader myself," says he.  "We must be

upsides with 'em for the honour of Bristol."



'Then he hatched a plot, sitting on the limewash

bucket.  We gave out to ride o' Tuesday to London and

made a show of taking farewells of our friends - especially

of Master John Collins.  But at Wadhurst Woods we

turned; rode home to the water-meadows; hid our horses

in a willow-tot at the foot of the glebe, and, come night,

stole a-tiptoe uphill to Barnabas' church again.  A thick

mist, and a moon striking through.

'I had no sooner locked the tower-door behind us than

over goes Sebastian full length in the dark.



"'Pest!" he says.  "Step high and feel low, Hal.  I've

stumbled over guns before."



'I groped, and one by one - the tower was pitchy dark -

I counted the lither barrels of twenty serpentines laid out

on pease straw.  No conceal at all!



"'There's two demi-cannon my end," says Sebastian,

slapping metal.  "They'll be for Andrew Barton's lower

deck.  Honest - honest John Collins!  So this is his ware-

house, his arsenal, his armoury!  Now see you why your

pokings and pryings have raised the Devil in Sussex?

You've hindered John's lawful trade for months," and he

laughed where he lay.



'A clay-cold tower is no fireside at midnight, so we

climbed the belfry stairs, and there Sebastian trips over a

cow-hide with its horns and tail.



"'Aha!  Your Devil has left his doublet!  Does it become

me, Hal?"  He draws it on and capers in the shafts of

window-moonlight - won'erful devilish-like.  Then he

sits on the stairs, rapping with his tail on a board, and his

back-aspect was dreader than his front, and a howlet lit

in, and screeched at the horns of him.



"'If you'd keep out the Devil, shut the door," he

whispered.  "And that's another false proverb, Hal, for I

can hear your tower-door opening."



"'I locked it.  Who a-plague has another key, then?" I said.



"'All the congregation, to judge by their feet," he says,

and peers into the blackness.  "Still!  Still, Hal!  Hear 'em

grunt!  That's more o' my serpentines, I'll be bound.  One

- two - three - four they bear in!  Faith, Andrew equips

himself like an Admiral!  Twenty-four serpentines in all!"



'As if it had been an echo, we heard John Collins's

voice come up all hollow:  "Twenty-four serpentines and

two demi-cannon.  That's the full tally for Sir Andrew Barton."



"'Courtesy costs naught," whispers Sebastian.  "Shall

I drop my dagger on his head?"



"'They go over to Rye o' Thursday in the wool-wains,

hid under the wool-packs.  Dirk Brenzett meets them at

Udimore, as before," says John.



"'Lord!  What a worn, handsmooth trade it is!" says

Sebastian.  "I lay we are the sole two babes in the village

that have not our lawful share in the venture."



'There was a full score folk below, talking like all

Robertsbridge Market.  We counted them by voice.



'Master John Collins pipes:  "The guns for the French

carrack must lie here next month.  Will, when does your

young fool" (me, so please you!) "come back from

Lunnon?"



"'No odds," I heard Ticehurst Will answer.  "Lay 'em

just where you've a mind, Mus' Collins.  We're all too

afraid o' the Devil to mell with the tower now." And the

long knave laughed.



"'Ah!  'tis easy enow for you to raise the Devil, Will,"

says another - Ralph Hobden of the Forge.



"'Aaa-men!" roars Sebastian, and ere I could hold him,

he leaps down the stairs - won'erful devilish-like

howling no bounds.  He had scarce time to lay out for the

nearest than they ran.  Saints, how they ran!  We heard

them pound on the door of the Bell Tavern, and then we

ran too.



"'What's next?" says Sebastian, looping up his cow-

tail as he leaped the briars.  "I've broke honest John's face."



"'Ride to Sir John Pelham's," I said.  "He is the only

one that ever stood by me."



'We rode to Brightling, and past Sir John's lodges,

where the keepers would have shot at us for deer-

stealers, and we had Sir John down into his Justice's

chair, and when we had told him our tale and showed

him the cow-hide which Sebastian wore still girt about

him, he laughed till the tears ran.



"'Wel-a-well!" he says.  "I'll see justice done before

daylight.  What's your complaint?  Master Collins is my

old friend."



"'He's none of mine," I cried.  "When I think how he

and his likes have baulked and dozened and cozened me

at every turn over the church" - and I choked at the thought.



"'Ah, but ye see now they needed it for another use,"

says he smoothly.



also they did my serpentines," Sebastian cries.  "I

should be half across the Western Ocean by now if my

guns had been ready.  But they're sold to a Scotch pirate

by your old friend -"



"'Where's your proof?" says Sir John, stroking his beard.



"'I broke my shins over them not an hour since, and I

heard John give order where they were to be taken," says Sebastian.



"'Words!  Words only," says Sir John.  "Master Collins

is somewhat of a liar at best."



'He carried it so gravely that, for the moment, I thought

he was dipped in this secret traffick too, and that there

was not an honest ironmaster in Sussex.



"'Name o' Reason!" says Sebastian, and raps with his

cow-tail on the table, "whose guns are they, then?"



"'Yours, manifestly," says Sir John.  "You come with

the King's Order for 'em, and Master Collins casts them

in his foundry.  If he chooses to bring them up from

Nether Forge and lay 'em out in the church-tower, why,

they are e'en so much the nearer to the main road and

you are saved a day's hauling.  What a coil to make of a

mere act of neighbourly kindness, lad!"



"'I fear I have requited him very scurvily," says

Sebastian, looking at his knuckles.  "But what of the

demi-cannon?  I could do with 'em well, but they are not in

the King's Order."



"'Kindness - loving-kindness," says Sir John.  "Questionless,

in his zeal for the King and his love for you, John

adds those two cannon as a gift.  'Tis plain as this coming

daylight, ye stockfish!"



"'So it is," says Sebastian.  "Oh, Sir John, Sir John, why

did you never use the sea?  You are lost ashore." And he

looked on him with great love.



"'I do my best in my station." Sir John strokes his

beard again and rolls forth his deep drumming Justice's

voice thus:  "But - suffer me!  - you two lads, on some

midnight frolic into which I probe not, roystering around

the taverns, surprise Master Collins at his" - he thinks a

moment - "at his good deeds done by stealth.  Ye surprise

him, I say, cruelly."



"'Truth, Sir John.  If you had seen him run!" says Sebastian.



"'On this you ride breakneck to me with a tale of

pirates, and wool-wains, and cow-hides, which, though

it hath moved my mirth as a man, offendeth my reason as

a magistrate.  So I will e'en accompany you back to the

tower with, perhaps, some few of my own people, and

three-four wagons, and I'll be your warrant that Master

John Collins will freely give you your guns and your

demi-cannon, Master Sebastian." He breaks into his

proper voice - "I warned the old tod and his neighbours

long ago that they'd come to trouble with their side-

sellings and bye-dealings; but we cannot have half

Sussex hanged for a little gun-running.  Are ye content, lads?"



"'I'd commit any treason for two demi-cannon, said

Sebastian, and rubs his hands.



,"Ye have just compounded with rank treason-felony

for the same bribe," says Sir John.  "Wherefore to horse,

and get the guns."'



'But Master Collins meant the guns for Sir Andrew

Barton all along, didn't he?' said Dan.



'Questionless, that he did,' said Hal.  'But he lost them.

We poured into the village on the red edge of dawn, Sir

John horsed, in half-armour, his pennon flying; behind

him thirty stout Brightling knaves, five abreast; behind

them four wool-wains, and behind them four trumpets

to triumph over the jest, blowing:  Our King went forth to

Normandie.  When we halted and rolled the ringing guns

out of the tower, 'twas for all the world like Friar Roger's

picture of the French siege in the Queen's Missal-book.'



'And what did we - I mean, what did our village do?' said Dan.



'Oh!  Bore it nobly - nobly,' cried Hal.  'Though they

had tricked me, I was proud of them.  They came out of

their housen, looked at that little army as though it had

been a post, and went their shut-mouthed way.  Never a

sign!  Never a word!  They'd ha' perished sooner than let

Brightling overcrow us.  Even that villain, Ticehurst Will,

coming out of the Bell for his morning ale, he all but runs

under Sir John's horse.



"''Ware, Sirrah Devil!" cries Sir John, reining back.



"'Oh!" says Will.  "Market-day, is it?  And all the

bullocks from Brightling here?"



'I spared him his belting for that - the brazen knave!



'But John Collins was our masterpiece!  He happened

along-street (his jaw tied up where Sebastian had clouted

him) when we were trundling the first demi-cannon

through the lych-gate.



"'I reckon you'll find her middlin' heavy," he says.  "If

you've a mind to pay, I'll loan ye my timber-tug.  She

won't lie easy on ary wool-wain."



'That was the one time I ever saw Sebastian taken flat

aback.  He opened and shut his mouth, fishy-like.



"'No offence," says Master John.  "You've got her

reasonable good cheap.  I thought ye might not grudge

me a groat if I helped move her." Ah, he was a masterpiece!

They say that morning's work cost our John two

hundred pounds, and he never winked an eyelid, not

even when he saw the guns all carted off to Lewes.'



'Neither then nor later?' said Puck.



'Once.  'Twas after he gave St Barnabas' the new chime

of bells.  (Oh, there was nothing the Collinses, or the

Hayes, or the Fowles, or the Fenners would not do for the

church then!  "Ask and have" was their song.) We had

rung 'em in, and he was in the tower with Black Nick

Fowle, that gave us our rood-screen.  The old man

pinches the bell-rope one hand and scratches his neck

with t'other.  "Sooner she was pulling yon clapper than

my neck, he says.  That was all!  That was Sussex

seely Sussex for everlasting'



'And what happened after?' said Una.



'I went back into England,' said Hal, slowly.  'I'd

had my lesson against pride.  But they tell me I left St

Barnabas' a jewel - justabout a jewel!  Wel-a-well!  'Twas

done for and among my own people, and - Father Roger

was right - I never knew such trouble or such triumph

since.  That's the nature o' things.  A dear - dear land.'  He

dropped his chin on his chest.



'There's your Father at the Forge.  What's he talking to

old Hobden about?' said Puck, opening his hand with

three leaves in it.



Dan looked towards the cottage.



'Oh, I know.  It's that old oak lying across the brook.

Pater always wants it grubbed.'



In the still valley they could hear old Hobden's deep tones.



'Have it as you've a mind to,' he was saying.  'But the

vivers of her roots they hold the bank together.  If you

grub her out, the bank she'll all come tearin' down, an'

next floods the brook'll swarve up .  But have it as you've a

mind.  The Mistuss she sets a heap by the ferns on her trunk.



'Oh!  I'll think it over,' said the Pater.



Una laughed a little bubbling chuckle.



'What Devil's in that belfry?' said Hal, with a lazy

laugh.  'That should be a Hobden by his voice.'



'Why, the oak is the regular bridge for all the rabbits

between the Three Acre and our meadow.  The best place

for wires on the farm, Hobden says.  He's got two

there now,' Una answered.  'He won't ever let it be grubbed!'



'Ah, Sussex!  Seely Sussex for everlastin',' murmured

Hal; and the next moment their Father's voice calling

across to Little Lindens broke the spell as little

St Barnabas' clock struck five.







A Smugglers' Song





If You wake at midnight, and hear a horse's feet,

Don't go drawing back the blind, or looking in the street,

Them that asks no questions isn't told a lie.

Watch the wall, my darling, while the Gentlemen go by!



     Five-and-twenty ponies,

     Trotting through the dark -

     Brandy for the Parson,

     'Baccy for the Clerk;

     Laces for a lady; letters for a spy,

     And watch the wall, my darling, while the Gentlemen go by!



Running round the woodlump if you chance to find

Little barrels, roped and tarred, all full of brandy-wine;

Don't you shout to come and look, nor take 'em for your play;

Put the brushwood back again, - and they'll be gone next day!

If you see the stable-door setting open wide;

If you see a tired horse lying down inside;

If your mother mends a coat cut about and tore;

If the lining's wet and warm - don't you ask no more!



If you meet King George's men, dressed in blue and red,

You be careful what you say, and mindful what is said.

If they call you 'pretty maid,' and chuck you 'neath the chin,

Don't you tell where no one is, nor yet where no one's been!



Knocks and footsteps round the house - whistles after dark -

You've no call for running out till the house-dogs bark.

Trusty's here, and Pincher's here, and see how dumb they lie -

They don't fret to follow when the Gentlemen go by!



If you do as you've been told, likely there's a chance

You'll be give a dainty doll, all the way from France,

With a cap of Valenciennes, and a velvet hood -

A present from the Gentlemen, along o' being good!



     Five-and-twenty ponies,

     Trotting through the dark -

     Brandy for the Parson,

     'Baccy for the Clerk.

     Them that asks no questions isn't told a lie -

     Watch the wall, my darling, while the Gentlemen go by!

