



CHAPTER THE SIXTH.



THE SUITOR.



LADY LUNDIE pointed significantly to the door, and addressed

herself to Sir Patrick's private ear.



"Observe!" she said. "Miss Silvester has just got rid of

somebody."



Sir Patrick deliberately looked in the wrong direction, and (in

the politest possible manner) observed--nothing.



Lady Lundie advanced into the summer-house. Suspicious hatred of

the governess was written legibly in every line of her face.

Suspicious distrust of the governess's illness spoke plainly in

every tone of her voice.



"May I inquire, Miss Silvester, if your sufferings are relieved?"



"I am no better, Lady Lundie."



"I beg your pardon?"



"I said I was no better."



"You appear to be able to stand up. When _I_ am ill, I am not so

fortunate. I am obliged to lie down."'



"I will follow your example, Lady Lundie. If you will be so good

as to excuse me, I will leave you, and lie down in my own room."



She could say no more. The interview with Geoffrey had worn her

out; there was no spirit left in her to resist the petty malice

of the woman, after bearing, as she had borne it, the brutish

indifference of the man. In another moment the hysterical

suffering which she was keeping down would have forced its way

outward in tears. Without waiting to know whether she was excused

or not, without stopping to hear a word more, she left the

summer-house.



Lady Lundie's magnificent black eyes opened to their utmost

width, and blazed with their most dazzling brightness. She

appealed to Sir Patrick, poised easily on his ivory cane, and

looking out at the lawn-party, the picture of venerable

innocence.



"After what I have already told you, Sir Patrick, of Miss

Silvester's conduct, may I ask whether you consider _that_

proceeding at all extraordinary?"



The old gentleman touched the spring in the knob of his cane, and

answered, in the courtly manner of the old school:



"I consider no proceeding extraordinary Lady Lundie, which

emanates from your enchanting sex."



He bowed, and took his pinch. With a little jaunty flourish of

the hand, he dusted the stray grains of snuff off his finger and

thumb, and looked back again at the lawn-party, and became more

absorbed in the diversions of his young friends than ever.



Lady Lundie stood her ground, plainly determined to force a

serious expression of opinion from her brother-in-law. Before she

could speak again, Arnold and Blanche appeared together at the

bottom of the steps. "And when does the dancing begin?" inquired

Sir Patrick, advancing to meet them, and looking as if he felt

the deepest interest in a speedy settlement of the question.



"The very thing I was going to ask mamma," returned Blanche. "Is

she in there with Anne? Is Anne better?"



Lady Lundie forthwith appeared, and took the answer to that

inquiry on herself.



"Miss Silvester has retired to her room. Miss Silvester persists

in being ill. Have you noticed, Sir Patrick, that these half-bred

sort of people are almost invariably rude when they are ill?"



Blanche's bright face flushed up. "If you think Anne a half-bred

person, Lady Lundie, you stand alone in your opinion. My uncle

doesn't agree with you, I'm sure."



Sir Patrick's interest in the first quadrille became almost

painful to see. "_Do_ tell me, my dear, when _is_ the dancing

going to begin?"



"The sooner the better," interposed Lady Lundie; "before Blanche

picks another quarrel with me on the subject of Miss Silvester."



Blanche looked at her uncle. "Begin! begin! Don't lose time!"

cried the ardent Sir Patrick, pointing toward the house with his

cane. "Certainly, uncle! Any thing that _you_ wish!" With that

parting shot at her step-mother, Blanche withdrew. Arnold, who

had thus far waited in silence at the foot of the steps, looked

appealingly at Sir Patrick. The train which was to take him to

his newly inherited property would start in less than an hour;

and he had not presented himself to Blanche's guardian in the

character of Blanche's suitor yet! Sir Patrick's indifference to

all domestic claims on him--claims of persons who loved, and

claims of persons who hated, it didn't matter which--remained

perfectly unassailable. There he stood, poised on his cane,

humming an old Scotch air. And there was Lady Lundie, resolute

not to leave him till he had seen the governess with _her_ eyes

and judged the governess with _her_ mind. She returned to the

charge--in spite of Sir Patrick, humming at the top of the steps,

and of Arnold, waiting at the bottom. (Her enemies said, "No

wonder poor Sir Thomas died in a few months after his marriage!"

And, oh dear me, our enemies _are_ sometimes right!)



"I must once more remind you, Sir Patrick, that I have serious

reason to doubt whether Miss Silvester is a fit companion for

Blanche. My governess has something on her mind. She has fits of

crying in private. She is up and walking about her room when she

ought to be asleep. She posts her own letters--_and,_ she has

lately been excessively insolent to Me. There is something wrong.

I must take some steps in the matter--and it is only proper that

I should do so with your sanction, as head of the family."



"Consider me as abdicating my position, Lady Lundie, in your

favor."



"Sir Patrick, I beg you to observe that I am speaking seriously,

and that I expect a serious reply."



"My good lady, ask me for any thing else and it is at your

service. I have not made a serious reply since I gave up practice

at the Scottish Bar. At my age," added Sir Patrick, cunningly

drifting into generalities, "nothing is serious--except

Indigestion. I say, with the philosopher, 'Life is a comedy to

those who think, and tragedy to those who feel.' " He took his

sister-in-law's hand, and kissed it. "Dear Lady Lundie, why

feel?"



Lady Lundie, who had never "felt" in her life, appeared

perversely determined to feel, on this occasion. She was

offended--and she showed it plainly.



"When you are next called on, Sir Patrick, to judge of Miss

Silvester's conduct," she said, "unless I am entirely mistaken,

you will find yourself _compelled_ to consider it as something

beyond a joke." With those words, she walked out of the

summer-house--and so forwarded Arnold's interests by leaving

Blanche's guardian alone at last.



It was an excellent opportunity. The guests were safe in the

house--there was no interruption to be feared, Arnold showed

himself. Sir Patrick (perfectly undisturbed by Lady Lundie's

parting speech) sat down in the summer-house, without noticing

his young friend, and asked himself a question founded on

profound observation of the female sex. "Were there ever two

women yet with a quarrel between them," thought the old

gentleman, "who didn't want to drag a man into it? Let them drag

_me_ in, if they can!"



Arnold advanced a step, and modestly announced himself. "I hope I

am not in the way, Sir Patrick?"



"In the way? of course not! Bless my soul, how serious the boy

looks! Are _you_ going to appeal to me as the head of the family

next?"



It was exactly what Arnold was about to do. But it was plain that

if he admitted it just then Sir Patrick (for some unintelligible

reason) would decline to listen to him. He answered cautiously,

"I asked leave to consult you in private, Sir; and you kindly

said you would give me the opportunity before I left W

indygates?"



"Ay! ay!  to be sure. I remember. We were both engaged in the

serious business of croquet at the time--and it was doubtful

which of us did that business most clumsily. Well, here is the

opportunity; and here am I, with all my worldly experience, at

your service. I have only one caution to give you. Don't appeal

to me as 'the head of the family.' My resignation is in Lady

Lundie's hands."



He was, as usual, half in jest, half in earnest. The wry twist of

humor showed itself at the corners of his lips. Arnold was at a

loss how to approach Sir Patrick on the subject of his niece

without reminding him of his domestic responsibilities on the one

hand, and without setting himself up as a target for the shafts

of Sir Patrick's wit on the other. In this difficulty, he

committed a mistake at the outset. He hesitated.



"Don't hurry yourself," said Sir Patrick. "Collect your ideas. I

can wait! I can wait!"



Arnold collected his ideas--and committed a second mistake. He

determined on feeling his way cautiously at first. Under the

circumstances (and with such a man as he had now to deal with),

it was perhaps the rashest resolution at which he could possibly

have arrived--it was the mouse attempting to outmanoeuvre the cat



"You have been very kind, Sir, in offering me the benefit of your

experience," he began. "I want a word of advice."



"Suppose you take it sitting?" suggested Sir Patrick. "Get a

chair." His sharp eyes followed Arnold with an expression of

malicious enjoyment. "Wants my advice?" he thought. "The young

humbug wants nothing of the sort--he wants my niece."



Arnold sat down under Sir Patrick's eye, with a well-founded

suspicion that he was destined to suffer, before he got up again,

under Sir Patrick's tongue.



"I am only a young man," he went on, moving uneasily in his

chair, "and I am beginning a new life--"



"Any thing wrong with the chair?" asked Sir Patrick. "Begin your

new life comfortably, and get another."



"There's nothing wrong with the chair, Sir. Would you--"



"Would I keep the chair, in that case? Certainly."



"I mean, would you advise me--"



"My good fellow, I'm waiting to advise you. (I'm sure there's

something wrong with that chair. Why be obstinate about it? Why

not get another?)"



"Please don't notice the chair, Sir Patrick--you put me out. I

want--in short--perhaps it's a curious question--"



"I can't say till I have heard it," remarked Sir Patrick.

"However, we will admit it, for form's sake, if you like. Say

it's a curious question. Or let us express it more strongly, if

that will help you. Say it's the most extraordinary question that

ever was put, since the beginning of the world, from one human

being to another."



"It's this!" Arnold burst out, desperately. "I want to be

married!"



"That isn't a question," objected Sir Patrick. "It's an

assertion. You say, I want to be married. And I say, Just so! And

there's an end of it."



Arnold's head began to whirl. "Would you advise me to get

married, Sir?" he said, piteously. "That's what I meant."



"Oh! That's the object of the present interview, is it? Would I

advise you to marry, eh?"



(Having caught the mouse by this time, the cat lifted his paw and

let the luckless little creature breathe again. Sir Patrick's

manner suddenly freed itself from any slight signs of impatience

which it might have hitherto shown, and became as pleasantly easy

and confidential as a manner could be. He touched the knob of his

cane, and helped himself, with infinite zest and enjoyment, to a

pinch of snuff.)



"Would I advise you to marry?" repeated Sir Patrick. "Two courses

are open to us, Mr. Arnold, in treating that question. We may put

it briefly, or we may put it at great length. I am for putting it

briefly. What do you say?"



"What you say, Sir Patrick."



"Very good. May I begin by making an inquiry relating to your

past life?"



"Certainly!"



"Very good again. When you were in the merchant service, did you

ever have any experience in buying provisions ashore?"



Arnold stared. If any relation existed between that question and

the subject in hand it was an impenetrable relation to _him_. He

answered, in unconcealed bewilderment, "Plenty of experience,

Sir."



"I'm coming to the point," pursued Sir Patrick. "Don't be

astonished. I'm coming to the point. What did you think of your

moist sugar when you bought it at the grocer's?"



"Think?" repeated Arnold. "Why, I thought it was moist sugar, to

be sure!"



"Marry, by all means!" cried Sir Patrick. "You are one of the few

men who can try that experiment with a fair chance of success."



The suddenness of the answer fairly took away Arnold's breath.

There was something perfectly electric in the brevity of his

venerable friend. He stared harder than ever.



"Don't you understand me?" asked Sir Patrick.



"I don't understand what the moist sugar has got to do with it,

Sir."



"You don't see that?"



"Not a bit!"



"Then I'll show you," said Sir Patrick, crossing his legs, and

setting in comfortably for a good talk "You go to the tea-shop,

and get your moist sugar. You take it on the understanding that

it is moist sugar. But it isn't any thing of the sort. It's a

compound of adulterations made up to look like sugar. You shut

your eyes to that awkward fact, and swallow your adulterated mess

in various articles of food; and you and your sugar get on

together in that way as well as you can. Do you follow me, so

far?"



Yes. Arnold (quite in the dark) followed, so far.



"Very good," pursued Sir Patrick. "You go to the marriage-shop,

and get a wife. You take her on the understanding--let us

say--that she has lovely yellow hair, that she has an exquisite

complexion, that her figure is the perfection of plumpness, and

that she is just tall enough to carry the plumpness off. You

bring her home, and you discover that it's the old story of the

sugar over again. Your wife is an adulterated article. Her lovely

yellow hair is--dye. Her exquisite skin is--pearl powder. Her

plumpness is--padding. And three inches of her height are--in the

boot-maker's heels. Shut your eyes, and swallow your adulterated

wife as you swallow your adulterated sugar--and, I tell you

again, you are one of the few men who can try the marriage

experiment with a fair chance of success."



With that he uncrossed his legs again, and looked hard at Arnold.

Arnold read the lesson, at last, in the right way. He gave up the

hopeless attempt to circumvent Sir Patrick, and--come what might

of it--dashed at a direct allusion to Sir Patrick's niece.



"That may be all very true, Sir, of some young ladies," he said.

"There is one I know of, who is nearly related to you, and who

doesn't deserve what you have said of the rest of them."



This was coming to the point. Sir Patrick showed his approval of

Arnold's frankness by coming to the point himself, as readily as

his own whimsical humor would let him.



"Is this female phenomenon my niece?" he inquired.



"Yes, Sir Patrick."



"May I ask how you know that my niece is not an adulterated

article, like the rest of them?"



Arnold's indignation loosened the last restraints that tied

Arnold's tongue. He exploded in the three words which mean three

volumes in every circulating library in the kingdom.



"I love her."



Sir Patrick sat back in his chair, and stretched out his legs

luxuriously.



"That's the most convincing answer I ever heard in my life," he

said.



"I'm in earnest!" cried Arnold, reckless by this time of every

consideration but one. "Put me to the test, Sir! put me to the

test!"



"Oh, very well. The test is easily put." He looked at Arnold,

with the irrepressible humor twinkling merrily in his eyes, and

twitching sharply at the corners of his lips. "My niece has a

beautiful complexion. Do you believe in her complexion?"



"There's a beautiful sky above our heads," returned Arnold. "I

believe in the sky."



"Do you?" retorted Sir Patrick. "You were evidently never caught

in a shower. My niece has an immense quantity of hair. Are you

convinced that it all grows on her head?"



"I defy any other woman's head to produce the like of it!"



"My dear Arnold, you greatly underrate the existing resources of

the trade in hair! Look into the shop-windows. When

 you next go to London pray look into the show-windows. In the

mean time, what do you think of my niece's figure?"



"Oh, come! there can't be any doubt about _that!_ Any man, with

eyes in his head, can see it's the loveliest figure in the

world."



Sir Patrick laughed softly, and crossed his legs again.



"My good fellow, of course it is! The loveliest figure in the

world is the commonest thing in the world. At a rough guess,

there are forty ladies at this lawn-party. Every one of them

possesses a beautiful figure. It varies in price; and when it's

particularly seductive you may swear it comes from Paris. Why,

how you stare! When I asked you what you thought of my niece's

figure, I meant--how much of it comes from Nature, and how much

of it comes from the Shop? I don't know, mind! Do you?"



"I'll take my oath to every inch of it!"



"Shop?"



"Nature!"



Sir Patrick rose to his feet; his satirical humor was silenced at

last.



"If ever I have a son," he thought to himself, "that son shall go

to sea!" He took Arnold's arm, as a preliminary to putting an end

to Arnold's suspense. "If I _ can_ be serious about any thing,"

he resumed, "it's time to be serious with you. I am convinced of

the sincerity of your attachment. All I know of you is in your

favor, and your birth and position are beyond dispute. If you

have Blanche's consent, you have mine." Arnold attempted to

express his gratitude. Sir Patrick, declining to hear him, went

on. "And remember this, in the future. When you next want any

thing that I can give you, ask for it plainly. Don't attempt to

mystify _me_ on the next occasion, and I will promise, on my

side, not to mystify _you._ There, that's understood. Now about

this journey of yours to see your estate. Property has its

duties, Master Arnold, as well as its rights. The time is fast

coming when its rights will be disputed, if its duties are not

performed. I have got a new interest in you, and I mean to see

that you do your duty. It's settled you are to leave Windygates

to-day. Is it arranged how you are to go?"



"Yes, Sir Patrick. Lady Lundie has kindly ordered the gig to take

me to the station, in time for the next train."



"When are you to be ready?"



Arnold looked at his watch. "In a quarter of an hour."



"Very good. Mind you _are_ ready. Stop a minute! you will have

plenty of time to speak to Blanche when I have done with you. You

don't appear to me to be sufficiently anxious about seeing your

own property."



"I am not very anxious to leave Blanche, Sir--that's the truth of

it."



"Never mind Blanche. Blanche is not business. They both begin

with a B--and that's the only connection between them. I hear you

have got one of the finest houses in this part of Scotland. How

long are you going to stay in Scotland? How long are you going to

stay in it?"



"I have arranged (as I have already told you, Sir) to return to

Windygates the day after to-morrow."



"What! Here is a man with a palace waiting to receive him--and he

is only going to stop one clear day in it!"



"I am not going to stop in it at all, Sir Patrick--I am going to

stay with the steward. I'm only wanted to be present to-morrow at

a dinner to my tenants--and, when that's over, there's nothing in

the world to prevent my coming back here. The steward himself

told me so in his last letter."



"Oh, if the steward told you so, of course there is nothing more

to be said!"



"Don't object to my coming back! pray don't, Sir Patrick! I'll

promise to live in my new house when I have got Blanche to live

in it with me. If you won't mind, I'll go and tell her at once

that it all belongs to her as well as to me."



"Gently! gently! you talk as if you were married to her already!"



"It's as good as done, Sir! Where's the difficulty in the way

now?"



As he asked the question the shadow of some third person,

advancing from the side of the summer-house, was thrown forward

on the open sunlit space at the top of the steps. In a moment

more the shadow was followed by the substance--in the shape of a

groom in his riding livery. The man was plainly a stranger to the

place. He started, and touched his hat, when he saw the two

gentlemen in the summer-house.



"What do you want?" asked Sir Patrick



"I beg your pardon, Sir; I was sent by my master--"



"Who is your master?"



"The Honorable Mr. Delamayn, Sir."



"Do you mean Mr. Geoffrey Delamayn?" asked Arnold.



"No, Sir. Mr. Geoffrey's brother--Mr. Julius. I have ridden over

from the house, Sir, with a message from my master to Mr.

Geoffrey."



"Can't you find him?"



"They told me I should find him hereabouts, Sir. But I'm a

stranger, and don't rightly know where to look." He stopped, and

took a card out of his pocket. "My master said it was very

important I should deliver this immediately. Would you be pleased

to tell me, gentlemen, if you happen to know where Mr. Geoffrey

is?"



Arnold turned to Sir Patrick. "I haven't seen him. Have you?"



"I have smelt him," answered Sir Patrick, "ever since I have been

in the summer-house. There is a detestable taint of tobacco in

the air--suggestive (disagreeably suggestive to _my_ mind) of

your friend, Mr. Delamayn."



Arnold laughed, and stepped outside the summer-house.



"If you are right, Sir Patrick, we will find him at once." He

looked around, and shouted, "Geoffrey!"



A voice from the rose-garden shouted back, "Hullo!"



"You're wanted. Come here!"



Geoffrey appeared, sauntering doggedly, with his pipe in his

mouth, and his hands in his pockets.



"Who wants me?"



"A groom--from your brother."



That answer appeared to electrify the lounging and lazy athlete.

Geoffrey hurried, with eager steps, to the summer-house. He

addressed the groom before the man had time to speak With horror

and dismay in his face, he exclaimed:



"By Jupiter! Ratcatcher has relapsed!"



Sir Patrick and Arnold looked at each other in blank amazement.



"The best horse in my brother's stables!" cried Geoffrey,

explaining, and appealing to them, in a breath. "I left written

directions with the coachman, I measured out his physic for three

days; I bled him," said Geoffrey, in a voice broken by

emotion--"I bled him myself, last night."



"I beg your pardon, Sir--" began the groom.



"What's the use of begging my pardon? You're a pack of infernal

fools! Where's your horse? I'll ride back, and break every bone

in the coachman's skin! Where's your horse?"



"If you please, Sir, it isn't Ratcatcher. Ratcatcher's all

right."



"Ratcatcher's all right? Then what the devil is it?"



"It's a message, Sir."



"About what?"



"About my lord."



"Oh! About my father?" He took out his handkerchief, and passed

it over his forehead, with a deep gasp of relief. "I thought it

was Ratcatcher," he said, looking at Arnold, with a smile. He put

his pipe into his mouth, and rekindled the dying ashes of the

tobacco. "Well?" he went on, when the pipe was in working order,

and his voice was composed again: "What's up with my father?"



"A telegram from London, Sir. Bad news of my lord."



The man produced his master's card.



Geoffrey read on it (written in his brother's handwriting) these

words:



"I have only a moment to scribble a line on my card. Our father

is dangerously ill--his lawyer has been sent for. Come with me to

London by the first train. Meet at the junction."



Without a word to any one of the three persons present, all

silently looking at him, Geoffrey consulted his watch. Anne had

told him to wait half an hour, and to assume that she had gone if

he failed to hear from her in that time. The interval had

passed--and no communication of any sort had reached him. The

flight from the house had been safely accomplished. Anne

Silvester was, at that moment, on her way to the mountain inn.

