




ELEVENTH SCENE.--SIR PATRICK'S HOUSE.



CHAPTER THE FORTY-SECOND.



THE SMOKING-ROOM WINDOW.



"I CAN'T believe it! I won't believe it! You're trying to part me

from my husband--you're trying to set me against my dearest

friend. It's infamous. It's horrible. What have I done to you?

Oh, my head! my head! Are you trying to drive me mad?"



Pale and wild; her hands twisted in her hair; her feet hurrying

her aimlessly to and fro in the room--so Blanche answered her

step-mother, when the object of Lady Lundie's pilgrimage had been

accomplished, and the cruel truth had been plainly told.



Her ladyship sat, superbly composed, looking out through the

window at the placid landscape of woods and fields which

surrounded Ham Farm.



"I was prepared for this outbreak," she said, sadly. "These wild

words relieve your over-burdened heart, my poor child. I can

wait, Blanche--I can wait!"



Blanche stopped, and confronted Lady Lundie.



"You and I never liked each other," she said. "I wrote you a pert

letter from this place. I have always taken Anne's part against

you. I have shown you plainly--rudely, I dare say--that I was

glad to be married and get away from you. This is not your

revenge, is it?"



"Oh, Blanche, Blanche, what thoughts to think! what words to say!

I can only pray for you."



"I am mad, Lady Lundie. You bear with mad people. Bear with me. I

have been hardly more than a fortnight married. I love _him_--I

love _her_--with all my heart. Remember what you have told me

about them. Remember! remember! remember!"



She reiterated the words with a low cry of pain. Her hands went

up to her head again; and she returned restlessly to pacing this

way and that in the room.



Lady Lundie tried the effect of a gentle remonstrance. "For your

own sake," she said, "don't persist in estranging yourself from

me. In this dreadful trial, I am the only friend you have."



Blanche came back to her step-mother's chair; and looked at her

steadily, in silence. Lady Lundie submitted to inspection--and

bore it perfectly.



"Look into my heart," she said. "Blanche! it bleeds for you!"



Blanche heard, without heeding. Her mind was painfully intent on

its own thoughts. "You are a religious woman," she said,

abruptly. "Will you swear on your Bible, that what you told me is

true?"



"_My_ Bible!" repeated Lady Lundie with sorrowful emphasis. "Oh,

my child! have _you_ no part in that precious inheritance? Is it

not _your_ Bible, too?"



A momentary triumph showed itself in Blanche's face. "You daren't

swear it!" she said. "That's enough for me!"



She turned away scornfully. Lady Lundie caught her by the hand,

and drew her sharply back. The suffering saint disappeared, and

the woman who was no longer to be trifled with took her place.



"There must be an end to this," she said. "You don't believe what

I have told you. Have you courage enough to put it to the test?"



Blanche started, and released her hand. She trembled a little.

There was a horrible certainty of conviction expressed in Lady

Lundie's sudden change of manner.



"How?" she asked.



"You shall see. Tell me the truth, on your side, first. Where is

Sir Patrick? Is he really out, as his servant told me?"



"Yes. He is out with the farm bailiff. You have taken us all by

surprise. You wrote that we were to expect you by the next

train."



"When does the next train arrive? It is eleven o'clock now."



"Between one and two."



"Sir Patrick will not be back till then?"



"Not till then."



"Where is Mr. Brinkworth?"



"My husband?"



"Your husband--if you like. Is he out, too?"



"He is in the smoking-room."



"Do you mean the long room, built out from the back of the

house?"



"Yes."



"Come down stairs at once with me."



Blanche advanced a step--and drew back. "What do you want of me?"

she asked, inspired by a

 sudden distrust.



Lady Lundie turned round, and looked at her impatiently.



"Can't you see yet," she said, sharply, "that your interest and

my interest in this matter are one? What have I told you?"



"Don't repeat it!"



"I must repeat it! I have told you that Arnold Brinkworth was

privately at Craig Fernie, with Miss Silvester, in the

acknowledged character of her husband--when we supposed him to be

visiting the estate left him by his aunt. You refuse to believe

it--and I am about to put it to the proof. Is it your interest or

is it not, to know whether this man deserves the blind belief

that you place in him?"



Blanche trembled from head to foot, and made no reply.



"I am going into the garden, to speak to Mr. Brinkworth through

the smoking-room window," pursued her ladyship. "Have you the

courage to come with me; to wait behind out of sight; and to hear

what he says with his own lips? I am not afraid of putting it to

that test. Are you?"



The tone in which she asked the question roused Blanche's spirit.



"If I believed him to be guilty," she said, resolutely, "I should

_not_ have the courage. I believe him to be innocent. Lead the

way, Lady Lundie, as soon as you please."



They left the room--Blanche's own room at Ham Farm--and descended

to the hall. Lady Lundie stopped, and consulted the railway

time-table hanging near the house-door.



"There is a train to London at a quarter to twelve," she said.

"How long does it take to walk to the station?"



"Why do you ask?"



"You will soon know. Answer my question."



"It's a walk of twenty minutes to the station."



Lady Lundie referred to her watch. "There will be just time," she

said.



"Time for what?"



"Come into the garden."



With that answer, she led the way out



The smoking-room projected at right angles from the wall of the

house, in an oblong form--with a bow-window at the farther end,

looking into the garden. Before she turned the corner, and showed

herself within the range of view from the window Lady Lundie

looked back, and signed to Blanche to wait behind the angle of

the wall. Blanche waited.



The next instant she heard the voices in conversation through the

open window. Arnold's voice was the first that spoke.



"Lady Lundie! Why, we didn't expect you till luncheon time!"



Lady Lundie was ready with her answer.



"I was able to leave town earlier than I had anticipated. Don't

put out your cigar; and don't move. I am not coming in."



The quick interchange of question and answer went on; every word

being audible in the perfect stillness of the place. Arnold was

the next to speak.



"Have you seen Blanche?"



"Blanche is getting ready to go out with me. We mean to have a

walk together. I have many things to say to her. Before we go, I

have something to say to _you._"



"Is it any thing very serious?"



"It is most serious."



"About me?"



"About you. I know where you went on the evening of my lawn-party

at Windygates--you went to Craig Fernie."



"Good Heavens! how did you find out--?"



"I know whom you went to meet--Miss Silvester. I know what is

said of you and of her--you are man and wife."



"Hush! don't speak so loud. Somebody may hear you!"



"What does it matter if they do? I am the only person whom you

have kept out of the secret. You all of you know it here."



"Nothing of the sort! Blanche doesn't know it."



"What! Neither you nor Sir Patrick has told Blanche of the

situation you stand in at this moment?"



"Not yet. Sir Patrick leaves it to me. I haven't been able to

bring myself to do it. Don't say a word, I entreat you. I don't

know how Blanche may interpret it. Her friend is expected in

London to-morrow. I want to wait till Sir Patrick can bring them

together. Her friend will break it to her better than I can. It's

_my_ notion. Sir Patrick thinks it a good one. Stop! you're not

going away already?"



"She will be here to look for me if I stay any longer."



"One word! I want to know--"



"You shall know later in the day."







Her ladyship appeared again round the angle of the wall. The next

words that passed were words spoken in a whisper.



"Are you satisfied now, Blanche?"



"Have you mercy enough left, Lady Lundie, to take me away from

this house?"



"My dear child! Why else did I look at the time-table in the

hall?"
