



CHAPTER THE SEVENTH.



THE DEBT.



ARNOLD was the first who broke the silence. "Is your father

seriously ill?" he asked.



Geoffrey answered by handing him the card.



Sir Patrick, who had stood apart (while the question of

Ratcatcher's relapse was under discussion) sardonically studying

the manners and customs of modern English youth, now came

forward, and took his part in the proceedings. Lady Lundie

herself must have acknowledged that he spoke and acted as became

the head of the family, on t his occasion.



"Am I right in supposing that Mr. Delamayn's father is

dangerously ill?" he asked, addressing himself to Arnold.



"Dangerously ill, in London," Arnold answered. "Geoffrey must

leave Windygates with me. The train I am traveling by meets the

train his brother is traveling by, at the junction. I shall leave

him at the second station from here."



"Didn't you tell me that Lady Lundie was going to send you to the

railway in a gig?"



"Yes."



"If the servant drives, there will be three of you--and there

will be no room."



"We had better ask for some other vehicle," suggested Arnold.



Sir Patrick looked at his watch. There was no time to change the

carriage. He turned to Geoffrey. "Can you drive, Mr. Delamayn?"



Still impenetrably silent, Geoffrey replied by a nod of the head.



Without noticing the unceremonious manner in which he had been

answered, Sir Patrick went on:



"In that case, you can leave the gig in charge of the

station-master. I'll tell the servant that he will not be wanted

to drive."



"Let me save you the trouble, Sir Patrick," said Arnold.



Sir Patrick declined, by a gesture. He turned again, with

undiminished courtesy, to Geoffrey. "It is one of the duties of

hospitality, Mr. Delamayn, to hasten your departure, under these

sad circumstances. Lady Lundie is engaged with her guests. I will

see myself that there is no unnecessary delay in sending you to

the station." He bowed--and left the summer-house.



Arnold said a word of sympathy to his friend, when they were

alone.



"I am sorry for this, Geoffrey. I hope and trust you will get to

London in time."



He stopped. There was something in Geoffrey's face--a strange

mixture of doubt and bewilderment, of annoyance and

hesitation--which was not to be accounted for as the natural

result of the news that he had received. His color shifted and

changed; he picked fretfully at his finger-nails; he looked at

Arnold as if he was going to speak--and then looked away again,

in silence.



"Is there something amiss, Geoffrey, besides this bad news about

your father?" asked Arnold.



"I'm in the devil's own mess," was the answer.



"Can I do any thing to help you?"



Instead of making a direct reply, Geoffrey lifted his mighty

hand, and gave Arnold a friendly slap on the shoulder which shook

him from head to foot. Arnold steadied himself, and

waited--wondering what was coming next.



"I say, old fellow!" said Geoffrey.



"Yes."



"Do you remember when the boat turned keel upward in Lisbon

Harbor?"



Arnold started. If he could have called to mind his first

interview in the summer-house with his father's old friend he

might have remembered Sir Patrick's prediction that he would

sooner or later pay, with interest, the debt he owed to the man

who had saved his life. As it was his memory reverted at a bound

to the time of the boat-accident. In the ardor of his gratitude

and the innocence of his heart, he almost resented his friend's

question as a reproach which he had not deserved.



"Do you think I can ever forget," he cried, warmly, "that you

swam ashore with me and saved my life?"



Geoffrey ventured a step nearer to the object that he had in

view.



"One good turn deserves another," he said, "don't it?"



Arnold took his hand. "Only tell me!" he eagerly rejoined--"only

tell me what I can do!"



"You are going to-day to see your new place, ain't you?"



"Yes."



"Can you put off going till to-morrow?"



"If it's any thing serious--of course I can!"



Geoffrey looked round at the entrance to the summer-house, to

make sure that they were alone.



"You know the governess here, don't you?" he said, in a whisper.



"Miss Silvester?"



"Yes. I've got into a little difficulty with Miss Silvester. And

there isn't a living soul I can ask to help me but _you._"



"You know I will help you. What is it?"



"It isn't so easy to say. Never mind--you're no saint either, are

you? You'll keep it a secret, of course? Look here! I've acted

like an infernal fool. I've gone and got the girl into a

scrape--"



Arnold drew back, suddenly understanding him.



"Good heavens, Geoffrey! You don't mean--"



"I do! Wait a bit--that's not the worst of it. She has left the

house."



"Left the house?"



"Left, for good and all. She can't come back again."



"Why not?"



"Because she's written to her missus. Women (hang 'em!) never do

these things by halves. She's left a letter to say she's

privately married, and gone off to her husband. Her husband

is--Me. Not that I'm married to her yet, you understand. I have

only promised to marry her. She has gone on first (on the sly) to

a place four miles from this. And we settled I was to follow, and

marry her privately this afternoon. That's out of the question

now. While she's expecting me at the inn I shall be bowling along

to London. Somebody must tell her what has happened--or she'll

play the devil, and the whole business will burst up. I can't

trust any of the people here. I'm done for, old chap, unless you

help me."



Arnold lifted his hands in dismay. "It's the most dreadful

situation, Geoffrey, I ever heard of in my life!"



Geoffrey thoroughly agreed with him. "Enough to knock a man

over," he said, "isn't it? I'd give something for a drink of

beer." He produced his everlasting pipe, from sheer force of

habit. "Got a match?" he asked.



Arnold's mind was too preoccupied to notice the question.



"I hope you won't think I'm making light of your father's

illness," he said, earnestly. "But it seems to me--I must say

it--it seems to me that the poor girl has the first claim on

you."



Geoffrey looked at him in surly amazement.



"The first claim on me? Do you think I'm going to risk being cut

out of my father's will? Not for the best woman that ever put on

a petticoat!"



Arnold's admiration of his friend was the solidly-founded

admiration of many years; admiration for a man who could row,

box, wrestle, jump--above all, who could swim--as few other men

could perform those exercises in contemporary England. But that

answer shook his faith. Only for the moment--unhappily for

Arnold, only for the moment.



"You know best," he returned, a little coldly. "What can I do?"



Geoffrey took his arm--roughly as he took every thing; but in a

companionable and confidential way.



"Go, like a good fellow, and tell her what has happened. We'll

start from here as if we were both going to the railway; and I'll

drop you at the foot-path, in the gig. You can get on to your own

place afterward by the evening train. It puts you to no

inconvenience, and it's doing the kind thing by an old friend.

There's no risk of being found out. I'm to drive, remember!

There's no servant with us, old boy, to notice, and tell tales."



Even Arnold began to see dimly by this time that he was likely to

pay his debt of obligation with interest--as Sir Patrick had

foretold.



"What am I to say to her?" he asked. "I'm bound to do all I can

do to help you, and I will. But what am I to say?"



It was a natural question to put. It was not an easy question to

answer. What a man, under given muscular circumstances, could do,

no person living knew better than Geoffrey Delamayn. Of what a

man, under given social circumstances, could say, no person

living knew less.



"Say?" he repeated. "Look here! say I'm half distracted, and all

that. And--wait a bit--tell her to stop where she is till I write

to her."



Arnold hesitated. Absolutely ignorant of that low and limited

form of knowledge which is called "knowledge of the world," his

inbred delicacy of mind revealed to him the serious difficulty of

the position which his friend was asking him to occupy as plainly

as if he was looking at it through the warily-gathered experience

of society of a man of twice his age.



"Can't you write to her now, Geoffrey?" he asked.



"What's the good of that?"



"Consider for a minute, and you will see. You have trusted me

with a very awkward secret. I may be wrong--I never was mixed up

in such a matter before--but to present myself to this lady as

your messenger seems exposing her to a dreadful humiliation. Am I

to go and tell her to her face: 'I know what you are hiding from

the knowledge of all the world;' and is she to be expected to

endure it?"



"Bosh!" said Geoffrey. "They can

 endure a deal more than you think. I wish you had heard how she

bullied me, in this very place. My good fellow, you don't

understand women. The grand secret, in dealing with a woman, is

to take her as you take a cat, by the scruff of the neck--"



"I can't face her--unless you will help me by breaking the thing

to her first. I'll stick at no sacrifice to serve you; but--hang

it!--make allowances, Geoffrey, for the difficulty you are

putting me in. I am almost a stranger; I don't know how Miss

Silvester may receive me, before I can open my lips."



Those last words touched the question on its practical side. The

matter-of-fact view of the difficulty was a view which Geoffrey

instantly recognized and understood.



"She has the devil's own temper," he said. "There's no denying

that. Perhaps I'd better write. Have we time to go into the

house?"



"No. The house is full of people, and we haven't a minute to

spare. Write at once, and write here. I have got a pencil."



"What am I to write on?"



"Any thing--your brother's card."



Geoffrey took the pencil which Arnold offered to him, and looked

at the card. The lines his brother had written covered it. There

was no room left. He felt in his pocket, and produced a

letter--the letter which Anne had referred to at the interview

between them--the letter which she had written to insist on his

attending the lawn-party at Windygates.



"This will do," he said. "It's one of Anne's own letters to me.

There's room on the fourth page. If I write," he added, turning

suddenly on Arnold, "you promise to take it to her? Your hand on

the bargain!"



He held out the hand which had saved Arnold's life in Lisbon

Harbor, and received Arnold's promise, in remembrance of that

time.



"All right, old fellow. I can tell you how to find the place as

we go along in the gig. By-the-by, there's one thing that's

rather important. I'd better mention it while I think of it."



"What is that?"



"You mustn't present yourself at the inn in your own name; and

you mustn't ask for her by _her_ name."



"Who am I to ask for?"



"It's a little awkward. She has gone there as a married woman, in

case they're particular about taking her in--"



"I understand. Go on."



"And she has planned to tell them (by way of making it all right

and straight for both of us, you know) that she expects her

husband to join her. If I had been able to go I should have asked

at the door for 'my wife.' You are going in my place--"



"And I must ask at the door for 'my wife,' or I shall expose Miss

Silvester to unpleasant consequences?"



"You don't object?"



"Not I! I don't care what I say to the people of the inn. It's

the meeting with Miss Silvester that I'm afraid of."



"I'll put that right for you--never fear!"



He went at once to the table and rapidly scribbled a few

lines--then stopped and considered. "Will that do?" he asked

himself. "No; I'd better say something spooney to quiet her." He

considered again, added a line, and brought his hand down on the

table with a cheery smack. "That will do the business! Read it

yourself, Arnold--it's not so badly written."



Arnold read the note without appearing to share his friend's

favorable opinion of it.



"This is rather short," he said.



"Have I time to make it longer?"



"Perhaps not. But let Miss Silvester see for herself that you

have no time to make it longer. The train starts in less than

half an hour. Put the time."



"Oh, all right! and the date too, if you like."



He had just added the desired words and figures, and had given

the revised letter to Arnold, when Sir Patrick returned to

announce that the gig was waiting.



"Come!" he said. "You haven't a moment to lose!"



Geoffrey started to his feet. Arnold hesitated.



"I must see Blanche!" he pleaded. "I can't leave Blanche without

saying good-by. Where is she?"



Sir Patrick pointed to the steps, with a smile. Blanche had

followed him from the house. Arnold ran out to her instantly.



"Going?" she said, a little sadly.



"I shall be back in two days," Arnold whispered. "It's all right!

Sir Patrick consents."



She held him fast by the arm. The hurried parting before other

people seemed to be not a parting to Blanche's taste.



"You will lose the train!" cried Sir Patrick.



Geoffrey seized Arnold by the arm which Blanche was holding, and

tore him--literally tore him--away. The two were out of sight, in

the shrubbery, before Blanche's indignation found words, and

addressed itself to her uncle.



"Why is that brute going away with Mr. Brinkworth?" she asked.



"Mr. Delamayn is called to London by his father's illness,"

replied Sir Patrick. "You don't like him?"



"I hate him!"



Sir Patrick reflected a little.



"She is a young girl of eighteen," he thought to himself. "And I

am an old man of seventy. Curious, that we should agree about any

thing. More than curious that we should agree in disliking Mr.

Delamayn."



He roused himself, and looked again at Blanche. She was seated at

the table, with her head on her hand; absent, and out of

spirits--thinking of Arnold, and set, with the future all smooth

before them, not thinking happily.



"Why, Blanche! Blanche!" cried Sir Patrick, "one would think he

had gone for a voyage round the world. You silly child! he will

be back again the day after to-morrow."



"I wish he hadn't gone with that man!" said Blanche. "I wish he

hadn't got that man for a friend!"



"There! there! the man was rude enough I own. Never mind! he will

leave the man at the second station. Come back to the ball-room

with me. Dance it off, my dear--dance it off!"



"No," returned Blanche. "I'm in no humor for dancing. I shall go

up stairs, and talk about it to Anne."



"You will do nothing of the sort!" said a third voice, suddenly

joining in the conversation.



Both uncle and niece looked up, and found Lady Lundie at the top

of the summer-house steps.



"I forbid you to mention that woman's name again in my hearing,"

pursued her ladyship. "Sir Patrick! I warned you (if you

remember?) that the matter of the governess was not a matter to

be trifled with. My worst anticipations are realized. Miss

Silvester has left the house!"
