




CHAPTER THE FIFTY-SECOND.



THE APPARITION.



THE night had advanced. It was close on twelve o'clock when Anne

heard the servant's voice, outside her bedroom door, asking leave

to speak with her for a moment.



"What is it?"



"The gentleman down stairs wishes to see you, ma'am."



"Do you mean Mr. Delamayn's brother?"



"Yes."



"Where is Mr. Delamayn?"



"Out in the garden, ma'am."



Anne went down stairs, and found Julius alone in

 the drawing-room.



"I am sorry to disturb you," he said. "I am afraid Geoffrey is

ill. The landlady has gone to bed, I am told--and I don't know

where to apply for medical assistance. Do you know of any doctor

in the neighborhood?"



Anne, like Julius, was a perfect stranger to the neighborhood.

She suggested making inquiry of the servant. On speaking to the

girl, it turned out that she knew of a medical man, living within

ten minutes' walk of the cottage. She could give plain directions

enabling any person to find the place--but she was afraid, at

that hour of the night and in that lonely neighborhood, to go out

by herself.



"Is he seriously ill?" Anne asked.



"He is in such a state of nervous irritability," said Julius,

"that he can't remain still for two moments together in the same

place. It began with incessant restlessness while he was reading

here. I persuaded him to go to bed. He couldn't lie still for an

instant--he came down again, burning with fever, and more

restless than ever. He is out in the garden in spite of every

thing I could do to prevent him; trying, as he says, to 'run it

off.' It appears to be serious to _me._. Come and judge for

yourself."



He led Anne into the next room; and, opening the shutter, pointed

to the garden.



The clouds had cleared off; the night was fine. The clear

starlight showed Geoffrey, stripped to his shirt and drawers,

running round and round the garden. He apparently believed

himself to be contending at the Fulham foot-race. At times, as

the white figure circled round and round in the star-light, they

heard him cheering for "the South." The slackening thump of his

feet on the ground, the heavier and heavier gasps in which he

drew his breath, as he passed the window, gave warning that his

strength was failing him. Exhaustion, if it led to no worse

consequences, would force him to return to the house. In the

state of his brain at that moment who could say what the result

might be, if medical help was not called in?



"I will go for the doctor," said Julius, "if you don't mind my

leaving you."



It was impossible for Anne to set any apprehensions of her own

against the plain necessity for summoning assistance. They found

the key of the gate in the pocket of Geoffrey's coat up stairs.

Anne went with Julius to let him out. "How can I thank you!" she

said, gratefully. "What should I have done without _you!_"



"I won't be a moment longer than I can help," he answered, and

left her.



She secured the gate again, and went back to the cottage. The

servant met her at the door, and proposed calling up Hester

Dethridge.



"We don't know what the master may do while his brother's away,"

said the girl. "And one more of us isn't one too many, when we

are only women in the house."



"You are quite right," said Anne. "Wake your mistress."



After ascending the stairs, they looked out into the garden,

through the window at the end of the passage on the upper floor.

He was still going round and round, but very slowly: his pace was

fast slackening to a walk.



Anne went back to her room, and waited near the open door--ready

to close and fasten it instantly if any thing occurred to alarm

her. "How changed I am!" she thought to herself. "Every thing

frightens me, now."



The inference was the natural one--but not the true one. The

change was not in herself, but in the situation in which she was

placed. Her position during the investigation at Lady Lundie's

house had tried her moral courage only. It had exacted from her

one of those noble efforts of self-sacrifice which the hidden

forces in a woman's nature are essentially capable of making. Her

position at the cottage tried her physical courage: it called on

her to rise superior to the sense of actual bodily danger--while

that danger was lurking in the dark. There, the woman's nature

sank under the stress laid on it--there, her courage could strike

no root in the strength of her love--there, the animal instincts

were the instincts appealed to; and the firmness wanted was the

firmness of a man.



Hester Dethridge's door opened. She walked straight into Anne's

room.



The yellow clay-cold color of her face showed a faint flush of

warmth; its deathlike stillness was stirred by a touch of life.

The stony eyes, fixed as ever in their gaze, shone strangely with

a dim inner lustre. Her gray hair, so neatly arranged at other

times, was in disorder under her cap. All her movements were

quicker than usual. Something had roused the stagnant vitality in

the woman--it was working in her mind; it was forcing itself

outward into her face. The servants at Windygates, in past times,

had seen these signs, and had known them for a warning to leave

Hester Dethridge to herself.



Anne asked her if she had heard what had happened.



She bowed her head.



"I hope you don't mind being disturbed?"



She wrote on her slate: "I'm glad to be disturbed. I have been

dreaming bad dreams. It's good for me to be wakened, when sleep

takes me backward in my life. What's wrong with you? Frightened?"



"Yes."



She wrote again, and pointed toward the garden with one hand,

while she held the slate up with the other: "Frightened of

_him?_"



"Terribly frightened."



She wrote for the third time, and offered the slate to Anne with

a ghastly smile: "I have been through it all. I know. You're only

at the beginning now. He'll put the wrinkles in your face, and

the gray in your hair. There will come a time when you'll wish

yourself dead and buried. You will live through it, for all that.

Look at Me."



As she read the last three words, Anne heard the garden door

below opened and banged to again. She caught Hester Dethridge by

the arm, and listened. The tramp of Geoffrey's feet, staggering

heavily in the passage, gave token of his approach to the stairs.

He was talking to himself, still possessed by the delusion that

he was at the foot-race. "Five to four on Delamayn. Delamayn's

won. Three cheers for the South, and one cheer more. Devilish

long race. Night already! Perry! where's Perry?"



He advanced, staggering from side to side of the passage. The

stairs below creaked as he set his foot on them. Hester Dethridge

dragged herself free from Anne, advanced, with her candle in her

hand, and threw open Geoffrey's bedroom door; returned to the

head of the stairs; and stood there, firm as a rock, waiting for

him. He looked up, as he set his foot on the next stair, and met

the view of Hester's face, brightly illuminated by the candle,

looking down at him. On the instant he stopped, rooted to the

place on which he stood. "Ghost! witch! devil!" he cried out,

"take your eyes off me!" He shook his fist at her furiously, with

an oath--sprang back into the hall--and shut himself into the

dining-room from the sight of her. The panic which had seized him

once already in the kitchen-garden at Windygates, under the eyes

of the dumb cook, had fastened its hold on him once more.

Frightened--absolutely frightened--of Hester Dethridge!



The gate bell rang. Julius had returned with the doctor.



Anne gave the key to the girl to let them in. Hester wrote on her

slate, as composedly as if nothing had happened: "They'll find me

in the kitchen, if they want me. I sha'n't go back to my bedroom.

My bedroom's full of bad dreams." She descended the stairs. Anne

waited in the upper passage, looking over into the hall below.

"Your brother is in the drawing-room," she called down to Julius.

"The landlady is in the kitchen, if you want her." She returned

to her room, and waited for what might happen next.



After a brief interval she heard the drawing-room door open, and

the voices of the men out side. There seemed to be some

difficulty in persuading Geoffrey to ascend the stairs; he

persisted in declaring that Hester Dethridge was waiting for him

at the top of them. After a little they persuaded him that the

way was free. Anne heard them ascend the stairs and close his

bedroom door.



Another and a longer interval passed before the door opened

again. The doctor was going away. He said his parting words to

Julius in the passage. "Look in at him from time  to time through

the night, and give him another dose of the sedative mixture if

he wakes. There is nothing to b e alarmed about in the

restlessness and the fever. They are only the outward

manifestations of some serious mischief hidden under them. Send

for the medical man who has last attended him. Knowledge of the

patient's constitution is very important knowledge in this case."



As Julius returned from letting the doctor out, Anne met him in

the hall. She was at once struck by the worn look in his face,

and by the fatigue which expressed itself in all his movements.



"You want rest," she said. "Pray go to your room. I have heard

what the doctor said to you. Leave it to the landlady and to me

to sit up."



Julius owned that he had been traveling from Scotland during the

previous night. But he was unwilling to abandon the

responsibility of watching his brother. "You are not strong

enough, I am sure, to take my place," he said, kindly. "And

Geoffrey has some unreasoning horror of the landlady which makes

it very undesirable that he should see her again, in his present

state. I will go up to my room, and rest on the bed. If you hear

any thing you have only to come and call me."



An hour more passed.



Anne went to Geoffrey's door and listened. He was stirring in his

bed, and muttering to himself. She went on to the door of the

next room, which Julius had left partly open. Fatigue had

overpowered him; she heard, within, the quiet breathing of a man

in a sound sleep. Anne turned back again resolved not to disturb

him.



At the head of the stairs she hesitated--not knowing what to do.

Her horror of entering Geoffrey's room, by herself, was

insurmountable. But who else was to do it? "The girl had gone to

bed. The reason which Julius had given for not employing the

assistance of Hester Dethridge was unanswerable. She listened

again at Geoffrey's door. No sound was now audible in the room to

a person in the passage outside. Would it be well to look in, and

make sure that he had only fallen asleep again? She hesitated

once more--she was still hesitating, when Hester Dethridge

appeared from the kitchen.



She joined Anne at the top of the stairs--looked at her--and

wrote a line on her slate: "Frightened to go in? Leave it to Me."



The silence in the room justified the inference that he was

asleep. If Hester looked in, Hester could do no harm now. Anne

accepted the proposal.



"If you find any thing wrong," she said, "don't disturb his

brother. Come to me first."



With that caution she withdrew. It was then nearly two in the

morning. She, like Julius, was sinking from fatigue. After

waiting a little, and hearing nothing, she threw herself on the

sofa in her room. If any thing happened, a knock at the door

would rouse her instantly.







In the mean while Hester Dethridge opened Geoffrey's bedroom door

and went in.



The movements and the mutterings which Anne had heard, had been

movements and mutterings in his sleep. The doctor's composing

draught, partially disturbed in its operation for the moment

only, had recovered its sedative influence on his brain. Geoffrey

was in a deep and quiet sleep.



Hester stood near the door, looking at him. She moved to go out

again--stopped--and fixed her eyes suddenly on one of the inner

corners of the room.



The same sinister change which had passed over her once already

in Geoffrey's presence, when they met in the kitchen-garden at

Windygates, now passed over her again. Her closed lips dropped

apart. Her eyes slowly dilated--moved, inch by inch from the

corner, following something along the empty wall, in the

direction of the bed--stopped at the head of the bed, exactly

above Geoffrey's sleeping face--stared, rigid and glittering, as

if they saw a sight of horror close over it. He sighed faintly in

his sleep. The sound, slight as it was, broke the spell that held

her. She slowly lifted her withered hands, and wrung them above

her head; fled back across the passage; and, rushing into her

room, sank on her knees at the bedside.



Now, in the dead of night, a strange thing happened. Now, in the

silence and the darkness, a hideous secret was revealed.



In the sanctuary of her own room--with all the other inmates of

the house sleeping round her--the dumb woman threw off the

mysterious and terrible disguise under which she deliberately

isolated herself among her fellow-creatures in the hours of the

day. Hester Dethridge spoke. In low, thick, smothered accents--in

a wild litany of her own--she prayed. She called upon the mercy

of God for deliverance from herself; for deliverance from the

possession of the Devil; for blindness to fall on her, for death

to strike her, so that she might never see that unnamed Horror

more! Sobs shook the whole frame of the stony woman whom nothing

human moved at other times. Tears poured over those clay-cold

cheeks. One by one, the frantic words of her prayer died away on

her lips. Fierce shuddering fits shook her from head to foot. She

started up from her knees in the darkness. Light! light! light!

The unnamed Horror was behind her in his room. The unnamed Horror

was looking at her through his open door. She found the

match-box, and lit the candle on her table--lit the two other

candles set for ornament only on the mantle piece--and looked all

round the brightly lighted little room. "Aha!" she said to

herself, wiping the cold sweat of her agony from her face.

"Candles to other people. God's light to _me._ Nothing to be

seen! nothing to be seen!" Taking one of the candles in her hand,

she crossed the passage, with her head down, turned her back on

Geoffrey's open door, closed it quickly and softly, stretching

out her hand behind her, and retreated again to her own room. She

fastened the door, and took an ink-bottle and a pen from the

mantle-piece. After considering for a moment, she hung a

handkerchief over the keyhole, and laid an old shawl longwise at

the bottom of the door, so as to hide the light in her room from

the observation of any one in the house who might wake and come

that way. This done, she opened the upper part of her dress, and,

slipping her fingers into a secret pocket hidden in the inner

side of her stays, produced from it some neatly folded leaves of

thin paper. Spread out on the table, the leaves revealed

themselves--all but the last--as closely covered with writing, in

her own hand.



The first leaf was headed by this inscription: "My Confession. To

be put into my coffin, and to be buried with me when I die."



She turned the manuscript over, so as to get at the last page.

The greater part of it was left blank. A few lines of writing, at

the top, bore the date of the day of the week and month on which

Lady Lundie had dismissed her from her situation at Windygates.

The entry was expressed in these terms:



"I have seen IT again to-day. The first time for two months past.

In the kitchen-garden. Standing behind the young gentleman whose

name is Delamayn. Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you. I

have resisted. By prayer. By meditation in solitude. By reading

good books. I have left my place. I have lost sight of the young

gentleman for good. Who will IT stand behind? and point to next?

Lord have mercy upon me! Christ have mercy upon me!"



Under this she now added the following lines, first carefully

prefixing the date:



"I have seen IT again to-night. I notice one awful change. IT has

appeared twice behind the same person. This has never happened

before. This makes the temptation more terrible than ever.

To-night, in his bedroom, between the bed-head and the wall, I

have seen IT behind young Mr. Delamayn again. The head just above

his face, and the finger pointing downward at his throat. Twice

behind this one man. And never twice behind any other living

creature till now. If I see IT a third time behind him--Lord

deliver me! Christ deliver me! I daren't think of it. He shall

leave my cottage to-morrow. I would fain have drawn back from the

bargain, when the stranger took the lodgings for his friend, and

the friend proved to be Mr. Delamayn. I didn't like it, even

then. After the warning to-night, my mind is made up. He shall

go. He may have his money back, if he likes. He shall  go.

(Memorandum:  Felt the temptation whispering this time, and the

terror tearing at me all the while, as I have

 never felt them yet. Resisted, as before, by prayer. Am now

going down stairs to meditate against it in solitude--to fortify

myself against it by good books. Lord be merciful to me a

sinner!)"



In those words she closed the entry, and put the manuscript back

in the secret pocket in her stays.



She went down to the little room looking on the garden, which had

once been her brother's study. There she lit a lamp, and took

some books from a shelf that hung against the wall. The books

were the Bible, a volume of Methodist sermons, and a set of

collected Memoirs of Methodist saints. Ranging these last

carefully round her, in an order of her own, Hester Dethridge sat

down with the Bible on her lap to watch out the night.





CHAPTER THE FIFTY-THIRD.



WHAT had happened in the hours of darkness?



This was Anne's first thought, when the sunlight poured in at her

window, and woke her the next morning.



She made immediate inquiry of the servant. The girl could only

speak for herself. Nothing had occurred to disturb her after she

had gone to bed. Her master was still, she believed, in his room.

Mrs. Dethridge was at her work in the kitchen.



Anne went to the kitchen. Hester Dethridge was at her usual

occupation at that time--preparing the breakfast. The slight

signs of animation which Anne had noticed in her when they last

met appeared no more. The dull look was back again in her stony

eyes; the lifeless torpor possessed all her movements. Asked if

any thing had happened in the night, she slowly shook her stolid

head, slowly made the sign with her hand which signified,

"Nothing."



Leaving the kitchen, Anne saw Julius in the front garden. She

went out and joined him.



"I believe I have to thank your consideration for me for some

hours of rest," he said. "It was five in the morning when I woke.

I hope you had no reason to regret having left me to sleep? I

went into Geoffrey's room, and found him stirring. A second dose

of the mixture composed him again. The fever has gone. He looks

weaker and paler, but in other respects like himself. We will

return directly to the question of his health. I have something

to say to you, first, about a change which may be coming in your

life here."



"Has he consented to the separation?"



"No. He is as obstinate about it as ever. I have placed the

matter before him in every possible light. He still refuses,

positively refuses, a provision which would make him an

independent man for life."



"Is it the provision he might have had, Lord Holchester, if--?"



"If he had married Mrs. Glenarm? No. It is impossible,

consistently with my duty to my mother, and with what I owe to

the position in which my father's death has placed me, that I can

offer him such a fortune as Mrs. Glenarm's. Still, it is a

handsome income which he is mad enough to refuse. I shall persist

in pressing it on him. He must and shall take it."



Anne felt no reviving hope roused in her by his last words. She

turned to another subject.



"You had something to tell me," she said. "You spoke of a

change."



"True. The landlady here is a very strange person; and she has

done a very strange thing. She has given Geoffrey notice to quit

these lodgings."



"Notice to quit?" Anne repeated, in amazement.



"Yes. In a formal letter. She handed it to me open, as soon as I

was up this morning. It was impossible to get any explanation

from her. The poor dumb creature simply wrote on her slate: 'He

may have his money back, if he likes: he shall go!' Greatly to my

surprise (for the woman inspires him with the strongest aversion)

Geoffrey refuses to go until his term is up. I have made the

peace between them for to-day. Mrs. Dethridge. very reluctantly,

consents to give him four-and-twenty hours. And there the matter

rests at present."



"What can her motive be?" said Anne.



"It's useless to inquire. Her mind is evidently off its balance.

One thing is clear, Geoffrey shall not keep you here much longer.

The coming change will remove you from this dismal place--which

is one thing gained. And it is quite possible that new scenes and

new surroundings may have their influence on Geoffrey for good.

His conduct--otherwise quite incomprehensible--may be the result

of some latent nervous irritation which medical help might reach.

I don't attempt to disguise from myself or from you, that your

position here is a most deplorable one. But before we despair of

the future, let us at least inquire whether there is any

explanation of my brother's present behavior to be found in the

present state of my brother's health. I have been considering

what the doctor said to me last night. The first thing to do is

to get the best medical advice on Geoffrey's case which is to be

had. What do you think?"



"I daren't tell you what I think, Lord Holchester. I will try--it

is a very small return to make for your kindness--I will try to

see my position with your eyes, not with mine. The best medical

advice that you can obtain is the advice of Mr. Speedwell. It was

he who first made the discovery that your brother was in broken

health."



"The very man for our purpose! I will send him here to-day or

to-morrow. Is there any thing else I can do for you? I shall see

Sir Patrick as soon as I get to town. Have you any message for

him?"



Anne hesitated. Looking attentively at her, Julius noticed that

she changed color when he mentioned Sir Patrick's name.



"Will you say that I gratefully thank him for the letter which

Lady Holchester was so good us to give me last night," she

replied. "And will you entreat him, from me, not to expose

himself, on my account, to--" she hesitated, and finished the

sentence with her eyes on the ground--"to what might happen, if

he came here and insisted on seeing me."



"Does he propose to do that?"



She hesitated again. The little nervous contraction of her lips

at one side of the mouth became more marked than usual. "He

writes that his anxiety is unendurable, and that he is resolved

to see me," she answered softly.



"He is likely to hold to his resolution, I think," said Julius.

"When I saw him yesterday, Sir Patrick spoke of you in terms of

admiration--"



He stopped. The bright tears were glittering on Anne's eyelashes;

one of her hands was toying nervously with something hidden

(possibly Sir Patrick's letter) in the bosom of her dress. "I

thank him with my whole heart," she said, in low, faltering

tones. "But it is best that he should not come here."



"Would you like to write to him?"



"I think I should prefer your giving him my message."



Julius understood that the subject was to proceed no further. Sir

Patrick's letter had produced some impression on her, which the

sensitive nature of the woman seemed to shrink from

acknowledging, even to herself. They turned back to enter the

cottage. At the door they were met by a surprise. Hester

Dethridge, with her bonnet on--dressed, at that hour of the

morning, to go out!



"Are you going to market already?" Anne asked.



Hester shook her head.



"When are you coming back?"



Hester wrote on her slate: "Not till the night-time."



Without another word of explanation she pulled her veil down over

her face, and made for the gate. The key had been left in the

dining-room by Julius, after he had let the doctor out. Hester

had it in her hand. She opened he gate and closed the door after

her, leaving the key in the lock. At the moment when the door

banged to Geoffrey appeared in the passage.



"Where's the key?" he asked. "Who's gone out?"



His brother answered the question. He looked backward and forward

suspiciously between Julius and Anne. "What does she go out for

at his time?" he said. "Has she left the house to avoid Me?"



Julius thought this the likely explanation. Geoffrey went down

sulkily to the gate to lock it, and returned to them, with the

key in his pocket.



"I'm obliged to be careful of the gate," he said. "The

neighborhood swarms with beggars and tramps. If you want to go

out," he added, turning pointedly to Anne, "I'm at your service,

as a good husband ought to be."



After a hurried breakfast Julius took his departure. "I don't

accept your refusal," he said to his brother, before Anne. "You

will see me here again." Geoffrey obstinately repe ated the

refusal. "If you come here every day of your life," he said, "it

will be just the same."



The gate closed on Julius. Anne returned again to the solitude of

her own chamber. Geoffrey entered the drawing-room, placed the

volumes of the Newgate Calendar on the table before him, and

resumed the reading which he had been unable to continue on the

evening before.



Hour after hour he doggedly plodded through one case of murder

after another. He had read one good half of the horrid chronicle

of crime before his power of fixing his attention began to fail

him. Then he lit his pipe, and went out to think over it in the

garden. However the atrocities of which he had been reading might

differ in other respects, there was one terrible point of

resemblance, which he had not anticipated, and in which every one

of the cases agreed. Sooner or later, there was the dead body

always certain to be found; always bearing its dumb witness, in

the traces of poison or in the marks of violence, to the crime

committed on it.



He walked to and fro slowly, still pondering over the problem

which had first found its way into his mind when he had stopped

in the front garden and had looked up at Anne's window in the

dark. "How?" That had been the one question before him, from the

time when the lawyer had annihilated his hopes of a divorce. It

remained the one question still. There was no answer to it in his

own brain; there was no answer to it in the book which he had

been consulting. Every thing was in his favor if he could only

find out "how." He had got his hated wife up stairs at his

mercy--thanks to his refusal of the money which Julius had

offered to him. He was living in a place absolutely secluded from

public observation on all sides of it--thanks to his resolution

to remain at the cottage, even after his landlady had insulted

him by sending him a notice to quit. Every thing had been

prepared, every thing had been sacrificed, to the fulfillment of

one purpose--and how to attain that purpose was still the same

impenetrable mystery to him which it had been from the first!



What was the other alternative? To accept the proposal which

Julius had made. In other words, to give up his vengeance on

Anne, and to turn his back on the splendid future which Mrs.

Glenarm's devotion still offered to him.



Never! He would go back to the books. He was not at the end of

them. The slightest hint in the pages which were still to be read

might set his sluggish brain working in the right direction. The

way to be rid of her, without exciting the suspicion of any

living creature, in the house or out of it, was a way that might

be found yet.







Could a man, in his position of life, reason in this brutal

manner? could he act in this merciless way? Surely the thought of

what he was about to do must have troubled him this time!



Pause for a moment--and look back at him in the past.



Did he feel any remorse when he was plotting the betrayal of

Arnold in the garden at Windygates? The sense which feels remorse

had not been put into him. What he is now is the legitimate

consequence of what he was then. A far more serious temptation is

now urging him to commit a far more serious crime. How is he to

resist? Will his skill in rowing (as Sir Patrick once put it),

his swiftness in running, his admirable capacity and endurance in

other physical exercises, help him to win a purely moral victory

over his own selfishness and his own cruelty? No! The moral and

mental neglect of himself, which the material tone of public

feeling about him has tacitly encouraged, has left him at the

mercy of the worst instincts in his nature--of all that is most

vile and of all that is most dangerous in the composition of the

natural man. With the mass of his fellows, no harm out of the

common has come of this, because no temptation out of the common

has passed their way. But with _him,_ the case is reversed. A

temptation out of the common has passed _his_ way. How does it

find him prepared to meet it? It finds him, literally and

exactly, what his training has left him, in the presence of any

temptation small or great--a defenseless man.







Geoffrey returned to the cottage. The servant stopped him in the

passage, to ask at what time he wished to dine. Instead of

answering, he inquired angrily for Mrs. Dethridge. Mrs. Dethridge

not come back.



It was now late in the afternoon, and she had been out since the

early morning. This had never happened before. Vague suspicions

of her, one more monstrous than another, began to rise in

Geoffrey's mind. Between the drink and the fever, he had been (as

Julius had told him) wandering in his mind during a part of the

night. Had he let any thing out in that condition? Had Hester

heard it? And was it, by any chance, at the bottom of her long

absence and her notice to quit? He determined--without letting

her see that he suspected her--to clear up that doubt as soon as

his landlady returned to the house.



The evening came. It was past nine o'clock before there was a

ring at the bell. The servant came to ask for the key. Geoffrey

rose to go to the gate himself--and changed his mind before he

left the room. _Her_ suspicions might be roused (supposing it to

be Hester who was waiting for admission) if he opened the gate to

her when the servant was there to do it. He gave the girl the

key, and kept out of sight.



                   *  *  *  *  *  *



"Dead tired!"--the servant said to herself, seeing her mistress

by the light of the lamp over the gate.



"Dead tired!"--Geoffrey said to himself, observing Hester

suspiciously as she passed him in the passage on her way up

stairs to take off her bonnet in her own room.



"Dead tired!"--Anne said to herself, meeting Hester on the upper

floor, and receiving from her a letter in Blanche's handwriting,

delivered to the mistress of the cottage by the postman, who had

met her at her own gate.



Having given the letter to Anne, Hester Dethridge withdrew to her

bedroom.



Geoffrey closed the door of the drawing-room, in which the

candles were burning, and went into the dining-room, in which

there was no light. Leaving the door ajar, he waited to intercept

his landlady on her way back to her supper in the kitchen.



Hester wearily secured her door, wearily lit the candles, wearily

put the pen and ink on the table. For some minutes after this she

was compelled to sit down, and rally her strength and fetch her

breath. After a little she was able to remove her upper clothing.

This done she took the manuscript inscribed, "My Confession," out

of the secret pocket of her stays--turned to the last leaf as

before--and wrote another entry, under the entry made on the

previous night.



"This morning I gave him notice to quit, and offered him his

money back if he wanted it. He refuses to go. He shall go

to-morrow, or I will burn the place over his head. All through

to-day I have avoided him by keeping out of the house. No rest to

ease my mind, and no sleep to close my eyes. I humbly bear my

cross as long as my strength will let me."



At those words the pen dropped from her fingers. Her head nodded

on her breast. She roused herself with a start. Sleep was the

enemy she dreaded: sleep brought dreams.



She unfastened the window-shutters and looked out at the night.

The peaceful moonlight was shining over the garden. The clear

depths of the night sky were soothing and beautiful to look at.

What! Fading already? clouds? darkness? No! Nearly asleep once

more. She roused herself again, with a start. There was the

moonlight, and there was the garden as bright under it as ever.



Dreams or no dreams, it was useless to fight longer against the

weariness that overpowered her. She closed the shutters, and went

back to the bed; and put her Confession in its customary place at

night, under her pillow.



She looked round the room--and shuddered. Every corner of it was

filled with the terrible memories of the past night. She might

wake from the torture of the dreams to find the terror of the

Apparition watching at her bedside. Was there no remedy? no

blessed safeguard under which she might tranquilly resign herself

to sleep? A thought crossed her mind. The good book--the Bible.

If she slept with the Bible under her pillow, there was hope in

the good book--the hope of sleeping in peace.



It was not worth while to put on the gown and the stays which she

had taken off. Her shawl would cover her. It was equally needless

to take the candle. The lower shutters would not be closed at

that hour; and if they were, she could lay her hand on the Bible,

in its place on the parlor book-shelf, in the dark.



She removed the Confession from under the pillow. Not even for a

minute could she prevail on herself to leave it in one room while

she was away from it in another. With the manuscript folded up,

and hidden in her hand, she slowly descended the stairs again.

Her knees trembled under her. She was obliged to hold by the

banister, with the hand that was free.



Geoffrey observed her from the dining-room, on her way down the

stairs. He waited to see what she did, before he showed himself,

and spoke to her. Instead of going on into the kitchen, she

stopped short, and entered the parlor. Another suspicious

circumstance! What did she want in the parlor, without a candle,

at that time of night?



She went to the book-case--her dark figure plainly visible in the

moonlight that flooded the little room. She staggered and put her

hand to her head; giddy, to all appearance, from extreme fatigue.

She recovered herself, and took a book from the shelf. She leaned

against the wall after she had possessed herself of the book. Too

weary, as it seemed, to get up stairs again without a little

rest. Her arm-chair was near her. Better rest, for a moment or

two, to be had in that than could be got by leaning against the

wall. She sat down heavily in the chair, with the book on her

lap. One of her arms hung over the arm of the chair, with the

hand closed, apparently holding something.



Her head nodded on her breast--recovered itself--and sank gently

on the cushion at the back of the chair. Asleep? Fast asleep.



In less than a minute the muscles of the closed hand that hung

over the arm of the chair slowly relaxed. Something white slipped

out of her hand, and lay in the moonlight on the floor.



Geoffrey took off his heavy shoes, and entered the room

noiselessly in his stockings. He picked up the white thing on the

floor. It proved to be a collection of several sheets of thin

paper, neatly folded together, and closely covered with writing.



Writing? As long as she was awake she had kept it hidden in her

hand. Why hide it?



Had he let out any thing to compromise himself when he was

light-headed with the fever the night before? and had she taken

it down in writing to produce against him? Possessed by guilty

distrust, even that monstrous doubt assumed a look of probability

to Geoffrey's mind. He left the parlor as noiselessly as he had

entered it, and made for the candle-light in the drawing-room,

determined to examine the manuscript in his hand.



After carefully smoothing out the folded leaves on the table, he

turned to the first page, and read these lines.

