




THE TREE OF JUSTICE




The Ballad of Minepit Shaw



About the time that taverns shut

  And men can buy no beer,

Two lads went up by the keepers' hut

  To steal Lord Pelham's deer.



Night and the liquor was in their heads -

  They laughed and talked no bounds,

Till they waked the keepers on their beds,

  And the keepers loosed the hounds.



They had killed a hart, they had killed a hind,

  Ready to carry away,

When they heard a whimper down the wind

  And they heard a bloodhound bay.



They took and ran across the fern,

  Their crossbows in their hand,

Till they met a man with a green lantern

  That called and bade 'em stand.



'What are you doing, O Flesh and Blood,

  And what's your foolish will,

That you must break into Minepit Wood

  And wake the Folk of the Hill?'



'Oh, we've broke into Lord Pelham's park,

  And killed Lord Pelham's deer,

And if ever you heard a little dog bark

  You'll know why we come here!'



'We ask you let us go our way,

  As fast as we can flee,

For if ever you heard a bloodhound bay,

  You'll know how pressed we be.'



'Oh, lay your crossbows on the bank

  And drop the knife from your hand,

And though the hounds are at your flank

  I'll save you where you stand!'

They laid their crossbows on the bank,

  They threw their knives in the wood,

And the ground before them opened and sank

  And saved 'em where they stood.

'Oh, what's the roaring in our ears

  That strikes us well-nigh dumb?'

'Oh, that is just how things appears

  According as they come.'



'What are the stars before our eyes

  That strike us well-nigh blind?'

'Oh, that is just how things arise

  According as you find.'



'And why's our bed so hard to the bones

  Excepting where it's cold?'

'Oh, that's because it is precious stones

  Excepting where 'tis gold.



'Think it over as you stand

  For I tell you without fail,

If you haven't got into Fairyland

  You're not in Lewes Gaol.'



All night long they thought of it,

  And, come the dawn, they saw

They'd tumbled into a great old pit,

  At the bottom of Minepit Shaw.



And the keepers' hound had followed 'em close

  And broke her neck in the fall;

So they picked up their knives and their cross-bows

  And buried the dog.  That's all.



But whether the man was a poacher too

  Or a Pharisee so bold -

I reckon there's more things told than are true,

  And more things true than are told.







The Tree of Justice



It was a warm, dark winter day with the Sou'-West wind singing

through Dallington Forest, and the woods below the Beacon.

The children set out after dinner to find old Hobden, who had a

three months' job in the Rough at the back of Pound's Wood.  He

had promised to get them a dormouse in its nest.  The bright leaf

Still clung to the beech coppice; the long chestnut leaves lay

orange on the ground, and the rides were speckled with scarlet-

lipped sprouting acorns.  They worked their way by their own

short cuts to the edge of Pound's Wood, and heard a horse's feet

just as they came to the beech where Ridley the keeper hangs up

the vermin.  The poor little fluffy bodies dangled from the

branches - some perfectly good, but most of them dried to

twisted strips.



'Three more owls,' said Dan, counting.  'Two stoats, four jays,

and a kestrel.  That's ten since last week.  Ridley's a beast.'



'In my time this sort of tree bore heavier fruit.'  Sir Richard

Dalyngridge reined up his grey horse, Swallow, in the ride

behind them.  [This is the Norman knight they met the year before

in PUCK OF POOK'S HILL.  See 'Young Men at the Manor,' 'The Knights

of the Joyous Venture,' and 'Old Men at Pevensey,' in that book.]

'What play do you make?'he asked.



'Nothing, Sir.  We're looking for old Hobden,'Dan replied.'He

promised to get us a sleeper.'



'Sleeper?  A DORMEUSE, do you say?'



'Yes, a dormouse, Sir.'

'I understand.  I passed a woodman on the low grounds.  Come!'

He wheeled up the ride again, and pointed through an opening

to the patch of beech-stubs, chestnut, hazel, and birch that old

Hobden would turn into firewood, hop-poles, pea-boughs, and

house-faggots before spring.  The old man was as busy as a beaver.



Something laughed beneath a thorn, and Puck stole out, his

finger on his lip.



'Look!' he whispered.  'Along between the spindle-trees.

Ridley has been there this half-hour.'



The children followed his point, and saw Ridley the keeper in

an old dry ditch, watching Hobden as a cat watches a mouse.



'Huhh!' cried Una.  'Hobden always 'tends to his wires before

breakfast.  He puts his rabbits into the faggots he's allowed to take

home.  He'll tell us about 'em tomorrow.'



'We had the same breed in my day,' Sir Richard replied, and

moved off quietly, Puck at his bridle, the children on either side

between the close-trimmed beech stuff.



'What did you do to them?' said Dan, as they repassed Ridley's

terrible tree.



'That!'  Sir Richard jerked his head toward the dangling owls.



'Not he!' said Puck.  'There was never enough brute Norman in

you to hang a man for taking a buck.'



'I - I cannot abide to hear their widows screech.  But why am I

on horseback while you are afoot?'  He dismounted lightly,

tapped Swallow on the chest, so that the wise thing backed

instead of turning in the narrow ride, and put himself at the head

of the little procession.  He walked as though all the woods

belonged to him.  'I have often told my friends,' he went on, 'that

Red William the King was not the only Norman found dead in a

forest while he hunted.'



'D'you mean William Rufus?'said Dan.



'Yes,' said Puck, kicking a clump of red toad-stools off a

dead log.



'For example, there was a knight new from Normandy,' Sir

Richard went on, 'to whom Henry our King granted a manor in

Kent near by.  He chose to hang his forester's son the day before a

deer-hunt that he gave to pleasure the King.'



'Now when would that be?' said Puck, and scratched an ear

thoughtfully.



'The summer of the year King Henry broke his brother Robert

of Normandy at Tenchebrai fight.  Our ships were even then at

Pevensey loading for the war.'



'What happened to the knight?'Dan asked.



'They found him pinned to an ash, three arrows through his 

leather coat.  I should have worn mail that day.'



'And did you see him all bloody?'Dan continued.



'Nay, I was with De Aquila at Pevensey, counting horseshoes,

and arrow-sheaves, and ale-barrels into the holds of the ships.

The army only waited for our King to lead them against Robert in

Normandy, but he sent word to De Aquila that he would hunt

with him here before he set out for France.'



'Why did the King want to hunt so particularly?' Una demanded.



'If he had gone straight to France after the Kentish knight

was killed, men would have said he feared being slain like the

knight.  It was his duty to show himself debonair to his English 

people as it was De Aquila's duty to see that he took no harm

while he did it, But it was a great burden!  De Aquila, Hugh, and I

ceased work on the ships, and scoured all the Honour of the Eagle -

all De

Aquila's lands - to make a fit, and, above all, a safe sport for

our King.  Look!'



The ride twisted, and came out on the top of Pound's Hill

Wood.  Sir Richard pointed to the swells of beautiful, dappled

Dallington, that showed like a woodcock's breast up the valley.

'Ye know the forest?' said he.



'You ought to see the bluebells there in Spring!' said Una.

'I have seen,' said Sir Richard, gazing, and stretched out his

hand.  'Hugh's work and mine was first to move the deer gently

from all parts into Dallington yonder, and there to hold them till

the King came.  Next, we must choose some three hundred

beaters to drive the deer to the stands within bowshot of the King.

Here was our trouble!  In the mellay of a deer-drive a Saxon

peasant and a Norman King may come over-close to each other.

The conquered do not love their conquerors all at once.  So we

needed sure men, for whom their village or kindred would

answer in life, cattle, and land if any harm come to the King.  Ye

see?'



'If one of the beaters shot the King,' said Puck, 'Sir Richard

wanted to be able to punish that man's village.  Then the village

would take care to send a good man.'



'So!  So it was.  But, lest our work should be too easy, the King

had done such a dread justice over at Salehurst, for the killing of

the Kentish knight (twenty-six men he hanged, as I heard), that

our folk were half mad with fear before we began.  It is easier to

dig out a badger gone to earth than a Saxon gone dumb-sullen.

And atop of their misery the old rumour waked that Harold the

Saxon was alive and would bring them deliverance from us

Normans.  This has happened every autumn since Santlache fight.'



'But King Harold was killed at Hastings,'said Una.



'So it was said, and so it was believed by us Normans, but our

Saxons always believed he would come again.  That rumour did

not make our work any more easy.'



Sir Richard strode on down the far slope of the wood, where

the trees thin out.  It was fascinating to watch how he managed his

long spurs among the lumps of blackened ling.



'But we did it!' he said.  'After all, a woman is as good as a man

to beat the woods, and the mere word that deer are afoot makes

cripples and crones young again.  De Aquila laughed when Hugh

told him over the list of beaters.  Half were women; and many of

the rest were clerks - Saxon and Norman priests.



'Hugh and I had not time to laugh for eight days, till De Aquila,

as Lord of Pevensey, met our King and led him to the first

shooting-stand - by the Mill on the edge of the forest.  Hugh and I

- it was no work for hot heads or heavy hands - lay with our

beaters on the skirts of Dallington to watch both them and the

deer.  When De Aquila's great horn blew we went forward, a line

half a league long.  Oh, to see the fat clerks, their gowns tucked

up, puffing and roaring, and the sober millers dusting the under-

growth with their staves; and, like as not, between them a Saxon

wench, hand in hand with her man, shrilling like a kite as she ran,

and leaping high through the fern, all for joy of the sport.'

'Ah!  How!  Ah!  How!  How-ah!  Sa-how-ah!' Puck bellowed

without warning, and Swallow bounded forward, ears cocked,

and nostrils cracking.



'Hal-lal-lal-lal-la-hai-ie!' Sir Richard answered in a high clear

shout.



The two voices joined in swooping circles of sound, and a

heron rose out of a red osier-bed below them, circling as though

he kept time to the outcry.  Swallow quivered and swished his

glorious tail.  They stopped together on the same note.



A hoarse shout answered them across the bare woods.



'That's old Hobden,'said Una.



'Small blame to him.  It is in his blood,' said Puck.  'Did your

beaters cry so, Sir Richard?'



'My faith, they forgot all else.  (Steady, Swallow, steady!) They

forgot where the King and his people waited to shoot.  They

followed the deer to the very edge of the open till the first flight of

wild arrows from the stands flew fair over them.



'I cried, "'Ware shot!  'Ware shot!" and a knot of young knights

new from Normandy, that had strayed away from the Grand

Stand, turned about, and in mere sport loosed off at our line

shouting: "'Ware Santlache arrows!  'Ware Santlache arrows!"  A

jest, I grant you, but too sharp.  One of our beaters answered in

Saxon: "'Ware New Forest arrows!  'Ware Red William's

arrow!" so I judged it time to end the jests, and when the boys saw

my old mail gown (for, to shoot with strangers I count the same

as war), they ceased shooting.  So that was smoothed over, and we

gave our beaters ale to wash down their anger.  They were

excusable!  We - they had sweated to show our guests good sport,

and our reward was a flight of hunting-arrows which no man

loves, and worse, a churl's jibe over hard-fought, fair-lost

Hastings fight.  So, before the next beat, Hugh and I assembled and

called the beaters over by name, to steady them.  The greater part

we knew, but among the Netherfield men I saw an old, old man,

in the dress of a pilgrim.



'The Clerk of Netherfield said he was well known by repute for

twenty years as a witless man that journeyed without rest to all

the shrines of England.  The old man sits, Saxon fashion, head

between fists.  We Normans rest the chin on the left palm.

'"Who answers for him?" said I.  "If he fails in his duty, who

will pay his fine?"



'"Who will pay my fine?" the pilgrim said.  "I have asked that

of all the Saints in England these forty years, less three months

and nine days!  They have not answered!"  When he lifted his thin

face I saw he was one-eyed, and frail as a rush.

'"Nay, but, Father," I said, "to whom hast thou commended

thyself-?"  He shook his head, so I spoke in Saxon: "Whose man

art thou?"



'"I think I have a writing from Rahere, the King's jester," said

he after a while.  "I am, as I suppose, Rahere's man."



'He pulled a writing from his scrip, and Hugh, coming up,

read it.



'It set out that the pilgrim was Rahere's man, and that Rahere

was the King's jester.  There was Latin writ at the back.



'"What a plague conjuration's here?" said Hugh, turning it

over.  "Pum-quum-sum oc-occ.  Magic?"



'"Black Magic," said the Clerk of Netherfield (he had been a

monk at Battle).  "They say Rahere is more of a priest than a fool

and more of a wizard than either.  Here's Rahere's name writ, and

there's Rahere's red cockscomb mark drawn below for such as

cannot read."  He looked slyly at me.



'"Then read it," said I, "and show thy learning."  He was a

vain little man, and he gave it us after much mouthing.



'"The charm, which I think is from Virgilius the Sorcerer,

says: 'When thou art once dead, and Minos' (which is a heathen

judge) 'has doomed thee, neither cunning, nor speechcraft, nor

good works will restore thee!' A terrible thing!  It denies any

mercy to a man's soul!"



'"Does it serve?" said the pilgrim, plucking at Hugh's cloak.

"Oh, man of the King's blood, does it cover me?"



'Hugh was of Earl Godwin's blood, and all Sussex knew it,

though no Saxon dared call him kingly in a Norman's hearing.

There can be but one King.



'"It serves," said Hugh.  "But the day will be long and hot.

Better rest here.  We go forward now."



'"No, I will keep with thee, my kinsman," he answered like a

child.  He was indeed childish through great age.



'The line had not moved a bowshot when De Aquila's great

horn blew for a halt, and soon young Fulke - our false Fulke's son

- yes, the imp that lit the straw in Pevensey Castle [See 'Old Men

at Pevensey' in PUCK OF POOK'S HILL.] - came thundering up

a woodway.



'"Uncle," said he (though he was a man grown, he called me

Uncle), "those young Norman fools who shot at you this morn

are saying that your beaters cried treason against the King.  It has

come to Harry's long ears, and he bids you give account of it.

There are heavy fines in his eye, but I am with you to the hilt,

Uncle!"

'When the boy had fled back, Hugh said to me: "It was Rahere's

witless man that cried, ''Ware Red William's arrow!'  I heard him,

and so did the Clerk of Netherfield."



'"Then Rahere must answer to the King for his man," said I.

"Keep him by you till I send," and I hastened down.



'The King was with De Aquila in the Grand Stand above

Welansford down in the valley yonder.  His Court - knights and

dames - lay glittering on the edge of the glade.  I made my

homage, and Henry took it coldly.

'"How came your beaters to shout threats against me?"

said he.



'"The tale has grown," I answered.  "One old witless man

cried out, ''Ware Red William's arrow,' when the young knights

shot at our line.  We had two beaters hit."



'"I will do justice on that man," he answered.  "Who is his

master?"



'"He's Rahere's man," said I.



'"Rahere's?" said Henry.  "Has my fool a fool?"



'I heard the bells jingle at the back of the stand, and a red leg

waved over it; then a black one.  So, very slowly, Rahere the

King's jester straddled the edge of the planks, and looked down

on us, rubbing his chin.  Loose-knit, with cropped hair, and a sad

priest's face, under his cockscomb cap, that he could twist like a

strip of wet leather.  His eyes were hollow-set.



'"Nay, nay, Brother," said he.  "If I suffer you to keep your

fool, you must e'en suffer me to keep mine."



'This he delivered slowly into the King's angry face!  My faith, a

King's jester must be bolder than lions!



'"Now we will judge the matter," said Rahere.  "Let these two

brave knights go hang my fool because he warned King Henry

against running after Saxon deer through woods full of Saxons.

'Faith, Brother, if thy Brother, Red William, now among the

Saints as we hope, had been timely warned against a certain arrow

in New Forest, one fool of us four would not be crowned fool of

England this morning.  Therefore, hang the fool's fool, knights!"

'Mark the fool's cunning!  Rahere had himself given us order to

hang the man.  No King dare confirm a fool's command to such a

great baron as De Aquila; and the helpless King knew it.



'"What?  No hanging?" said Rahere, after a silence.  "A' God's

Gracious Name, kill something, then!  Go forward with the

hunt!"



'He splits his face ear to ear in a yawn like a fish-pond.

"Henry," says he, "the next time I sleep, do not pester me with

thy fooleries."  Then he throws himself out of sight behind the

back of the stand.



'I have seen courage with mirth in De Aquila and Hugh, but

stark mad courage of Rahere's sort I had never even guessed at.'



'What did the King say?' cried Dan.



'He had opened his mouth to speak, when young Fulke, who

had come into the stand with us, laughed, and, boy-like, once

begun, could not check himself.  He kneeled on the instant for

pardon, but fell sideways, crying: "His legs!  Oh, his long,

waving red legs as he went backward!"



'Like a storm breaking, our grave King laughed, - stamped and

reeled with laughter till the stand shook.  So, like a storm, this

strange thing passed!



'He wiped his eyes, and signed to De Aquila to let the drive

come on.



'When the deer broke, we were pleased that the King shot from

the shelter of the stand, and did not ride out after the hurt beasts as

Red William would have done.  Most vilely his knights and

barons shot!



De Aquila kept me beside him, and I saw no more of Hugh till

evening.  We two had a little hut of boughs by the camp, where I

went to wash me before the great supper, and in the dusk I heard

Hugh on the couch.



'"Wearied, Hugh?" said I.



'"A little," he says.  "I have driven Saxon deer all day for a

Norman King, and there is enough of Earl Godwin's blood left in

me to sicken at the work.  Wait awhile with the torch."



'I waited then, and I thought I heard him sob.'



'Poor Hugh!  Was he so tired?' said Una.  'Hobden says beating

is hard work sometimes.'



'I think this tale is getting like the woods,' said Dan, 'darker and

twistier every minute.'

Sir Richard had walked as he talked, and though the children

thought they knew the woods well enough, they felt a little lost.



'A dark tale enough,' says Sir Richard, 'but the end was not all

black.  When we had washed, we went to wait on the King at meat

in the great pavilion.  just before the trumpets blew for the Entry -

all the guests upstanding - long Rahere comes posturing up to

Hugh, and strikes him with his bauble-bladder.



'"Here's a heavy heart for a joyous meal!" he says.  "But each

man must have his black hour or where would be the merit of

laughing?  Take a fool's advice, and sit it out with my man.  I'll

make a jest to excuse you to the King if he remember to ask for

you.  That's more than I would do for Archbishop Anselm."



'Hugh looked at him heavy-eyed.  "Rahere?" said he.  "The

King's jester?  Oh, Saints, what punishment for my King!" and

smites his hands together.

'"Go - go fight it out in the dark," says Rahere, "and thy

Saxon Saints reward thee for thy pity to my fool."  He pushed him

from the pavilion, and Hugh lurched away like one drunk.'



'But why?' said Una.  'I don't understand.'



'Ah, why indeed?  Live you long enough, maiden, and you shall

know the meaning of many whys.'  Sir Richard smiled.  'I wondered

too, but it was my duty to wait on the King at the High

Table in all that glitter and stir.



'He spoke me his thanks for the sport I had helped show him,

and he had learned from De Aquila enough of my folk and my

castle in Normandy to graciously feign that he knew and had

loved my brother there.  (This, also, is part of a king's work.)

Many great men sat at the High Table - chosen by the King for

their wits, not for their birth.  I have forgotten their names, and

their faces I only saw that one night.  But' - Sir Richard turned in

his stride - 'but Rahere, flaming in black and scarlet among our

guests, the hollow of his dark cheek flushed with wine - long,

laughing Rahere, and the stricken sadness of his face when he was

not twisting it about - Rahere I shall never forget.



'At the King's outgoing De Aquila bade me follow him, with

his great bishops and two great barons, to the little pavilion.  We

had devised jugglers and dances for the Court's sport; but Henry

loved to talk gravely to grave men, and De Aquila had told him of

my travels to the world's end.  We had a fire of apple-wood, sweet

as incense, - and the curtains at the door being looped up, we

could hear the music and see the lights shining on mail and

dresses.



'Rahere lay behind the King's chair.  The questions he darted

forth at me were as shrewd as the flames.  I was telling of our fight

with the apes, as ye called them, at the world's end.  [See 'The

Knights of the Joyous Venture' in PUCK OF POOK'S HILL.]

'"But where is the Saxon knight that went with you?" said

Henry.  "He must confirm these miracles."



'"He is busy," said Rahere, "confirming a new miracle."



'"Enough miracles for today," said the King.  "Rahere, you

have saved your long neck.  Fetch the Saxon knight."



'"Pest on it," said Rahere.  "Who would be a King's jester?  I'll

bring him, Brother, if you'll see that none of your home-brewed

bishops taste my wine while I am away."  So he jingled forth

between the men-at-arms at the door.



'Henry had made many bishops in England without the Pope's

leave.  I know not the rights of the matter, but only Rahere dared

jest about it.  We waited on the King's next word.



'"I think Rahere is jealous of you," said he, smiling, to Nigel

of Ely.  He was one bishop; and William of Exeter, the other -

Wal-wist the Saxons called him - laughed long.  "Rahere is a priest

at heart.  Shall I make him a bishop, De Aquila?" says the King.



'"There might be worse," said our Lord of Pevensey.  "Rahere

would never do what Anselm has done."



'This Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, had gone off raging

to the Pope at Rome, because Henry would make bishops

without his leave either.  I knew not the rights of it, but De Aquila

did, and the King laughed.



'"Anselm means no harm.  He should have been a monk, not a

bishop," said the King.  "I'll never quarrel with Anselm or his

Pope till they quarrel with my England.  If we can keep the King's

peace till my son comes to rule, no man will lightly quarrel with

our England."



'"Amen," said De Aquila.  "But the King's peace ends when

the King dies."



'That is true.  The King's peace dies with the King.  The custom

then is that all laws are outlaw, and men do what they will till the

new King is chosen.



'"I will amend that," said the King hotly.  "I will have it so that

though King, son, and grandson were all slain in one day, still the

King's peace should hold over all England!  What is a man that his

mere death must upheave a people?  We must have the Law."



'"Truth," said William of Exeter; but that he would have said

to any word of the King.



'The two great barons behind said nothing.  This teaching was

clean against their stomachs, for when the King's peace ends, the

great barons go to war and increase their lands.  At that instant we

heard Rahere's voice returning, in a scurril Saxon rhyme against

William of Exeter:



     '"Well wist Wal-wist where lay his fortune

     When that he fawned on the King for his crozier,"



and amid our laughter he burst in, with one arm round Hugh, and

one round the old pilgrim of Netherfield.



'"Here is your knight, Brother," said he, "and for the better

disport of the company, here is my fool.  Hold up, Saxon Samson,

the gates of Gaza are clean carried away!"



'Hugh broke loose, white and sick, and staggered to my side;

the old man blinked upon the company.



'We looked at the King, but he smiled.



'"Rahere promised he would show me some sport after supper

to cover his morning's offence," said he to De Aquila.  "So this is

thy man, Rahere?"



'"Even so," said Rahere.  "My man he has been, and my

protection he has taken, ever since I found him under the gallows

at Stamford Bridge telling the kites atop of it that he was - Harold

of England!"



'There was a great silence upon these last strange words, and

Hugh hid his face on my shoulder, woman-fashion.



'"It is most cruel true," he whispered to me.  "The old man

proved it to me at the beat after you left, and again in our hut even

now.  It is Harold, my King!"



'De Aquila crept forward.  He walked about the man and swallowed.



'"Bones of the Saints!" said he, staring.



'"Many a stray shot goes too well home," said Rahere.



The old man flinched as at an arrow.  "Why do you hurt me

still?" he said in Saxon.  "It was on some bones of some Saints that

I promised I would give my England to the Great Duke."  He

turns on us all crying, shrilly: "Thanes, he had caught me at

Rouen - a lifetime ago.  If I had not promised, I should have lain

there all my life.  What else could I have done?  I have lain in a strait

prison all my life none the less.  There is no need to throw stones at

me.  " He guarded his face with his arms, and shivered.

"Now his madness will strike him down," said Rahere.  "Cast

out the evil spirit, one of you new bishops."



'Said William of Exeter: "Harold was slain at Santlache fight.

All the world knows it."



'"I think this man must have forgotten," said Rahere.  "Be

comforted, Father.  Thou wast well slain at Hastings forty years

gone, less three months and nine days.  Tell the King."



'The man uncovered his face.  "I thought they would stone

me," he said.  "I did not know I spoke before a King."  He came to

his full towering height - no mean man, but frail beyond belief.



'The King turned to the tables, and held him out his own cup of

wine.  The old man drank, and beckoned behind him, and, before

all the Normans, my Hugh bore away the empty cup, Saxon-

fashion, upon the knee.



"It is Harold!" said De Aquila.  "His own stiff-necked blood

kneels to serve him.



"Be it so," said Henry.  "Sit, then, thou that hast been Harold

of England."



'The madman sat, and hard, dark Henry looked at him between

half-shut eyes.  We others stared like oxen, all but De Aquila, who

watched Rahere as I have seen him watch a far sail on the sea.



'The wine and the warmth cast the old man into a dream.  His

white head bowed; his hands hung.  His eye indeed was opened,

but the mind was shut.  When he stretched his feet, they were

scurfed and road-cut like a slave's.



'"Ah, Rahere," cried Hugh, "why hast thou shown him thus?

Better have let him die than shame him - and me!"



'"Shame thee?" said the King.  "Would any baron of mine

kneel to me if I were witless, discrowned, and alone, and Harold

had my throne?"




'"No," said Rahere.  "I am the sole fool that might do it,

Brother, unless" - he pointed at De Aquila, whom he had only

met that day - "yonder tough Norman crab kept me company.

But, Sir Hugh, I did not mean to shame him.  He hath been

somewhat punished through, maybe, little fault of his own."



, "Yet he lied to my Father, the Conqueror, " said the King, and

the old man flinched in his sleep.



'"Maybe," said Rahere, "but thy Brother Robert, whose

throat we purpose soon to slit with our own hands -"



'"Hutt!" said the King, laughing.  "I'll keep Robert at my table

for a life's guest when I catch him.  Robert means no harm.  It is all

his cursed barons."



'"None the less," said Rahere, "Robert may say that thou hast

not always spoken the stark truth to him about England.  I should

not hang too many men on that bough, Brother."

'"And it is certain," said Hugh, "that" - he pointed to the old

man - "Harold was forced to make his promise to the Great Duke."



'"Very strongly, forced," said De Aquila.  He had never any

pride in the Duke William's dealings with Harold before Hastings.

Yet, as he said, one cannot build a house all of straight sticks.



'"No matter how he was forced," said Henry, "England was

promised to my Father William by Edward the Confessor.  Is it

not so?"  William of Exeter nodded.  "Harold confirmed that

promise to my Father on the bones of the Saints.  Afterwards he

broke his oath and would have taken England by the strong hand.  "

'"Oh!  La!  La!"  Rahere rolled up his eyes like a girl.  "That ever

England should be taken by the strong hand!"



'Seeing that Red William and Henry after him had each in just

that fashion snatched England from Robert of Normandy, we

others knew not where to look.  But De Aquila saved us quickly.

'"Promise kept or promise broken," he said, "Harold came

near enough to breaking us Normans at Santlache.  "



"Was it so close a fight, then?" said Henry.



"A hair would have turned it either way," De Aquila

answered.  "His house-carles stood like rocks against rain.  Where

wast thou, Hugh, in it?"



'"Among Godwin's folk beneath the Golden Dragon till your

front gave back, and we broke our ranks to follow," said Hugh.



"But I bade you stand!  I bade you stand!  I knew it was all a

deceit!"  Harold had waked, and leaned forward as one crying

from the grave.



'"Ah, now we see how the traitor himself was betrayed!" said

William of Exeter, and looked for a smile from the King.



'"I made thee Bishop to preach at my bidding," said Henry;

and turning to Harold, "Tell us here how thy people fought us?"

said he.  "Their sons serve me now against my Brother Robert!"



'The old man shook his head cunningly.  "Na - Na - Na!" he

cried.  "I know better.  Every time I tell my tale men stone me.

But, Thanes, I will tell you a greater thing.  Listen!"  He told us

how many paces it was from some Saxon Saint's shrine to another

shrine, and how many more back to the Abbey of the Battle.



'"Ay," said he.  "I have trodden it too often to be out even ten

paces.  I move very swiftly.  Harold of Norway knows that, and so

does Tostig my brother.  They lie at ease at Stamford Bridge, and

from Stamford Bridge to the Battle Abbey it is -" he muttered

over many numbers and forgot us.



'"Ay, " said De Aquila, all in a muse.  "That man broke Harold

of Norway at Stamford Bridge, and came near to breaking us at

Santlache - all within one month."



'"But how did he come alive from Santlache fight?" asked the

King.  "Ask him!  Hast thou heard it, Rahere?"

"Never.  He says he has been stoned too often for telling the

tale.  But he can count you off Saxon and Norman shrines till

daylight," said Rahere and the old man nodded proudly.



'"My faith!" said Henry after a while.  "I think even my Father

the Great Duke would pity if he could see him.



'"How if he does see?" said Rahere.



'Hugh covered his face with his sound hand.  "Ah, why hast

thou shamed him?" he cried again to Rahere.



'"No - no," says the old man, reaching to pluck at Rahere's

cape.  "I am Rahere's man.  None stone me now," and he played

with the bells on the scollops of it.



'"How if he had been brought to me when you found him?"

said the King to Rahere.



You would have held him prisoner again - as the Great Duke

did," Rahere answered.



'"True," said our King.  "He is nothing except his name.  Yet

that name might have been used by stronger men to trouble my

England.  Yes.  I must have made him my life's guest - as I shall

make Robert."



'"I knew it," said Rahere.  "But while this man wandered mad

by the wayside, none cared what he called himself."



'"I learned to cease talking before the stones flew," says the old

man, and Hugh groaned.



'"Ye have heard!" said Rahere.  "Witless, landless, nameless,

and, but for my protection, masterless, he can still make shift to

bide his doom under the open sky.

'"Then wherefore didst thou bring him here for a mock and a

shame?" cried Hugh, beside himself with woe.



'"A right mock and a just shame!" said William of Exeter.



'"Not to me," said Nigel of Ely.  "I see and I tremble, but I

neither mock nor judge."

Well spoken, Ely."  Rahere falls into the pure fool again.  "I'll

pray for thee when I turn monk.  Thou hast given thy blessing on a

war between two most Christian brothers."  He meant the war

forward 'twixt Henry and Robert of Normandy.  "I charge you,

Brother," he says, wheeling on the King, "dost thou mock my

fool?"

The King shook his head, and so then did smooth William

of Exeter.



'"De Aquila, does thou mock him?"  Rahere jingled from one

to another, and the old man smiled.



'"By the Bones of the Saints, not I," said our Lord of Pevensey.

"I know how dooms near he broke us at Santlache.



'"Sir Hugh, you are excused the question.  But you, valiant,

loyal, honourable, and devout barons, Lords of Man's justice in

your own bounds, do you mock my fool?"



'He shook his bauble in the very faces of those two barons

whose names I have forgotten.  "Na - Na!" they said, and waved

him back foolishly enough.



'He hies him across to staring, nodding Harold, and speaks

from behind his chair.



'"No man mocks thee, Who here judges this man?  Henry of

England - Nigel - De Aquila!  On your souls, swift with the

answer!" he cried.



'None answered.  We were all - the King not least - over-borne

by that terrible scarlet-and-black wizard-jester.



'"Well for your souls," he said, wiping his brow.  Next, shrill

like a woman: "Oh, come to me!" and Hugh ran forward to hold

Harold, that had slidden down in the chair.



'"Hearken," said Rahere, his arm round Harold's neck.  "The

King - his bishops - the knights - all the world's crazy chessboard

neither mock nor judge thee.  Take that comfort with thee,

Harold of England!"



'Hugh heaved the old man up and he smiled.



'"Good comfort," said Harold.  "Tell me again!  I have been

somewhat punished."

'Rahere hallooed it once more into his ear as the head rolled.  We

heard him sigh, and Nigel of Ely stood forth, praying aloud.



'"Out!  I will have no Norman!" Harold said as clearly as I

speak now, and he refuged himself on Hugh's sound shoulder,

and stretched out, and lay all still.'



'Dead?' said Una, turning up a white face in the dusk.



'That was his good fortune.  To die in the King's presence, and

on the breast of the most gentlest, truest knight of his own house.

Some of us envied him,' said Sir Richard, and fell back to take

Swallow's bridle.



'Turn left here,' Puck called ahead of them from under an oak.

They ducked down a narrow path through close ash plantation.



The children hurried forward, but cutting a corner charged

full-abreast into the thorn-faggot that old Hobden was carrying

home on his back.

'My!  My!' said he.  'Have you scratted your face, Miss Una?'



'Sorry!  It's all right,' said Una, rubbing her nose.  'How many

rabbits did you get today?'



'That's tellin'!' the old man grinned as he re-hoisted his faggot.

'I reckon Mus' Ridley he've got rheumatism along o' lyin' in the

dik to see I didn't snap up any.  Think o' that now!'



They laughed a good deal while he told them the tale.



'An' just as he crawled away I heard some one hollerin' to the

hounds in our woods,' said he.  'Didn't you hear?  You must ha'

been asleep sure-ly.'



'Oh, what about the sleeper you promised to show us?'

Dan cried.



''Ere he be - house an' all!'  Hobden dived into the prickly heart

of the faggot and took out a dormouse's wonderfully woven nest

of grass and leaves.  His blunt fingers parted it as if it had been

precious lace, and tilting it toward the last of the light he showed

the little, red, furry chap curled up inside, his tail between his eyes

that were shut for their winter sleep.



'Let's take him home.  Don't breathe on him,' said Una.  'It'll

make him warm and he'll wake up and die straight off.  Won't he,

Hobby?'



'Dat's a heap better by my reckonin' than wakin' up and findin'

himself in a cage for life.  No!  We'll lay him into the bottom o' this

hedge.  Dat's jus' right!  No more trouble for him till come Spring.

An' now we'll go home.'







A Carol





Our Lord Who did the Ox command

To kneel to Judah's King,

He binds His frost upon the land

To ripen it for Spring -

To ripen it for Spring, good sirs,

According to His word;

Which well must be as ye can see -

And who shall judge the Lord?



When we poor fenmen skate the ice

Or shiver on the wold,

We hear the cry of a single tree

That breaks her heart in the cold -

That breaks her heart in the cold, good sirs,

And rendeth by the board;

Which well must be as ye can see -

And who shall judge the Lord?



Her wood is crazed and little worth

Excepting as to burn

That we may warm and make our mirth

Until the Spring return -

Until the Spring return, good sirs,

When people walk abroad;

Which well must be as ye can see -

And who shall judge the Lord?



God bless the master of this house,

And all that sleep therein!

And guard the fens from pirate folk,

And keep us all from sin,

To walk in honesty, good sirs,

Of thought and deed and word!

Which shall befriend our latter end -

And who shall judge the Lord?







End 
