




SIMPLE SIMON




The Thousandth Man



One man in a thousand, Solomon says,

  Will stick more close than a brother.

And it's worth while seeking him half your days

  If you find him before the other.

Nine hundred and ninety-nine depend

  on what the world sees in you,

But the Thousandth Man will stand your friend

  With the whole round world agin you.



'Tis neither promise nor prayer nor show

  Will settle the finding for 'ee.

Nine hundred and ninety-nine of 'em go

  By your looks or your acts or your glory.

But if he finds you and you find him,

  The rest of the world don't matter;

For the Thousandth Man will sink or swim

  With you in any water.



You can use his purse with no more shame

  Than he uses yours for his spendings;

And laugh and mention it just the same

  As though there had been no lendings.

Nine hundred and ninety-nine of 'em call

  For silver and gold in their dealings;

But the Thousandth Man he's worth 'em all,

  Because you can show him your feelings!



His wrong's your wrong, and his right's your right,

  In season or out of season.

Stand up and back it in all men's sight -

  With that for your only reason!

Nine hundred and ninety-nine can't bide

  The shame or mocking or laughter,

But the Thousandth Man will stand by your side

  To the gallows-foot - and after!







Simple Simon





Cattiwow came down the steep lane with his five-horse timber-

tug.  He stopped by the wood-lump at the back gate to take off the

brakes.  His real name was Brabon, but the first time the children

met him, years and years ago, he told them he was 'carting

wood,' and it sounded so exactly like 'cattiwow' that they never

called him anything else.



'HI!' Una shouted from the top of the wood-lump, where they

had been watching the lane.  'What are you doing?  Why weren't

we told?'



'They've just sent for me,' Cattiwow answered.  'There's a

middlin' big log stacked in the dirt at Rabbit Shaw, and' - he

flicked his whip back along the line - 'so they've sent for us all.'



Dan and Una threw themselves off the wood-lump almost

under black Sailor's nose.  Cattiwow never let them ride the big

beam that makes the body of the timber-tug, but they hung on

behind while their teeth thuttered.



The Wood road beyond the brook climbs at once into the

woods, and you see all the horses' backs rising, one above

another, like moving stairs.  Cattiwow strode ahead in his

sackcloth woodman's petticoat, belted at the waist with a leather

strap; and when he turned and grinned, his red lips showed under

his sackcloth-coloured beard.  His cap was sackcloth too, with a

flap behind, to keep twigs and bark out of his neck.  He navigated

the tug among pools of heather-water that splashed in their faces,

and through clumps of young birches that slashed at their legs,

and when they hit an old toadstooled stump, they never knew

whether it would give way in showers of rotten wood, or jar

them back again.



At the top of Rabbit Shaw half-a-dozen men and a team of

horses stood round a forty-foot oak log in a muddy hollow.  The

ground about was poached and stoached with sliding hoofmarks,

and a wave of dirt was driven up in front of the butt.



'What did you want to bury her for this way?' said Cattiwow.

He took his broad-axe and went up the log tapping it.



'She's sticked fast,' said 'Bunny' Lewknor, who managed the

other team.



Cattiwow unfastened the five wise horses from the tug.  They

cocked their ears forward, looked, and shook themselves.



'I believe Sailor knows,' Dan whispered to Una.



'He do,' said a man behind them.  He was dressed in flour sacks

like the others, and he leaned on his broad-axe, but the children,

who knew all the wood-gangs, knew he was a stranger.  In his size

and oily hairiness he might have been Bunny Lewknor's brother,

except that his brown eyes were as soft as a spaniel's, and his

rounded black beard, beginning close up under them, reminded

Una of the walrus in 'The Walrus and the Carpenter.'



'Don't he justabout know?' he said shyly, and shifted from one

foot to the other.



'Yes.  "What Cattiwow can't get out of the woods must have

roots growing to her."'  Dan had heard old Hobden say this a

few days before.



At that minute Puck pranced up, picking his way through the

pools of black water in the ling.



'Look out!' cried Una, jumping forward.  'He'll see you, Puck!'



'Me and Mus' Robin are pretty middlin' well acquainted,' the

man answered with a smile that made them forget all about walruses.



'This is Simon Cheyneys,' Puck began, and cleared his throat.

'Shipbuilder of Rye Port; burgess of the said town, and the only -'



'Oh, look!  Look ye!  That's a knowing one,' said the man.



Cattiwow had fastened his team to the thin end of the log, and

was moving them about with his whip till they stood at right

angles to it, heading downhill.  Then he grunted.  The horses took

the strain, beginning with Sailor next the log, like a tug-of-war

team, and dropped almost to their knees.  The log shifted a nail's

breadth in the clinging dirt, with the noise of a giant's kiss.



'You're getting her!'  Simon Cheyneys slapped his knee.  'Hing

on!  Hing on, lads, or she'll master ye!  Ah!'



Sailor's left hind hoof had slipped on a heather-tuft.  One of the

men whipped off his sack apron and spread it down.  They saw

Sailor feel for it, and recover.  Still the log hung, and the team

grunted in despair.



'Hai!' shouted Cattiwow, and brought his dreadful whip twice

across Sailor's loins with the crack of a shot-gun.  The horse

almost screamed as he pulled that extra last ounce which he did

not know was in him.  The thin end of the log left the dirt and

rasped on dry gravel.  The butt ground round like a buffalo in his

wallow.  Quick as an axe-cut, Lewknor snapped on his five

horses, and sliding, trampling, jingling, and snorting, they had

the whole thing out on the heather.



'Dat's the very first time I've knowed you lay into Sailor - to

hurt him,' said Lewknor.



'It is,' said Cattiwow, and passed his hand over the two wheals.

'But I'd ha' laid my own brother open at that pinch.  Now we'll

twitch her down the hill a piece - she lies just about right - and get

her home by the low road.  My team'll do it, Bunny; you bring the

tug along.  Mind out!'



He spoke to the horses, who tightened the chains.  The great log

half rolled over, and slowly drew itself out of sight downhill,

followed by the wood-gang and the timber-tug.  In half a minute

there was nothing to see but the deserted hollow of the torn-up

dirt, the birch undergrowth still shaking, and the water draining

back into the hoof-prints.



'Ye heard him?' Simon Cheyneys asked.  'He cherished his

horse, but he'd ha' laid him open in that pinch.'



'Not for his own advantage,' said Puck quickly.  ''Twas only

to shift the log.'



'I reckon every man born of woman has his log to shift in the

world - if so be you're hintin' at any o' Frankie's doings.  He never

hit beyond reason or without reason,' said Simon.



'I never said a word against Frankie,' Puck retorted, with a

wink at the children.  'An' if I did, do it lie in your mouth to

contest my say-so, seeing how you -'



'Why don't it lie in my mouth, seeing I was the first which

knowed Frankie for all he was?'  The burly sack-clad man puffed

down at cool little Puck.



'Yes, and the first which set out to poison him - Frankie - on

the high seas -'



Simon's angry face changed to a sheepish grin.  He waggled his

immense hands, but Puck stood off and laughed mercilessly.



'But let me tell you, Mus' Robin,'he pleaded.



'I've heard the tale.  Tell the children here.  Look, Dan!  Look,

Una!'  - Puck's straight brown finger levelled like an arrow.

'There's the only man that ever tried to poison Sir Francis Drake!'



'Oh, Mus' Robin!  'Tidn't fair.  You've the 'vantage of us all in

your upbringin's by hundreds o' years.  Stands to nature you

know all the tales against every one.'



He turned his soft eyes so helplessly on Una that she cried,

'Stop ragging him, Puck!  You know he didn't really.'



'I do.  But why are you so sure, little maid?'

'Because - because he doesn't look like it,' said Una stoutly.



'I thank you,' said Simon to Una.  'I - I was always trustable-

like with children if you let me alone, you double handful o'

mischief.'  He pretended to heave up his axe on Puck; and then his

shyness overtook him afresh.



'Where did you know Sir Francis Drake?' said Dan, not liking

being called a child.



'At Rye Port, to be sure,' said Simon, and seeing Dan's

bewilderment, repeated it.



'Yes, but look here,'said Dan.  '"Drake he was a Devon man."

The song says so.'



'"And ruled the Devon seas,"' Una went on.  'That's what I

was thinking - if you don't mind.'



Simon Cheyneys seemed to mind very much indeed, for he

swelled in silence while Puck laughed.



'Hutt!' he burst out at last, 'I've heard that talk too.  If you listen

to them West Country folk, you'll listen to a pack o' lies.  I believe

Frankie was born somewhere out west among the Shires, but his

father had to run for it when Frankie was a baby, because the

neighbours was wishful to kill him, d'ye see?  He run to Chatham,

old Parson Drake did, an' Frankie was brought up in a old hulks of

a ship moored in the Medway river, same as it might ha' been the

Rother.  Brought up at sea, you might say, before he could walk

on land - nigh Chatham in Kent.  And ain't Kent back-door to

Sussex?  And don't that make Frankie Sussex?  O' course it do.

Devon man!  Bah!  Those West Country boats they're always

fishin' in other folks' water.'



'I beg your pardon,' said Dan.  'I'm sorry .



'No call to be sorry.  You've been misled.  I met Frankie at Rye

Port when my Uncle, that was the shipbuilder there, pushed me

off his wharf-edge on to Frankie's ship.  Frankie had put in from

Chatham with his rudder splutted, and a man's arm - Moon's that

'ud be - broken at the tiller.  "Take this boy aboard an' drown

him," says my Uncle, "and I'll mend your rudder-piece for love."



'What did your Uncle want you drowned for?'said Una.



'That was only his fashion of say-so, same as Mus' Robin.  I'd a

foolishness in my head that ships could be builded out of iron.  Yes

- iron ships!  I'd made me a liddle toy one of iron plates beat out

thin - and she floated a wonder!  But my Uncle, bein' a burgess of

Rye, and a shipbuilder, he 'prenticed me to Frankie in the fetchin'

trade, to cure this foolishness.'



'What was the fetchin' trade?' Dan interrupted.



'Fetchin' poor Flemishers and Dutchmen out o' the Low

Countries into England.  The King o' Spain, d'ye see, he was burnin'

'em in those parts, for to make 'em Papishers, so Frankie he

fetched 'em away to our parts, and a risky trade it was.  His master

wouldn't never touch it while he lived, but he left his ship to

Frankie when he died, and Frankie turned her into this fetchin'

trade.  Outrageous cruel hard work - on besom-black nights

bulting back and forth off they Dutch roads with shoals on all

sides, and having to hark out for the frish-frish-frish-like of a

Spanish galliwopses' oars creepin' up on ye.  Frankie 'ud have the

tiller and Moon he'd peer forth at the bows, our lantern under his

skirts, till the boat we was lookin' for 'ud blurt up out o' the dark,

and we'd lay hold and haul aboard whoever 'twas - man, woman,

or babe - an' round we'd go again, the wind bewling like a kite in

our riggin's, and they'd drop into the hold and praise God for

happy deliverance till they was all sick.



'I had nigh a year at it, an' we must have fetched off - oh, a

hundred pore folk, I reckon.  Outrageous bold, too, Frankie

growed to be.  Outrageous cunnin' he was.  Once we was as near

as nothin' nipped by a tall ship off Tergoes Sands in a snowstorm.

She had the wind of us, and spooned straight before it, shootin' all

bow guns.  Frankie fled inshore smack for the beach, till he was

atop of the first breakers.  Then he hove his anchor out, which

nigh tore our bows off, but it twitched us round end-for-end into

the wind, d'ye see, an' we clawed off them sands like a drunk man

rubbin' along a tavern bench.  When we could see, the Spanisher

was laid flat along in the breakers with the snows whitening on his

wet belly.  He thought he could go where Frankie went.'



'What happened to the crew?' said Una.



'We didn't stop,' Simon answered.  'There was a very liddle

new baby in our hold, and the mother she wanted to get to some

dry bed middlin' quick.  We runned into Dover, and said nothing.'



'Was Sir Francis Drake very much pleased?'

'Heart alive, maid, he'd no head to his name in those days.  He

was just a outrageous, valiant, crop-haired, tutt-mouthed boy,

roarin' up an' down the narrer seas, with his beard not yet quilted

out.  He made a laughing-stock of everything all day, and he'd

hold our lives in the bight of his arm all the besom-black night

among they Dutch sands; and we'd ha' jumped overside to

behove him any one time, all of us.'



'Then why did you try to poison him?' Una asked wickedly,

and Simon hung his head like a shy child.



'Oh, that was when he set me to make a pudden, for because

our cook was hurted.  I done my uttermost, but she all fetched

adrift like in the bag, an' the more I biled the bits of her, the less

she favoured any fashion o' pudden.  Moon he chawed and

chammed his piece, and Frankie chawed and chammed his'n, and

- no words to it - he took me by the ear an' walked me out over

the bow-end, an' him an' Moon hove the pudden at me on the

bowsprit gub by gub, something cruel hard!'  Simon rubbed his

hairy cheek.



'"Nex' time you bring me anything," says Frankie, "you

bring me cannon-shot an' I'll know what I'm getting."  But as for

poisonin' -' He stopped, the children laughed so.



'Of course you didn't,' said Una.  'Oh, Simon, we do like you!'



'I was always likeable with children.'  His smile crinkled up

through the hair round his eyes.  'Simple Simon they used to call

me through our yard gates.'



'Did Sir Francis mock you?' Dan asked.



'Ah, no.  He was gentle-born.  Laugh he did - he was always

laughing - but not so as to hurt a feather.  An' I loved 'en.  I loved

'en before England knew 'en, or Queen Bess she broke his heart.'



'But he hadn't really done anything when you knew him, had

he?' Una insisted.  'Armadas and those things, I mean.'



Simon pointed to the scars and scrapes left by Cattiwow's great

log.  'You tell me that that good ship's timber never done nothing

against winds and weathers since her up-springing, and I'll

confess ye that young Frankie never done nothing neither.

Nothing?  He adventured and suffered and made shift on they

Dutch sands as much in any one month as ever he had occasion for

to do in a half-year on the high seas afterwards.  An' what was his

tools?  A coaster boat - a liddle box o' walty plankin' an' some few

fathom feeble rope held together an' made able by him sole.  He

drawed our spirits up In our bodies same as a chimney-towel

draws a fire.  'Twas in him, and it comed out all times and shapes.'

'I wonder did he ever 'magine what he was going to be?  Tell

himself stories about it?' said Dan with a flush.



'I expect so.  We mostly do - even when we're grown.  But bein'

Frankie, he took good care to find out beforehand what his

fortune might be.  Had I rightly ought to tell 'em this piece?'

Simon turned to Puck, who nodded.



'My Mother, she was just a fair woman, but my Aunt, her

sister, she had gifts by inheritance laid up in her,' Simon began.



'Oh, that'll never do,' cried Puck, for the children stared

blankly.  'Do you remember what Robin promised to the Widow

Whitgift so long as her blood and get lasted?" [See 'Dymchurch 

Flit' in PUCK OF POOK'S HILL.]

'Yes.  There was always to be one of them that could see farther

through a millstone than most,' Dan answered promptly.



'Well, Simon's Aunt's mother,' said Puck slowly, 'married the

Widow's blind son on the Marsh, and Simon's Aunt was the one

chosen to see farthest through millstones.  Do you understand?'



'That was what I was gettin' at,' said Simon, 'but you're so

desperate quick.  My Aunt she knew what was comin' to people.

My Uncle being a burgess of Rye, he counted all such things

odious, and my Aunt she couldn't be got to practise her gifts

hardly at all, because it hurted her head for a week after-wards; but

when Frankie heard she had 'em, he was all for nothin' till she

foretold on him - till she looked in his hand to tell his fortune, d'ye

see?  One time we was at Rye she come aboard with my other shirt

and some apples, and he fair beazled the life out of her about it.



'"Oh, you'll be twice wed, and die childless," she says, and

pushes his hand away.



'"That's the woman's part," he says.  "What'll come to me-to

me?" an' he thrusts it back under her nose.



'"Gold - gold, past belief or counting," she says.  "Let go o'

me, lad."



'"Sink the gold!" he says.  "What'll I do, mother?"  He coaxed

her like no woman could well withstand.  I've seen him with 'em -

even when they were sea-sick.



'"If you will have it," she says at last, you shall have it.  You'll

do a many things, and eating and drinking with a dead man

beyond the world's end will be the least of them.  For you'll open a

road from the East unto the West, and back again, and you'll bury

your heart with your best friend by that road-side, and the road

you open none shall shut so long as you're let lie quiet in your

grave."





[The old lady's prophecy is in a fair way to come true, for

now the Panama Canal is finished, one end of it opens into the

very bay where Sir Francis Drake was buried.  So ships are taken

through the Canal, and the road round Cape Horn which Sir Francis

opened is very little used.]





'"And if I'm not?" he says.



'"Why, then," she says, "Sim's iron ships will be sailing on

dry land.  Now ha' done with this foolishness.  Where's Sim's shirt?"



'He couldn't fetch no more out of her, and when we come up

from the cabin, he stood mazed-like by the tiller, playing

with a apple.

'"My Sorrow!" says my Aunt; "d'ye see that?  The great world

lying in his hand, liddle and round like a apple."



'"Why, 'tis one you gived him," I says.



'"To be sure," she says.  "'Tis just a apple," and she went

ashore with her hand to her head.  It always hurted her to show

her gifts.



Him and me puzzled over that talk plenty.  It sticked in his

mind quite extravagant.  The very next time we slipped out for

some fetchin' trade, we met Mus' Stenning's boat over by Calais

sands; and he warned us that the Spanishers had shut down all

their Dutch ports against us English, and their galliwopses was

out picking up our boats like flies off hogs' backs.  Mus' Stenning

he runs for Shoreham, but Frankie held on a piece, knowin' that

Mus Stenning was jealous of our good trade.  Over by Dunkirk a

great gor-bellied Spanisher, with the Cross on his sails, came

rampin' at us.  We left him.  We left him all they bare seas to

conquest in.



'"Looks like this road was going to be shut pretty soon," says

Frankie, humourin' her at the tiller.  "I'll have to open that other

one your Aunt foretold of."



'"The Spanisher's crowdin' down on us middlin' quick," I says.

No odds," says Frankie, "he'll have the inshore tide against

him.  Did your Aunt say I was to be quiet in my grave for ever?"



'"Till my iron ships sailed dry land," I says.



'"That's foolishness," he says.  "Who cares where Frankie

Drake makes a hole in the water now or twenty years from now?"



'The Spanisher kept muckin' on more and more canvas.  I told

him so.



'"He's feelin' the tide," was all he says.  "If he was among

Tergoes Sands with this wind, we'd be picking his bones proper.

I'd give my heart to have all their tall ships there some night

before a north gale, and me to windward.  There'd be gold in My

hands then.  Did your Aunt say she saw the world settin' in my

hand, Sim?"



Yes, but 'twas a apple," says I, and he laughed like he always

did at me.  "Do you ever feel minded to jump overside and be

done with everything?" he asks after a while.



'"No.  What water comes aboard is too wet as 'tis," I says.

"The Spanisher's going about."



'"I told you," says he, never looking back.  "He'll give us the

Pope's Blessing as he swings.  Come down off that rail.  There's no

knowin' where stray shots may hit."  So I came down off the rail,

and leaned against it, and the Spanisher he ruffled round in the

wind, and his port-lids opened all red inside.



'"Now what'll happen to my road if they don't let me lie quiet

in my grave?" he says.  "Does your Aunt mean there's two roads

to be found and kept open - or what does she mean?  I don't like

that talk about t'other road.  D'you believe in your iron

ships, Sim?"



'He knowed I did, so I only nodded, and he nodded back again.

'"Anybody but me 'ud call you a fool, Sim," he says.  "Lie

down.  Here comes the Pope's Blessing!"



'The Spanisher gave us his broadside as he went about.  They all

fell short except one that smack-smooth hit the rail behind my

back, an' I felt most won'erful cold.



'"Be you hit anywhere to signify?" he says.  "Come over to me."



'"O Lord, Mus' Drake," I says, "my legs won't move," and

that was the last I spoke for months.'



'Why?  What had happened?' cried Dan and Una together.



'The rail had jarred me in here like.'  Simon reached behind him

clumsily.  'From my shoulders down I didn't act no shape.  Frankie

carried me piggyback to my Aunt's house, and I lay bed-rid and

tongue-tied while she rubbed me day and night, month in and

month out.  She had faith in rubbing with the hands.  P'raps she

put some of her gifts into it, too.  Last of all, something loosed

itself in my pore back, and lo!  I was whole restored again, but

kitten-feeble.



'"Where's Frankie?" I says, thinking I'd been a longish

while abed.



'"Down-wind amongst the Dons - months ago," says my Aunt.



'"When can I go after 'en?" I says.



'"Your duty's to your town and trade now," says she.  "Your

Uncle he died last Michaelmas and he've left you and me the yard.

So no more iron ships, mind ye."



'"What?" I says.  "And you the only one that beleft in 'em!"





'"Maybe I do still," she says, "but I'm a woman before I'm a

Whitgift, and wooden ships is what England needs us to build.  I

lay on ye to do so."



'That's why I've never teched iron since that day - not to build a

toy ship of.  I've never even drawed a draft of one for my pleasure

of evenings.'  Simon smiled down on them all.

'Whitgift blood is terrible resolute - on the she-side,'said Puck.



'Didn't You ever see Sir Francis Drake again?'Dan asked.



'With one thing and another, and my being made a burgess of

Rye, I never clapped eyes on him for the next twenty years.  Oh, I

had the news of his mighty doings the world over.  They was the

very same bold, cunning shifts and passes he'd worked with

beforetimes off they Dutch sands, but, naturally, folk took more

note of them.  When Queen Bess made him knight, he sent my

Aunt a dried orange stuffed with spiceries to smell to.  She cried

outrageous on it.  She blamed herself for her foretellings, having

set him on his won'erful road; but I reckon he'd ha' gone that way

all withstanding.  Curious how close she foretelled it!  The world

in his hand like an apple, an' he burying his best friend, Mus'

Doughty -'



'Never mind for Mus' Doughty,' Puck interrupted.  'Tell us

where you met Sir Francis next.'



'Oh, ha!  That was the year I was made a burgess of Rye - the

same year which King Philip sent his ships to take England

without Frankie's leave.'



'The Armada!' said Dan contentedly.  'I was hoping that

would come.'



'I knowed Frankie would never let 'em smell London smoke,

but plenty good men in Rye was two-three minded about the

upshot.  'Twas the noise of the gun-fire tarrified us.  The wind

favoured it our way from off behind the Isle of Wight.  It made a

mutter like, which growed and growed, and by the end of a week

women was shruckin' in the streets.  Then they come slidderin'

past Fairlight in a great smoky pat vambrished with red gun-fire,

and our ships flyin' forth and duckin' in again.  The smoke-pat

sliddered over to the French shore, so I knowed Frankie was

edgin' the Spanishers toward they Dutch sands where he was

master.  I says to my Aunt, "The smoke's thinnin' out.  I lay

Frankie's just about scrapin' his hold for a few last rounds shot.

'Tis time for me to go."



'"Never in them clothes," she says.  "Do on the doublet I

bought you to be made burgess in, and don't you shame this

day."



'So I mucked it on, and my chain, and my stiffed Dutch

breeches and all.



'"I be comin', too," she says from her chamber, and forth she

come pavisandin' like a peacock - stuff, ruff, stomacher and all.

She was a notable woman.'



'But how did you go?  You haven't told us,' said Una.



'In my own ship - but half-share was my Aunt's.  In the ANTONY

OF RYE, to be sure; and not empty-handed.  I'd been loadin' her for

three days with the pick of our yard.  We was ballasted on cannon-

shot of all three sizes; and iron rods and straps for his carpenters;

and a nice passel of clean three-inch oak planking and hide breech-

ropes for his cannon, and gubs of good oakum, and bolts o'

canvas, and all the sound rope in the yard.  What else could I ha'

done?  I knowed what he'd need most after a week's such work.

I'm a shipbuilder, little maid.



'We'd a fair slant o' wind off Dungeness, and we crept on till it

fell light airs and puffed out.  The Spanishers was all in a huddle

over by Calais, and our ships was strawed about mending

'emselves like dogs lickin' bites.  Now and then a Spanisher would

fire from a low port, and the ball 'ud troll across the flat swells,

but both sides was finished fightin' for that tide.



'The first ship we foreslowed on, her breastworks was crushed

in, an' men was shorin' 'em up.  She said nothing.  The next was a

black pinnace, his pumps clackin' middling quick, and he said

nothing.  But the third, mending shot-holes, he spoke out plenty .

I asked him where Mus' Drake might be, and a shiny-suited man

on the poop looked down into us, and saw what we carried.



'"Lay alongside you!" he says.  "We'll take that all."



'"'Tis for Mus' Drake," I says, keeping away lest his size

should lee the wind out of my sails.



'"Hi!  Ho!  Hither!  We're Lord High Admiral of England!

Come alongside, or we'll hang ye," he says.



''Twas none of my affairs who he was if he wasn't Frankie, and

while he talked so hot I slipped behind a green-painted ship with

her top-sides splintered.  We was all in the middest of 'em then.



'"Hi!  Hoi!" the green ship says.  "Come alongside, honest

man, and I'll buy your load.  I'm Fenner that fought the seven

Portugals - clean out of shot or bullets.  Frankie knows me."



'"Ay, but I don't," I says, and I slacked nothing.



'He was a masterpiece.  Seein' I was for goin' on, he hails a

Bridport hoy beyond us and shouts, "George!  Oh, George!  Wing

that duck.  He's fat!"  An' true as we're all here, that squatty

Bridport boat rounds to acrost our bows, intendin' to stop us by

means o' shooting.



'my Aunt looks over our rail.  "George," she says, "you finish

with your enemies afore you begin on your friends."



'Him that was laying the liddle swivel-gun at us sweeps off his

hat an' calls her Queen Bess, and asks if she was selling liquor to

pore dry sailors.  My Aunt answered him quite a piece.  She was a

notable woman.



'Then he come up - his long pennant trailing overside - his

waistcloths and netting tore all to pieces where the Spanishers had

grappled, and his sides black-smeared with their gun-blasts like

candle-smoke in a bottle.  We hooked on to a lower port and hung.



'"Oh, Mus' Drake!  Mus' Drake!" I calls up.



'He stood on the great anchor cathead, his shirt open to the

middle, and his face shining like the sun.



'"Why, Sim!" he says.  just like that - after twenty year!

"Sim," he says, "what brings you?"



'"Pudden," I says, not knowing whether to laugh or cry.



'"You told me to bring cannon-shot next time, an' I've

brought 'em.  "



'He saw we had.  He ripped out a fathom and a half o' brimstone

Spanish, and he swung down on our rail, and he kissed me before

all his fine young captains.  His men was swarming out of the

lower ports ready to unload us.  When he saw how I'd considered

all his likely wants, he kissed me again.



'"Here's a friend that sticketh closer than a brother!" he says.

"Mistress," he says to my Aunt, "all you foretold on me was true.

I've opened that road from the East to the West, and I've buried

my heart beside it.  "



'"I know," she says.  "That's why I be come."



'"But ye never foretold this"; he points to both they

great fleets.



'"This don't seem to me to make much odds compared to

what happens to a man," she says.  "Do it?"



'"Certain sure a man forgets to remember when he's proper

mucked up with work.  Sim," he says to me, "we must shift every

living Spanisher round Dunkirk corner on to our Dutch sands

before morning.  The wind'll come out of the North after this

calm - same as it used - and then they're our meat."



'"Amen," says I.  "I've brought you what I could scutchel up

of odds and ends.  Be you hit anywhere to signify?"



'"Oh, our folk'll attend to all that when we've time," he says.

He turns to talk to my Aunt, while his men flew the stuff out of

our hold.  I think I saw old Moon amongst 'em, but he was too

busy to more than nod like.  Yet the Spanishers was going to

prayers with their bells and candles before we'd cleaned out the

ANTONY.  Twenty-two ton o' useful stuff I'd fetched him.

'"Now, Sim," says my Aunt, "no more devouring of Mus'

Drake's time.  He's sending us home in the Bridport hoy.  I want

to speak to them young springalds again."



'"But here's our ship all ready and swept," I says.



'"Swep' an' garnished," says Frankie.  "I'm going to fill her

with devils in the likeness o' pitch and sulphur.  We must shift the

Dons round Dunkirk comer, and if shot can't do it, we'll send

down fireships."



'"I've given him my share of the ANTONY," says my Aunt.

"What do you reckon to do about yours?"



'"She offered it," said Frankie, laughing.



'"She wouldn't have if I'd overheard her," I says; "because I'd

have offered my share first."  Then I told him how the ANTONY's

sails was best trimmed to drive before the wind, and seeing he was



full of occupations we went acrost to that Bridport hoy, and

left him.



'But Frankie was gentle-born, d'ye see, and that sort they never

overlook any folks' dues.



'When the hoy passed under his stern, he stood bare-headed on

the poop same as if my Aunt had been his Queen, and his

musicianers played "Mary Ambree" on their silver trumpets

quite a long while.  Heart alive, little maid!  I never meaned to

make you look sorrowful!"



Bunny Lewknor in his sackcloth petticoats burst through the

birch scrub wiping his forehead.



'We've got the stick to rights now!  She've been a whole hatful

o' trouble.  You come an' ride her home, Mus' Dan and Miss Una!'



They found the proud wood-gang at the foot of the slope, with

the log double-chained on the tug.



'Cattiwow, what are you going to do with it?'said Dan, as they

straddled the thin part.



'She's going down to Rye to make a keel for a Lowestoft

fishin'-boat, I've heard.  Hold tight!'



Cattiwow cracked his whip, and the great log dipped and

tilted, and leaned and dipped again, exactly like a stately ship

upon the high seas.







Frankie's Trade





Old Horn to All Atlantic said:

  (A-hay O!  To me O!)

'Now where did Frankie learn his trade?

For he ran me down with a three-reef mains'le.'

(All round the Horn!)



Atlantic answered: 'Not from me!

You'd better ask the cold North Sea,

For he ran me down under all plain canvas.'

(All round the Horn!)



The North Sea answered: 'He's my man,

For he came to me when he began -

Frankie Drake in an open coaster.

(All round the Sands!)



'I caught him young and I used him sore,

So you never shall startle Frankie more,

Without capsizing Earth and her waters.

(All round the Sands!)



'I did not favour him at all,

I made him pull and I made him haul -

And stand his trick with the common sailors.

(All round the Sands!)



'I froze him stiff and I fogged him blind,

And kicked him home with his road to find

By what he could see of a three-day snow-storm.

(All round the Sands!)



'I learned him his trade o' winter nights,

'Twixt Mardyk Fort and Dunkirk lights

On a five-knot tide with the forts a-firing.

(All round the Sands!)



'Before his beard began to shoot,

I showed him the length of the Spaniard's foot -

And I reckon he clapped the boot on it later.

(All round the Sands!)

'If there's a risk which you can make

That's worse than he was used to take

Nigh every week in the way of his business;

(All round the Sands!)



'If there's a trick that you can try

Which he hasn't met in time gone by,

Not once or twice, but ten times over;

(All round the Sands!)



'If you can teach him aught that's new,

  (A-hay O!  To me O!)

I'll give you Bruges and Niewport too,

And the ten tall churches that stand between 'em.'

Storm along, my gallant Captains!

  (All round the Horn!)

