







The Looking-Glass



Queen Bess Was Harry's daughter!



The Queen was in her chamber, and she was middling old,

Her petticoat was satin and her stomacher was gold.

Backwards and forwards and sideways did she pass,

Making up her mind to face the cruel looking-glass.

The cruel looking-glass that will never show a lass

As comely or as kindly or as young as once she was!



The Queen was in her chamber, a-combing of her hair,

There came Queen Mary's spirit and it stood behind her chair,

Singing, 'Backwards and forwards and sideways you may pass,

But I will stand behind you till you face the looking-glass.

The cruel looking-glass that will never show a lass

As lovely or unlucky or as lonely as I was!'



The Queen was in her chamber, a-weeping very sore,

There came Lord Leicester's spirit and it scratched upon the door,

Singing, 'Backwards and forwards and sideways may you pass,

But I will walk beside you till you face the looking-glass.

The cruel looking-glass that will never show a lass

As hard and unforgiving or as wicked as you was!'



The Queen was in her chamber; her sins were on her head;

She looked the spirits up and down and statelily she said:

'Backwards and forwards and sideways though I've been,

Yet I am Harry's daughter and I am England's Queen!'

And she faced the looking-glass (and whatever else there was),

And she saw her day was over and she saw her beauty pass

In the cruel looking-glass that can always hurt a lass

More hard than any ghost there is or any man there was!









THE WRONG THING







A Truthful Song





  THE BRICKLAYER:



I tell this tale, which is strictly true,

just by way of convincing you

How very little since things were made

Things have altered in the building trade.



A year ago, come the middle o' March,

We was building flats near the Marble Arch,

When a thin young man with coal-black hair

Came up to watch us working there.



Now there wasn't a trick in brick or stone

That this young man hadn't seen or known;

Nor there wasn't a tool from trowel to maul

But this young man could use 'em all!

Then up and spoke the plumbyers bold,

Which was laying the pipes for the hot and cold:

'Since you with us have made so free,

Will you kindly say what your name might be?'



The young man kindly answered them:

'It might be Lot or Methusalem,

Or it might be Moses (a man I hate),

Whereas it is Pharaoh surnamed the Great.



'Your glazing is new and your plumbing's strange,

But other-wise I perceive no change,

And in less than a month, if you do as I bid,

I'd learn you to build me a Pyramid.'



  THE SAILOR:



I tell this tale, which is stricter true,

just by way of convincing you

How very little since things was made

Things have altered in the shipwright's trade.



In Blackwall Basin yesterday

A China barque re-fitting lay,

When a fat old man with snow-white hair

Came up to watch us working there.



Now there wasn't a knot which the riggers knew

But the old man made it - and better too;

Nor there wasn't a sheet, or a lift, or a brace,

But the old man knew its lead and place.



Then up and spake the caulkyers bold,

Which was packing the pump in the after-hold:

'Since you with us have made so free,

Will you kindly tell what your name might be?'



The old man kindly answered them:

'it might be Japhet, it might be Shem,

Or it might be Ham (though his skin was dark),

Whereas it is Noah, commanding the Ark.



'Your wheel is new and your pumps are strange,

But otherwise I perceive no change,

And in less than a week, if she did not ground,

I'd sail this hooker the wide world round!'



  BOTH: We tell these tales, which are strictest true, etc.







The Wrong Thing





Dan had gone in for building model boats; but after he had filled

the schoolroom with chips, which he expected Una to clear away,

they turned him out of doors and he took all his tools up the hill to

Mr Springett's yard, where he knew he could make as much mess

as he chose.  Old Mr Springett was a builder, contractor, and

sanitary engineer, and his yard, which opened off the village

street, was always full of interesting things.  At one end of it was a

long loft, reached by a ladder, where he kept his iron-bound

scaffold-planks, tins of paints, pulleys, and odds and ends he had

found in old houses.  He would sit here by the hour watching his

carts as they loaded or unloaded in the yard below, while Dan

gouged and grunted at the carpenter's bench near the loft

window.  Mr Springett and Dan had always been particular

friends, for Mr Springett was so old he could remember when

railways were being made in the southern counties of England,

and people were allowed to drive dogs in carts.



One hot, still afternoon - the tar-paper on the roof smelt like

ships - Dan, in his shirt-sleeves, was smoothing down a new

schooner's bow, and Mr Springett was talking of barns and

houses he had built.  He said he never forgot any stick or stone he

had ever handled, or any man, woman, or child he had ever met.

just then he was very proud of the Village Hall at the entrance of

the village, which he had finished a few weeks before.



'An' I don't mind tellin' you, Mus' Dan,' he said, 'that the Hall

will be my last job top of this mortal earth.  I didn't make ten

pounds - no, nor yet five - out o' the whole contrac', but my

name's lettered on the foundation stone - Ralph Springett, Builder

- and the stone she's bedded on four foot good concrete.  If she

shifts any time these five hundred years, I'll sure-ly turn in my

grave.  I told the Lunnon architec' so when he come down to

oversee my work.'



'What did he say?'  Dan was sandpapering the schooner's port bow.



'Nothing.  The Hall ain't more than one of his small jobs for

him, but 'tain't small to me, an' my name is cut and lettered,

frontin' the village street, I do hope an' pray, for time everlastin'.

You'll want the little round file for that holler in her bow.  Who's

there?'  Mr Springett turned stiffly in his chair.



A long pile of scaffold-planks ran down the centre of the loft.

Dan looked, and saw Hal o' the Draft's touzled head beyond

them.  [See 'Hal o' the Draft' in PUCK OF POOK'S HILL.]



'Be you the builder of the Village Hall?' he asked of Mr Springett.



'I be,' was the answer.  'But if you want a job -'



Hal laughed.  'No, faith!'he said.  'Only the Hall is as good and

honest a piece of work as I've ever run a rule over.  So, being born

hereabouts, and being reckoned a master among masons, and

accepted as a master mason, I made bold to pay my brotherly

respects to the builder.'



'Aa - um!'  Mr Springett looked important.  'I be a bit rusty, but

I'll try ye!'



He asked Hal several curious questions, and the answers must

have pleased him, for he invited Hal to sit down.  Hal moved up,

always keeping behind the pile of planks so that only his head

showed, and sat down on a trestle in the dark corner at the back of

Mr Springett's desk.  He took no notice of Dan, but talked at once

to Mr Springett about bricks, and cement, and lead and glass, and

after a while Dan went on with his work.  He knew Mr Springett

was pleased, because he tugged his white sandy beard, and

smoked his pipe in short puffs.  The two men seemed to agree

about everything, but when grown-ups agree they interrupt each

other almost as much as if they were quarrelling.  Hal said

something about workmen.



'Why, that's what I always say,' Mr Springett cried.  'A man

who can only do one thing, he's but next-above-fool to the man

that can't do nothin'.  That's where the Unions make their mistake.'



'My thought to the very dot.'  Dan heard Hal slap his tight-

hosed leg.  'I've suffered 'in my time from these same Guilds -

Unions, d'you call 'em?  All their precious talk of the mysteries of

their trades - why, what does it come to?'



'Nothin'!  You've justabout hit it,' said Mr Springett, and

rammed his hot tobacco with his thumb.



'Take the art of wood-carving,'Hal went on.  He reached across

the planks, grabbed a wooden mallet, and moved his other hand

as though he wanted something.  Mr Springett without a word

passed him one of Dan's broad chisels.  'Ah!  Wood-carving, for

example.  If you can cut wood and have a fair draft of what ye

mean to do, a' Heaven's name take chisel and maul and let drive at

it, say I!  You'll soon find all the mystery, forsooth, of wood-

carving under your proper hand!'  Whack, came the mallet on the

chisel, and a sliver of wood curled up in front of it.  Mr Springett

watched like an old raven.



'All art is one, man - one!' said Hal between whacks; 'and to

wait on another man to finish out -'



'To finish out your work ain't no sense,' Mr Springett cut in.

'That's what I'm always sayin' to the boy here.'  He nodded

towards Dan.  'That's what I said when I put the new wheel into

Brewster's Mill in Eighteen hundred Seventy-two.  I reckoned I

was millwright enough for the job 'thout bringin' a man from

Lunnon.  An' besides, dividin' work eats up profits, no bounds.'



Hal laughed his beautiful deep laugh, and Mr Springett joined

in till Dan laughed too.



'You handle your tools, I can see,' said Mr Springett.  'I reckon,

if you're any way like me, you've found yourself hindered by

those - Guilds, did you call 'em?  - Unions, we say.'



'You may say so!'  Hal pointed to a white scar on his cheekbone.

'This is a remembrance from the Master watching-Foreman of Masons

on Magdalen Tower, because, please you, I dared to carve stone without

their leave.  They said a stone had slipped from the cornice by accident.'



'I know them accidents.  There's no way to disprove 'em.  An'

stones ain't the only things that slip,' Mr Springett grunted.  Hal

went on:



'I've seen a scaffold-plank keckle and shoot a too-clever workman

thirty foot on to the cold chancel floor below.  And a rope can

break -'

'Yes, natural as nature; an' lime'll fly up in a man's eyes without

any breath o' wind sometimes,' said Mr Springett.  'But who's to

show 'twasn't a accident?'



'Who do these things?' Dan asked, and straightened his back at

the bench as he turned the schooner end-for-end in the vice to get

at her counter.



'Them which don't wish other men to work no better nor

quicker than they do,' growled Mr Springett.  'Don't pinch her so

hard in the vice, Mus' Dan.  Put a piece o' rag in the jaws, or you'll

bruise her.  More than that'- he turned towards Hal -'if a man has

his private spite laid up against you, the Unions give him his

excuse for workin' it off.'



'Well I know it,'said Hal.



'They never let you go, them spiteful ones.  I knowed a plasterer

in Eighteen hundred Sixty-one - down to the wells.  He was a

Frenchy - a bad enemy he was.'

'I had mine too.  He was an Italian, called Benedetto.  I met him

first at Oxford on Magdalen Tower when I was learning my trade

-or trades, I should say.  A bad enemy he was, as you say, but he

came to be my singular good friend,' said Hal as he put down the

mallet and settled himself comfortably.



'What might his trade have been - plastering' Mr Springett asked.



'Plastering of a sort.  He worked in stucco - fresco we call it.

Made pictures on plaster.  Not but what he had a fine sweep of the

hand in drawing.  He'd take the long sides of a cloister, trowel on

his stuff, and roll out his great all-abroad pictures of saints and

croppy-topped trees quick as a webster unrolling cloth almost.

Oh, Benedetto could draw, but 'a was a little-minded man,

professing to be full of secrets of colour or plaster - common

tricks, all of 'em - and his one single talk was how Tom, Dick or

Harry had stole this or t'other secret art from him.'



'I know that sort,' said Mr Springett.  'There's no keeping peace

or making peace with such.  An' they're mostly born an' bone idle.'



'True.  Even his fellow-countrymen laughed at his jealousy.  We

two came to loggerheads early on Magdalen Tower.  I was a

youngster then.  Maybe I spoke my mind about his work.'



'You shouldn't never do that.'  Mr Springett shook his head.

'That sort lay it up against you.'



'True enough.  This Benedetto did most specially.  Body o' me,

the man lived to hate me!  But I always kept my eyes open on a

plank or a scaffold.  I was mighty glad to be shut of him when he

quarrelled with his Guild foreman, and went off, nose in air, and

paints under his arm.  But' - Hal leaned forward -'if you hate a

man or a man hates you -'



'I know.  You're everlastin' running acrost him,' Mr Springett

interrupted.  'Excuse me, sir.'  He leaned out of the window, and

shouted to a carter who was loading a cart with bricks.



'Ain't you no more sense than to heap 'em up that way?' he

said.  'Take an' throw a hundred of 'em off.  It's more than the

team can compass.  Throw 'em off, I tell you, and make another

trip for what's left over.  Excuse me, sir.  You was sayin'-'



'I was saying that before the end of the year I went to Bury to

strengthen the lead-work in the great Abbey east window there.'



'Now that's just one of the things I've never done.  But I mind

there was a cheap excursion to Chichester in Eighteen hundred

Seventy-nine, an' I went an' watched 'em leadin' a won'erful fine

window in Chichester Cathedral.  I stayed watchin' till 'twas time

for us to go back.  Dunno as I had two drinks p'raps, all that day.'



Hal smiled.  'At Bury, then, sure enough, I met my enemy

Benedetto.  He had painted a picture in plaster on the south wall of

the Refectory - a noble place for a noble thing - a picture of

Jonah.'



'Ah!  Jonah an' his whale.  I've never been as far as Bury.  You've

worked about a lot,' said Mr Springett, with his eyes on the

carter below.



'No.  Not the whale.  This was a picture of Jonah and the

pompion that withered.  But all that Benedetto had shown was a

peevish grey-beard huggled up in angle-edged drapery beneath a

pompion on a wooden trellis.  This last, being a dead thing, he'd

drawn it as 'twere to the life.  But fierce old Jonah, bared in the

sun, angry even to death that his cold prophecy was disproven -

Jonah, ashamed, and already hearing the children of Nineveh

running to mock him - ah, that was what Benedetto had not

drawn!'



'He better ha' stuck to his whale, then,' said Mr Springett.



'He'd ha' done no better with that.  He draws the damp cloth off

the picture, an' shows it to me.  I was a craftsman too, d'ye see?'



'"Tis good," I said, "but it goes no deeper than the plaster."



'"What?" he said in a whisper.



'"Be thy own judge, Benedetto," I answered.  "Does it go

deeper than the plaster?"



'He reeled against a piece of dry wall.  "No," he says, "and I

know it.  I could not hate thee more than I have done these five

years, but if I live, I will try, Hal.  I will try."  Then he goes away.  I

pitied him, but I had spoken truth.  His picture went no deeper

than the plaster.'



'Ah!' said Mr Springett, who had turned quite red.  'You was

talkin' so fast I didn't understand what you was drivin' at.  I've

seen men - good workmen they was - try to do more than they

could do, and - and they couldn't compass it.  They knowed it,

and it nigh broke their hearts like.  You was in your right, o'

course, sir, to say what you thought o' his work; but if you'll

excuse me, was you in your duty?'



'I was wrong to say it,' Hal replied.  'God forgive me - I was

young!  He was workman enough himself to know where he

failed.  But it all came evens in the long run.  By the same token,

did ye ever hear o' one Torrigiano - Torrisany we called him?'



'I can't say I ever did.  Was he a Frenchy like?'



'No, a hectoring, hard-mouthed, long-sworded Italian

builder, as vain as a peacock and as strong as a bull, but, mark

you, a master workman.  More than that - he could get his best

work out of the worst men.'



'Which it's a gift.  I had a foreman-bricklayer like him once,'

said Mr Springett.  'He used to prod 'em in the back like with a

pointing-trowel, and they did wonders.'



I've seen our Torrisany lay a 'prentice down with one buffet

and raise him with another - to make a mason of him.  I worked

under him at building a chapel in London - a chapel and a tomb

for the King.'



'I never knew kings went to chapel much,' said Mr Springett.

'But I always hold with a man - don't care who he be - seein'

about his own grave before he dies.  'Tidn't the sort of thing to

leave to your family after the will's read.  I reckon 'twas a fine vault?'



'None finer in England.  This Torrigiano had the contract for it,

as you'd say.  He picked master craftsmen from all parts -

England, France, Italy, the Low Countries - no odds to him so

long as they knew their work, and he drove them like - like pigs at

Brightling Fair.  He called us English all pigs.  We suffered it

because he was a master in his craft.  If he misliked any work that a

man had done, with his own great hands he'd rive it out, and tear

it down before us all.  "Ah, you pig - you English pig!" he'd

scream in the dumb wretch's face.  "You answer me?  You look at

me?  You think at me?  Come out with me into the cloisters.  I will

teach you carving myself.  I will gild you all over!"  But when his

passion had blown out, he'd slip his arm round the man's neck,

and impart knowledge worth gold.  'Twould have done your

heart good, Mus' Springett, to see the two hundred of us

masons, jewellers, carvers, gilders, iron-workers and the rest - all

toiling like cock-angels, and this mad Italian hornet fleeing one to

next up and down the chapel.  Done your heart good, it would!'



'I believe you,' said Mr Springett.  'In Eighteen hundred Fifty-four,

I mind, the railway was bein' made into Hastin's.  There was

two thousand navvies on it - all young - all strong - an' I was one

of 'em.  Oh, dearie me!  Excuse me, sir, but was your enemy

workin' with you?'



'Benedetto?  Be sure he was.  He followed me like a lover.  He

painted pictures on the chapel ceiling - slung from a chair.

Torrigiano made us promise not to fight till the work should be

finished.  We were both master craftsmen, do ye see, and he

needed us.  None the less, I never went aloft to carve 'thout testing

all my ropes and knots each morning.  We were never far from

each other.  Benedetto 'ud sharpen his knife on his sole while he

waited for his plaster to dry - wheet, wheet, wheet.  I'd hear it where

I hung chipping round a pillar-head, and we'd nod to each other

friendly-like.  Oh, he was a craftsman, was Benedetto, but his

hate spoiled his eye and his hand.  I mind the night I had finished

the models for the bronze saints round the tomb; Torrigiano

embraced me before all the chapel, and bade me to supper.  I met

Benedetto when I came out.  He was slavering in the porch Like a

mad dog.'



'Workin' himself up to it?' said Mr Springett.  'Did he have it in

at ye that night?'



'No, no.  That time he kept his oath to Torrigiano.  But I pitied

him.  Eh, well!  Now I come to my own follies.  I had never

thought too little of myself; but after Torrisany had put his arm

round my neck, I - I' - Hal broke into a laugh - 'I lay there was not

much odds 'twixt me and a cock-sparrow in his pride.'



'I was pretty middlin' young once on a time,' said Mr Springett.



'Then ye know that a man can't drink and dice and dress fine,

and keep company above his station, but his work suffers for it,

Mus' Springett.'



'I never held much with dressin' up, but - you're right!  The

worst mistakes I ever made they was made of a Monday

morning,' Mr Springett answered.  'We've all been one sort of

fool or t'other.  Mus' Dan, Mus' Dan, take the smallest gouge, or

you'll be spluttin' her stem works clean out.  Can't ye see the grain

of the wood don't favour a chisel?'



'I'll spare you some of my follies.  But there was a man called

Brygandyne - Bob Brygandyne - Clerk of the King's Ships, a

little, smooth, bustling atomy, as clever as a woman to get work

done for nothin' - a won'erful smooth-tongued pleader.  He made

much o' me, and asked me to draft him out a drawing, a piece of

carved and gilt scroll-work for the bows of one of the King's

Ships - the SOVEREIGN was her name.'



'Was she a man-of-war?'asked Dan.



'She was a warship, and a woman called Catherine of Castile

desired the King to give her the ship for a pleasure-ship of her own.

I did not know at the time, but she'd been at Bob to get this

scroll-work done and fitted that the King might see it.  I made him

the picture, in an hour, all of a heat after supper - one great

heaving play of dolphins and a Neptune or so reining in webby-

footed sea-horses, and Arion with his harp high atop of them.  It

was twenty-three foot long, and maybe nine foot deep - painted

and gilt.'



It must ha' justabout looked fine,' said Mr Springett.



'That's the curiosity of it.  'Twas bad - rank bad.  In my conceit I

must needs show it to Torrigiano, in the chapel.  He straddles his

legs, hunches his knife behind him, and whistles like a storm-cock

through a sleet-shower.  Benedetto was behind him.  We were

never far apart, I've told you.



'"That is pig's work," says our Master.  "Swine's work.  You

make any more such things, even after your fine Court suppers,

and you shall be sent away."



'Benedetto licks his lips like a cat.  "It is so bad then, Master?"

he says.  "What a pity!"



'"Yes," says Torrigiano.  "Scarcely you could do things so bad.

I will condescend to show."



'He talks to me then and there.  No shouting, no swearing (it

was too bad for that); but good, memorable counsel, bitten in

slowly.  Then he sets me to draft out a pair of iron gates, to take, as

he said, the taste of my naughty dolphins out of my mouth.  Iron's

sweet stuff if you don't torture her, and hammered work is all

pure, truthful line, with a reason and a support for every curve

and bar of it.  A week at that settled my stomach handsomely, and

the Master let me put the work through the smithy, where I

sweated out more of my foolish pride.'



'Good stuff is good iron,' said Mr Springett.  'I done a pair of

lodge gates once in Eighteen hundred Sixty-three.'



'Oh, I forgot to say that Bob Brygandyne whipped away my

draft of the ship's scroll-work, and would not give it back to me

to re-draw.  He said 'twould do well enough.  Howsoever, my

lawful work kept me too busied to remember him.  Body o' me,

but I worked that winter upon the gates and the bronzes for the

tomb as I'd never worked before!  I was leaner than a lath, but I

lived - I lived then!'  Hal looked at Mr Springett with his wise,

crinkled-up eyes, and the old man smiled back.



'Ouch!' Dan cried.  He had been hollowing out the schooner's

after-deck, the little gouge had slipped and gashed the ball of his

left thumb, - an ugly, triangular tear.



'That came of not steadying your wrist,' said Hal calmly.

'Don't bleed over the wood.  Do your work with your heart's

blood, but no need to let it show.'  He rose and peered into a

corner of the loft.



Mr Springett had risen too, and swept down a ball of cobwebs

from a rafter.



'Clap that on,' was all he said, 'and put your handkerchief atop.

'Twill cake over in a minute.  It don't hurt now, do it?'



'No,' said Dan indignantly.  'You know it has happened lots of

times.  I'll tie it up myself.  Go on, sir.'



'And it'll happen hundreds of times more,' said Hal with a

friendly nod as he sat down again.  But he did not go on till Dan's

hand was tied up properly.  Then he said:



'One dark December day - too dark to judge colour - we was

all sitting and talking round the fires in the chapel (you heard good

talk there), when Bob Brygandyne bustles in and - "Hal, you're

sent for," he squeals.  I was at Torrigiano's feet on a pile of

put-locks, as I might be here, toasting a herring on my knife's

point.  'Twas the one English thing our Master liked - salt herring.



'"I'm busy, about my art," I calls.





'"Art?" says Bob.  "What's Art compared to your scroll-work

for the SOVEREIGN?  Come."



'"Be sure your sins will find you out," says Torrigiano.  "Go

with him and see."  As I followed Bob out I was aware of Benedetto,

like a black spot when the eyes are tired, sliddering up

behind me.



'Bob hurries through the streets in the raw fog, slips into a

doorway, up stairs, along passages, and at last thrusts me into a

little cold room vilely hung with Flemish tapestries, and no

furnishing except a table and my draft of the SOVEREIGN's scrollwork.

Here he leaves me.  Presently comes in a dark, long-nosed

man in a fur cap.



'"Master Harry Dawe?" said he.



'"The same," I says.  "Where a plague has Bob Brygandyne gone?"



'His thin eyebrows surged up in a piece and come down again

in a stiff bar.  "He went to the King," he says.



'"All one.  Where's your pleasure with me?" I says, shivering,

for it was mortal cold.



'He lays his hand flat on my draft.  "Master Dawe," he says,

"do you know the present price of gold leaf for all this wicked

gilding of yours?"



'By that I guessed he was some cheese-paring clerk or other of

the King's Ships, so I gave him the price.  I forget it now, but it

worked out to thirty pounds - carved, gilt, and fitted in place.



'"Thirty pounds!" he said, as though I had pulled a tooth of

him.  "You talk as though thirty pounds was to be had for the

asking.  None the less," he says, "your draft's a fine piece of work."



'I'd been looking at it ever since I came in, and 'twas viler even

than I judged it at first.  My eye and hand had been purified the

past months, d'ye see, by my iron work.



'"I could do it better now," I said.  The more I studied my

squabby Neptunes the less I liked 'em; and Arion was a pure

flaming shame atop of the unbalanced dolphins.



'"I doubt it will be fresh expense to draft it again," he says.



'"Bob never paid me for the first draft.  I lay he'll never pay me

for the second.  'Twill cost the King nothing if I re-draw it," I says.



'"There's a woman wishes it to be done quickly," he says.

"We'll stick to your first drawing, Master Dawe.  But thirty

pounds is thirty pounds.  You must make it less.'



'And all the while the faults in my draft fair leaped out and hit

me between the eyes.  At any cost, I thinks to myself, I must get it

back and re-draft it.  He grunts at me impatiently, and a splendid

thought comes to me, which shall save me.  By the same token,

It was quite honest.'



'They ain't always,' says Mr Springett.  'How did you get out of it?'



'By the truth.  I says to Master Fur Cap, as I might to you here, I

says, "I'll tell you something, since you seem a knowledgeable

man.  Is the SOVEREIGN to lie in Thames river all her days, or will she

take the high seas?"



'"Oh," he says quickly, "the King keeps no cats that don't

catch mice.  She must sail the seas, Master Dawe.  She'll be hired to

merchants for the trade.  She'll be out in all shapes o' weathers.

Does that make any odds?"

'"Why, then," says I, "the first heavy sea she sticks her nose

into'll claw off half that scroll-work, and the next will finish it.  If

she's meant for a pleasure-ship give me my draft again, and I'll

porture you a pretty, light piece of scroll-work, good cheap.  If

she's meant for the open- sea, pitch the draft into the fire.  She can

never carry that weight on her bows.



'He looks at me squintlings and plucks his under-lip.



'"Is this your honest, unswayed opinion?" he says.



'"Body o' me!  Ask about!" I says.  "Any seaman could tell you

'tis true.  I'm advising you against my own profit, but why I do so

is my own concern.



'"Not altogether ", he says.  "It's some of mine.  You've saved

me thirty pounds, Master Dawe, and you've given me good

arguments to use against a willful woman that wants my fine new

ship for her own toy.  We'll not have any scroll-work."  His face

shined with pure joy.



'"Then see that the thirty pounds you've saved on it are

honestly paid the King," I says, "and keep clear o' women-folk."

I gathered up my draft and crumpled it under my arm.  "If that's

all you need of me I'll be gone," I says.  "I'm pressed."



'He turns him round and fumbles in a corner.  "Too pressed to

be made a knight, Sir Harry?" he says, and comes at me smiling,

with three-quarters of a rusty sword.



'I pledge you my Mark I never guessed it was the King till that

moment.  I kneeled, and he tapped me on the shoulder.



'"Rise up, Sir Harry Dawe," he says, and, in the same breath,

"I'm pressed, too," and slips through the tapestries, leaving me

like a stuck calf.



'It come over me, in a bitter wave like, that here was I, a master

craftsman, who had worked no bounds, soul or body, to make

the King's tomb and chapel a triumph and a glory for all time; and

here, d'ye see, I was made knight, not for anything I'd slaved

over, or given my heart and guts to, but expressedly because I'd

saved him thirty pounds and a tongue-lashing from Catherine of

Castille - she that had asked for the ship.  That thought shrivelled

me with insides while I was folding away my draft.  On the heels

of it - maybe you'll see why - I began to grin to myself.  I thought

of the earnest simplicity of the man - the King, I should say -

because I'd saved him the money; his smile as though he'd won

half France!  I thought of my own silly pride and foolish expectations

that some day he'd honour me as a master craftsman.  I

thought of the broken-tipped sword he'd found behind the

hangings; the dirt of the cold room, and his cold eye, wrapped up

in his own concerns, scarcely resting on me.  Then I remembered

the solemn chapel roof and the bronzes about the stately tomb

he'd lie in, and - d'ye see?  - the unreason of it all - the mad high

humour of it all - took hold on me till I sat me down on a dark

stair-head in a passage, and laughed till I could laugh no more.

What else could I have done?



'I never heard his feet behind me - he always walked like a cat -

but his arm slid round my neck, pulling me back where I sat, till

my head lay on his chest, and his left hand held the knife plumb

over my heart - Benedetto!  Even so I laughed - the fit was beyond

my holding - laughed while he ground his teeth in my ear.  He was

stark crazed for the time.



'"Laugh," he said.  "Finish the laughter.  I'll not cut ye short.

Tell me now" - he wrenched at my head - "why the King chose

to honour you, - you - you - you lickspittle Englishman?  I am full

of patience now.  I have waited so long."  Then he was off at score

about his Jonah in Bury Refectory, and what I'd said of it, and his

pictures in the chapel which all men praised and none looked at

twice (as if that was my fault!), and a whole parcel of words and

looks treasured up against me through years.



'"Ease off your arm a little," I said.  "I cannot die by choking,

for I am just dubbed knight, Benedetto."



'"Tell me, and I'll confess ye, Sir Harry Dawe, Knight.

There's a long night before ye.  Tell," says he.



'So I told him - his chin on my crown - told him all; told it as

well and with as many words as I have ever told a tale at a supper

with Torrigiano.  I knew Benedetto would understand, for, mad

or sad, he was a craftsman.  I believed it to be the last tale I'd ever

tell top of mortal earth, and I would not put out bad work before I

left the Lodge.  All art's one art, as I said.  I bore Benedetto no

malice.  My spirits, d'ye see, were catched up in a high, solemn

exaltation, and I saw all earth's vanities foreshortened and little,

laid out below me like a town from a cathedral scaffolding.  I told

him what befell, and what I thought of it.  I gave him the King's

very voice at "Master Dawe, you've saved me thirty pounds!";

his peevish grunt while he looked for the sword; and how the

badger-eyed figures of Glory and Victory leered at me from the

Flemish hangings.  Body o' me, 'twas a fine, noble tale, and, as I

thought, my last work on earth.



'"That is how I was honoured by the King," I said.  "They'll

hang ye for killing me, Benedetto.  And, since you've killed in the

King's Palace, they'll draw and quarter you; but you're too mad

to care.  Grant me, though, ye never heard a better tale."

'He said nothing, but I felt him shake.  My head on his chest

shook; his right arm fell away, his left dropped the knife, and he

leaned with both hands on my shoulder - shaking - shaking!  I

turned me round.  No need to put my foot on his knife.  The man

was speechless with laughter - honest craftsman's mirth.  The first

time I'd ever seen him laugh.  You know the mirth that cuts off the

very breath, while ye stamp and snatch at the short ribs?  That was

Benedetto's case.



'When he began to roar and bay and whoop in the passage, I

haled him out into the street, and there we leaned against the wall

and had it all over again - waving our hands and wagging our

heads - till the watch came to know if we were drunk.



'Benedetto says to 'em, solemn as an owl: "You have saved me

thirty pounds, Mus' Dawe," and off he pealed.  In some sort we

were mad-drunk - I because dear life had been given back to me,

and he because, as he said afterwards, because the old crust of

hatred round his heart was broke up and carried away by

laughter.  His very face had changed too.



'"Hal," he cries, "I forgive thee.  Forgive me too, Hal.  Oh,

you English, you English!  Did it gall thee, Hal, to see the rust on

the dirty sword?  Tell me again, Hal, how the King grunted with

joy.  Oh, let us tell the Master."



'So we reeled back to the chapel, arms round each other's

necks, and when we could speak - he thought we'd been fighting -

we told the Master.  Yes, we told Torrigiano, and he laughed till

he rolled on the new cold pavement.  Then he knocked our heads together.



'"Ah, you English!" he cried.  "You are more than pigs.  You

are English.  Now you are well punished for your dirty fishes.  Put

the draft in the fire, and never do so any more.  You are a fool, Hal,

and you are a fool, Benedetto, but I need your works to please this

beautiful English King."



'"And I meant to kill Hal," says Benedetto.  "Master, I meant

to kill him because the English King had made him a knight."



'"Ah!" says the Master, shaking his finger.  "Benedetto, if you

had killed my Hal, I should have killed you - in the cloister.  But

you are a craftsman too, so I should have killed you like a

craftsman, very, very slowly - in an hour, if I could spare the

time!"  That was Torrigiano - the Master!'



Mr Springett sat quite still for some time after Hal had finished.

Then he turned dark red; then he rocked to and fro; then he

coughed and wheezed till the tears ran down his face.  Dan knew

by this that he was laughing, but it surprised Hal at first.



'Excuse me, sir,' said Mr Springett, 'but I was thinkin' of some

stables I built for a gentleman in Eighteen hundred Seventy-four.

They was stables in blue brick - very particular work.  Dunno as

they weren't the best job which ever I'd done.  But the gentleman's

lady - she'd come from Lunnon, new married - she was all

for buildin' what was called a haw-haw - what you an' me 'ud call

a dik - right acrost his park.  A middlin' big job which I'd have had

the contract of, for she spoke to me in the library about it.  But I

told her there was a line o' springs just where she wanted to dig

her ditch, an' she'd flood the park if she went on.'



'Were there any springs at all?' said Hal.



'Bound to be springs everywhere if you dig deep enough, ain't

there?  But what I said about the springs put her out o' conceit o'

diggin' haw-haws, an' she took an' built a white tile dairy instead.

But when I sent in my last bill for the stables, the gentleman he

paid it 'thout even lookin' at it, and I hadn't forgotten nothin', I do

assure you.  More than that, he slips two five-pound notes into my

hand in the library, an'"Ralph, he says - he allers called me by

name - "Ralph," he says, "you've saved me a heap of expense an'

trouble this autumn."  I didn't say nothin', o' course.  I knowed he

didn't want any haws-haws digged acrost his park no more'n I

did, but I never said nothin'.  No more he didn't say nothin' about

my blue-brick stables, which was really the best an' honestest

piece o' work I'd done in quite a while.  He give me ten pounds for

savin' him a hem of a deal o' trouble at home.  I reckon things are

pretty much alike, all times, in all places.'



Hal and he laughed together.  Dan couldn't quite understand

what they thought so funny, and went on with his work for some

time without speaking.



When he looked up, Mr Springett, alone, was wiping his eyes

with his green-and-yellow pocket-handkerchief.



'Bless me, Mus' Dan, I've been asleep,' he said.  'An' I've

dreamed a dream which has made me laugh - laugh as I ain't

laughed in a long day.  I can't remember what 'twas all about, but

they do say that when old men take to laughin' in their sleep,

they're middlin' ripe for the next world.  Have you been workin'

honest, Mus' Dan?'



'Ra-ather,' said Dan, unclamping the schooner from the vice.

'And look how I've cut myself with the small gouge.'



'Ye-es.  You want a lump o' cobwebs to that,' said Mr

Springett.  'Oh, I see you've put it on already.  That's right, Mus'

Dan.'







King Henry VII and the Shipwrights



Harry our King in England from London town is gone,

And comen to Hamull on the Hoke in the countie of Suthampton.

For there lay the MARY OF THE TOWER, his ship of war so strong,

And he would discover, certaynely, if his shipwrights did him wrong.



He told not none of his setting forth, nor yet where he would go

(But only my Lord of Arundel), and meanly did he show,

In an old jerkin and patched hose that no man might him mark;

With his frieze hood and cloak about, he looked like any clerk.

He was at Hamull on the Hoke about the hour of the tide,

And saw the MARY haled into dock, the winter to abide,

With all her tackle and habiliments which are the King his own;

But then ran on his false shipwrights and stripped her to the bone.



They heaved the main-mast overboard, that was of a trusty tree,

And they wrote down it was spent and lost by force of weather at sea.

But they sawen it into planks and strakes as far as it might go,

To maken beds for their own wives and little children also.



There was a knave called Slingawai, he crope beneath the deck,

Crying: 'Good felawes, come and see!  The ship is nigh a wreck!

For the storm that took our tall main-mast, it blew so fierce and fell,

Alack!  it hath taken the kettles and pans, and this brass pott as well!'



With that he set the pott on his head and hied him up the hatch,

While all the shipwrights ran below to find what they might snatch;

All except Bob Brygandyne and he was a yeoman good,

He caught Slingawai round the waist and threw him on to the mud.



'I have taken plank and rope and nail, without the King his leave,

After the custom of Portesmouth, but I will not suffer a thief.

Nay, never lift up thy hand at me!  There's no clean hands in the trade.

Steal in measure,' quo' Brygandyne.  'There's measure in all things made!'



'Gramercy, yeoman!' said our King.  'Thy counsel liketh me.'

And he pulled a whistle out of his neck and whistled whistles three.

Then came my Lord of Arundel pricking across the down,

And behind him the Mayor and Burgesses of merry Suthampton town.



They drew the naughty shipwrights up, with the kettles in their hands,

And bound them round the forecastle to wait the King's commands.

But 'Since ye have made your beds,' said the King, 'ye needs must lie

thereon.

For the sake of your wives and little ones - felawes, get you gone!'



When they had beaten Slingawai, out of his own lips,

Our King appointed Brygandyne to be Clerk of all his ships.

'Nay, never lift up thy hands to me - there's no clean hands in the trade.

But steal in measure,'said Harry our King.  'There's measure in all things

made!'



God speed the 'Mary of the Tower,' the 'Sovereign' and 'Grace Dieu,'

The 'Sweepstakes' and the 'Mary Fortune,' and the 'Henry of Bristol' too!

All tall ships that sail on the sea, or in our harbours stand,

That they may keep measure with Harry our King and peace in Engeland!

