



Rewards and Fairies



	by Rudyard Kipling





Contents


   A Charm

Introduction

Cold Iron

   Cold Iron

Gloriana

   The Two Cousins

   The Looking-Glass

The Wrong Thing

   A Truthful Song

   King Henry VII and the Shipwrights

Marklake Witches

   The Way through the Woods

   Brookland Road

The Knife and the Naked Chalk

   The Run of the Downs

   Song of the Men's Side

Brother Square-Toes

   Philadelphia

   If -

'A Priest in Spite of Himself'

   A St Helena Lullaby

   'Poor Honest Men'

The Conversion of St Wilfrid

   Eddi's Service

   Song of the Red War-Boat

A Doctor of Medicine

   An Astrologer's Song

   'Our Fathers of Old'

Simple Simon

   The Thousandth Man

   Frankie's Trade

The Tree of Justice

   The Ballad of Minepit Shaw

   A Carol









A Charm





Take of English earth as much

As either hand may rightly clutch.

In the taking of it breathe

Prayer for all who lie beneath -

Not the great nor well-bespoke,

But the mere uncounted folk

Of whose life and death is none

Report or lamentation.

Lay that earth upon thy heart,

And thy sickness shall depart!



It shall sweeten and make whole

Fevered breath and festered soul;

It shall mightily restrain

Over-busy hand and brain;

it shall ease thy mortal strife

'Gainst the immortal woe of life,

Till thyself restored shall prove

By what grace the Heavens do move.



Take of English flowers these -

Spring's full-faced primroses,

Summer's wild wide-hearted rose,

Autumn's wall-flower of the close,

And, thy darkness to illume,

Winter's bee-thronged ivy-bloom.

Seek and serve them where they bide

From Candlemas to Christmas-tide,

For these simples used aright

Shall restore a failing sight.



These shall cleanse and purify

Webbed and inward-turning eye;

These shall show thee treasure hid,

Thy familiar fields amid,

At thy threshold, on thy hearth,

Or about thy daily path;

And reveal (which is thy need)

Every man a King indeed!









Introduction





Once upon a time, Dan and Una, brother and sister, living in the

English country, had the good fortune to meet with Puck, alias

Robin Goodfellow, alias Nick o' Lincoln, alias Lob-lie-by-the-

Fire, the last survivor in England of those whom mortals call

Fairies.  Their proper name, of course, is 'The People of the Hills'.

This Puck, by means of the magic of Oak, Ash, and Thorn, gave

the children power



     To see what they should see and hear what they should hear,

     Though it should have happened three thousand year.



The result was that from time to time, and in different places on

the farm and in the fields and in the country about, they saw and

talked to some rather interesting people.  One of these, for

instance, was a Knight of the Norman Conquest, another a young

Centurion of a Roman Legion stationed in England, another a

builder and decorator of King Henry VII's time; and so on and so

forth; as I have tried to explain in a book called PUCK OF POOK'S HILL.



A year or so later, the children met Puck once more, and

though they were then older and wiser, and wore boots regularly

instead of going barefooted when they got the chance, Puck was

as kind to them as ever, and introduced them to more people of

the old days.



He was careful, of course, to take away their memory of their

walks and conversations afterwards, but otherwise he did not

interfere; and Dan and Una would find the strangest sort of

persons in their gardens or woods.



In the stories that follow I am trying to tell something about

those people.









COLD IRON





When Dan and Una had arranged to go out before breakfast, they

did not remember that it was Midsummer Morning.  They only

wanted to see the otter which, old Hobden said, had been fishing

their brook for weeks; and early morning was the time to surprise

him.  As they tiptoed out of the house into the wonderful stillness,

the church clock struck five.  Dan took a few steps across the

dew-blobbed lawn, and looked at his black footprints.



'I think we ought to be kind to our poor boots,'he said.  'They'll

get horrid wet.'



it was their first summer in boots, and they hated them, so they

took them off, and slung them round their necks, and paddled

joyfully over the dripping turf where the shadows lay the wrong

way, like evening in the East.

The sun was well up and warm, but by the brook the last of the

night mist still fumed off the water.  They picked up the chain of

otter's footprints on the mud, and followed it from the bank,

between the weeds and the drenched mowing, while the birds

shouted with surprise.  Then the track left the brook and became a

smear, as though a log had been dragged along.



They traced it into Three Cows meadow, over the mill-sluice

to the Forge, round Hobden's garden, and then up the slope till it

ran out on the short turf and fern of Pook's Hill, and they heard

the cock-pheasants crowing in the woods behind them.



'No use!' said Dan, questing like a puzzled hound.  'The dew's

drying off, and old Hobden says otters'll travel for miles.'



'I'm sure we've travelled miles.'  Una fanned herself with her

hat.  'How still it is!  It's going to be a regular roaster.'  She looked

down the valley, where no chimney yet smoked.



'Hobden's up!'  Dan pointed to the open door of the Forge

cottage.  'What d'you suppose he has for breakfast?'

'One of them.  He says they eat good all times of the year,' Una

jerked her head at some stately pheasants going down to the

brook for a drink.



A few steps farther on a fox broke almost under their bare feet,

yapped, and trotted off.



'Ah, Mus' Reynolds -Mus' Reynolds'-Dan was quoting from

old Hobden, - 'if I knowed all you knowed, I'd know something.'  [See 'The

Winged Hats' in PUCK OF POOK'S HILL.]



I say,' - Una lowered her voice -'you know that funny feeling of

things having happened before.  I felt it when you said "Mus' Reynolds."'



'So did I,' Dan began.  'What is it?'



They faced each other, stammering with excitement.



'Wait a shake!  I'll remember in a minute.  Wasn't it something

about a fox - last year?  Oh, I nearly had it then!' Dan cried.



'Be quiet!' said Una, prancing excitedly.  'There was something

happened before we met the fox last year.  Hills!  Broken Hills -

the play at the theatre - see what you see -'



'I remember now,' Dan shouted.  'It's as plain as the nose on

your face - Pook's Hill - Puck's Hill - Puck!'



'I remember, too,' said Una.  'And it's Midsummer Day again!'

The young fern on a knoll rustled, and Puck walked out,

chewing a green-topped rush.



'Good Midsummer Morning to you!  Here's a happy meeting,'

said he.  They shook hands all round, and asked questions.



'You've wintered well,' he said after a while, and looked them

up and down.  'Nothing much wrong with you, seemingly.'



'They've put us into boots,' said Una.  'Look at my feet -

they're all pale white, and my toes are squidged together awfully.'



'Yes - boots make a difference.'  Puck wriggled his brown,

square, hairy foot, and cropped a dandelion flower between the

big toe and the next.



'I could do that - last year,' Dan said dismally, as he tried and

failed.  'And boots simply ruin one's climbing.'



'There must be some advantage to them, I suppose,'said Puck,

or folk wouldn't wear them.  Shall we come this way?'

They sauntered along side by side till they reached the gate at

the far end of the hillside.  Here they halted just like cattle, and let

the sun warm their backs while they listened to the flies in the wood.



'Little Lindens is awake,' said Una, as she hung with her chin

on the top rail.  'See the chimney smoke?'



'Today's Thursday, isn't it?'  Puck turned to look at the old pink

farmhouse across the little valley.  'Mrs Vincey's baking day.

Bread should rise well this weather.'  He yawned, and that set

them both yawning.



The bracken about rustled and ticked and shook in every direction.

They felt that little crowds were stealing past.



'Doesn't that sound like - er - the People of the Hills?'said Una.



'It's the birds and wild things drawing up to the woods before

people get about,' said Puck, as though he were Ridley the keeper.



'Oh, we know that.  I only said it sounded like.'



'As I remember 'em, the People of the Hills used to make more

noise.  They'd settle down for the day rather like small birds

settling down for the night.  But that was in the days when they

carried the high hand.  Oh, me!  The deeds that I've had act and

part in, you'd scarcely believe!'



'I like that!' said Dan.  'After all you told us last year, too!'



'Only, the minute you went away, you made us forget

everything,' said Una.



Puck laughed and shook his head.  'I shall this year, too.  I've

given you seizin of Old England, and I've taken away your Doubt

and Fear, but your memory and remembrance between whiles I'll

keep where old Billy Trott kept his night-lines - and that's where

he could draw 'em up and hide 'em at need.  Does that suit?'  He

twinkled mischievously.



'It's got to suit,'said Una, and laughed.  'We Can't magic back at

you.'  She folded her arms and leaned against the gate.  'Suppose,

now, you wanted to magic me into something - an otter?  Could you?'



'Not with those boots round your neck.'

'I'll take them off.'  She threw them on the turf.  Dan's followed

immediately.  'Now!' she said.



'Less than ever now you've trusted me.  Where there's true

faith, there's no call for magic.'  Puck's slow smile broadened all

over his face.



'But what have boots to do with it?' said Una, perching on the gate.



'There's Cold Iron in them,' said Puck, and settled beside her.

'Nails in the soles, I mean.  It makes a difference.'



'How?'

'Can't you feel it does?  You wouldn't like to go back to bare

feet again, same as last year, would you?  Not really?'



'No-o.  I suppose I shouldn't - not for always.  I'm growing

up, you know,' said Una.



'But you told us last year, in the Long Slip - at the theatre - that

you didn't mind Cold Iron,'said Dan.



'I don't; but folks in housen, as the People of the Hills call them,

must be ruled by Cold Iron.  Folk in housen are born on the near

side of Cold Iron - there's iron 'in every man's house, isn't there?

They handle Cold Iron every day of their lives, and their fortune's

made or spoilt by Cold Iron in some shape or other.  That's how it

goes with Flesh and Blood, and one can't prevent it.'



'I don't quite see.  How do you mean?'said Dan.



'It would take me some time to tell you.'



'Oh, it's ever so long to breakfast,' said Dan.  'We looked in the

larder before we came out.'  He unpocketed one big hunk of bread

and Una another, which they shared with Puck.



'That's Little Lindens' baking,' he said, as his white teeth sunk

in it.  'I know Mrs Vincey's hand.'  He ate with a slow sideways

thrust and grind, just like old Hobden, and, like Hobden, hardly

dropped a crumb.  The sun flashed on Little Lindens' windows,

and the cloudless sky grew stiller and hotter in the valley.



'AH - Cold Iron,' he said at last to the impatient children.  'Folk

in housen, as the People of the Hills say, grow careless about Cold

Iron.  They'll nail the Horseshoe over the front door, and forget to

put it over the back.  Then, some time or other, the People of the

Hills slip in, find the cradle-babe in the corner, and -'



'Oh, I know.  Steal it and leave a changeling,'Una cried.



'No,' said Puck firmly.  'All that talk of changelings is people's

excuse for their own neglect.  Never believe 'em.  I'd whip 'em at

the cart-tail through three parishes if I had my way.'



'But they don't do it now,' said Una.



'Whip, or neglect children?  Umm!  Some folks and some fields

never alter.  But the People of the Hills didn't work any changeling

tricks.  They'd tiptoe in and whisper and weave round the

cradle-babe in the chimney-corner - a fag-end of a charm here, or

half a spell there - like kettles singing; but when the babe's mind

came to bud out afterwards, it would act differently from other

people in its station.  That's no advantage to man or maid.  So I

wouldn't allow it with my folks' babies here.  I told Sir Huon so

once.'



'Who was Sir Huon?' Dan asked, and Puck turned on him in

quiet astonishment.



'Sir Huon of Bordeaux - he succeeded King Oberon.  He had

been a bold knight once, but he was lost on the road to Babylon, a

long while back.  Have you ever heard "How many miles to

Babylon?"?'



'Of course,' said Dan, flushing.



'Well, Sir Huon was young when that song was new.  But

about tricks on mortal babies.  I said to Sir Huon in the fern here,

on just such a morning as this: "If you crave to act and influence

on folk in housen, which I know is your desire, why don't you

take some human cradle-babe by fair dealing, and bring him up

among yourselves on the far side of Cold Iron - as Oberon did in

time past?  Then you could make him a splendid fortune, and send

him out into the world."



'"Time past is past time," says Sir Huon.  "I doubt if we could

do it.  For one thing, the babe would have to be taken without

wronging man, woman, or child.  For another, he'd have to be

born on the far side of Cold Iron - in some house where no Cold

Iron ever stood; and for yet the third, he'd have to be kept from

Cold Iron all his days till we let him find his fortune.  No, it's not

easy," he said, and he rode off, thinking.  You see, Sir Huon had

been a man once.

'I happened to attend Lewes Market next Woden's Day even,

and watched the slaves being sold there - same as pigs are sold at

Robertsbridge Market nowadays.  Only, the pigs have rings on

their noses, and the slaves had rings round their necks.'



'What sort of rings?' said Dan.



'A ring of Cold Iron, four fingers wide, and a thumb thick, just

like a quoit, but with a snap to it for to snap round the slave's

neck.  They used to do a big trade in slave-rings at the Forge here,

and ship them to all parts of Old England, packed in oak sawdust.

But, as I was saying, there was a farmer out of the Weald who had

bought a woman with a babe in her arms, and he didn't want any

encumbrances to her driving his beasts home for him.'



'Beast himself!' said Una, and kicked her bare heel on the gate.



'So he blamed the auctioneer.  "It's none o' my baby," the

wench puts in.  "I took it off a woman in our gang who died on

Terrible Down yesterday."  "I'll take it off to the church then,"

says the farmer.  "Mother Church'll make a monk of it, and we'll

step along home."



'It was dusk then.  He slipped down to St Pancras' Church, and

laid the babe at the cold chapel door.  I breathed on the back of his

stooping neck - and - I've heard he never could be warm at any fire

afterwards.  I should have been surprised if he could!  Then I

whipped up the babe, and came flying home here like a bat to his

belfry.



'On the dewy break of morning of Thor's own day -just such a

day as this - I laid the babe outside the Hill here, and the People

flocked up and wondered at the sight.



'"You've brought him, then?" Sir Huon said, staring like any

mortal man.



'"Yes, and he's brought his mouth with him, too," I said.  The

babe was crying loud for his breakfast.



'"What is he?" says Sir Huon, when the womenfolk had

drawn him under to feed him.



'"Full Moon and Morning Star may know," I says.  "I don't.

By what I could make out of him in the moonlight, he's without

brand or blemish.  I'll answer for it that he's born on the far side of

Cold Iron, for he was born under a shaw on Terrible Down, and

I've wronged neither man, woman, nor child in taking him, for

he is the son of a dead slave-woman.



'"All to the good, Robin," Sir Huon said.  "He'll be the less

anxious to leave us.  Oh, we'll give him a splendid fortune, and we

shall act and influence on folk in housen as we have always

craved."  His Lady came up then, and drew him under to watch

the babe's wonderful doings.'

'Who was his Lady?'said Dan.

'The Lady Esclairmonde.  She had been a woman once, till she

followed Sir Huon across the fern, as we say.  Babies are no special

treat to me - I've watched too many of them - so I stayed on the

Hill.  Presently I heard hammering down at the Forge there.'Puck

pointed towards Hobden's cottage.  'It was too early for any

workmen, but it passed through my mind that the breaking day

was Thor's own day.  A slow north-east wind blew up and set the

oaks sawing and fretting in a way I remembered; so I slipped over

to see what I could see.'



'And what did you see?'

'A smith forging something or other out of Cold Iron.  When it

was finished, he weighed it in his hand (his back was towards me),

and tossed it from him a longish quoit-throw down the valley.  I

saw Cold Iron flash in the sun, but I couldn't quite make out

where it fell.  That didn't trouble me.  I knew it would be found

sooner or later by someone.'



'How did you know?'Dan went on.



'Because I knew the Smith that made it,' said Puck quietly.



'Wayland Smith?' Una suggested.  [See 'Weland's Sword' in PUCK

OF POOK'S HILL.]



'No.  I should have passed the time o' day with Wayland Smith,

of course.  This other was different.  So' - Puck made a queer

crescent in the air with his finger - 'I counted the blades of grass

under my nose till the wind dropped and he had gone - he and his

Hammer.'



'Was it Thor then?' Una murmured under her breath.



'Who else?  It was Thor's own day.'  Puck repeated the sign.  'I

didn't tell Sir Huon or his Lady what I'd seen.  Borrow trouble for

yourself if that's your nature, but don't lend it to your neighbours.

Moreover, I might have been mistaken about the Smith's

work.  He might have been making things for mere amusement,

though it wasn't like him, or he might have thrown away an old

piece of made iron.  One can never be sure.  So I held my tongue

and enjoyed the babe.  He was a wonderful child - and the People

of the Hills were so set on him, they wouldn't have believed me.

He took to me wonderfully.  As soon as he could walk he'd putter

forth with me all about my Hill here.  Fern makes soft falling!  He

knew when day broke on earth above, for he'd thump, thump,

thump, like an old buck-rabbit in a bury, and I'd hear him say

"Opy!" till some one who knew the Charm let him out, and then

it would be "Robin!  Robin!" all round Robin Hood's barn, as we

say, till he'd found me.'



'The dear!' said Una.  'I'd like to have seen him!'

'Yes, he was a boy.  And when it came to learning his words -

spells and such-like - he'd sit on the Hill in the long shadows,

worrying out bits of charms to try on passersby.  And when the

bird flew to him, or the tree bowed to him for pure love's sake

(like everything else on my Hill), he'd shout, "Robin!  Look -see!

Look, see, Robin!" and sputter out some spell or other that they

had taught him, all wrong end first, till I hadn't the heart to tell

him it was his own dear self and not the words that worked the

wonder.  When he got more abreast of his words, and could cast

spells for sure, as we say, he took more and more notice of things

and people in the world.  People, of course, always drew him, for

he was mortal all through.



'Seeing that he was free to move among folk in housen, under

or over Cold Iron, I used to take him along with me, night-

walking, where he could watch folk, and I could keep him from

touching Cold Iron.  That wasn't so difficult as it sounds, because

there are plenty of things besides Cold Iron in housen to catch a

boy's fancy.  He was a handful, though!  I shan't forget when I took

him to Little Lindens - his first night under a roof.  The smell of

the rushlights and the bacon on the beams - they were stuffing a

feather-bed too, and it was a drizzling warm night - got into his

head.  Before I could stop him -we were hiding in the bakehouse -

he'd whipped up a storm of wildfire, with flashlights and voices,

which sent the folk shrieking into the garden, and a girl overset a

hive there, and - of course he didn't know till then such things

could touch him - he got badly stung, and came home with his

face looking like kidney potatoes!

'You can imagine how angry Sir Huon and Lady Esclairmonde

were with poor Robin!  They said the Boy was never to be trusted

with me night-walking any more - and he took about as much

notice of their order as he did of the bee-stings.  Night after night,

as soon as it was dark, I'd pick up his whistle in the wet fern, and

off we'd flit together among folk in housen till break of day - he

asking questions, and I answering according to my knowledge.

Then we fell into mischief again!'Puck shook till the gate rattled.



'We came across a man up at Brightling who was beating his

wife with a bat in the garden.  I was just going to toss the man over

his own woodlump when the Boy jumped the hedge and ran at him.

Of course the woman took her husband's part, and while the man

beat him, the woman scratted his face.  It wasn't till I danced

among the cabbages like Brightling Beacon all ablaze that they

gave up and ran indoors.  The Boy's fine green-and-gold clothes

were torn all to pieces, and he had been welted in twenty places

with the man's bat, and scratted by the woman's nails to pieces.

He looked like a Robertsbridge hopper on a Monday morning.



'"Robin," said he, while I was trying to clean him down with a

bunch of hay, "I don't quite understand folk in housen.  I went to

help that old woman, and she hit me, Robin!"



'"What else did you expect?" I said.  "That was the one time

when you might have worked one of your charms, instead of

running into three times your weight."



'"I didn't think," he says.  "But I caught the man one on the

head that was as good as any charm.  Did you see it work, Robin?"



'"Mind your nose," I said.  "Bleed it on a dockleaf - not your

sleeve, for pity's sake."  I knew what the Lady Esclairmonde

would say.



'He didn't care.  He was as happy as a gipsy with a stolen pony,

and the front part of his gold coat, all blood and grass stains,

looked like ancient sacrifices.



'Of course the People of the Hills laid the blame on me.  The

Boy could do nothing wrong, in their eyes.



'"You are bringing him up to act and influence on folk in

housen, when you're ready to let him go," I said.  "Now he's

begun to do it, why do you cry shame on me?  That's no shame.

It's his nature drawing him to his kind.



'"But we don't want him to begin that way," the Lady

Esclairmonde said.  "We intend a splendid fortune for him - not

your flitter-by-night, hedge-jumping, gipsy-work."



'"I don't blame you, Robin," says Sir Huon, "but I do think

you might look after the Boy more closely."



'"I've kept him away from Cold Iron these sixteen years ," I

said.  "You know as well as I do, the first time he touches Cold

Iron he'll find his own fortune, in spite of everything you intend

for him.  You owe me something for that."



'Sir Huon, having been a man, was going to allow me the right

of it, but the Lady Esclairmonde, being the Mother of all

Mothers, over-persuaded him.



'"We're very grateful," Sir Huon said, "but we think that just

for the present you are about too much with him on the Hill."



'"Though you have said it," I said, "I will give you a second chance."

I did not like being called to account for my doings on my own Hill.

I wouldn't have stood it even that far except I loved the Boy.



'"No!  No!" says the Lady Esclairmonde.  "He's never any

trouble when he's left to me and himself.  It's your fault."



'"You have said it," I answered.  "Hear me!  From now on till

the Boy has found his fortune, whatever that may be, I vow to

you all on my Hill, by Oak, and Ash, and Thorn, and by the

Hammer of Asa Thor" - again Puck made that curious double-

cut in the air - '"that you may leave me out of all your counts and

reckonings."  Then I went out'- he snapped his fingers -'like the

puff of a candle, and though they called and cried, they made

nothing by it.  I didn't promise not to keep an eye on the Boy,

though.  I watched him close - close - close!



'When he found what his people had forced me to do, he gave

them a piece of his mind, but they all kissed and cried round him,

and being only a boy, he came over to their way of thinking (I

don't blame him), and called himself unkind and ungrateful; and

it all ended in fresh shows and plays, and magics to distract him

from folk in housen.  Dear heart alive!  How he used to call and call

on me, and I couldn't answer, or even let him know that I was

near!'



'Not even once?' said Una.  'If he was very lonely?'

'No, he couldn't,' said Dan, who had been thinking.  'Didn't

you swear by the Hammer of Thor that you wouldn't, Puck?'



'By that Hammer!' was the deep rumbled reply.  Then he came

back to his soft speaking voice.  'And the Boy was lonely, when he

couldn't see me any more.  He began to try to learn all learning (he

had good teachers), but I saw him lift his eyes from the big black

books towards folk in housen all the time.  He studied song-

making (good teachers he had too!), but he sang those songs with

his back toward the Hill, and his face toward folk.  I know!  I have

sat and grieved over him grieving within a rabbit's jump of him.

Then he studied the High, Low, and Middle Magic.  He had

promised the Lady Esclairmonde he would never go near folk in

housen; so he had to make shows and shadows for his mind to

chew on.'

'What sort of shows?' said Dan.



'Just boy's Magic as we say.  I'll show you some, some time.  It

pleased him for the while, and it didn't hurt any one in particular

except a few men coming home late from the taverns.  But I knew

what it was a sign of, and I followed him like a weasel follows a

rabbit.  As good a boy as ever lived!  I've seen him with Sir Huon

and the Lady Esclairmonde stepping just as they stepped to avoid

the track of Cold Iron in a furrow, or walking wide of some old

ash-tot because a man had left his swop-hook or spade there; and

all his heart aching to go straightforward among folk in housen all

the time.  Oh, a good boy!  They always intended a fine fortune for

him - but they could never find it in their heart to let him begin.

I've heard that many warned them, but they wouldn't be warned.

So it happened as it happened.



'One hot night I saw the Boy roving about here wrapped in his

flaming discontents.  There was flash on flash against the clouds,

and rush on rush of shadows down the valley till the shaws were

full of his hounds giving tongue, and the woodways were packed

with his knights in armour riding down into the water-mists - all

his own Magic, of course.  Behind them you could see great

castles lifting slow and splendid on arches of moonshine, with

maidens waving their hands at the windows, which all turned

into roaring rivers; and then would come the darkness of his own

young heart wiping out the whole slateful.  But boy's Magic

doesn't trouble me - or Merlin's either for that matter.  I followed

the Boy by the flashes and the whirling wildfire of his discontent,

and oh, but I grieved for him!  Oh, but I grieved for him!  He

pounded back and forth like a bullock in a strange pasture -

sometimes alone - sometimes waist-deep among his shadow-

hounds - sometimes leading his shadow-knights on a hawk-

winged horse to rescue his shadow-girls.  I never guessed he had

such Magic at his command; but it's often that way with boys.



'Just when the owl comes home for the second time, I saw Sir

Huon and the Lady ride down my Hill, where there's not much

Magic allowed except mine.  They were very pleased at the Boy's

Magic - the valley flared with it - and I heard them settling his

splendid fortune when they should find it in their hearts to let him

go to act and influence among folk in housen.  Sir Huon was for

making him a great King somewhere or other, and the Lady was

for making him a marvellous wise man whom all should praise

for his skill and kindness.  She was very kind-hearted.



'Of a sudden we saw the flashes of his discontents turned back

on the clouds, and his shadow-hounds stopped baying.



'"There's Magic fighting Magic over yonder," the Lady

Esclairmonde cried, reigning up.  "Who is against him?"



'I could have told her, but I did not count it any of my business

to speak of Asa Thor's comings and goings.



'How did you know?'said Una.



'A slow North-East wind blew up, sawing and fretting

through the oaks in a way I remembered.  The wildfire roared up,

one last time in one sheet, and snuffed out like a rushlight, and a

bucketful of stinging hail fell.  We heard the Boy walking in the

Long Slip - where I first met you.



'"Here, oh, come here!" said the Lady Esclairmonde, and

stretched out her arms in the dark.



'He was coming slowly, but he stumbled in the footpath,

being, of course, mortal man.



'"Why, what's this?" he said to himself.  We three heard him.



'"Hold, lad, hold!  'Ware Cold Iron!" said Sir Huon, and they

two swept down like nightjars, crying as they rode.



'I ran at their stirrups, but it was too late.  We felt that the Boy

had touched Cold Iron somewhere in the dark, for the Horses of

the Hill shied off, and whipped round, snorting.



'Then I judged it was time for me to show myself in my own

shape; so I did.



'"Whatever it is," I said, "he has taken hold of it.  Now we

must find out whatever it is that he has taken hold of, for that will

be his fortune."



'"Come here, Robin," the Boy shouted, as soon as he heard

my voice.  "I don't know what I've hold of."



'"It is in your hands," I called back.  "Tell us if it is hard and

cold, with jewels atop.  For that will be a King's Sceptre.  "



'"Not by a furrow-long," he said, and stooped and tugged in

the dark.  We heard him.

'"Has it a handle and two cutting edges?" I called.  "For that'll

be a Knight's Sword."



'"No, it hasn't," he says.  "It's neither ploughshare, whittle,

hook, nor crook, nor aught I've yet seen men handle."  By this

time he was scratting in the dirt to prise it up.



'"Whatever it is, you know who put it there, Robin," said Sir

Huon to me, "or you would not ask those questions.  You should

have told me as soon as you knew."



'"What could you or I have done against the Smith that made it

and laid it for him to find?" I said, and I whispered Sir Huon what

I had seen at the Forge on Thor's Day, when the babe was first

brought to the Hill.



'"Oh, good-bye, our dreams!" said Sir Huon.  "It's neither

sceptre, sword, nor plough!  Maybe yet it's a bookful of learning,

bound with iron clasps.  There's a chance for a splendid fortune in

that sometimes."



'But we knew we were only speaking to comfort ourselves,

and the Lady Esclairmonde, having been a woman, said so.



'"Thur aie!  Thor help us!" the Boy called.  "It is round,

without end, Cold Iron, four fingers wide and a thumb thick, and

there is writing on the breadth of it."



'"Read the writing if you have the learning," I called.  The

darkness had lifted by then, and the owl was out over the fern again.



'He called back, reading the runes on the iron:



  "Few can see

  Further forth

  Than when the child

  Meets the Cold Iron."



And there he stood, in clear starlight, with a new, heavy, shining

slave-ring round his proud neck.



'"Is this how it goes?" he asked, while the Lady Esclairmonde cried.



'"That is how it goes," I said.  He hadn't snapped the catch

home yet, though.



'"What fortune does it mean for him?" said Sir Huon, while

the Boy fingered the ring.  "You who walk under Cold Iron, you

must tell us and teach us."



'"Tell I can, but teach I cannot," I said.  "The virtue of the Ring


is only that he must go among folk in housen henceforward,

doing what they want done, or what he knows they need, all Old

England over.  Never will he be his own master, nor yet ever any

man's.  He will get half he gives, and give twice what he gets, till

his life's last breath; and if he lays aside his load before he draws

that last breath, all his work will go for naught."



'"Oh, cruel, wicked Thor!" cried the Lady Esclairmonde.

"Ah, look see, all of you!  The catch is still open!  He hasn't locked

it.  He can still take it off.  He can still come back.  Come back!"  She

went as near as she dared, but she could not lay hands on Cold

Iron.  The Boy could have taken it off, yes.  We waited to see if he

would, but he put up his hand, and the snap locked home.



'"What else could I have done?" said he.



'"Surely, then, you will do," I said.  "Morning's coming, and

if you three have any farewells to make, make them now, for,

after sunrise, Cold Iron must be your master."

'So the three sat down, cheek by wet cheek, telling over their

farewells till morning light.  As good a boy as ever lived, he was.'



'And what happened to him?' asked Dan.



'When morning came, Cold Iron was master of him and his

fortune, and he went to work among folk in housen.  Presently he

came across a maid like-minded with himself, and they were

wedded, and had bushels of children, as the saying is.  Perhaps

you'll meet some of his breed, this year.'



'Thank you,' said Una.  'But what did the poor Lady

Esclairmonde do?'



'What can you do when Asa Thor lays the Cold Iron in a lad's

path?  She and Sir Huon were comforted to think they had given

the Boy good store of learning to act and influence on folk in

housen.  For he was a good boy!  Isn't it getting on for breakfast-

time?  I'll walk with you a piece.'



When they were well in the centre of the bone-dry fern, Dan

nudged Una, who stopped and put on a boot as quickly as she could.

'Now,' she said, 'you can't get any Oak, Ash, and Thorn leaves

from here, and' - she balanced wildly on one leg - 'I'm standing

on Cold Iron.  What'll you do if we don't go away?'



'E-eh?  Of all mortal impudence!'said Puck, as Dan, also in one

boot, grabbed his sister's hand to steady himself.  He walked

round them, shaking with delight.  'You think I can only work

with a handful of dead leaves?  This comes of taking away your

Doubt and Fear!  I'll show you!'





A minute later they charged into old Hobden at his simple breakfast

of cold roast pheasant, shouting that there was a wasps' nest in

the fern which they had nearly stepped on, and asking him to

come and smoke it out.

'It's too early for wops-nests, an' I don't go diggin' in the Hill,

not for shillin's,' said the old man placidly.  'You've a thorn in

your foot, Miss Una.  Sit down, and put on your t'other boot.

You're too old to be caperin' barefoot on an empty stomach.  Stay

it with this chicken o' mine.'

