






Cold Iron





'Gold is for the mistress - silver for the maid!

Copper for the craftsman cunning at his trade.'

'Good!' said the Baron, sitting in his hall,

'But Iron - Cold Iron - is master of them all!'



So he made rebellion 'gainst the King his liege,

Camped before his citadel and summoned it to siege -

'Nay!' said the cannoneer on the castle wall,

'But Iron - Cold Iron - shall be master of you all!'



Woe for the Baron and his knights so strong,

When the cruel cannon-balls laid 'em all along!

He was taken prisoner, he was cast in thrall,

And Iron - Cold Iron - was master of it all!



Yet his King spake kindly (Oh, how kind a Lord!)

'What if I release thee now and give thee back thy sword?'

'Nay!' said the Baron, 'mock not at my fall,

For Iron - Cold Iron - is master of men all.'



'Tears are for the craven, prayers are for the clown -

Halters for the silly neck that cannot keep a crown.'

'As my loss is grievous, so my hope is small,

For Iron - Cold Iron - must be master of men all!'



Yet his King made answer (few such Kings there be!)

'Here is Bread and here is Wine - sit and sup with me.

Eat and drink in Mary's Name, the whiles I do recall

How Iron - Cold Iron - can be master of men all!'



He took the Wine and blessed It; He blessed and brake the Bread.

With His own Hands He served Them, and presently He said:

'Look!  These Hands they pierced with nails outside my city wall

Show Iron - Cold Iron - to be master of men all!



'Wounds are for the desperate, blows are for the strong,

Balm and oil for weary hearts all cut and bruised with wrong.

I forgive thy treason - I redeem thy fall -

For Iron - Cold Iron - must be master of men all!'



'Crowns are for the valiant - sceptres for the bold!

Thrones and powers for mighty men who dare to take and hold.'

'Nay!' said the Baron, kneeling in his hall,

'But Iron - Cold Iron - is master of men all!

Iron, out of Calvary, is master of men all!'









GLORIANA







The Two Cousins





Valour and Innocence

Have latterly gone hence

To certain death by certain shame attended.

Envy - ah!  even to tears!  -

The fortune of their years

Which, though so few, yet so divinely ended.



Scarce had they lifted up

Life's full and fiery cup,

Than they had set it down untouched before them.

Before their day arose

They beckoned it to close -

Close in destruction and confusion o'er them.



They did not stay to ask

What prize should crown their task,

Well sure that prize was such as no man strives for;

But passed into eclipse,

Her kiss upon their lips -

Even Belphoebe's, whom they gave their lives for!







Gloriana





Willow Shaw, the little fenced wood where the hop-poles are

stacked like Indian wigwams, had been given to Dan and Una for

their very own kingdom when they were quite small.  As they

grew older, they contrived to keep it most particularly private.

Even Phillips, the gardener, told them every time that he came in

to take a hop-pole for his beans, and old Hobden would no more

have thought of setting his rabbit-wires there without leave,

given fresh each spring, than he would have torn down the calico

and marking ink notice on the big willow which said: 'Grown-

ups not allowed in the Kingdom unless brought.'



Now you can understand their indignation when, one blowy

July afternoon, as they were going up for a potato-roast, they saw

somebody moving among the trees.  They hurled themselves

over the gate, dropping half the potatoes, and while they were

picking them up Puck came out of a wigwam.



:Oh, it's you, is it?' said Una.  'We thought it was people.'

'I saw you were angry - from your legs,' he answered with a grin.



'Well, it's our own Kingdom - not counting you, of course.'



'That's rather why I came.  A lady here wants to see you.'



'What about?' said Dan cautiously.

'Oh, just Kingdoms and things.  She knows about Kingdoms.'



There was a lady near the fence dressed in a long dark cloak that

hid everything except her high red-heeled shoes.  Her face was

half covered by a black silk fringed mask, without goggles.  And

yet she did not look in the least as if she motored.



Puck led them up to her and bowed solemnly.  Una made the

best dancing-lesson curtsy she could remember.  The lady

answered with a long, deep, slow, billowy one.



'Since it seems that you are a Queen of this Kingdom,'she said,

'I can do no less than acknowledge your sovereignty.'  She turned

sharply on staring Dan.  'What's in your head, lad?  Manners?'



'I was thinking how wonderfully you did that curtsy,' he answered.



She laughed a rather shrill laugh.  'You're a courtier already.  Do

you know anything of dances, wench - or Queen, must I say?'



'I've had some lessons, but I can't really dance a bit,' said Una.



'You should learn, then.'  The lady moved forward as though

she would teach her at once.  'It gives a woman alone among men

or her enemies time to think how she shall win or - lose.  A

woman can only work in man's play-time.  Heigho!'She sat down

on the bank.



Old Middenboro, the lawn-mower pony, stumped across the

paddock and hung his sorrowful head over the fence.



'A pleasant Kingdom,' said the lady, looking round.  'Well

enclosed.  And how does your Majesty govern it?  Who is your Minister?'



Una did not quite understand.  'We don't play that,' she said.



'Play?'  The lady threw up her hands and laughed.



'We have it for our own, together,' Dan explained.



'And d'you never quarrel, young Burleigh?'



'Sometimes, but then we don't tell.'



The lady nodded.  'I've no brats of my own, but I understand

keeping a secret between Queens and their Ministers.  Ay de mi!



But with no disrespect to present majesty, methinks your realm'

small, and therefore likely to be coveted by man and beast.  For Is

example' - she pointed to Middenboro -'yonder old horse, with

the face of a Spanish friar - does he never break in?'



'He can't.  Old Hobden stops all our gaps for us,' said Una, 'and

we let Hobden catch rabbits in the Shaw.'



The lady laughed like a man.  'I see!  Hobden catches conies -

rabbits - for himself, and guards your defences for you.  Does he

make a profit out of his coney-catching?'



'We never ask,' said Una.  'Hobden's a particular friend of

ours.'

'Hoity-toity!' the lady began angrily.  Then she laughed.  'But I

forget.  It is your Kingdom.  I knew a maid once that had a larger

one than this to defend, and so long as her men kept the fences

stopped, she asked 'em no questions either.'



'Was she trying to grow flowers?'said Una.



'No, trees - perdurable trees.  Her flowers all withered.'  The

lady leaned her head on her hand.



'They do if you don't look after them.  We've got a few.  Would

you like to see?  I'll fetch you some.'  Una ran off to the rank grass

in the shade behind the wigwam, and came back with a handful of

red flowers.  'Aren't they pretty?' she said.  'They're Virginia stock.'



'Virginia?' said the lady, and lifted them to the fringe of

her mask.



'Yes.  They come from Virginia.  Did your maid ever plant any?'



'Not herself - but her men adventured all over the earth to

pluck or to plant flowers for her crown.  They judged her worthy

of them.'



'And was she?' said Dan cheerfully.



'Quien sabe?  [who knows?] But at least, while her men toiled

abroad she toiled in England, that they might find a safe home to

come back to.'



'And what was she called?'



'Gloriana - Belphoebe - Elizabeth of England.'  Her voice

changed at each word.



'You mean Queen Bess?'



The lady bowed her head a little towards Dan.  'You name her

lightly enough, young Burleigh.  What might you know of her?'

said she.



, Well, I - I've seen the little green shoes she left at Brickwall

House - down the road, you know.  They're in a glass case -

awfully tiny things.'



'Oh, Burleigh, Burleigh!' she laughed.  'You are a courtier

too soon.'



'But they are,' Dan insisted.  'As little as dolls' shoes.  Did you

really know her well?'



'Well.  She was a - woman.  I've been at her Court all my life.

Yes, I remember when she danced after the banquet at Brickwall.

They say she danced Philip of Spain out of a brand-new kingdom

that day.  Worth the price of a pair of old shoes - hey?'



She thrust out one foot, and stooped forward to look at its

broad flashing buckle.



'You've heard of Philip of Spain - long-suffering Philip,' she

said, her eyes still on the shining stones.  'Faith, what some men

will endure at some women's hands passes belief!  If I had been a

man, and a woman had played with me as Elizabeth played with

Philip, I would have -' She nipped off one of the Virginia stocks

and held it up between finger and thumb.  'But for all that' - she

began to strip the leaves one by one - 'they say - and I am

persuaded - that Philip loved her.'  She tossed her head sideways.



'I don't quite understand,' said Una.



'The high heavens forbid that you should, wench!'  She swept

the flowers from her lap and stood up in the rush of shadows that

the wind chased through the wood.



'I should like to know about the shoes,' said Dan.



'So ye shall, Burleigh.  So ye shall, if ye watch me.  'Twill be as

good as a play.'



'We've never been to a play,' said Una.



The lady looked at her and laughed.  'I'll make one for you.

Watch!  You are to imagine that she - Gloriana, Belphoebe, Elizabeth - has

gone on a progress to Rye to comfort her sad heart

(maids are often melancholic), and while she halts at Brickwall

House, the village - what was its name?'  She pushed Puck with

her foot.



'Norgem,' he croaked, and squatted by the wigwam.



'Norgem village loyally entertains her with a masque or play,

and a Latin oration spoken by the parson, for whose false quantities,

if I'd made 'em in my girlhood, I should have been

whipped.'



'You whipped?' said Dan.



'Soundly, sirrah, soundly!  She stomachs the affront to her

scholarship, makes her grateful, gracious thanks from the teeth

outwards, thus'- (the lady yawned) -'Oh, a Queen may love her

subjects in her heart, and yet be dog-wearied of 'em 'in body and

mind - and so sits down'- her skirts foamed about her as she sat -

'to a banquet beneath Brickwall Oak.  Here for her sins she is

waited upon by - What were the young cockerels' names that

served Gloriana at table?'



'Frewens, Courthopes, Fullers, Husseys,' Puck began.



She held up her long jewelled hand.  'Spare the rest!  They were

the best blood of Sussex, and by so much the more clumsy in

handling the dishes and plates.  Wherefore' - she looked funnily

over her shoulder - 'you are to think of Gloriana in a green and

gold-laced habit, dreadfully expecting that the jostling youths

behind her would, of pure jealousy or devotion, spatter it with

sauces and wines.  The gown was Philip's gift, too!  At this happy

juncture a Queen's messenger, mounted and mired, spurs up the

Rye road and delivers her a letter' - she giggled -'a letter from a

good, simple, frantic Spanish gentleman called - Don Philip.'



'That wasn't Philip, King of Spain?'Dan asked.



'Truly, it was.  'Twixt you and me and the bedpost, young

Burleigh, these kings and queens are very like men and women,

and I've heard they write each other fond, foolish letters that none

of their ministers should open.'



'Did her ministers ever open Queen Elizabeth's letters?' said Una.



'Faith, yes!  But she'd have done as much for theirs, any day.

You are to think of Gloriana, then (they say she had a pretty

hand), excusing herself thus to the company - for the Queen's

time is never her own - and, while the music strikes up, reading

Philip's letter, as I do.'  She drew a real letter from her pocket, and

held it out almost at arm's length, like the old post-mistress in the

village when she reads telegrams.



'Hm!  Hm!  Hm!  Philip writes as ever most lovingly.  He says his

Gloriana is cold, for which reason he burns for her through a fair

written page.'  She turned it with a snap.  'What's here?  Philip

complains that certain of her gentlemen have fought against his

generals in the Low Countries.  He prays her to hang 'em when

they re-enter her realms.  (Hm, that's as may be.) Here's a list of

burnt shipping slipped between two vows of burning adoration.

Oh, poor Philip!  His admirals at sea - no less than three of 'em -

have been boarded, sacked, and scuttled on their lawful voyages

by certain English mariners (gentlemen, he will not call them),

who are now at large and working more piracies in his American

ocean, which the Pope gave him.  (He and the Pope should guard

it, then!) Philip hears, but his devout ears will not credit it, that

Gloriana in some fashion countenances these villains' misdeeds,

shares in their booty, and - oh, shame!  - has even lent them ships

royal for their sinful thefts.  Therefore he requires (which is a

word Gloriana loves not), requires that she shall hang 'em when

they return to England, and afterwards shall account to him for all

the goods and gold they have plundered.  A most loving request!

If Gloriana will not be Philip's bride, she shall be his broker and

his butcher!  Should she still be stiff-necked, he writes - see where

the pen digged the innocent paper!  - that he hath both the means

and the intention to be revenged on her.  Aha!  Now we come to

the Spaniard in his shirt!'  (She waved the letter merrily.) 'Listen

here!  Philip will prepare for Gloriana a destruction from the West

- a destruction from the West - far exceeding that which Pedro de

Avila wrought upon the Huguenots.  And he rests and remains,

kissing her feet and her hands, her slave, her enemy, or her

conqueror, as he shall find that she uses him.'



She thrust back the letter under her cloak, and went on acting,

but in a softer voice.  'All this while - hark to it - the wind blows

through Brickwall Oak, the music plays, and, with the

company's eyes upon her, the Queen of England must think what

this means.  She cannot remember the name of Pedro de Avila,

nor what he did to the Huguenots, nor when, nor where.  She can

only see darkly some dark motion moving in Philip's dark mind,

for he hath never written before in this fashion.  She must smile

above the letter as though it were good news from her ministers -

the smile that tires the mouth and the poor heart.  What shall she

do?'  Again her voice changed.



'You are to fancy that the music of a sudden wavers away.

Chris Hatton, Captain of her bodyguard, quits the table all red

and ruffled, and Gloriana's virgin ear catches the clash of swords

at work behind a wall.  The mothers of Sussex look round to

count their chicks - I mean those young gamecocks that waited on

her.  Two dainty youths have stepped aside into Brickwall garden

with rapier and dagger on a private point of honour.  They are

haled out through the gate, disarmed and glaring - the lively

image of a brace of young Cupids transformed into pale, panting

Cains.  Ahem!  Gloriana beckons awfully - thus!  They come up for

judgement.  Their lives and estates lie at her mercy whom they

have doubly offended, both as Queen and woman.  But la!  what

will not foolish young men do for a beautiful maid?'



'Why?  What did she do?  What had they done?' said Una.



'Hsh!  You mar the play!  Gloriana had guessed the cause of the

trouble.  They were handsome lads.  So she frowns a while and

tells 'em not to be bigger fools than their mothers had made 'em,

and warns 'em, if they do not kiss and be friends on the instant,

she'll have Chris Hatton horse and birch 'em in the style of the

new school at Harrow.  (Chris looks sour at that.) Lastly, because

she needed time to think on Philip's letter burning in her pocket,

she signifies her pleasure to dance with 'em and teach 'em better

manners.  Whereat the revived company call down Heaven's blessing

on her gracious head; Chris and the others prepare Brickwall

House for a dance; and she walks in the clipped garden between

those two lovely young sinners who are both ready to sink for

shame.  They confess their fault.  It appears that midway in the

banquet the elder - they were cousins - conceived that the Queen

looked upon him with special favour.  The younger, taking the

look to himself, after some words gives the elder the lie.  Hence, as

she guessed, the duel.'



'And which had she really looked at?' Dan asked.



'Neither - except to wish them farther off.  She was afraid all the

while they'd spill dishes on her gown.  She tells 'em this, poor

chicks - and it completes their abasement.  When they had grilled

long enough, she says: "And so you would have fleshed your

maiden swords for me - for me?"  Faith, they would have been at

it again if she'd egged 'em on!  but their swords - oh, prettily they

said it!  - had been drawn for her once or twice already.



'"And where?" says she.  "On your hobby-horses before you

were breeched?"



'"On my own ship," says the elder.  "My cousin was vice-

admiral of our venture in his pinnace.  We would not have you

think of us as brawling children."



'"No, no," says the younger, and flames like a very Tudor

rose.  "At least the Spaniards know us better."



'"Admiral Boy - Vice-Admiral Babe," says Gloriana, "I cry

your pardon.  The heat of these present times ripens childhood to

age more quickly than I can follow.  But we are at peace with

Spain.  Where did you break your Queen's peace?"

'"On the sea called the Spanish Main, though 'tis no more

Spanish than my doublet," says the elder.  Guess how that

warmed Gloriana's already melting heart!  She would never suffer

any sea to be called Spanish in her private hearing.



'"And why was I not told?  What booty got you, and where

have you hid it?  Disclose," says she.  "You stand in some danger

of the gallows for pirates."



'"The axe, most gracious lady," says the elder, "for we are

gentle born."  He spoke truth, but no woman can brook contradiction.

"Hoity-toity!" says she, and, but that she remembered that she 

was Queen, she'd have cuffed the pair of 'em.  "It shall be

gallows, hurdle, and dung-cart if I choose."



'"Had our Queen known of our going beforehand, Philip

might have held her to blame for some small things we did on the

seas," the younger lisps.



'"As for treasure," says the elder, "we brought back but our

bare lives.  We were wrecked on the Gascons' Graveyard, where

our sole company for three months was the bleached bones of De

Avila's men."



'Gloriana's mind jumped back to Philip's last letter.



'"De Avila that destroyed the Huguenots?  What d'you know

of him?" she says.  The music called from the house here, and they

three turned back between the yews.



'"Simply that De Avila broke in upon a plantation of Frenchmen

on that coast, and very Spaniardly hung them all for heretics -

eight hundred or so.  The next year Dominique de Gorgues, a

Gascon, broke in upon De Avila's men, and very justly hung 'em

all for murderers - five hundred or so.  No Christians inhabit there

now, says the elder lad, "though 'tis a goodly land north of

Florida.  "



'"How far is it from England?" asks prudent Gloriana.



'"With a fair wind, six weeks.  They say that Philip will plant it

again soon."  This was the younger, and he looked at her out of

the corner of his innocent eye.



'Chris Hatton, fuming, meets and leads her into Brickwall

Hall, where she dances - thus.  A woman can think while she

dances - can think.  I'll show you.  Watch!'



She took off her cloak slowly, and stood forth in dove-coloured

satin, worked over with pearls that trembled like running water

in the running shadows of the trees.  Still talking - more to herself

than to the children - she swam into a majestical dance of the

stateliest balancings, the naughtiest wheelings and turnings aside,

the most dignified sinkings, the gravest risings, all joined

together by the elaboratest interlacing steps and circles.

They leaned forward breathlessly to watch the splendid acting.



'Would a Spaniard,' she began, looking on the ground, 'speak

of his revenge till his revenge were ripe?  No.  Yet a man who

loved a woman might threaten her 'in the hope that his threats

would make her love him.  Such things have been.'  She moved

slowly across a bar of sunlight.  'A destruction from the West may

signify that Philip means to descend on Ireland.  But then my Irish

spies would have had some warning.  The Irish keep no secrets.

No - it is not Ireland.  Now why - why - why' - the red shoes

clicked and paused -'does Philip name Pedro Melendez de Avila,

a general in his Americas, unless' - she turned more quickly -

unless he intends to work his destruction from the Americas?  Did

he say De Avila only to put her off her guard, or for this once has

his black pen betrayed his black heart?  We' - she raised herself to

her full height - 'England must forestall Master Philip.  But not

openly,'- she sank again -'we cannot fight Spain openly -not yet

- not yet.'  She stepped three paces as though she were pegging

down some snare with her twinkling shoe-buckles.  'The Queen's

mad gentlemen may fight Philip's poor admirals where they find

'em, but England, Gloriana, Harry's daughter, must keep the

peace.  Perhaps, after all, Philip loves her - as many men and boys

do.  That may help England.  Oh, what shall help England?'



She raised her head - the masked head that seemed to have

nothing to do with the busy feet - and stared straight at the children.



'I think this is rather creepy,' said Una with a shiver.  'I wish

she'd stop.'



The lady held out her jewelled hand as though she were taking

some one else's hand in the Grand Chain.



'Can a ship go down into the Gascons' Graveyard and wait

there?' she asked into the air, and passed on rustling.



'She's pretending to ask one of the cousins, isn't she?' said Dan,

and Puck nodded.



Back she came in the silent, swaying, ghostly dance.  They saw

she was smiling beneath the mask, and they could hear her

breathing hard.



'I cannot lend you any of my ships for the venture; Philip would

hear of it,' she whispered over her shoulder; 'but as much guns

and powder as you ask, if you do not ask too -'Her voice shot up

and she stamped her foot thrice.  'Louder!  Louder, the music in the

gallery!  Oh, me, but I have burst out of my shoe!'



She gathered her skirts in each hand, and began a curtsy.  'You

will go at your own charges,' she whispered straight before her.

'Oh, enviable and adorable age of youth!'  Her eyes shone through

the mask-holes.  'But I warn you you'll repent it.  Put not your

trust in princes - or Queens.  Philip's ships'll blow you out of

water.  You'll not be frightened?  Well, we'll talk on it again, when

I return from Rye, dear lads.'



The wonderful curtsy ended.  She stood up.  Nothing stirred on

her except the rush of the shadows.



'And so it was finished,' she said to the children.  'Why d'you

not applaud?'



'What was finished?' said Una.



'The dance,' the lady replied offendedly.  'And a pair of 

green shoes.'



'I don't understand a bit,' said Una.



'Eh?  What did you make of it, young Burleigh?'



'I'm not quite sure,' Dan began, 'but -'



'You never can be - with a woman.  But -?'



'But I thought Gloriana meant the cousins to go back to the

Gascons' Graveyard, wherever that was.'



''Twas Virginia after-wards.  Her plantation of Virginia.'



'Virginia afterwards, and stop Philip from taking it.  Didn't she

say she'd lend 'em guns?'



'Right so.  But not ships - then.'



'And I thought you meant they must have told her they'd do it

off their own bat, without getting her into a row with Philip.  Was

I right?'



'Near enough for a Minister of the Queen.  But remember she

gave the lads full time to change their minds.  She was three long

days at Rye Royal - knighting of fat Mayors.  When she came back

to Brickwall, they met her a mile down the road, and she could

feel their eyes burn through her riding-mask.  Chris Hatton, poor

fool, was vexed at it.



'"YOU would not birch them when I gave you the chance,"

says she to Chris.  "Now you must get me half an hour's private

speech with 'em in Brickwall garden.  Eve tempted Adam in a

garden.  Quick, man, or I may repent!"'



'She was a Queen.  Why did she not send for them herself?' said Una.



The lady shook her head.  'That was never her way.  I've seen

her walk to her own mirror by bye-ends, and the woman that

cannot walk straight there is past praying for.  Yet I would have

you pray for her!  What else - what else in England's name could

she have done?'  She lifted her hand to her throat for a moment.

'Faith,' she cried, 'I'd forgotten the little green shoes!  She left 'em

at Brickwall - so she did.  And I remember she gave the Norgem

parson - John Withers, was he?  - a text for his sermon - "Over

Edom have I cast out my shoe."  Neat, if he'd understood!'



'I don't understand,' said Una.  'What about the two cousins?'



'You are as cruel as a woman,' the lady answered.  'I was not to

blame.  I told you I gave 'em time to change their minds.  On my

honour (ay de mi!), she asked no more of 'em at first than to wait a

while off that coast - the Gascons' Graveyard - to hover a little if

their ships chanced to pass that way - they had only one tall ship

and a pinnace - only to watch and bring me word of Philip's

doings.  One must watch Philip always.  What a murrain right had

he to make any plantation there, a hundred leagues north of his

Spanish Main, and only six weeks from England?  By my dread

father's soul, I tell you he had none - none!' She stamped her red

foot again, and the two children shrunk back for a second.



'Nay, nay.  You must not turn from me too!  She laid it all fairly

before the lads in Brickwall garden between the yews.  I told 'em

that if Philip sent a fleet (and to make a plantation he could not

well send less), their poor little cock-boats could not sink it.  They

answered that, with submission, the fight would be their own

concern.  She showed 'em again that there could be only one end

to it - quick death on the sea, or slow death in Philip's prisons.

They asked no more than to embrace death for my sake.  Many

men have prayed to me for life.  I've refused 'em, and slept none

the worse after; but when my men, my tall, fantastical young

men, beseech me on their knees for leave to die for me, it shakes

me - ah, it shakes me to the marrow of my old bones.'

Her chest sounded like a board as she hit it.

'She showed 'em all.  I told 'em that this was no time for open

war with Spain.  If by miracle inconceivable they prevailed against

Philip's fleet, Philip would hold me accountable.  For England's

sake, to save war, I should e'en be forced (I told 'em so) to give

him up their young lives.  If they failed, and again by some miracle

escaped Philip's hand, and crept back to England with their bare

lives, they must lie - oh, I told 'em all - under my sovereign

displeasure.  She could not know them, see them, nor hear their

names, nor stretch out a finger to save them from the gallows, if

Philip chose to ask it.



'"Be it the gallows, then," says the elder.  (I could have wept,

but that my face was made for the day.)



'"Either way - any way - this venture is death, which I know

you fear not.  But it is death with assured dishonour," I cried.



'"Yet our Queen will know in her heart what we have done,"

says the younger.

'"Sweetheart," I said.  "A queen has no heart."



'"But she is a woman, and a woman would not forget," says

the elder.  "We will go!"  They knelt at my feet.



'"Nay, dear lads - but here!" I said, and I opened my arms to

them and I kissed them.



'"Be ruled by me," I said.  "We'll hire some ill-featured old

tarry-breeks of an admiral to watch the Graveyard, and you shall

come to Court."



'"Hire whom you please," says the elder; "we are ruled by

you, body and soul"; and the younger, who shook most when I

kissed 'em, says between his white lips, "I think you have power

to make a god of a man."



'"Come to Court and be sure of't," I said.



'They shook their heads and I knew - I knew, that go they

would.  If I had not kissed them - perhaps I might have prevailed.'



'Then why did you do it?' said Una.  'I don't think you knew

really what you wanted done.'



'May it please your Majesty' - the lady bowed her head low -

'this Gloriana whom I have represented for your pleasure was a

woman and a Queen.  Remember her when you come to your Kingdom.'



'But- did the cousins go to the Gascons' Graveyard?' said Dan,

as Una frowned.



'They went,' said the lady.



'Did they ever come back?' Una began; but - 'Did they stop

King Philip's fleet?' Dan interrupted.



The lady turned to him eagerly.



'D'you think they did right to go?' she asked.



'I don't see what else they could have done,' Dan replied, after

thinking it over.



'D'you think she did right to send 'em?'  The lady's voice rose a

little.



'Well,' said Dan, 'I don't see what else she could have done,

either - do you?  How did they stop King Philip from getting Virginia?'



'There's the sad part of it.  They sailed out that autumn from

Rye Royal, and there never came back so much as a single

rope-yarn to show what had befallen them.  The winds blew, and

they were not.  Does that make you alter your mind, young Burleigh?'

'I expect they were drowned, then.  Anyhow, Philip didn't

score, did he?'



'Gloriana wiped out her score with Philip later.  But if Philip 

had won, would you have blamed Gloriana for wasting those

lads' lives?'



'Of course not.  She was bound to try to stop him.'



The lady coughed.  'You have the root of the matter in you.

Were I Queen, I'd make you Minister.'



'We don't play that game,' said Una, who felt that she disliked

the lady as much as she disliked the noise the high wind made

tearing through Willow Shaw.



'Play!' said the lady with a laugh, and threw up her hands

affectedly.  The sunshine caught the jewels on her many rings and

made them flash till Una's eyes dazzled, and she had to rub them.

Then she saw Dan on his knees picking up the potatoes they had

spilled at the gate.



'There wasn't anybody in the Shaw, after all,' he said.  'Didn't

you think you saw someone?'



'I'm most awfully glad there isn't,' said Una.  Then they went

on with the potato-roast.

