




THE KNIFE AND THE NAKED CHALK




The Run of the Downs



The Weald is good, the Downs are best -

I'll give you the run of 'em, East to West.

Beachy Head and Winddoor Hill,

They were once and they are still.

Firle, Mount Caburn and Mount Harry

Go back as far as sums'll carry.

Ditchling Beacon and Chanctonbury Ring,

They have looked on many a thing;

And what those two have missed between 'em

I reckon Truleigh Hill has seen 'em.

Highden, Bignor and Duncton Down

Knew Old England before the Crown.

Linch Down, Treyford and Sunwood

Knew Old England before the Flood.

And when you end on the Hampshire side -

Butser's old as Time and Tide.

The Downs are sheep, the Weald is corn,

You be glad you are Sussex born!







The Knife and the Naked Chalk





The children went to the seaside for a month, and lived in a flint

village on the bare windy chalk Downs, quite thirty miles away

from home.  They made friends with an old shepherd, called Mr

Dudeney, who had known their Father when their Father was

little.  He did not talk like their own people in the Weald of Sussex,

and he used different names for farm things, but he understood

how they felt, and let them go with him.  He had a tiny cottage

about half a mile from the village, where his wife made mead

from thyme honey, and nursed sick lambs in front of a coal fire,

while Old Jim, who was Mr Dudeney's sheep-dog's father, lay at

the door.  They brought up beef bones for Old Jim (you must

never give a sheep-dog mutton bones), and if Mr Dudeney happened

to be far in the Downs, Mrs Dudeney would tell the dog to

take them to him, and he did.



One August afternoon when the village water-cart had made

the street smell specially townified, they went to look for their

shepherd as usual, and, as usual, Old Jim crawled over the doorstep

and took them in charge.  The sun was hot, the dry grass was

very slippery, and the distances were very distant.



'It's Just like the sea,' said Una, when Old Jim halted in the

shade of a lonely flint barn on a bare rise.  'You see where you're

going, and - you go there, and there's nothing between.'



Dan slipped off his shoes.  'When we get home I shall sit in the

woods all day,' he said.



'Whuff!' said Old Jim, to show he was ready, and struck across

a long rolling stretch of turf.  Presently he asked for his beefbone.



'Not yet,' said Dan.  'Where's Mr Dudeney?  Where's Master?'

Old Jim looked as if he thought they were mad, and asked

again.



'Don't you give it him,' Una cried.  'I'm not going to be left

howling in a desert.'



'Show, boy!  Show!' said Dan, for the Downs seemed as bare as

the palm of your hand.



Old Jim sighed, and trotted forward.  Soon they spied the blob

of Mr Dudeney's hat against the sky a long way off.



'Right!  All right!' said Dan.  Old Jim wheeled round, took his

bone carefully between his blunted teeth, and returned to the

shadow of the old barn, looking just like a wolf.  The children

went on.  Two kestrels hung bivvering and squealing above them.

A gull flapped lazily along the white edge of the cliffs.  The curves

of the Downs shook a little in the heat, and so did Mr Dudeney's

distant head.



They walked toward it very slowly and found themselves

staring into a horseshoe-shaped hollow a hundred feet deep,

whose steep sides were laced with tangled sheep-tracks.  The flock

grazed on the flat at the bottom, under charge of Young Jim.  Mr

Dudeney sat comfortably knitting on the edge of the slope, his

crook between his knees.  They told him what Old Jim had done.



'Ah, he thought you could see my head as soon as he did.  The

closeter you be to the turf the more you see things.  You look

warm-like,'said Mr Dudeney.



'We be,' said Una, flopping down.  'And tired.'



'Set beside o' me here.  The shadow'll begin to stretch out in a

little while, and a heat-shake o' wind will come up with it that'll

overlay your eyes like so much wool.'



'We don't want to sleep,' said Una indignantly; but she settled

herself as she spoke, in the first strip of early afternoon shade.



'O' course not.  You come to talk with me same as your father

used.  He didn't need no dog to guide him to Norton Pit.'



'Well, he belonged here,' said Dan, and laid himself down at

length on the turf.



'He did.  And what beats me is why he went off to live among

them messy trees in the Weald, when he might ha' stayed here and

looked all about him.  There's no profit to trees.  They draw the

lightning, and sheep shelter under 'em, and so, like as not, you'll

lose a half-score ewes struck dead in one storm.  Tck!  Your father

knew that.'



'Trees aren't messy.'  Una rose on her elbow.  'And what about

firewood?  I don't like coal.'



'Eh?  You lie a piece more uphill and you'll lie more natural,'

said Mr Dudeney, with his provoking deaf smile.  'Now press

your face down and smell to the turf.  That's Southdown thyme

which makes our Southdown mutton beyond compare, and, my

mother told me, 'twill cure anything except broken necks, or

hearts.  I forget which.'



They sniffed, and somehow forgot to lift their cheeks from the

soft thymy cushions.



'You don't get nothing like that in the Weald.  Watercress,

maybe?' said Mr Dudeney.



'But we've water - brooks full of it - where you paddle in hot

weather,' Una replied, watching a yellow-and-violet-banded

snail-shell close to her eye.



'Brooks flood.  Then you must shift your sheep - let alone

foot-rot afterward.  I put more dependence on a dew-pond any day.'



'How's a dew-pond made?' said Dan, and tilted his hat over his

eyes.  Mr Dudeney explained.



The air trembled a little as though it could not make up its mind

whether to slide into the Pit or move across the open.  But it

seemed easiest to go downhill, and the children felt one soft puff

after another slip and sidle down the slope in fragrant breaths that

baffed on their eyelids.  The little whisper of the sea by the cliffs

joined with the whisper of the wind over the grass, the hum of

insects in the thyme, the ruffle and rustle of the flock below, and a

thickish mutter deep in the very chalk beneath them.  Mr

Dudeney stopped explaining, and went on with his knitting.

They were roused by voices.  The shadow had crept halfway

down the steep side of Norton Pit, and on the edge of it, his back

to them, Puck sat beside a half-naked man who seemed busy at

some work.  The wind had dropped, and in that funnel of ground

every least noise and movement reached them like whispers up a

water-Pipe.



'That is clever,' said Puck, leaning over.  'How truly you shape it!'



'Yes, but what does The Beast care for a brittle flint tip?  Bah!'

The man flicked something contemptuously over his shoulder.  It

fell between Dan and Una - a beautiful dark-blue flint arrow-head

still hot from the maker's hand.



The man reached for another stone, and worked away like a

thrush with a snail-shell.



'Flint work is fool's work,' he said at last.  'One does it because

one always did it; but when it comes to dealing with The Beast -

no good!'  He shook his shaggy head.

'The Beast was dealt with long ago.  He has gone,' said Puck.



'He'll be back at lambing time.  I know him.'  He chipped very

carefully, and the flints squeaked.



'Not he.  Children can lie out on the Chalk now all day through

and go home safe.'



'Can they?  Well, call The Beast by his True Name, and I'll

believe it,' the man replied.

'Surely!'  Puck leaped to his feet, curved his hands round his

mouth and shouted: 'Wolf!  Wolf!'



Norton Pit threw back the echo from its dry sides - 'Wuff!'

Wuff!' like Young jim's bark.



'You see?  You hear?' said Puck.  'Nobody answers.  Grey

Shepherd is gone.  Feet-in-the-Night has run off.  There are no

more wolves.'



'Wonderful!'  The man wiped his forehead as though he were

hot.  'Who drove him away?  You?'



'Many men through many years, each working in his own

country.  Were you one of them?' Puck answered.



The man slid his sheepskin cloak to his waist, and without a

word pointed to his side, which was all seamed and blotched with

scars.  His arms, too, were dimpled from shoulder to elbow with

horrible white dimples.



'I see,' said Puck.  'It is The Beast's mark.  What did you use

against him?'

'Hand, hammer, and spear, as our fathers did before us.'



'So?  Then how' - Puck twitched aside the man's dark-brown

cloak - 'how did a Flint-worker come by that?  Show, man, show!'

He held out his little hand.



The man slipped a long dark iron knife, almost a short sword,

from his belt, and after breathing on it, handed it hilt-first to

Puck, who took it with his head on one side, as you should when

you look at the works of a watch, squinted down the dark blade,

and very delicately rubbed his forefinger from the point to the hilt.



'Good!' said he, in a surprised tone.



'It should be.  The Children of the Night made it,' the man answered.



'So I see by the iron.  What might it have cost you?'



'This!'  The man raised his hand to his cheek.  Puck whistled like

a Weald starling.



'By the Great Rings of the Chalk!' he cried.  'Was that your

price?  Turn sunward that I may see better, and shut your eye.'

He slipped his hand beneath the man's chin and swung him till

he faced the children up the slope.  They saw that his right eye was

gone, and the eyelid lay shrunk.  Quickly Puck turned him round

again, and the two sat down.



'It was for the sheep.  The sheep are the people,' said the man, in

an ashamed voice.  'What else could I have done?  You know, Old

One.'



Puck sighed a little fluttering sigh.  'Take the knife.  I listen.'

The man bowed his head, drove the knife into the turf, and

while it still quivered said: 'This is witness between us that I speak

the thing that has been.  Before my Knife and the Naked Chalk I

speak.  Touch!'



Puck laid a hand on the hilt.  It stopped shaking.  The children

wriggled a little nearer.



'I am of the People of the Worked Flint.  I am the one son of the

Priestess who sells the Winds to the Men of the Sea.  I am the

Buyer of the Knife - the Keeper of the People,' the man began, in

a sort of singing shout.  'These are my names in this country of the

Naked Chalk, between the Trees and the Sea.'



'Yours was a great country.  Your names are great too,' said Puck.



'One cannot feed some things on names and songs.'  The man

hit himself on the chest.  'It is better - always better - to count

one's children safe round the fire, their Mother among them.'



'Ahai!' said Puck.  'I think this will be a very old tale.'

'I warm myself and eat at any fire that I choose, but there is no

one to light me a fire or cook my meat.  I sold all that when I

bought the Magic Knife for my people.  it was not right that The

Beast should master man.  What else could I have done?'



'I hear.  I know.  I listen,' said Puck.



'When I was old enough to take my place in the Sheepguard,

The Beast gnawed all our country like a bone between his teeth.

He came in behind the flocks at watering-time, and watched them

round the Dew-ponds; he leaped into the folds between our knees

at the shearing; he walked out alongside the grazing flocks, and

chose his meat on the hoof while our boys threw flints at him; he

crept by night 'into the huts, and licked the babe from between the

mother's hands; he called his companions and pulled down men

in broad daylight on the Naked Chalk.  No - not always did he do

so!  This was his cunning!  He would go away for a while to let us

forget him.  A year - two years perhaps - we neither smelt, nor

heard, nor saw him.  When our flocks had increased; when our

men did not always look behind them; when children strayed

from the fenced places; when our women walked alone to draw

water - back, back, back came the Curse of the Chalk, Grey

Shepherd, Feet-in-the-Night - The Beast, The Beast, The Beast!



'He laughed at our little brittle arrows and our poor blunt

spears.  He learned to run in under the stroke of the hammer.  I

think he knew when there was a flaw in the flint.  Often it does not

show till you bring it down on his snout.  Then - Pouf!  - the false

flint falls all to flinders, and you are left with the hammer-handle

in your fist, and his teeth in your flank!  I have felt them.  At

evening, too, in the dew, or when it has misted and rained, your

spear-head lashings slack off, though you have kept them beneath

your cloak all day.  You are alone - but so close to the home ponds

that you stop to tighten the sinews with hands, teeth, and a piece

of driftwood.  You bend over and pull - so!  That is the minute for

which he has followed you since the stars went out.  "Aarh!" he

"Wurr-aarh!" he says.'  (Norton Pit gave back the growl like

a pack of real wolves.) 'Then he is on your right shoulder feeling

for the vein in your neck, and - perhaps your sheep run on

without you.  To fight The Beast is nothing, but to be despised by

The Beast when he fights you - that is like his teeth in the heart!

Old One, why is it that men desire so greatly, and can do so little?'



'I do not know.  Did you desire so much?' said Puck.



'I desired to master The Beast.  It is not right that The Beast

should master man.  But my people were afraid.  Even, my

Mother, the Priestess, was afraid when I told her what I desired.

We were accustomed to be afraid of The Beast.  When I was made

a man, and a maiden - she was a Priestess - waited for me at the

Dew-ponds, The Beast flitted from off the Chalk.  Perhaps it was

a sickness; perhaps he had gone to his Gods to learn how to do us

new harm.  But he went, and we breathed more freely.  The

women sang again; the children were not so much guarded; our

flocks grazed far out.  I took mine yonder'- he pointed inland to

the hazy line of the Weald -'where the new grass was best.  They

grazed north.  I followed till we were close to the Trees' - he

lowered his voice - 'close there where the Children of the Night

live.'  He pointed north again.



'Ah, now I remember a thing,' said Puck.  'Tell me, why did

your people fear the Trees so extremely?'



'Because the Gods hate the Trees and strike them with lightning.

We can see them burning for days all along the Chalk's

edge.  Besides, all the Chalk knows that the Children of the Night,

though they worship our Gods, are magicians.  When a man goes

into their country, they change his spirit; they put words into his

mouth; they make him like talking water.  But a voice in my heart

told me to go toward the north.  While I watched my sheep there I

saw three Beasts chasing a man, who ran toward the Trees.  By

this I knew he was a Child of the Night.  We Flint-workers fear the

Trees more than we fear The Beast.  He had no hammer.  He

carried a knife like this one.  A Beast leaped at him.  He stretched

out his knife.  The Beast fell dead.  The other Beasts ran away

howling, which they would never have done from a Flint-

worker.  The man went in among the Trees.  I looked for the dead

Beast.  He had been killed in a new way - by a single deep, clean

cut, without bruise or tear, which had split his bad heart.  Wonderful!

So I saw that the man's knife was magic, and I thought

how to get it, - thought strongly how to get it.



'When I brought the flocks to the shearing, my Mother the

Priestess asked me, "What is the new thing which you have seen

and I see in your face?" I said, "It is a sorrow to me"; and she

answered, "All new things are sorrow.  Sit in my place, and eat

sorrow."  I sat down in her place by the fire, where she talks to the

ghosts in winter, and two voices spoke in my heart.  One voice

said, "Ask the Children of the Night for the Magic Knife.  It is not

fit that The Beast should master man."  I listened to that voice.



,one voice said, "If you go among the Trees, the Children of

the Night will change your spirit.  Eat and sleep here."  The other

voice said, "Ask for the Knife."  I listened to that voice.



'I said to my Mother in the morning, "I go away to find a thing

for the people, but I do not know whether I shall return in my

own shape."  She answered, "Whether you live or die, or are

made different, I am your Mother."'



'True,' said Puck.  'The Old Ones themselves cannot change

men's mothers even if they would.'



'Let us thank the Old Ones!  I spoke to my Maiden, the Priestess

who waited for me at the Dew-ponds.  She promised fine things

too.'  The man laughed.  'I went away to that place where I had

seen the magician with the knife.  I lay out two days on the short

grass before I ventured among the Trees.  I felt my way before me

with a stick.  I was afraid of the terrible talking Trees.  I was afraid

of the ghosts in the branches; of the soft ground underfoot; of the

red and black waters.  I was afraid, above all, of the Change.  It

came!'



They saw him wipe his forehead once again, and his strong

back-muscles quivered till he laid his hand on the knife-hilt.



'A fire without a flame burned in my head; an evil taste grew in

my mouth; my eyelids shut hot over my eyes; my breath was hot

between my teeth, and my hands were like the hands of a

stranger.  I was made to sing songs and to mock the Trees, though

I was afraid of them.  At the same time I saw myself laughing, and

I was very sad for this fine young man, who was myself.  Ah!  The

Children of the Night know magic.'



'I think that is done by the Spirits of the Mist.  They change a

man, if he sleeps among them,' said Puck.  'Had you slept in any mists?'



'Yes - but I know it was the Children of the Night.  After three

days I saw a red light behind the Trees, and I heard a heavy noise.  I

saw the Children of the Night dig red stones from a hole, and lay

them in fires.  The stones melted like tallow, and the men beat the

soft stuff with hammers.  I wished to speak to these men, but the

words were changed in my mouth, and all I could say was, "Do

not make that noise.  It hurts my head."  By this I knew that I was

bewitched, and I clung to the Trees, and prayed the Children of

the Night to take off their spells.  They were cruel.  They asked me

many questions which they would never allow me to answer.

They changed my words between my teeth till I wept.  Then they

led me into a hut and covered the floor with hot stones and dashed

water on the stones, and sang charms till the sweat poured off me

like water.  I slept.  When I waked, my own spirit -not the strange,

shouting thing - was back in my body, and I was like a cool bright

stone on the shingle between the sea and the sunshine.  The

magicians came to hear me - women and men - each wearing a

Magic Knife.  Their Priestess was their Ears and their Mouth.



'I spoke.  I spoke many words that went smoothly along like

sheep in order when their shepherd, standing on a mound, can

count those coming, and those far off getting ready to come.  I

asked for Magic Knives for my people.  I said that my people

would bring meat, and milk, and wool, and lay them in the short

grass outside the Trees, if the Children of the Night would leave

Magic Knives for our people to take away.  They were pleased.

Their Priestess said, "For whose sake have you come?"  I

answered, "The sheep are the people.  If The Beast kills our sheep,

our people die.  So I come for a Magic Knife to kill The Beast."



'She said, "We do not know if our God will let us trade with the

people of the Naked Chalk.  Wait till we have asked."



'When they came back from the Question-place (their Gods are

our Gods), their Priestess said, "The God needs a proof that your

words are true."  I said, "What is the proof?"  She said, "The God

says that if you have come for the sake of your people you will

give him your right eye to be put out; but if you have come for

any other reason you will not give it.  This proof is between you

and the God.  We ourselves are sorry."



'I said, "This is a hard proof.  Is there no other road?"



'She said, "Yes.  You can go back to your people with your two

eyes in your head if you choose.  But then you will not get any

Magic Knives for your people."



'I said, "It would be easier if I knew that I were to be killed."



'She said, "Perhaps the God knew this too.  See!  I have made my

knife hot."



'I said, "Be quick, then!"  With her knife heated in the flame she

put out my right eye.  She herself did it.  I am the son of a Priestess.

She was a Priestess.  It was not work for any common man.'



'True!  Most true,' said Puck.  'No common man's work that.

And, afterwards?'



'Afterwards I did not see out of that eye any more.  I found also

that a one eye does not tell you truly where things are.  Try it!'



At this Dan put his hand over one eye, and reached for the flint

arrow-head on the grass.  He missed it by inches.  'It's true,' he

whispered to Una.  'You can't judge distances a bit with only one

eye.'



Puck was evidently making the same experiment, for the man

laughed at him.



'I know it is so,' said he.  'Even now I am not always sure of my

blow.  I stayed with the Children of the Night till my eye healed.

They said I was the son of Tyr, the God who put his right hand in

a Beast's mouth.  They showed me how they melted their red

stone and made the Magic Knives of it.  They told me the charms

they sang over the fires and at the beatings.  I can sing many

charms.'  Then he began to laugh like a boy.



'I was thinking of my journey home,' he said, 'and of the

surprised Beast.  He had come back to the Chalk.  I saw him - I

smelt his lairs as soon as ever I left the Trees.  He did not know I

had the Magic Knife - I hid it under my cloak - the Knife that the

Priestess gave me.  Ho!  Ho!  That happy day was too short!  See!  A

Beast would wind me.  "Wow!" he would say.  "Here is my

Flint-worker!"  He would come leaping, tail in air; he would roll;

he would lay his head between his paws out of merriness of heart

at his warm, waiting meal.  He would leap - and, oh, his eye in

mid-leap when he saw - when he saw the knife held ready for

him!  It pierced his hide as a rush pierces curdled milk.  Often he

had no time to howl.  I did not trouble to flay any beasts I killed.

Sometimes I missed my blow.  Then I took my little flint hammer

and beat out his brains as he cowered.  He made no fight.  He knew

the Knife!  But The Beast is very cunning.  Before evening all The

Beasts had smelt the blood on my knife, and were running from

me like hares.  They knew!  Then I walked as a man should - the

Master of The Beast!



'So came I back to my Mother's house.  There was a lamb to be

killed.  I cut it in two halves with my knife, and I told her all my

tale.  She said, "This is the work of a God."  I kissed her and

laughed.  I went to my Maiden who waited for me at the Dew-

ponds.  There was a lamb to be killed.  I cut it in two halves with

my knife, and told her all my tale.  She said, "It is the work of a

God."  I laughed, but she pushed me away, and being on my blind

side, ran off before I could kiss her.  I went to the Men of the

Sheepguard at watering-time.  There was a sheep to be killed for

their meat.  I cut it in two halves with my knife, and told them all

my tale.  They said, "It is the work of a God."  I said, "We talk too

much about Gods.  Let us eat and be happy, and tomorrow I will

take you to the Children of the Night, and each man will find a

Magic Knife.  "



'I was glad to smell our sheep again; to see the broad sky from

edge to edge, and to hear the sea.  I slept beneath the stars in my

cloak.  The men talked among themselves.



'I led them, the next day, to the Trees, taking with me meat,

wool, and curdled milk, as I had promised.  We found the Magic

Knives laid out on the grass, as the Children of the Night had

promised.  They watched us from among the Trees.  Their Priestess

called to me and said, "How is it with your people?"  I said

"Their hearts are changed.  I cannot see their hearts as I used to."

She said, "That is because you have only one eye.  Come to me

and I will be both your eyes."  But I said, "I must show my people

how to use their knives against The Beast, as you showed me how

to use my knife."  I said this because the Magic Knife does not

balance like the flint.  She said, "What you have done, you have

done for the sake of a woman, and not for the sake of your

people."  I asked of her, "Then why did the God accept my right

eye, and why are you so angry?"  She answered, "Because any

man can lie to a God, but no man can lie to a woman.  And I am not

angry with you.  I am only very sorrowful for you.  Wait a little,

and you will see out of your one eye why I am sorry.  So she hid herself.



'I went back with my people, each one carrying his Knife, and

making it sing in the air - tssee-sssse.  The Flint never sings.  It

mutters - ump-ump.  The Beast heard.  The Beast saw.  He knew!

Everywhere he ran away from us.  We all laughed.  As we walked

over the grass my Mother's brother - the Chief on the Men's Side

- he took off his Chief's necklace of yellow sea-stones.'



'How?  Eh?  Oh, I remember!  Amber,' said Puck.



'And would have put them on my neck.  I said, "No, I am

content.  What does my one eye matter if my other eye sees fat

sheep and fat children running about safely?"  My Mother's

brother said to them, "I told you he would never take such

things."  Then they began to sing a song in the Old Tongue - The

Song of Tyr.  I sang with them, but my Mother's brother said,

"This is your song, O Buyer of the Knife.  Let us sing it, Tyr."



'Even then I did not understand, till I saw that - that no man

stepped on my shadow; and I knew that they thought me to be a

God, like the God Tyr, who gave his right hand to conquer a

Great Beast.'



'By the Fire in the Belly of the Flint was that so?' Puck

rapped out.



'By my Knife and the Naked Chalk, so it was!  They made way

for my shadow as though it had been a Priestess walking to the

Barrows of the Dead.  I was afraid.  I said to myself, "My Mother

and my Maiden will know I am not Tyr."  But still I was afraid,

with the fear of a man who falls into a steep flint-pit while he runs,

and feels that it will be hard to climb out.



'When we came to the Dew-ponds all our people were there.

The men showed their knives and told their tale.  The sheep guards

also had seen The Beast flying from us.  The Beast went west

across the river in packs - howling!  He knew the Knife had come

to the Naked Chalk at last - at last!  He knew!  So my work was

done.  I looked for my Maiden among the Priestesses.  She looked

at me, but she did not smile.  She made the sign to me that our

Priestesses must make when they sacrifice to the Old Dead in the

Barrows.  I would have spoken, but my Mother's brother made

himself my Mouth, as though I had been one of the Old Dead in

the Barrows for whom our Priests speak to the people on

Midsummer Mornings.'



'I remember.  Well I remember those Midsummer Mornings!'

said Puck.



'Then I went away angrily to my Mother's house.  She would

have knelt before me.  Then I was more angry, but she said,

"Only a God would have spoken to me thus, a Priestess.  A man

would have feared the punishment of the Gods."  I looked at her

and I laughed.  I could not stop my unhappy laughing.  They called

me from the door by the name of Tyr himself.  A young man with

whom I had watched my first flocks, and chipped my first arrow,

and fought my first Beast, called me by that name in the Old

Tongue.  He asked my leave to take my Maiden.  His eyes were

lowered, his hands were on his forehead.  He was full of the fear of

a God, but of me, a man, he had no fear when he asked.  I did not

kill him.  I said, "Call the maiden."  She came also without fear -

this very one that had waited for me, that had talked with me, by

our Dew-ponds.  Being a Priestess, she lifted her eyes to me.  As I

look on a hill or a cloud, so she looked at me.  She spoke in the Old

Tongue which Priestesses use when they make prayers to the Old

Dead in the Barrows.  She asked leave that she might light the fire

in my companion's house -and that I should bless their children.  I

did not kill her.  I heard my own voice, little and cold, say, "Let it

be as you desire," and they went away hand in hand.  My heart

grew little and cold; a wind shouted in my ears; my eye darkened.

I said to my Mother, "Can a God die?"  I heard her say, "What is

it?  What is it, my son?" and I fell into darkness full of hammer-

noises.  I was not.'



'Oh, poor - poor God!' said Puck.  'And your wise Mother?'



'She knew.  As soon as I dropped she knew.  When my spirit

came back I heard her whisper in my ear, "Whether you live or

die, or are made different, I am your Mother."  That was good -

better even than the water she gave me and the going away of the

sickness.  Though I was ashamed to have fallen down, yet I was

very glad.  She was glad too.  Neither of us wished to lose the

other.  There is only the one Mother for the one son.  I heaped the

fire for her, and barred the doors, and sat at her feet as before I

went away, and she combed my hair, and sang.



'I said at last, "What is to be done to the people who say that I

am Tyr?"



'She said, "He who has done a God-like thing must bear

himself like a God.  I see no way out of it.  The people are now your

sheep till you die.  You cannot drive them off."





'I said, "This is a heavier sheep than I can lift."  She said, "In

time it will grow easy.  In time perhaps you will not lay it down

for any maiden anywhere.  Be wise - be very wise, my son, for

nothing is left you except the words, and the songs, and the

worship of a God."



'Oh, poor God!' said Puck.  'But those are not altogether

bad things.'



'I know they are not; but I would sell them all - all - all for one

small child of my own, smearing himself with the ashes of our

own house-fire.'



He wrenched his knife from the turf, thrust it into his belt and

stood up.



'And yet, what else could I have done?' he said.  'The sheep are

the people.'



'It is a very old tale,' Puck answered.  'I have heard the like of it

not only on the Naked Chalk, but also among the Trees - under

Oak, and Ash, and Thorn.'



The afternoon shadows filled all the quiet emptiness of Norton

Pit.  The children heard the sheep-bells and Young jim's busy

bark above them, and they scrambled up the slope to the level.



'We let you have your sleep out,' said Mr Dudeney, as the flock

scattered before them.  'It's making for tea-time now.'



'Look what I've found, said Dan, and held up a little blue flint

arrow-head as fresh as though it had been chipped that very day.



'Oh,' said Mr Dudeney, 'the closeter you be to the turf the

more you're apt to see things.  I've found 'em often.  Some says the

fairies made 'em, but I says they was made by folks like ourselves

- only a goodish time back.  They're lucky to keep.  Now, you

couldn't ever have slept - not to any profit - among your father's

trees same as you've laid out on Naked Chalk - could you?'



'One doesn't want to sleep in the woods,' said Una.



'Then what's the good of 'em?' said Mr Dudeney.  'Might as

well set in the barn all day.  Fetch 'em 'long, Jim boy!'



The Downs, that looked so bare and hot when they came, were

full of delicious little shadow-dimples; the smell of the thyme and

the salt mixed together on the south-west drift from the still sea;

their eyes dazzled with the low sun, and the long grass under it

looked golden.  The sheep knew where their fold was, so Young

Jim came back to his master, and they all four strolled home, the

scabious-heads swishing about their ankles, and their shadows

streaking behind them like the shadows of giants.







Song of the Men's Side





Once we feared The Beast - when he followed us we ran,

Ran very fast though we knew

It was not right that The Beast should master Man;

But what could we Flint-workers do?

The Beast only grinned at our spears round his ears -

Grinned at the hammers that we made;

But now we will hunt him for the life with the Knife -

And this is the Buyer of the Blade!



     Room for his shadow on the grass - let it pass!

     To left and right - stand clear!

     This is the Buyer of the Blade - be afraid!

     This is the great God Tyr!



Tyr thought hard till he hammered out a plan,

For he knew it was not right

(And it is not right) that The Beast should master Man;

So he went to the Children of the Night.

He begged a Magic Knife of their make for our sake.

When he begged for the Knife they said:

'The price of the Knife you would buy is an eye!'

And that was the price he paid.



     Tell it to the Barrows of the Dead - run ahead!

     Shout it so the Women's Side can hear!

     This is the Buyer of the Blade - be afraid!

     This is the great God Tyr!



Our women and our little ones may walk on the Chalk,

As far as we can see them and beyond.

We shall not be anxious for our sheep when we keep

Tally at the shearing-pond.



We can eat with both our elbows on our knees, if we please,

We can sleep after meals in the sun;

For Shepherd-of-the-Twilight is dismayed at the Blade,

Feet-in-the-Night have run!

Dog-without-a-Master goes away (Hai, Tyr aie!),

Devil-in-the-Dusk has run!



Then:

     Room for his shadow on the grass - let it pass!

     To left and right - stand clear!

     This is the Buyer of the Blade - be afraid!

     This is the great God Tyr!









BROTHER SQUARE-TOES







Philadelphia





If you're off to Philadelphia in the morning,

You mustn't take my stories for a guide.

There's little left indeed of the city you will read of,

And all the folk I write about have died.

Now few will understand if you mention Talleyrand,

Or remember what his cunning and his skill did.

And the cabmen at the wharf do not know Count Zinnendorf,

Nor the Church in Philadelphia he builded.



     It is gone, gone, gone with lost Atlantis

     (Never say I didn't give you warning).

     In Seventeen Ninety-three 'twas there for all to see,

     But it's not in Philadelphia this morning,



If you're off to Philadelphia in the morning,

You mustn't go by everything I've said.

Bob Bicknell's Southern Stages have been laid aside for ages,

But the Limited will take you there instead.

Toby Hirte can't be seen at One Hundred and Eighteen,

North Second Street - no matter when you call;

And I fear you'll search in vain for the wash-house down the lane

Where Pharaoh played the fiddle at the ball.



     It is gone, gone, gone with Thebes the Golden

     (Never say I didn't give you warning).

     In Seventeen Ninety-four 'twas a famous dancing-floor -

     But it's not in Philadelphia this morning.



If you're off to Philadelphia in the morning,

You must telegraph for rooms at some Hotel.

You needn't try your luck at Epply's or the 'Buck,'

Though the Father of his Country liked them well.

It is not the slightest use to inquire for Adam Goos,

Or to ask where Pastor Meder has removed - so

You must treat as out-of-date the story I relate

Of the Church in Philadelphia he loved so.



     He is gone, gone, gone with Martin Luther

     (Never say I didn't give you warning).

     In Seventeen Ninety-five he was (rest his soul!) alive,

     But he's not in Philadelphia this morning.

If you're off to Philadelphia this morning,

And wish to prove the truth of what I say,

I pledge my word you'll find the pleasant land behind

Unaltered since Red Jacket rode that way.

Still the pine-woods scent the noon; still the cat-bird sings his tune;

Still Autumn sets the maple-forest blazing.

Still the grape-vine through the dusk flings her soul-compelling musk;

Still the fire-flies in the corn make night amazing.

     They are there, there, there with Earth immortal

     (Citizens, I give you friendly warning).

     The things that truly last when men and times have passed,

     They are all in Pennsylvania this morning!







Brother Square-Toes





It was almost the end of their visit to the seaside.  They had turned

themselves out of doors while their trunks were being packed,

and strolled over the Downs towards the dull evening sea.  The

tide was dead low under the chalk cliffs, and the little wrinkled

waves grieved along the sands up the coast to Newhaven and

down the coast to long, grey Brighton, whose smoke trailed out

across the Channel.



They walked to The Gap, where the cliff is only a few feet high.

A windlass for hoisting shingle from the beach below stands at the

edge of it.  The Coastguard cottages are a little farther on, and an

old ship's figurehead of a Turk in a turban stared at them over the wall.

'This time tomorrow we shall be at home, thank goodness,'

said Una.  'I hate the sea!'



'I believe it's all right in the middle,' said Dan.  'The edges are

the sorrowful parts.'



Cordery, the coastguard, came out of the cottage, levelled his

telescope at some fishing-boats, shut it with a click and walked

away.  He grew smaller and smaller along the edge of the cliff,

where neat piles of white chalk every few yards show the path

even on the darkest night.

'Where's Cordery going?'said Una.



'Half-way to Newhaven,'said Dan.  'Then he'll meet the

Newhaven coastguard and turn back.  He says if coastguards were done

away with, smuggling would start up at once.'



A voice on the beach under the cliff began to sing:



     'The moon she shined on Telscombe Tye -

     On Telscombe Tye at night it was -

     She saw the smugglers riding by,

     A very pretty sight it was!'



Feet scrabbled on the flinty path.  A dark, thin-faced man in

very neat brown clothes and broad-toed shoes came up, followed

by Puck.



     'Three Dunkirk boats was standin' in!'



the man went on.

'Hssh!' said Puck.  'You'll shock these nice young people.'



'Oh!  Shall I?  Mille pardons!'  He shrugged his shoulders almost

up to his ears - spread his hands abroad, and jabbered in French.

'No comprenny?' he said.  'I'll give it you in Low German.'  And

he went off in another language, changing his voice and manner

so completely that they hardly knew him for the same person.

But his dark beady-brown eyes still twinkled merrily in his lean

face, and the children felt that they did not suit the straight, plain,

snuffy-brown coat, brown knee-breeches, and broad-brimmed

hat.  His hair was tied 'in a short pigtail which danced wickedly

when he turned his head.



'Ha' done!' said Puck, laughing.  'Be one thing or t'other,

Pharaoh - French or English or German - no great odds which.'



'Oh, but it is, though,' said Una quickly.  'We haven't begun

German yet, and - and we're going back to our French next week.'



'Aren't you English?' said Dan.  'We heard you singing just now.'



'Aha!  That was the Sussex side o' me.  Dad he married a French

girl out o' Boulogne, and French she stayed till her dyin' day.  She

was an Aurette, of course.  We Lees mostly marry Aurettes.

Haven't you ever come across the saying:



     'Aurettes and Lees,

     Like as two peas.

     What they can't smuggle,

     They'll run over seas'?



'Then, are you a smuggler?' Una cried; and, 'Have you

smuggled much?'said Dan.



Mr Lee nodded solemnly.



'Mind you,' said he, 'I don't uphold smuggling for the generality

o' mankind - mostly they can't make a do of it - but I was

brought up to the trade, d'ye see, in a lawful line o' descent on' -

he waved across the Channel -'on both sides the water.  'Twas all

in the families, same as fiddling.  The Aurettes used mostly to run

the stuff across from Boulogne, and we Lees landed it here and ran

it up to London Town, by the safest road.'



'Then where did you live?' said Una.



'You mustn't ever live too close to your business in our trade.

We kept our little fishing smack at Shoreham, but otherwise we

Lees was all honest cottager folk - at Warminghurst under Washington

- Bramber way - on the old Penn estate.'



'Ah!' said Puck, squatted by the windlass.  'I remember a piece

about the Lees at Warminghurst, I do:



     'There was never a Lee to Warminghurst

     That wasn't a gipsy last and first.



I reckon that's truth, Pharaoh.'



Pharaoh laughed.  'Admettin' that's true,' he said, 'my gipsy

blood must be wore pretty thin, for I've made and kept a worldly

fortune.'



'By smuggling?' Dan asked.

'No, in the tobacco trade.'



'You don't mean to say you gave up smuggling just to go and

be a tobacconist!'  Dan looked so disappointed they all had to laugh.



'I'm sorry; but there's all sorts of tobacconists,' Pharaoh

replied.  'How far out, now, would you call that smack with the

patch on her foresail?'  He pointed to the fishing-boats.



'A scant mile,' said Puck after a quick look.



'Just about.  It's seven fathom under her - clean sand.  That was

where Uncle Aurette used to sink his brandy kegs from

Boulogne, and we fished 'em up and rowed 'em into The Gap

here for the ponies to run inland.  One thickish night in January of

'Ninety-three, Dad and Uncle Lot and me came over from

Shoreham in the smack, and we found Uncle Aurette and the

L'Estranges, my cousins, waiting for us in their lugger with New

Year's presents from Mother's folk in Boulogne.  I remember

Aunt Cecile she'd sent me a fine new red knitted cap, which I put

on then and there, for the French was having their Revolution in

those days, and red caps was all the fashion.  Uncle Aurette tells us

that they had cut off their King Louis' head, and, moreover, the

Brest forts had fired on an English man-o'-war.  The news wasn't

a week old.



'"That means war again, when we was only just getting used

to the peace," says Dad.  "Why can't King George's men and King

Louis' men do on their uniforms and fight it out over our heads?"



'"Me too, I wish that," says Uncle Aurette.  "But they'll be

pressing better men than themselves to fight for 'em.  The press-

gangs are out already on our side.  You look out for yours.  "



'"I'll have to bide ashore and grow cabbages for a while, after

I've run this cargo; but I do wish" - Dad says, going over the

lugger's side with our New Year presents under his arm and

young L'Estrange holding the lantern - "I just do wish that those

folk which make war so easy had to run one cargo a month all this

winter.  It 'ud show 'em what honest work means."



'"Well, I've warned ye," says Uncle Aurette.  "I'll be slipping

off now before your Revenue cutter comes.  Give my love to

Sister and take care o' the kegs.  It's thicking to southward."

'I remember him waving to us and young Stephen L'Estrange

blowing out the lantern.  By the time we'd fished up the kegs the

fog came down so thick Dad judged it risky for me to row 'em

ashore, even though we could hear the ponies stamping on the

beach.  So he and Uncle Lot took the dinghy and left me in the

smack playing on my fiddle to guide 'em back.



'Presently I heard guns.  Two of 'em sounded mighty like

Uncle Aurette's three-pounders.  He didn't go naked about the

seas after dark.  Then come more, which I reckoned was Captain

Giddens in the Revenue cutter.  He was open-handed with his

compliments, but he would lay his guns himself.  I stopped fiddling

to listen, and I heard a whole skyful o' French up in the fog -

and a high bow come down on top o' the smack.  I hadn't time to

call or think.  I remember the smack heeling over, and me

standing on the gunwale pushing against the ship's side as if I

hoped to bear her off.  Then the square of an open port, with a

lantern in it, slid by in front of my nose.  I kicked back on our

gunwale as it went under and slipped through that port into the

French ship - me and my fiddle.'



'Gracious!' said Una.  'What an adventure!'



'Didn't anybody see you come in?' said Dan.



'There wasn't any one there.  I'd made use of an orlop-deck port

- that's the next deck below the gun-deck, which by rights should

not have been open at all.  The crew was standing by their guns up

above.  I rolled on to a pile of dunnage in the dark and I went to

sleep.  When I woke, men was talking all round me, telling each

other their names and sorrows just like Dad told me pressed men

used to talk in the last war.  Pretty soon I made out they'd all been

hove aboard together by the press-gangs, and left to sort

'emselves.  The ship she was the Embuscade, a thirty-six-gun

Republican frigate, Captain Jean Baptiste Bompard, two days out

of Le Havre, going to the United States with a Republican French

Ambassador of the name of Genet.  They had been up all night

clearing for action on account of hearing guns in the fog.  Uncle

Aurette and Captain Giddens must have been passing the time o'

day with each other off Newhaven, and the frigate had drifted

past 'em.  She never knew she'd run down our smack.  Seeing so

many aboard was total strangers to each other, I thought one

more mightn't be noticed; so I put Aunt Cecile's red cap on the

back of my head, and my hands in my pockets like the rest, and, as

we French say, I circulated till I found the galley.



'"What!  Here's one of 'em that isn't sick!" says a cook.  "Take

his breakfast to Citizen Bompard."



'I carried the tray to the cabin, but I didn't call this Bompard

"Citizen."  Oh no!  "Mon Capitaine" was my little word, same as

Uncle Aurette used to answer in King Louis' Navy.  Bompard, he

liked it.  He took me on for cabin servant, and after that no one

asked questions; and thus I got good victuals and light work all

the way across to America.  He talked a heap of politics, and so did

his officers, and when this Ambassador Genet got rid of his

land-stomach and laid down the law after dinner, a rooks'

parliament was nothing compared to their cabin.  I learned to

know most of the men which had worked the French Revolution,

through waiting at table and hearing talk about 'em.  One of our

forecas'le six-pounders was called Danton and t'other Marat.  I

used to play the fiddle between 'em, sitting on the capstan.  Day in

and day out Bompard and Monsieur Genet talked o' what France

had done, and how the United States was going to join her to

finish off the English in this war.  Monsieur Genet said he'd

justabout make the United States fight for France.  He was a rude

common man.  But I liked listening.  I always helped drink any

healths that was proposed - specially Citizen Danton's who'd cut

off King Louis' head.  An all-Englishman might have been

shocked - but that's where my French blood saved me.



'It didn't save me from getting a dose of ship's fever though, the

week before we put Monsieur Genet ashore at Charleston; and

what was left of me after bleeding and pills took the dumb horrors

from living 'tween decks.  The surgeon, Karaguen his name was,

kept me down there to help him with his plasters - I was too weak

to wait on Bompard.  I don't remember much of any account for

the next few weeks, till I smelled lilacs, and I looked out of the

port, and we was moored to a wharf-edge and there was a town o'

fine gardens and red-brick houses and all the green leaves o' God's

world waiting for me outside.



'"What's this?" I said to the sick-bay man - Old Pierre

Tiphaigne he was.  "Philadelphia," says Pierre.  "You've missed it

all.  We're sailing next week.  "



'I just turned round and cried for longing to be amongst

the laylocks.



'"If that's your trouble," says old Pierre, "you go straight

ashore.  None'll hinder you.  They're all gone mad on these coasts

- French and American together.  'Tisn't my notion o' war."

Pierre was an old King Louis man.



'My legs was pretty tottly, but I made shift to go on deck,

which it was like a fair.  The frigate was crowded with fine

gentlemen and ladies pouring in and out.  They sung and they

waved French flags, while Captain Bompard and his officers -

yes, and some of the men - speechified to all and sundry about

war with England.  They shouted, "Down with England!" -

"Down with Washington!" - "Hurrah for France and the

Republic!"  I couldn't make sense of it.  I wanted to get out from

that crunch of swords and petticoats and sit in a field.  One of the

gentlemen said to me, "Is that a genuine cap o' Liberty you're

wearing?"  'Twas Aunt Cecile's red one, and pretty near wore

out.  "Oh yes!" I says, "straight from France."  "I'll give you a

shilling for it," he says, and with that money in my hand and my

fiddle under my arm I squeezed past the entry-port and went

ashore.  It was like a dream - meadows, trees, flowers, birds,

houses, and people all different!  I sat me down in a meadow and

fiddled a bit, and then I went in and out the streets, looking and

smelling and touching, like a little dog at a fair.  Fine folk was

setting on the white stone doorsteps of their houses, and a girl

threw me a handful of laylock sprays, and when I said "Merci"

without thinking, she said she loved the French.  They all was the

fashion in the city.  I saw more tricolour flags in Philadelphia than

ever I'd seen in Boulogne, and every one was shouting for war

with England.  A crowd o' folk was cheering after our French

Ambassador - that same Monsieur Genet which we'd left at

Charleston.  He was a-horseback behaving as if the place belonged

to him - and commanding all and sundry to fight the British.  But

I'd heard that before.  I got into a long straight street as wide as the

Broyle, where gentlemen was racing horses.  I'm fond o' horses.

Nobody hindered 'em, and a man told me it was called Race

Street o' purpose for that.  Then I followed some black niggers,

which I'd never seen close before; but I left them to run after a

great, proud, copper-faced man with feathers in his hair and a red

blanket trailing behind him.  A man told me he was a real Red

Indian called Red Jacket, and I followed him into an alley-way off

Race Street by Second Street, where there was a fiddle playing.

I'm fond o' fiddling.  The Indian stopped at a baker's shop -

Conrad Gerhard's it was - and bought some sugary cakes.  Hearing

what the price was I was going to have some too, but the

Indian asked me in English if I was hungry.  "Oh yes!" I says.  I

must have looked a sore scrattel.  He opens a door on to a staircase

and leads the way up.  We walked into a dirty little room full of

flutes and fiddles and a fat man fiddling by the window, in a smell

of cheese and medicines fit to knock you down.  I was knocked

down too, for the fat man jumped up and hit me a smack in the

face.  I fell against an old spinet covered with pill-boxes and the

pills rolled about the floor.  The Indian never moved an eyelid.



'"Pick up the pills!  Pick up the pills!" the fat man screeches.



'I started picking 'em up - hundreds of 'em - meaning to run

out under the Indian's arm, but I came on giddy all over and I sat

down.  The fat man went back to his fiddling.



'"Toby!" says the Indian after quite a while.  "I brought the

boy to be fed, not hit."



'"What?" says Toby, "I thought it was Gert Schwankfelder."

He put down his fiddle and took a good look at me.  "Himmel!"

he says.  "I have hit the wrong boy.  It is not the new boy.  Why are

you not the new boy?  Why are you not Gert Schwankfelder?"



'"I don't know," I said.  "The gentleman in the pink blanket

brought me."



'Says the Indian, "He is hungry, Toby.  Christians always feed

the hungry.  So I bring him."



'"You should have said that first," said Toby.  He pushed

plates at me and the Indian put bread and pork on them, and a

glass of Madeira wine.  I told him I was off the French ship, which

I had joined on account of my mother being French.  That was

true enough when you think of it, and besides I saw that the

French was all the fashion in Philadelphia.  Toby and the Indian

whispered and I went on picking up the pills.



'"You like pills - eh?" says Toby.

'"No," I says.  "I've seen our ship's doctor roll too many of

em.'



'"Ho!" he says, and he shoves two bottles at me.  "What's

those?"



'"Calomel," I says.  "And t'other's senna.



'"Right," he says.  "One week have I tried to teach Gert

Schwankfelder the difference between them, yet he cannot tell.

You like to fiddle?" he says.  He'd just seen my kit on the floor.



'"Oh yes!" says I,



'"Oho!" he says.  "What note is this?" drawing his bow across.



'He meant it for A, so I told him it was.



'"My brother," he says to the Indian.  "I think this is the hand

of Providence!  I warned that Gert if he went to play upon the

wharves any more he would hear from me.  Now look at this boy

and say what you think."



'The Indian looked me over whole minutes - there was a

musical clock on the wall and dolls came out and hopped while

the hour struck.  He looked me over all the while they did it.



'"Good," he says at last.  "This boy is good."



'"Good, then," says Toby.  "Now I shall play my fiddle and

you shall sing your hymn, brother.  Boy, go down to the bakery

and tell them you are young Gert Schwankfelder that was.  The

horses are in Davy jones's locker.  If you ask any questions you

shall hear from me."



'I left 'em singing hymns and I went down to old Conrad

Gerhard.  He wasn't at all surprised when I told him I was young

Gert Schwankfelder that was.  He knew Toby.  His wife she

walked me into the back-yard without a word, and she washed

me and she cut my hair to the edge of a basin, and she put me to

bed, and oh!  how I slept - how I slept in that little room behind the

oven looking on the flower garden!  I didn't know Toby went to

the Embuscade that night and bought me off Dr Karaguen for

twelve dollars and a dozen bottles of Seneca Oil.  Karaguen

wanted a new lace to his coat, and he reckoned I hadn't long to

live; so he put me down as "discharged sick."



'I like Toby,' said Una.



'Who was he?' said Puck.



'Apothecary Tobias Hirte,' Pharaoh replied.  'One Hundred

and Eighteen, Second Street - the famous Seneca Oil man, that

lived half of every year among the Indians.  But let me tell my tale

my own way, same as his brown mare used to go to Lebanon.'



'Then why did he keep her in Davy Jones's locker?' Dan asked.

'That was his joke.  He kept her under David Jones's hat shop in

the "Buck" tavern yard, and his Indian friends kept their ponies

there when they visited him.  I looked after the horses when I

wasn't rolling pills on top of the old spinet, while he played his

fiddle and Red Jacket sang hymns.  I liked it.  I had good victuals,

light work, a suit o' clean clothes, a plenty music, and quiet,

smiling German folk all around that let me sit in their gardens.

My first Sunday, Toby took me to his church in Moravian Alley;

and that was in a garden too.  The women wore long-eared caps

and handkerchiefs.  They came in at one door and the men at

another, and there was a brass chandelier you could see your face

in, and a nigger-boy to blow the organ bellows.  I carried Toby's

fiddle, and he played pretty much as he chose all against the organ

and the singing.  He was the only one they let do it, for they was a

simple-minded folk.  They used to wash each other's feet up in the

attic to keep 'emselves humble: which Lord knows they didn't need.'



'How very queer!' said Una.



Pharaoh's eyes twinkled.  'I've met many and seen much,' he

said; 'but I haven't yet found any better or quieter or forbearinger

people than the Brethren and Sistern of the Moravian Church in

Philadelphia.  Nor will I ever forget my first Sunday - the service

was in English that week - with the smell of the flowers coming in

from Pastor Meder's garden where the big peach tree is, and me

looking at all the clean strangeness and thinking of 'tween decks

on the Embuscade only six days ago.  Being a boy, it seemed to me

it had lasted for ever, and was going on for ever.  But I didn't

know Toby then.  As soon as the dancing clock struck midnight

that Sunday - I was lying under the spinet - I heard Toby's fiddle.

He'd just done his supper, which he always took late and heavy.

"Gert," says he, "get the horses.  Liberty and Independence for

Ever!  The flowers appear upon the earth, and the time of the

singing of birds is come.  We are going to my country seat in

Lebanon."



'I rubbed my eyes, and fetched 'em out of the "Buck" stables.

Red Jacket was there saddling his, and when I'd packed the

saddle-bags we three rode up Race Street to the Ferry by starlight.

So we went travelling.  It's a kindly, softly country there, back of

Philadelphia among the German towns, Lancaster way.  Little

houses and bursting big barns, fat cattle, fat women, and all as

peaceful as Heaven might be if they farmed there.  Toby sold

medicines out of his saddlebags, and gave the French war-news to

folk along the roads.  Him and his long-hilted umberell was as

well known as the stage-coaches.  He took orders for that famous

Seneca Oil which he had the secret of from Red Jacket's Indians,

and he slept in friends' farmhouses, but he would shut all the

windows; so Red Jacket and me slept outside.  There's nothing to

hurt except snakes - and they slip away quick enough if you

thrash in the bushes.'



'I'd have liked that!' said Dan.



'I'd no fault to find with those days.  In the cool o' the morning

the cat-bird sings.  He's something to listen to.  And there's a smell

of wild grape-vine growing in damp hollows which you drop

into, after long rides in the heat, which is beyond compare for

sweetness.  So's the puffs out of the pine woods of afternoons.

Come sundown, the frogs strike up, and later on the fireflies

dance in the corn.  Oh me, the fireflies in the corn!  We were a week

or ten days on the road, tacking from one place to another - such

as Lancaster, Bethlehem-Ephrata - "thou Bethlehem-Ephrata."

No odds - I loved the going about.  And so we jogged 'into dozy

little Lebanon by the Blue Mountains, where Toby had a cottage

and a garden of all fruits.  He come north every year for this

wonderful Seneca Oil the Seneca Indians made for him.  They'd

never sell to any one else, and he doctored 'em with von Swieten

pills, which they valued more than their own oil.  He could do

what he chose with them, and, of course, he tried to make them

Moravians.  The Senecas are a seemly, quiet people, and they'd

had trouble enough from white men - American and English -

during the wars, to keep 'em in that walk.  They lived on a

Reservation by themselves away off by their lake.  Toby took me

up there, and they treated me as if I was their own blood brother.

Red Jacket said the mark of my bare feet in the dust was just like an

Indian's and my style of walking was similar.  I know I took to

their ways all over.'



'Maybe the gipsy drop in your blood helped you?' said Puck.



'Sometimes I think it did,' Pharaoh went on.  'Anyhow, Red

Jacket and Cornplanter, the other Seneca chief, they let me be

adopted into the tribe.  It's only a compliment, of course, but

Toby was angry when I showed up with my face painted.  They

gave me a side-name which means "Two Tongues," because,

d'ye see, I talked French and English.



'They had their own opinions (I've heard 'em) about the French

and the English, and the Americans.  They'd suffered from all of

'em during the wars, and they only wished to be left alone.  But

they thought a heap of the President of the United States.  Cornplanter

had had dealings with him in some French wars out West

when General Washington was only a lad.  His being President

afterwards made no odds to 'em.  They always called him Big

Hand, for he was a large-fisted man, and he was all of their notion

of a white chief.  Cornplanter 'ud sweep his blanket round him,

and after I'd filled his pipe he'd begin - "In the old days, long ago,

when braves were many and blankets were few, Big Hand said-"

If Red Jacket agreed to the say-so he'd trickle a little smoke out of

the corners of his mouth.  If he didn't, he'd blow through his

nostrils.  Then Cornplanter 'ud stop and Red Jacket 'ud take on.

Red Jacket was the better talker of the two.  I've laid and listened to

'em for hours.  Oh!  they knew General Washington well.  Cornplanter

used to meet him at Epply's - the great dancing-place in

the city before District Marshal William Nichols bought it.  They

told me he was always glad to see 'em, and he'd hear 'em out to

the end if they had anything on their minds.  They had a good deal

in those days.  I came at it by degrees, after I was adopted into the

tribe.  The talk up in Lebanon and everywhere else that summer

was about the French war with England and whether the United

States 'ud join in with France or make a peace treaty with

England.  Toby wanted peace so as he could go about the Reservation

buying his oils.  But most of the white men wished for war,

and they was angry because the President wouldn't give the sign

for it.  The newspaper said men was burning Guy Fawkes images

of General Washington and yelling after him in the streets of

Philadelphia.  You'd have been astonished what those two fine old

chiefs knew of the ins and outs of such matters.  The little I've

learned of politics I picked up from Cornplanter and Red Jacket

on the Reservation.  Toby used to read the Aurora newspaper.  He

was what they call a "Democrat," though our Church is against

the Brethren concerning themselves with politics.'



'I hate politics, too,' said Una, and Pharaoh laughed.



'I might ha' guessed it,' he said.  'But here's something that isn't

politics.  One hot evening late in August, Toby was reading the

newspaper on the stoop and Red Jacket was smoking under a

peach tree and I was fiddling.  Of a sudden Toby drops his Aurora.



'"I am an oldish man, too fond of my own comforts," he says.

"I will go to the Church which is in Philadelphia.  My brother,

lend me a spare pony.  I must be there tomorrow night."



'"Good!" says Red Jacket, looking at the sun.  "My brother

shall be there.  I will ride with him and bring back the ponies.



'I went to pack the saddle-bags.  Toby had cured me of asking

questions.  He stopped my fiddling if I did.  Besides, Indians don't

ask questions much and I wanted to be like 'em.



'When the horses were ready I jumped up.



'"Get off," says Toby.  "Stay and mind the cottage till I come

back.  The Lord has laid this on me, not on you.  I wish He

hadn't."



'He powders off down the Lancaster road, and I sat on the

doorstep wondering after him.  When I picked up the paper to

wrap his fiddle-strings in, I spelled out a piece about the yellow

fever being in Philadelphia so dreadful every one was running

away.  I was scared, for I was fond of Toby.  We never said much

to each other, but we fiddled together, and music's as good as

talking to them that understand.'



'Did Toby die of yellow fever?'Una asked.



'Not him!  There's justice left in the world still.  He went down

to the City and bled 'em well again in heaps.  He sent back word

by Red Jacket that, if there was war or he died, I was to bring the

oils along to the City, but till then I was to go on working in the

garden and Red Jacket was to see me do it.  Down at heart all

Indians reckon digging a squaw's business, and neither him nor

Cornplanter, when he relieved watch, was a hard task-Master.

We hired a nigger-boy to do our work, and a lazy grinning

runagate he was.  When I found Toby didn't die the minute he

reached town, why, boylike, I took him off my mind and went

with my Indians again.  Oh!  those days up north at Canasedago,

running races and gambling with the Senecas, or bee-hunting 'in

the woods, or fishing in the lake.'  Pharaoh sighed and looked

across the water.  'But it's best,' he went on suddenly, 'after the

first frosts.  You roll out o' your blanket and find every leaf left

green over night turned red and yellow, not by trees at a time, but

hundreds and hundreds of miles of 'em, like sunsets splattered

upside down.  On one of such days - the maples was flaming

scarlet and gold, and the sumach bushes were redder - Cornplanter

and Red Jacket came out in full war-dress, making the

very leaves look silly: feathered war-bonnets, yellow doeskin

leggings, fringed and tasselled, red horse-blankets, and their

bridles feathered and shelled and beaded no bounds.  I thought it

was war against the British till I saw their faces weren't painted,

and they only carried wrist-whips.  Then I hummed "Yankee

Doodle" at 'em.  They told me they was going to visit Big Hand

and find out for sure whether he meant to join the French in

fighting the English or make a peace treaty with England.  I

reckon those two would ha' gone out on the war-path at a nod

from Big Hand, but they knew well, if there was war 'twixt

England and the United States, their tribe 'ud catch it from both

parties same as in all the other wars.  They asked me to come along

and hold the ponies.  That puzzled me, because they always put

their ponies up at the "Buck" or Epply's when they went to see

General Washington in the city, and horse-holding is a nigger's

job.  Besides, I wasn't exactly dressed for it.'



'D'you mean you were dressed like an Indian?'Dan demanded.



Pharaoh looked a little abashed.  'This didn't happen at

Lebanon,' he said, 'but a bit farther north, on the Reservation; and

at that particular moment of time, so far as blanket, hair-band,

moccasins, and sunburn went, there wasn't much odds 'twix' me

and a young Seneca buck.  You may laugh'- he smoothed down

his long-skirted brown coat -'but I told you I took to their ways

all over.  I said nothing, though I was bursting to let out the

war-whoop like the young men had taught me.'



'No, and you don't let out one here, either,' said Puck before

Dan could ask.  'Go on, Brother Square-toes.'



'We went on.'  Pharaoh's narrow dark eyes gleamed and

danced.  'We went on - forty, fifty miles a day, for days on end -

we three braves.  And how a great tall Indian a-horse-back can

carry his war-bonnet at a canter through thick timber without

brushing a feather beats me!  My silly head was banged often

enough by low branches, but they slipped through like running

elk.  We had evening hymn-singing every night after they'd

blown their pipe-smoke to the quarters of heaven.  Where did we

go?  I'll tell you, but don't blame me if you're no wiser.  We took

the old war-trail from the end of the Lake along the East

Susquehanna through the Nantego country, right down to Fort

Shamokin on the Senachse river.  We crossed the Juniata by Fort

Granville, got into Shippensberg over the hills by the Ochwick

trail, and then to Williams Ferry (it's a bad one).  From Williams

Ferry, across the Shanedore, over the Blue Mountains, through

Ashby's Gap, and so south-east by south from there, till we found

the President at the back of his own plantations.  I'd hate to be

trailed by Indians in earnest.  They caught him like a partridge on a

stump.  After we'd left our ponies, we scouted forward through a

woody piece, and, creeping slower and slower, at last if my

moccasins even slipped Red Jacket 'ud turn and frown.  I heard

voices - Monsieur Genet's for choice - long before I saw anything,

and we pulled up at the edge of a clearing where some

niggers in grey-and-red liveries were holding horses, and half-a-

dozen gentlemen - but one was Genet - were talking among felled

timber.  I fancy they'd come to see Genet a piece on his road, for

his portmantle was with him.  I hid in between two logs as near to

the company as I be to that old windlass there.  I didn't need

anybody to show me Big Hand.  He stood up, very still, his legs a

little apart, listening to Genet, that French Ambassador, which

never had more manners than a Bosham tinker.  Genet was as

good as ordering him to declare war on England at once.  I had

heard that clack before on the Embuscade.  He said he'd stir up the

whole United States to have war with England, whether Big

Hand liked it or not.



'Big Hand heard him out to the last end.  I looked behind me,

and my two chiefs had vanished like smoke.  Says Big Hand,

"That is very forcibly put, Monsieur Genet -"



'"Citizen - citizen!" the fellow spits in.  "I, at least, am

a Republican!"



"Citizen Genet," he says, "you may be sure it will receive my

fullest consideration."  This seemed to take Citizen Genet back a

piece.  He rode off grumbling, and never gave his nigger a penny.

No gentleman!



'The others all assembled round Big Hand then, and, in their

way, they said pretty much what Genet had said.  They put it to

him, here was France and England at war, in a manner of speaking,

right across the United States' stomach, and paying no

regards to any one.  The French was searching American ships on

pretence they was helping England, but really for to steal the

goods.  The English was doing the same, only t'other way round,

and besides searching, they was pressing American citizens into

their Navy to help them fight France, on pretence that those

Americans was lawful British subjects.  His gentlemen put this

very clear to Big Hand.  It didn't look to them, they said, as though

the United States trying to keep out of the fight was any advantage

to her, because she only catched it from both French and

English.  They said that nine out of ten good Americans was crazy

to fight the English then and there.  They wouldn't say whether

that was right or wrong; they only wanted Big Hand to turn it

over in his mind.  He did - for a while.  I saw Red Jacket and

Cornplanter watching him from the far side of the clearing, and

how they had slipped round there was another mystery.  Then Big

Hand drew himself up, and he let his gentlemen have it.'



'Hit 'em?' Dan asked.



'No, nor yet was it what you might call swearing.  He - he

blasted 'em with his natural speech.  He asked them half-a-dozen

times over whether the United States had enough armed ships for

any shape or sort of war with any one.  He asked 'em, if they

thought she had those ships, to give him those ships, and they

looked on the ground, as if they expected to find 'em there.  He put

it to 'em whether, setting ships aside, their country - I reckon he

gave 'em good reasons - whether the United States was ready or

able to face a new big war; she having but so few years back

wound up one against England, and being all holds full of her

own troubles.  As I said, the strong way he laid it all before 'em

blasted 'em, and when he'd done it was like a still in the woods

after a storm.  A little man - but they all looked little - pipes up like

a young rook in a blowed-down nest, "Nevertheless, General, it

seems you will be compelled to fight England."  Quick Big Hand

wheeled on him, "And is there anything in my past which makes

you think I am averse to fighting Great Britain?"



'Everybody laughed except him.  "Oh, General, you mistake

us entirely!" they says.  "I trust so," he says.  "But I know my

duty.  We must have peace with England."



'"At any price?" says the man with the rook's voice.



'"At any price," says he, word by word.  "Our ships will be

searched - our citizens will be pressed, but -"



'"Then what about the Declaration of Independence?" says one.



'"Deal with facts, not fancies," says Big Hand.  "The United

States are in no position to fight England."



'"But think of public opinion," another one starts up.  "The

feeling in Philadelphia alone is at fever heat."



'He held up one of his big hands.  "Gentlemen," he says - slow

he spoke, but his voice carried far - "I have to think of our

country.  Let me assure you that the treaty with Great Britain will

be made though every city in the Union burn me in effigy."



'"At any price?" the actor-like chap keeps on croaking.



'"The treaty must be made on Great Britain's own terms.

What else can I do?"

'He turns his back on 'em and they looked at each other and

slinked off to the horses, leaving him alone: and then I saw he was

an old man.  Then Red Jacket and Cornplanter rode down the

clearing from the far end as though they had just chanced along.

Back went Big Hand's shoulders, up went his head, and he

stepped forward one single pace with a great deep Hough!  so

pleased he was.  That was a statelified meeting to behold - three

big men, and two of 'em looking like jewelled images among the

spattle of gay-coloured leaves.  I saw my chiefs' war-bonnets

sinking together, down and down.  Then they made the sign

which no Indian makes outside of the Medicine Lodges - a sweep

of the right hand just clear of the dust and an inbend of the left

knee at the same time, and those proud eagle feathers almost

touched his boot-top.'



'What did it mean?' said Dan.



'Mean!' Pharaoh cried.  'Why it's what you - what we - it's the

Sachems' way of sprinkling the sacred corn-meal in front of - oh!

it's a piece of Indian compliment really, and it signifies that you

are a very big chief.



'Big Hand looked down on 'em.  First he says quite softly, "My

brothers know it is not easy to be a chief."  Then his voice grew.

"My children," says he, "what is in your minds?"



'Says Cornplanter, "We came to ask whether there will be war

with King George's men, but we have heard what our Father has

said to his chiefs.  We will carry away that talk in our hearts to tell

to our people."



'"No," says Big Hand.  "Leave all that talk behind - it was

between white men only - but take this message from me to your

people - 'There will be no war.'"



'His gentlemen were waiting, so they didn't delay him-, only

Cornplanter says, using his old side-name, "Big Hand, did you

see us among the timber just now?"



'"Surely," says he.  "You taught me to look behind trees when

we were both young."  And with that he cantered off.



'Neither of my chiefs spoke till we were back on our ponies

again and a half-hour along the home-trail.  Then Cornplanter

says to Red Jacket, "We will have the Corn-dance this year.  There

will be no war."  And that was all there was to it.'



Pharaoh stood up as though he had finished.



'Yes,' said Puck, rising too.  'And what came out of it in the

long run?'



'Let me get at my story my own way,'was the answer.  'Look!

it's later than I thought.  That Shoreham smack's thinking of her supper.'

The children looked across the darkening Channel.  A smack

had hoisted a lantern and slowly moved west where Brighton pier

lights ran out in a twinkling line.  When they turned round The

Gap was empty behind them.



'I expect they've packed our trunks by now,' said Dan.  'This

time tomorrow we'll be home.'
