


	"A Death in the Desert"




Everett Hilgarde was conscious that the man in the seat

across the aisle was looking at him intently.  He was a large,

florid man, wore a conspicuous diamond solitaire upon his third

finger, and Everett judged him to be a traveling salesman of some

sort.  He had the air of an adaptable fellow who had been about

the world and who could keep cool and clean under almost any

circumstances.



The "High Line Flyer," as this train was derisively called

among railroad men, was jerking along through the hot afternoon

over the monotonous country between Holdridge and Cheyenne. 

Besides the blond man and himself the only occupants of the car

were two dusty, bedraggled-looking girls who had been to the

Exposition at Chicago, and who were earnestly discussing the cost

of their first trip out of Colorado.  The four uncomfortable

passengers were covered with a sediment of fine, yellow dust

which clung to their hair and eyebrows like gold powder.  It blew

up in clouds from the bleak, lifeless country through which they

passed, until they were one color with the sagebrush and

sandhills.  The gray-and-yellow desert was varied only by

occasional ruins of deserted towns, and the little red boxes of

station houses, where the spindling trees and sickly vines in the

bluegrass yards made little green reserves fenced off in that

confusing wilderness of sand.



As the slanting rays of the sun beat in stronger and

stronger through the car windows, the blond gentleman asked the

ladies' permission to remove his coat, and sat in his lavender

striped shirt sleeves, with a black silk handkerchief tucked

carefully about his collar.  He had seemed interested in Everett

since they had boarded the train at Holdridge, and kept

glancing at him curiously and then looking reflectively out of

the window, as though he were trying to recall something.  But

wherever Everett went someone was almost sure to look at him with

that curious interest, and it had ceased to embarrass or annoy him.

Presently the stranger, seeming satisfied with his observation,

leaned back in his seat, half-closed his eyes, and began softly

to whistle the "Spring Song" from <i>Proserpine</i>, the cantata

that a dozen years before had made its young composer famous in a

night.  Everett had heard that air on guitars in Old Mexico, on

mandolins at college glees, on cottage organs in New England

hamlets, and only two weeks ago he had heard it played on

sleighbells at a variety theater in Denver.  There was literally no

way of escaping his brother's precocity.  Adriance could live on

the other side of the Atlantic, where his youthful indiscretions

were forgotten in his mature achievements, but his brother had

never been able to outrun <i>Proserpine</i>, and here he found it

again in the Colorado sand hills.  Not that Everett was exactly

ashamed of <i>Proserpine</i>; only a man of genius could have

written it, but it was the sort of thing that a man of genius

outgrows as soon as he can.



Everett unbent a trifle and smiled at his neighbor across

the aisle.  Immediately the large man rose and, coming over,

dropped into the seat facing Hilgarde, extending his card.



"Dusty ride, isn't it?  I don't mind it myself; I'm used to

it.  Born and bred in de briar patch, like Br'er Rabbit.  I've

been trying to place you for a long time; I think I must have met

you before."



"Thank you," said Everett, taking the card; "my name is

Hilgarde.  You've probably met my brother, Adriance; people often

mistake me for him."



The traveling man brought his hand down upon his knee with

such vehemence that the solitaire blazed.



"So I was right after all, and if you're not Adriance

Hilgarde, you're his double.  I thought I couldn't be mistaken. 

Seen him?  Well, I guess!  I never missed one of his recitals at

the Auditorium, and he played the piano score of <i>Proserpine</i>

through to us once at the Chicago Press Club.  I used to be on

the <i>Commercial</i> there before I <i>146</i> began to travel

for the publishing department of the concern.  So you're Hilgarde's

brother, and here I've run into you at the jumping-off place. 

Sounds like a newspaper yarn, doesn't it?"



The traveling man laughed and offered Everett a cigar, and

plied him with questions on the only subject that people ever

seemed to care to talk to Everett about.  At length the salesman

and the two girls alighted at a Colorado way station, and Everett

went on to Cheyenne alone.



The train pulled into Cheyenne at nine o'clock, late by a

matter of four hours or so; but no one seemed particularly

concerned at its tardiness except the station agent, who grumbled

at being kept in the office overtime on a summer night.  When

Everett alighted from the train he walked down the platform and

stopped at the track crossing, uncertain as to what direction he

should take to reach a hotel.  A phaeton stood near the crossing,

and a woman held the reins.  She was dressed in white, and her

figure was clearly silhouetted against the cushions, though it

was too dark to see her face.  Everett had scarcely noticed her,

when the switch engine came puffing up from the opposite

direction, and the headlight threw a strong glare of light on his

face.  Suddenly the woman in the phaeton uttered a low cry and

dropped the reins.  Everett started forward and caught the

horse's head, but the animal only lifted its ears and whisked its

tail in impatient surprise.  The woman sat perfectly still, her

head sunk between her shoulders and her handkerchief pressed to

her face.  Another woman came out of the depot and hurried toward

the phaeton, crying, "Katharine, dear, what is the matter?"



Everett hesitated a moment in painful embarrassment, then

lifted his hat and passed on.  He was accustomed to sudden

recognitions in the most impossible places, especially by women,

but this cry out of the night had shaken him.



While Everett was breakfasting the next morning, the headwaiter

leaned over his chair to murmur that there was a gentleman waiting

to see him in the parlor.  Everett finished his coffee and went in

the direction indicated, where he found his visitor restlessly

pacing the floor.  His whole manner betrayed a high degree of

agitation, though his physique was not that of a man whose nerves

lie near the surface.  He was something below medium height,

square-shouldered and solidly built.  His thick, closely cut hair

was beginning to show gray about the ears, and his bronzed face was

heavily lined.  His square brown hands were locked behind him, and

he held his shoulders like a man conscious of responsibilities;

yet, as he turned to greet Everett, there was an incongruous

diffidence in his address.



"Good morning, Mr. Hilgarde," he said, extending his hand;

"I found your name on the hotel register.  My name is Gaylord. 

I'm afraid my sister startled you at the station last night, Mr.

Hilgarde, and I've come around to apologize."



"Ah!  The young lady in the phaeton?  I'm sure I didn't know

whether I had anything to do with her alarm or not.  If I did, it

is I who owe the apology."



The man colored a little under the dark brown of his face.



"Oh, it's nothing you could help, sir, I fully understand

that.  You see, my sister used to be a pupil of your brother's,

and it seems you favor him; and when the switch engine threw a

light on your face it startled her."



Everett wheeled about in his chair.  "Oh! <i>Katharine</i> Gaylord!

Is it possible!  Now it's you who have given me a turn.  Why, I

used to know her when I was a boy.  What on earth--"



"Is she doing here?" said Gaylord, grimly filling out the

pause.  "You've got at the heart of the matter.  You knew my

sister had been in bad health for a long time?"



"No, I had never heard a word of that.  The last I knew of

her she was singing in London.  My brother and I correspond

infrequently and seldom get beyond family matters.  I am deeply

sorry to hear this.  There are more reasons why I am concerned

than I can tell you."



The lines in Charley Gaylord's brow relaxed a little.



"What I'm trying to say, Mr. Hilgarde, is that she wants to see

you.  I hate to ask you, but she's so set on it.  We live several

miles out of town, but my rig's below, and I can take you out

anytime you can go."



"I can go now, and it will give me real pleasure to do so," said

Everett, quickly.  "I'll get my hat and be with you in a moment."



When he came downstairs Everett found a cart at the door,

and Charley Gaylord drew a long sigh of relief as he gathered up

the reins and settled back into his own element.



"You see, I think I'd better tell you something about my

sister before you see her, and I don't know just where to begin. 

She traveled in Europe with your brother and his wife, and sang

at a lot of his concerts; but I don't know just how much you know

about her."



"Very little, except that my brother always thought her the

most gifted of his pupils, and that when I knew her she was very

young and very beautiful and turned my head sadly for a while."



Everett saw that Gaylord's mind was quite engrossed by his

grief.  He was wrought up to the point where his reserve and

sense of proportion had quite left him, and his trouble was the

one vital thing in the world.  "That's the whole thing," he went

on, flicking his horses with the whip.



"She was a great woman, as you say, and she didn't come of a

great family.  She had to fight her own way from the first.  She

got to Chicago, and then to New York, and then to Europe, where

she went up like lightning, and got a taste for it all; and now

she's dying here like a rat in a hole, out of her own world, and

she can't fall back into ours.  We've grown apart, some way--

miles and miles apart--and I'm afraid she's fearfully unhappy."



"It's a very tragic story that you are telling me, Gaylord,"

said Everett.  They were well out into the country now, spinning

along over the dusty plains of red grass, with the ragged-blue

outline of the mountains before them.



"Tragic!" cried Gaylord, starting up in his seat, "my God, man,

nobody will ever know how tragic.  It's a tragedy I live with and

eat with and sleep with, until I've lost my grip on everything. 

You see she had made a good bit of money, but she spent it all

going to health resorts.  It's her lungs, you know.  I've got money

enough to send her anywhere, but the doctors all say it's no use. 

She hasn't the ghost of a chance.  It's just getting through the

days now.  I had no notion she was half so bad before she came to

me.  She just wrote that she was all run down.  Now that she's

here, I think she'd be happier anywhere under the sun, but she

won't leave.  She says it's easier to let go of life here, and that

to go East would be dying twice.  There was a time when I was a

brakeman with a run out of Bird City, Iowa, and she was a little

thing I could carry on my shoulder, when I could get her everything

on earth she wanted, and she hadn't a wish my $80 a month didn't

cover; and now, when I've got a little property together, I can't

buy her a night's sleep!"



Everett saw that, whatever Charley Gaylord's present status

in the world might be, he had brought the brakeman's heart up the

ladder with him, and the brakeman's frank avowal of sentiment. 

Presently Gaylord went on:



"You can understand how she has outgrown her family.  We're

all a pretty common sort, railroaders from away back.  My father

was a conductor.  He died when we were kids.  Maggie, my other

sister, who lives with me, was a telegraph operator here while I

was getting my grip on things.  We had no education to speak of. 

I have to hire a stenographer because I can't spell straight--the

Almighty couldn't teach me to spell.  The things that make up

life to Kate are all Greek to me, and there's scarcely a point

where we touch any more, except in our recollections of the old

times when we were all young and happy together, and Kate sang in

a church choir in Bird City.  But I believe, Mr. Hilgarde, that

if she can see just one person like you, who knows about the

things and people she's interested in, it will give her about the

only comfort she can have now."



The reins slackened in Charley Gaylord's hand as they drew

up before a showily painted house with many gables and a round

tower.  "Here we are," he said, turning to Everett, "and I guess

we understand each other."



They were met at the door by a thin, colorless woman, whom

Gaylord introduced as "my sister, Maggie."  She asked her brother

to show Mr. Hilgarde into the music room, where Katharine wished

to see him alone.



When Everett entered the music room he gave a little start

of surprise, feeling that he had stepped from the glaring Wyoming

sunlight into some New York studio that he had always known.  He

wondered which it was of those countless studios, high up under

the roofs, over banks and shops and wholesale houses, that this

room resembled, and he looked incredulously out of the window at

the gray plain that ended in the great upheaval of the Rockies.



The haunting air of familiarity about the room perplexed

him.  Was it a copy of some particular studio he knew, or was it

merely the studio atmosphere that seemed so individual and

poignantly reminiscent here in Wyoming?  He sat down in a reading

chair and looked keenly about him.  Suddenly his eye fell upon a

large photograph of his brother above the piano.  Then it all

became clear to him: this was veritably his brother's room.  If

it were not an exact copy of one of the many studios that

Adriance had fitted up in various parts of the world, wearying of

them and leaving almost before the renovator's varnish had dried,

it was at least in the same tone.  In every detail Adriance's

taste was so manifest that the room seemed to exhale his

personality.



Among the photographs on the wall there was one of Katharine

Gaylord, taken in the days when Everett had known her, and when

the flash of her eye or the flutter of her skirt was enough to

set his boyish heart in a tumult.  Even now, he stood before the

portrait with a certain degree of embarrassment.  It was the face

of a woman already old in her first youth, thoroughly

sophisticated and a trifle hard, and it told of what her brother

had called her fight.  The camaraderie of her frank, confident

eyes was qualified by the deep lines about her mouth and the

curve of the lips, which was both sad and cynical.  Certainly she

had more good will than confidence toward the world, and the

bravado of her smile could not conceal the shadow of an unrest

that was almost discontent.  The chief charm of the woman, as

Everett had known her, lay in her superb figure and in her eyes,

which possessed a warm, lifegiving quality like the sunlight;

eyes which glowed with a sort of perpetual <i>salutat</i> to the

world.  Her head, Everett remembered as peculiarly well-shaped and

proudly poised.  There had been always a little of the imperatrix

about her, and her pose in the photograph revived all his old

impressions of her unattachedness, of how absolutely and valiantly

she stood alone.



Everett was still standing before the picture, his hands behind him

and his head inclined, when he heard the door open.  A very tall

woman advanced toward him, holding out her hand.  As she started to

speak, she coughed slightly; then, laughing, said, in a low, rich

voice, a trifle husky: "You see I make the traditional Camille

entrance--with the cough.  How good of you to come, Mr. Hilgarde."



Everett was acutely conscious that while addressing him she

was not looking at him at all, and, as he assured her of his

pleasure in coming, he was glad to have an opportunity to collect

himself.  He had not reckoned upon the ravages of a long illness. 

The long, loose folds of her white gown had been especially

designed to conceal the sharp outlines of her emaciated body, but

the stamp of her disease was there; simple and ugly and obtrusive,

a pitiless fact that could not be disguised or evaded.  The

splendid shoulders were stooped, there was a swaying unevenness in

her gait, her arms seemed disproportionately long, and her hands

were transparently white and cold to the touch.  The changes in her

face were less obvious; the proud carriage of the head, the warm,

clear eyes, even the delicate flush of color in her cheeks, all

defiantly remained, though they were all in a lower key--older,

sadder, softer.



She sat down upon the divan and began nervously to arrange the

pillows.  "I know I'm not an inspiring object to look upon, but you

must be quite frank and sensible about that and get used to it at

once, for we've no time to lose.  And if I'm a trifle irritable you

won't mind?--for I'm more than usually nervous."



"Don't bother with me this morning, if you are tired," urged

Everett.  "I can come quite as well tomorrow."



"Gracious, no!" she protested, with a flash of that quick,

keen humor that he remembered as a part of her.  "It's solitude

that I'm tired to death of--solitude and the wrong kind of people. 

You see, the minister, not content with reading the prayers for the

sick, called on me this morning.  He happened to be riding

by on his bicycle and felt it his duty to stop.  Of course, he

disapproves of my profession, and I think he takes it for granted

that I have a dark past.  The funniest feature of his conversation

is that he is always excusing my own vocation to me--condoning it,

you know--and trying to patch up my peace with my conscience by

suggesting possible noble uses for what he kindly calls my talent."



Everett laughed.  "Oh!  I'm afraid I'm not the person to call

after such a serious gentleman--I can't sustain the situation. 

At my best I don't reach higher than low comedy.  Have you

decided to which one of the noble uses you will devote yourself?"



Katharine lifted her hands in a gesture of renunciation and

exclaimed: "I'm not equal to any of them, not even the least

noble.  I didn't study that method."



She laughed and went on nervously: "The parson's not so bad. 

His English never offends me, and he has read Gibbon's <i>Decline

and Fall</i>, all five volumes, and that's something.  Then, he has

been to New York, and that's a great deal.  But how we are losing

time!  Do tell me about New York; Charley says you're just on from

there.  How does it look and taste and smell just now?  I think a

whiff of the Jersey ferry would be as flagons of cod-liver oil to

me.  Who conspicuously walks the Rialto now, and what does he or

she wear?  Are the trees still green in Madison Square, or have

they grown brown and dusty?  Does the chaste Diana on the Garden

Theatre still keep her vestal vows through all the exasperating

changes of weather?  Who has your brother's old studio now, and

what misguided aspirants practice their scales in the rookeries

about Carnegie Hall?  What do people go to see at the theaters,

and what do they eat and drink there in the world nowadays?  You

see, I'm homesick for it all, from the Battery to Riverside.  Oh,

let me die in Harlem!"  She was interrupted by a violent attack

of coughing, and Everett, embarrassed by her discomfort, plunged

into gossip about the professional people he had met in town

during the summer and the musical outlook for the winter.  He was

diagraming with his pencil, on the back of an old envelope he

found in his pocket, some new mechanical device to be

used at the Metropolitan in the production of the <i>Rheingold</i>,

when he became conscious that she was looking at him intently, and

that he was talking to the four walls.



Katharine was lying back among the pillows, watching him

through half-closed eyes, as a painter looks at a picture.  He

finished his explanation vaguely enough and put the envelope back

in his pocket.  As he did so she said, quietly: "How wonderfully

like Adriance you are!" and he felt as though a crisis of some

sort had been met and tided over.



He laughed, looking up at her with a touch of pride in his

eyes that made them seem quite boyish.  "Yes, isn't it absurd?

It's almost as awkward as looking like Napoleon--but, after all,

there are some advantages.  It has made some of his friends like

me, and I hope it will make you."



Katharine smiled and gave him a quick, meaning glance from

under her lashes.  "Oh, it did that long ago.  What a haughty,

reserved youth you were then, and how you used to stare at people

and then blush and look cross if they paid you back in your own

coin.  Do you remember that night when you took me home from a

rehearsal and scarcely spoke a word to me?"



"It was the silence of admiration," protested Everett, "very

crude and boyish, but very sincere and not a little painful. 

Perhaps you suspected something of the sort?  I remember you saw

fit to be very grown-up and worldly.



"I believe I suspected a pose; the one that college boys

usually affect with singers--'an earthen vessel in love with a

star,' you know.  But it rather surprised me in you, for you must

have seen a good deal of your brother's pupils.  Or had you an

omnivorous capacity, and elasticity that always met the

occasion?"



"Don't ask a man to confess the follies of his youth," said

Everett, smiling a little sadly; "I am sensitive about some of

them even now.  But I was not so sophisticated as you imagined. 

I saw my brother's pupils come and go, but that was about all. 

Sometimes I was called on to play accompaniments, or to fill out

a vacancy at a rehearsal, or to order a carriage for an

infuriated soprano who had thrown up her part.  But they never

spent any time on me, unless it was to notice the resemblance you

speak of."



"Yes", observed Katharine, thoughtfully, "I noticed it then,

too; but it has grown as you have grown older.  That is rather

strange, when you have lived such different lives.  It's not

merely an ordinary family likeness of feature, you know, but a

sort of interchangeable individuality; the suggestion of the

other man's personality in your face like an air transposed to

another key.  But I'm not attempting to define it; it's beyond

me; something altogether unusual and a trifle--well, uncanny,"

she finished, laughing.



"I remember," Everett said seriously, twirling the pencil

between his fingers and looking, as he sat with his head thrown

back, out under the red window blind which was raised just a

little, and as it swung back and forth in the wind revealed the

glaring panorama of the desert--a blinding stretch of yellow,

flat as the sea in dead calm, splotched here and there with deep

purple shadows; and, beyond, the ragged-blue outline of the

mountains and the peaks of snow, white as the white clouds--"I

remember, when I was a little fellow I used to be very sensitive

about it. I don't think it exactly displeased me, or that I would

have had it otherwise if I could, but it seemed to me like a

birthmark, or something not to be lightly spoken of.  People were

naturally always fonder of Ad than of me, and I used to feel the

chill of reflected light pretty often.  It came into even my

relations with my mother.  Ad went abroad to study when he was

absurdly young, you know, and mother was all broken up over it. 

She did her whole duty by each of us, but it was sort of

generally understood among us that she'd have made burnt

offerings of us all for Ad any day.  I was a little fellow then,

and when she sat alone on the porch in the summer dusk she used

sometimes to call me to her and turn my face up in the light that

streamed out through the shutters and kiss me, and then I always

knew she was thinking of Adriance."



"Poor little chap," said Katharine, and her tone was a

trifle huskier than usual.  "How fond people have always been of

Adriance!  Now tell me the latest news of him.  I haven't heard,

except through the press, for a year or more.  He was in Algeria

then, in the valley of the Chelif, riding horseback night and day

in an Arabian costume, and in his usual enthusiastic fashion he

had quite made up his mind to adopt the Mohammedan faith

and become as nearly an Arab as possible.  How many countries and

faiths has be adopted, I wonder?  Probably he was playing Arab to

himself all the time.  I remember he was a sixteenth-century duke

in Florence once for weeks together."



"Oh, that's Adriance," chuckled Everett.  "He is himself

barely long enough to write checks and be measured for his

clothes.  I didn't hear from him while he was an Arab; I missed

that."



"He was writing an Algerian suite for the piano then; it

must be in the publisher's hands by this time.  I have been too

ill to answer his letter, and have lost touch with him."



Everett drew a letter from his pocket.  "This came about a

month ago.  It's chiefly about his new opera, which is to be

brought out in London next winter.  Read it at your leisure."



"I think I shall keep it as a hostage, so that I may be sure

you will come again.  Now I want you to play for me.  Whatever

you like; but if there is anything new in the world, in mercy let

me hear it.  For nine months I have heard nothing but 'The

Baggage Coach Ahead' and 'She Is My Baby's Mother.'"



He sat down at the piano, and Katharine sat near him,

absorbed in his remarkable physical likeness to his brother and

trying to discover in just what it consisted.  She told herself

that it was very much as though a sculptor's finished work had

been rudely copied in wood.  He was of a larger build than

Adriance, and his shoulders were broad and heavy, while those of

his brother were slender and rather girlish.  His face was of the

same oval mold, but it was gray and darkened about the mouth by

continual shaving.  His eyes were of the same inconstant April

color, but they were reflective and rather dull; while Adriance's

were always points of highlight, and always meaning another thing

than the thing they meant yesterday.  But it was hard to see why

this earnest man should so continually suggest that lyric,

youthful face that was as gay as his was grave.  For Adriance,

though he was ten years the elder, and though his hair was

streaked with silver, had the face of a boy of twenty, so mobile

that it told his thoughts before he could put them into words.

A contralto, famous for the extravagance of her vocal

methods and of her affections, had once said to him that the

shepherd boys who sang in the Vale of Tempe must certainly have

looked like young Hilgarde; and the comparison had been

appropriated by a hundred shyer women who preferred to quote.





As Everett sat smoking on the veranda of the InterOcean

House that night, he was a victim to random recollections.  His

infatuation for Katharine Gaylord, visionary as it was, had been

the most serious of his boyish love affairs, and had long

disturbed his bachelor dreams.  He was painfully timid in

everything relating to the emotions, and his hurt had withdrawn

him from the society of women.  The fact that it was all so done

and dead and far behind him, and that the woman had lived her

life out since then, gave him an oppressive sense of age and

loss.  He bethought himself of something he had read about

"sitting by the hearth and remembering the faces of women without

desire," and felt himself an octogenarian.



He remembered how bitter and morose he had grown during his

stay at his brother's studio when Katharine Gaylord was working

there, and how he had wounded Adriance on the night of his last

concert in New York.  He had sat there in the box while his

brother and Katharine were called back again and again after the

last number, watching the roses go up over the footlights until

they were stacked half as high as the piano, brooding, in his

sullen boy's heart, upon the pride those two felt in each other's

work--spurring each other to their best and beautifully

contending in song.  The footlights had seemed a hard, glittering

line drawn sharply between their life and his; a circle of flame

set about those splendid children of genius.  He walked back to

his hotel alone and sat in his window staring out on Madison

Square until long after midnight, resolving to beat no more at

doors that he could never enter and realizing more keenly than

ever before how far this glorious world of beautiful creations

lay from the paths of men like himself.  He told himself that he

had in common with this woman only the baser uses of life.



Everett's week in Cheyenne stretched to three, and he saw no

prospect of release except through the thing he dreaded.  The

bright, windy days of the Wyoming autumn passed swiftly.  Letters

and telegrams came urging him to hasten his trip to the coast,

but he resolutely postponed his business engagements.  The

mornings he spent on one of Charley Gaylord's ponies, or fishing

in the mountains, and in the evenings he sat in his room writing

letters or reading.  In the afternoon he was usually at his post

of duty.  Destiny, he reflected, seems to have very positive

notions about the sort of parts we are fitted to play.  The scene

changes and the compensation varies, but in the end we usually

find that we have played the same class of business from first to

last.  Everett had been a stopgap all his life.  He remembered

going through a looking glass labyrinth when he was a boy and

trying gallery after gallery, only at every turn to bump his nose

against his own face--which, indeed, was not his own, but his

brother's.  No matter what his mission, east or west, by land or

sea, he was sure to find himself employed in his brother's

business, one of the tributary lives which helped to swell the

shining current of Adriance Hilgarde's.  It was not the first

time that his duty had been to comfort, as best he could, one of

the broken things his brother's imperious speed had cast aside

and forgotten.  He made no attempt to analyze the situation or to

state it in exact terms; but he felt Katharine Gaylord's need for

him, and he accepted it as a commission from his brother to help

this woman to die.  Day by day he felt her demands on him grow

more imperious, her need for him grow more acute and positive;

and day by day he felt that in his peculiar relation to her his

own individuality played a smaller and smaller part.  His power

to minister to her comfort, he saw, lay solely in his link with

his brother's life.  He understood all that his physical

resemblance meant to her.  He knew that she sat by him always

watching for some common trick of gesture, some familiar play of

expression, some illusion of light and shadow, in which he should

seem wholly Adriance.  He knew that she lived upon this and that

her disease fed upon it; that it sent shudders of remembrance

through her and that in the exhaustion which followed this

turmoil of her dying senses, she slept deep and sweet and

dreamed of youth and art and days in a certain old Florentine

garden, and not of bitterness and death.



The question which most perplexed him was, "How much shall I

know?  How much does she wish me to know?"  A few days after his

first meeting with Katharine Gaylord, he had cabled his brother

to write her.  He had merely said that she was mortally ill; he

could depend on Adriance to say the right thing--that was a part

of his gift.  Adriance always said not only the right thing, but

the opportune, graceful, exquisite thing.  His phrases took the

color of the moment and the then-present condition, so that they

never savored of perfunctory compliment or frequent usage.  He

always caught the lyric essence of the moment, the poetic

suggestion of every situation.  Moreover, he usually did the

right thing, the opportune, graceful, exquisite thing--except,

when he did very cruel things--bent upon making people happy

when their existence touched his, just as he insisted that his

material environment should be beautiful; lavishing upon those

near him all the warmth and radiance of his rich nature, all the

homage of the poet and troubadour, and, when they were no longer

near, forgetting--for that also was a part of Adriance's gift.



Three weeks after Everett had sent his cable, when he made

his daily call at the gaily painted ranch house, he found

Katharine laughing like a schoolgirl.  "Have you ever thought,"

she said, as he entered the music room, "how much these seances

of ours are like Heine's 'Florentine Nights,' except that I don't

give you an opportunity to monopolize the conversation as Heine

did?"  She held his hand longer than usual, as she greeted him,

and looked searchingly up into his face.  "You are the kindest

man living; the kindest," she added, softly.



Everett's gray face colored faintly as he drew his hand

away, for he felt that this time she was looking at him and not

at a whimsical caricature of his brother.  "Why, what have I done

now?" he asked, lamely.  "I can't remember having sent you any

stale candy or champagne since yesterday."



She drew a letter with a foreign postmark from between

the leaves of a book and held it out, smiling.  "You got him to

write it.  Don't say you didn't, for it came direct, you see, and

the last address I gave him was a place in Florida.  This deed

shall be remembered of you when I am with the just in Paradise.

But one thing you did not ask him to do, for you didn't know about

it.  He has sent me his latest work, the new sonata, the most

ambitious thing he has ever done, and you are to play it for me

directly, though it looks horribly intricate.  But first for the

letter; I think you would better read it aloud to me."



Everett sat down in a low chair facing the window seat in

which she reclined with a barricade of pillows behind her.  He

opened the letter, his lashes half-veiling his kind eyes, and saw

to his satisfaction that it was a long one--wonderfully tactful

and tender, even for Adriance, who was tender with his valet and

his stable boy, with his old gondolier and the beggar-women who

prayed to the saints for him.



The letter was from Granada, written in the Alhambra, as he

sat by the fountain of the Patio di Lindaraxa.  The air was

heavy, with the warm fragrance of the South and full of the sound

of splashing, running water, as it had been in a certain old

garden in Florence, long ago.  The sky was one great turquoise,

heated until it glowed.  The wonderful Moorish arches threw

graceful blue shadows all about him.  He had sketched an outline

of them on the margin of his notepaper.  The subtleties of Arabic

decoration had cast an unholy spell over him, and the brutal

exaggerations of Gothic art were a bad dream, easily forgotten. 

The Alhambra itself had, from the first, seemed perfectly

familiar to him, and he knew that he must have trod that court,

sleek and brown and obsequious, centuries before Ferdinand rode

into Andalusia.  The letter was full of confidences about his

work, and delicate allusions to their old happy days of study and

comradeship, and of her own work, still so warmly remembered and

appreciatively discussed everywhere he went.



As Everett folded the letter he felt that Adriance had

divined the thing needed and had risen to it in his own wonderful

way.  The letter was consistently egotistical and seemed to him

even a trifle patronizing, yet it was just what she had

wanted.  A strong realization of his brother's charm and intensity

and power came over him; he felt the breath of that whirlwind of

flame in which Adriance passed, consuming all in his path, and

himself even more resolutely than he consumed others.  Then he

looked down at this white, burnt-out brand that lay before him.

"Like him, isn't it?" she said, quietly.



"I think I can scarcely answer his letter, but when you see

him next you can do that for me.  I want you to tell him many

things for me, yet they can all be summed up in this: I want him

to grow wholly into his best and greatest self, even at the cost

of the dear boyishness that is half his charm to you and me.  Do

you understand me?"



"I know perfectly well what you mean," answered Everett,

thoughtfully.  "I have often felt so about him myself.  And yet

it's difficult to prescribe for those fellows; so little makes,

so little mars."



Katharine raised herself upon her elbow, and her face

flushed with feverish earnestness.  "Ah, but it is the waste of

himself that I mean; his lashing himself out on stupid and

uncomprehending people until they take him at their own estimate. 

He can kindle marble, strike fire from putty, but is it worth

what it costs him?"



"Come, come," expostulated Everett, alarmed at her excitement. 

"Where is the new sonata?  Let him speak for himself."



He sat down at the piano and began playing the first

movement, which was indeed the voice of Adriance, his proper

speech.  The sonata was the most ambitious work he had done up to

that time and marked the transition from his purely lyric vein to

a deeper and nobler style.  Everett played intelligently and with

that sympathetic comprehension which seems peculiar to a certain

lovable class of men who never accomplish anything in particular. 

When he had finished he turned to Katharine.



"How he has grown!" she cried.  "What the three last years have

done for him!  He used to write only the tragedies of passion; but

this is the tragedy of the soul, the shadow coexistent with the

soul.  This is the tragedy of effort and failure, the thing Keats

called hell.  This is my tragedy, as I lie here spent by the

racecourse, listening to the feet of the runners as they pass me. 

Ah, God!  The swift feet of the runners!"



She turned her face away and covered it with her straining

hands.  Everett crossed over to her quickly and knelt beside her. 

In all the days he had known her she had never before, beyond an

occasional ironical jest, given voice to the bitterness of her

own defeat.  Her courage had become a point of pride with him,

and to see it going sickened him.



"Don't do it," he gasped.  "I can't stand it, I really

can't, I feel it too much.  We mustn't speak of that; it's too

tragic and too vast."



When she turned her face back to him there was a ghost of the old,

brave, cynical smile on it, more bitter than the tears she could

not shed.  "No, I won't be so ungenerous; I will save that for the

watches of the night when I have no better company.  Now you may

mix me another drink of some sort.  Formerly, when it was not

<i>if</i> I should ever sing Brunnhilde, but quite simply when I

<i>should</i> sing Brunnhilde, I was always starving myself and

thinking what I might drink and what I might not.  But broken music

boxes may drink whatsoever they list, and no one cares whether they

lose their figure.  Run over that theme at the beginning again. 

That, at least, is not new.  It was running in his head when we

were in Venice years ago, and he used to drum it on his glass at

the dinner table.  He had just begun to work it out when the late

autumn came on, and the paleness of the Adriatic oppressed him,

and he decided to go to Florence for the winter, and lost touch

with the theme during his illness.  Do you remember those

frightful days?  All the people who have loved him are not strong

enough to save him from himself!  When I got word from Florence

that he had been ill I was in Nice filling a concert engagement. 

His wife was hurrying to him from Paris, but I reached him first. 

I arrived at dusk, in a terrific storm.  They had taken an old

palace there for the winter, and I found him in the library--a

long, dark room full of old Latin books and heavy furniture and

bronzes.  He was sitting by a wood fire at one end of the room,

looking, oh, so worn and pale!--as he always does when he is ill,

you know.  Ah, it is so good that you <i>do</i> know!  Even

his red smoking jacket lent no color to his face.  His first words

were not to tell me how ill he had been, but that that morning he

had been well enough to put the last strokes to the score of his

<i>Souvenirs d'Automne</i>.  He was as I most like to remember him:

so calm and happy and tired; not gay, as he usually is, but just

contented and tired with that heavenly tiredness that comes after

a good work done at last.  Outside, the rain poured down in

torrents, and the wind moaned for the pain of all the world and

sobbed in the branches of the shivering olives and about the walls

of that desolated old palace.  How that night comes back to me!

There were no lights in the room, only the wood fire which glowed

upon the hard features of the bronze Dante, like the reflection of

purgatorial flames, and threw long black shadows about us; beyond

us it scarcely penetrated the gloom at all, Adriance sat staring at

the fire with the weariness of all his life in his eves, and of all

the other lives that must aspire and suffer to make up one such

life as his.  Somehow the wind with all its world-pain had got into

the room, and the cold rain was in our eyes, and the wave came up

in both of us at once--that awful, vague, universal pain, that

cold fear of life and death and God and hope--and we were like

two clinging together on a spar in midocean after the shipwreck

of everything.  Then we heard the front door open with a great

gust of wind that shook even the walls, and the servants came

running with lights, announcing that Madam had returned, <i>'and in

the book we read no more that night.'</i>"



She gave the old line with a certain bitter humor, and with

the hard, bright smile in which of old she had wrapped her

weakness as in a glittering garment.  That ironical smile, worn

like a mask through so many years, had gradually changed even the

lines of her face completely, and when she looked in the mirror

she saw not herself, but the scathing critic, the amused observer

and satirist of herself.  Everett dropped his head upon his hand

and sat looking at the rug.  "How much you have cared!" he said.



"Ah, yes, I cared," she replied, closing her eyes with a

long-drawn sigh of relief; and lying perfectly still, she went

on: "You can't imagine what a comfort it is to have you know how I

cared, what a relief it is to be able to tell it to someone.  I

used to want to shriek it out to the world in the long nights when

I could not sleep.  It seemed to me that I could not die with it. 

It demanded some sort of expression.  And now that you know, you

would scarcely believe how much less sharp the anguish of it is."



Everett continued to look helplessly at the floor.  "I was

not sure how much you wanted me to know," he said.



"Oh, I intended you should know from the first time I looked

into your face, when you came that day with Charley.  I flatter

myself that I have been able to conceal it when I chose, though I

suppose women always think that.  The more observing ones may

have seen, but discerning people are usually discreet and often

kind, for we usually bleed a little before we begin to discern. 

But I wanted you to know; you are so like him that it is almost

like telling him himself.  At least, I feel now that he will know

some day, and then I will be quite sacred from his compassion,

for we none of us dare pity the dead.  Since it was what my life

has chiefly meant, I should like him to know.  On the whole I am

not ashamed of it.  I have fought a good fight."



"And has he never known at all?" asked Everett, in a thick voice.



"Oh!  Never at all in the way that you mean.  Of course, he

is accustomed to looking into the eyes of women and finding love

there; when he doesn't find it there he thinks he must have been

guilty of some discourtesy and is miserable about it.  He has a

genuine fondness for everyone who is not stupid or gloomy, or old

or preternaturally ugly.  Granted youth and cheerfulness, and a

moderate amount of wit and some tact, and Adriance will always be

glad to see you coming around the corner.  I shared with the

rest; shared the smiles and the gallantries and the droll little

sermons.  It was quite like a Sunday-school picnic; we wore our

best clothes and a smile and took our turns.  It was his kindness

that was hardest.  I have pretty well used my life up at standing

punishment."



"Don't; you'll make me hate him," groaned Everett.



Katharine laughed and began to play nervously with her fan. 

"It wasn't in the slightest degree his fault; that is the most

grotesque part of it.  Why, it had really begun before I

ever met him.  I fought my way to him, and I drank my doom

greedily enough."



Everett rose and stood hesitating.  "I think I must go.  You ought

to be quiet, and I don't think I can hear any more just now."



She put out her hand and took his playfully.  "You've put in

three weeks at this sort of thing, haven't you?  Well, it may

never be to your glory in this world, perhaps, but it's been the

mercy of heaven to me, and it ought to square accounts for a much

worse life than yours will ever be."



Everett knelt beside her, saying, brokenly: "I stayed because I

wanted to be with you, that's all.  I have never cared about other

women since I met you in New York when I was a lad.  You are a part

of my destiny, and I could not leave you if I would."



She put her hands on his shoulders and shook her head.  "No,

no; don't tell me that.  I have seen enough of tragedy, God

knows.  Don't show me any more just as the curtain is going down. 

No, no, it was only a boy's fancy, and your divine pity and my

utter pitiableness have recalled it for a moment.  One does not

love the dying, dear friend.  If some fancy of that sort had been

left over from boyhood, this would rid you of it, and that were

well.  Now go, and you will come again tomorrow, as long as there

are tomorrows, will you not?"  She took his hand with a smile that

lifted the mask from her soul, that was both courage and despair,

and full of infinite loyalty and tenderness, as she said softly:



     For ever and for ever, farewell, Cassius;

     If we do meet again, why, we shall smile;

     If not, why then, this parting was well made.



The courage in her eyes was like the clear light of a star to him

as he went out.



On the night of Adriance Hilgarde's opening concert in Paris

Everett sat by the bed in the ranch house in Wyoming, watching

over the last battle that we have with the flesh before we are

done with it and free of it forever.  At times it seemed that the

serene soul of her must have left already and found some refuge

from the storm, and only the tenacious animal life were left to do

battle with death.  She labored under a delusion at once pitiful

and merciful, thinking that she was in the Pullman on her way to

New York, going back to her life and her work.  When she aroused

from her stupor it was only to ask the porter to waken her half an

hour out of Jersey City, or to remonstrate with him about the

delays and the roughness of the road.  At midnight Everett and the

nurse were left alone with her.  Poor Charley Gaylord had lain down

on a couch outside the door.  Everett sat looking at the sputtering

night lamp until it made his eyes ache.  His head dropped forward

on the foot of the bed, and he sank into a heavy, distressful

slumber.  He was dreaming of Adriance's concert in Paris, and of

Adriance, the troubadour, smiling and debonair, with his boyish

face and the touch of silver gray in his hair.  He heard the

applause and he saw the roses going up over the footlights until

they were stacked half as high as the piano, and the petals fell

and scattered, making crimson splotches on the floor.  Down this

crimson pathway came Adriance with his youthful step, leading his

prima donna by the hand; a dark woman this time, with Spanish eyes.



The nurse touched him on the shoulder; he started and awoke. 

She screened the lamp with her hand.  Everett saw that Katharine

was awake and conscious, and struggling a little.  He lifted her

gently on his arm and began to fan her.  She laid her hands

lightly on his hair and looked into his face with eyes that

seemed never to have wept or doubted.  "Ah, dear Adriance, dear,

dear," she whispered.



Everett went to call her brother, but when they came back

the madness of art was over for Katharine.



Two days later Everett was pacing the station siding,

waiting for the westbound train.  Charley Gaylord walked beside

him, but the two men had nothing to say to each other.  Everett's

bags were piled on the truck, and his step was hurried and his

eyes were full of impatience, as he gazed again and again up the

track, watching for the train.  Gaylord's impatience was not less

than his own; these two, who had grown so close, had now become

painful and impossible to each other, and longed for the

wrench of farewell.



As the train pulled in Everett wrung Gaylord's hand among

the crowd of alighting passengers.  The people of a German opera

company, en route to the coast, rushed by them in frantic haste

to snatch their breakfast during the stop.  Everett heard an

exclamation in a broad German dialect, and a massive woman whose

figure persistently escaped from her stays in the most improbable

places rushed up to him, her blond hair disordered by the wind,

and glowing with joyful surprise she caught his coat sleeve with

her tightly gloved hands.



"<i>Herr Gott</i>, Adriance, <i>lieber Freund</i>," she cried,

emotionally.



Everett quickly withdrew his arm and lifted  his hat,

blushing.  "Pardon me, madam, but I see that  you have mistaken

me for Adriance Hilgarde.  I am his brother," he said quietly,

and turning from the crestfallen singer, he hurried into the car.



End
