

The Troll Garden


	Flavia and Her Artists




As the train neared Tarrytown, Imogen Willard began to

wonder why she had consented to be one of Flavia's house party at

all.  She had not felt enthusiastic about it since leaving the

city, and was experiencing a prolonged ebb of purpose, a current

of chilling indecision, under which she vainly sought for the

motive which had induced her to accept Flavia's invitation.



Perhaps it was a vague curiosity to see Flavia's husband,

who had been the magician of her childhood and the hero of

innumerable Arabian fairy tales.  Perhaps it was a desire to see

M. Roux, whom Flavia had announced as the especial attraction of

the occasion.  Perhaps it was a wish to study that remarkable

woman in her own setting.



Imogen admitted a mild curiosity concerning Flavia.  She was

in the habit of taking people rather seriously, but somehow found

it impossible to take Flavia so, because of the very vehemence

and insistence with which Flavia demanded it.  Submerged in her

studies, Imogen had, of late years, seen very little of Flavia;

but Flavia, in her hurried visits to New York, between her

excursions from studio to studio--her luncheons with this lady

who had to play at a matinee, and her dinners with that singer

who had an evening concert--had seen enough of her friend's

handsome daughter to conceive for her an inclination of such

violence and assurance as only Flavia could afford.  The fact

that Imogen had shown rather marked capacity in certain esoteric

lines of scholarship, and had decided to specialize in a well-

sounding branch of philology at the Ecole des Chartes, had fairly

placed her in that category of "interesting people" whom Flavia

considered her natural affinities, and lawful prey.



When Imogen stepped upon the station platform she was immediately

appropriated by her hostess, whose commanding figure and assurance

of attire she had recognized from a distance.  She was hurried into

a high tilbury and Flavia, taking the driver's cushion beside her,

gathered up the reins with an experienced hand.



"My dear girl," she remarked, as she turned the horses up the

street, "I was afraid the train might be late.  M. Roux insisted

upon coming up by boat and did not arrive until after seven."



"To think of M. Roux's being in this part of the world at

all, and subject to the vicissitudes of river boats!  Why in the

world did he come over?" queried Imogen with lively interest. 

"He is the sort of man who must dissolve and become a shadow

outside of Paris."



"Oh, we have a houseful of the most interesting people,"

said Flavia, professionally.  "We have actually managed to get

Ivan Schemetzkin.  He was ill in California at the close of his

concert tour, you know, and he is recuperating with us, after his

wearing journey from the coast.  Then there is Jules Martel, the

painter; Signor Donati, the tenor; Professor Schotte, who has dug

up Assyria, you know; Restzhoff, the Russian chemist; Alcee

Buisson, the philologist; Frank Wellington, the novelist; and

Will Maidenwood, the editor of <i>Woman</i>.  Then there is my

second cousin, Jemima Broadwood, who made such a hit in Pinero's

comedy last winter, and Frau Lichtenfeld.  <i>Have</i> you read

her?"



Imogen confessed her utter ignorance of Frau Lichtenfeld,

and Flavia went on.



"Well, she is a most remarkable person; one of those

advanced German women, a militant iconoclast, and this drive will

not be long enough to permit of my telling you her history.  Such

a story!  Her novels were the talk of all Germany when I was there

last, and several of them have been suppressed--an honor in

Germany, I understand.  'At Whose Door' has been translated.  I

am so unfortunate as not to read German."



"I'm all excitement at the prospect of meeting Miss

Broadwood," said Imogen.  "I've seen her in nearly everything she

does.  Her stage personality is delightful.  She always reminds me

of a nice, clean, pink-and-white boy who has just had his cold

bath, and come down all aglow for a run before breakfast."



"Yes, but isn't it unfortunate that she will limit herself to

those minor comedy parts that are so little appreciated in this

country?  One ought to be satisfied with nothing less than the

best, ought one?"  The peculiar, breathy tone in which Flavia

always uttered that word "best," the most worn in her vocabulary,

always jarred on Imogen and always made her obdurate.



"I don't at all agree with you," she said reservedly.  "I

thought everyone admitted that the most remarkable thing about Miss

Broadwood is her admirable sense of fitness, which is rare enough

in her profession."



Flavia could not endure being contradicted; she always seemed

to regard it in the light of a defeat, and usually colored

unbecomingly.  Now she changed the subject.



"Look, my dear," she cried, "there is Frau Lichtenfeld now,

coming to meet us.  Doesn't she look as if she had just escaped out

of Valhalla?  She is actually over six feet."



Imogen saw a woman of immense stature, in a very short skirt

and a broad, flapping sun hat, striding down the hillside at a

long, swinging gait.  The refugee from Valhalla approached,

panting.  Her heavy, Teutonic features were scarlet from the rigor

of her exercise, and her hair, under her flapping sun hat, was

tightly befrizzled about her brow.  She fixed her sharp little eves

upon Imogen and extended both her hands.



"So this is the little friend?" she cried, in a rolling baritone.



Imogen was quite as tall as her hostess; but everything, she

reflected, is comparative.  After the introduction Flavia

apologized.



"I wish I could ask you to drive up with us, Frau Lichtenfeld."



"Ah, no!" cried the giantess, drooping her head in humorous

caricature of a time-honored pose of the heroines of sentimental

romances.  "It has never been my fate to be fitted into corners. 

I have never known the sweet privileges of the tiny."



Laughing, Flavia started the ponies, and the colossal woman,

standing in the middle of the dusty road, took off her wide hat

and waved them a farewell which, in scope of gesture, recalled

the salute of a plumed cavalier.



When they arrived at the house, Imogen looked about her with

keen curiosity, for this was veritably the work of Flavia's

hands, the materialization of hopes long deferred.  They passed

directly into a large, square hall with a gallery on three sides,

studio fashion.  This opened at one end into a Dutch breakfast

room, beyond which was the large dining room.  At the other end

of the hall was the music room.  There was a smoking room, which

one entered through the library behind the staircase.  On the

second floor there was the same general arrangement: a square

hall, and, opening from it, the guest chambers, or, as Miss

Broadwood termed them, the "cages."



When Imogen went to her room, the guests had begun to return

from their various afternoon excursions.  Boys were gliding

through the halls with ice water, covered trays, and flowers,

colliding with maids and valets who carried shoes and other

articles of wearing apparel.  Yet, all this was done in response

to inaudible bells, on felt soles, and in hushed voices, so that

there was very little confusion about it.



Flavia had at last built her house and hewn out her seven

pillars; there could be no doubt, now, that the asylum for

talent, the sanatorium of the arts, so long projected, was an

accomplished fact.  Her ambition had long ago outgrown the

dimensions of her house on Prairie Avenue; besides, she had

bitterly complained that in Chicago traditions were against her. 

Her project had been delayed by Arthur's doggedly standing out

for the Michigan woods, but Flavia knew well enough that certain

of the <i>rarae aves</i>--"the best"--could not be lured so far

away from the seaport, so she declared herself for the historic

Hudson and knew no retreat.  The establishing of a New York office

had at length overthrown Arthur's last valid objection to quitting

the lake country for three months of the year; and Arthur could

be wearied into anything, as those who knew him knew.



Flavia's house was the mirror of her exultation; it was

a temple to the gods of Victory, a sort of triumphal arch.  In

her earlier days she had swallowed experiences that would have

unmanned one of less torrential enthusiasm or blind pertinacity. 

But, of late years, her determination had told; she saw less and

less of those mysterious persons with mysterious obstacles in

their path and mysterious grievances against the world, who had

once frequented her house on Prairie Avenue.  In the stead of

this multitude of the unarrived, she had now the few, the select,

"the best."  Of all that band of indigent retainers who had once

fed at her board like the suitors in the halls of Penelope, only

Alcee Buisson still retained his right of entree.  He alone had

remembered that ambition hath a knapsack at his back, wherein he

puts alms to oblivion, and he alone had been considerate enough

to do what Flavia had expected of him, and give his name a

current value in the world.  Then, as Miss Broadwood put it, "he

was her first real one,"--and Flavia, like Mohammed, could

remember her first believer.



"The House of Song," as Miss Broadwood had called it, was

the outcome of Flavia's more exalted strategies.  A woman who

made less a point of sympathizing with their delicate organisms,

might have sought to plunge these phosphorescent pieces into the

tepid bath of domestic life; but Flavia's discernment was deeper. 

This must be a refuge where the shrinking soul, the sensitive

brain, should be unconstrained; where the caprice of fancy should

outweigh the civil code, if necessary.  She considered that this

much Arthur owed her; for she, in her turn, had made concessions. 

Flavia had, indeed, quite an equipment of epigrams to the effect

that our century creates the iron genii which evolve its fairy

tales: but the fact that her husband's name was annually painted

upon some ten thousand threshing machines in reality contributed

very little to her happiness.



Arthur Hamilton was born and had spent his boyhood in the

West Indies, and physically he had never lost the brand of the

tropics.  His father, after inventing the machine which bore his

name, had returned to the States to patent and manufacture it. 

After leaving college, Arthur had spent five years ranching in

the West and traveling abroad.  Upon his father's death

he had returned to Chicago and, to the astonishment of all his

friends, had taken up the business--without any demonstration of

enthusiasm, but with quiet perseverance, marked ability, and

amazing industry.  Why or how a self-sufficient, rather ascetic

man of thirty, indifferent in manner, wholly negative in all

other personal relations, should have doggedly wooed and finally

married Flavia Malcolm was a problem that had vexed older heads

than Imogen's.



While Imogen was dressing she heard a knock at her door, and

a young woman entered whom she at once recognized as Jemima

Broadwood--"Jimmy" Broadwood she was called by people in her own

profession.  While there was something unmistakably professional

in her frank <i>savoir-faire</i>, "Jimmy's" was one of those faces

to which the rouge never seems to stick.  Her eyes were keen and

gray as a windy April sky, and so far from having been seared by

calcium lights, you might have fancied they had never looked on

anything less bucolic than growing fields and country fairs.  She

wore her thick, brown hair short and parted at the side; and,

rather than hinting at freakishness, this seemed admirably in

keeping with her fresh, boyish countenance.  She extended to

Imogen a large, well-shaped hand which it was a pleasure to

clasp.



"Ah!  You are Miss Willard, and I see I need not introduce

myself.  Flavia said you were kind enough to express a wish to

meet me, and I preferred to meet you alone.  Do you mind if I

smoke?"



"Why, certainly not," said Imogen, somewhat disconcerted and

looking hurriedly about for matches.



"There, be calm, I'm always prepared," said Miss Broadwood,

checking Imogen's flurry with a soothing gesture, and producing

an oddly fashioned silver match-case from some mysterious recess

in her dinner gown.  She sat down in a deep chair, crossed her

patent-leather Oxfords, and lit her cigarette.  "This matchbox,"

she went on meditatively, "once belonged to a Prussian officer. 

He shot himself in his bathtub, and I bought it at the sale of

his effects."



Imogen had not yet found any suitable reply to make to this

rather irrelevant confidence, when Miss Broadwood turned to her

cordially: "I'm awfully glad you've come, Miss Willard, though I've

not quite decided why you did it. I wanted very much to meet you. 

Flavia gave me your thesis to read."



"Why, how funny!" ejaculated Imogen.



"On the contrary," remarked Miss Broadwood.  "I thought it

decidedly lacked humor."



"I meant," stammered Imogen, beginning to feel very much

like Alice in Wonderland, "I meant that I thought it rather

strange Mrs. Hamilton should fancy you would be interested."



Miss Broadwood laughed heartily.  "Now, don't let my

rudeness frighten you.  Really, I found it very interesting, and

no end impressive.  You see, most people in my profession are

good for absolutely nothing else, and, therefore, they have a

deep and abiding conviction that in some other line they might

have shone.  Strange to say, scholarship is the object of our

envious and particular admiration.  Anything in type impresses us

greatly; that's why so many of us marry authors or newspapermen

and lead miserable lives."  Miss Broadwood saw that she had rather

disconcerted Imogen, and blithely tacked in another direction. 

"You see," she went on, tossing aside her half-consumed

cigarette, "some years ago Flavia would not have deemed me worthy

to open the pages of your thesis--nor to be one of her house

party of the chosen, for that matter.  I've Pinero to thank for

both pleasures.  It all depends on the class of business I'm

playing whether I'm in favor or not.  Flavia is my second cousin,

you know, so I can say whatever disagreeable things I choose with

perfect good grace.  I'm quite desperate for someone to laugh

with, so I'm going to fasten myself upon you--for, of course, one

can't expect any of these gypsy-dago people to see anything

funny.  I don't intend you shall lose the humor of the situation. 

What do you think of Flavia's infirmary for the arts, anyway?"



"Well, it's rather too soon for me to have any opinion at

all," said Imogen, as she again turned to her dressing.  "So far,

you are the only one of the artists I've met."



"One of them?" echoed Miss Broadwood.  "One of the <i>artists</i>?

My offense may be rank, my dear, but I really don't deserve

that.  Come, now, whatever badges of my tribe I may bear upon me,

just let me divest you of any notion that I take myself seriously."



Imogen turned from the mirror in blank astonishment and sat

down on the arm of a chair, facing her visitor.  "I can't fathom

you at all, Miss Broadwood," she said frankly.  "Why shouldn't

you take yourself seriously?  What's the use of beating about the

bush?  Surely you know that you are one of the few players on this

side of the water who have at all the spirit of natural or

ingenuous comedy?"



"Thank you, my dear.  Now we are quite even about the thesis,

aren't we?  Oh, did you mean it?  Well, you <i>are</i> a clever

girl.  But you see it doesn't do to permit oneself to look at it

in that light.  If we do, we always go to pieces and waste our

substance astarring as the unhappy daughter of the Capulets.  But

there, I hear Flavia coming to take you down; and just remember

I'm not one of them--the artists, I mean."





Flavia conducted Imogen and Miss Broadwood downstairs.  As

they reached the lower hall they heard voices from the music

room, and dim figures were lurking in the shadows under the

gallery, but their hostess led straight to the smoking room.  The

June evening was chilly, and a fire had been lighted in the

fireplace.  Through the deepening dusk, the firelight flickered

upon the pipes and curious weapons on the wall and threw an

orange glow over the Turkish hangings.  One side of the smoking

room was entirely of glass, separating it from the conservatory,

which was flooded with white light from the electric bulbs. 

There was about the darkened room some suggestion of certain

chambers in the Arabian Nights, opening on a court of palms. 

Perhaps it was partially this memory-evoking suggestion that

caused Imogen to start so violently when she saw dimly, in a blur

of shadow, the figure of a man, who sat smoking in a low, deep

chair before the fire.  He was long, and thin, and brown.  His

long, nerveless hands drooped from the arms of his chair.  A

brown mustache shaded his mouth, and his eyes were sleepy and

apathetic.  When Imogen entered he rose indolently and gave her

his hand, his manner barely courteous.



"I am glad you arrived promptly, Miss Willard," he said with

an indifferent drawl.  "Flavia was afraid you might be late.  You

had a pleasant ride up, I hope?"



"Oh, very, thank you, Mr. Hamilton," she replied, feeling

that he did not particularly care whether she replied at all.



Flavia explained that she had not yet had time to dress for

dinner, as she had been attending to Mr. Will Maidenwood, who had

become faint after hurting his finger in an obdurate window, and

immediately excused herself As she left, Hamilton turned to Miss

Broadwood with a rather spiritless smile.



"Well, Jimmy," he remarked, "I brought up a piano box full

of fireworks for the boys.  How do you suppose we'll manage to

keep them until the Fourth?"



"We can't, unless we steel ourselves to deny there are any on the

premises," said Miss Broadwood, seating herself on a low stool by

Hamilton's chair and leaning back against the mantel.  "Have you

seen Helen, and has she told you the tragedy of the tooth?"



"She met me at the station, with her tooth wrapped up in

tissue paper.  I had tea with her an hour ago.  Better sit down,

Miss Willard;" he rose and pushed a chair toward Imogen, who was

standing peering into the conservatory.  "We are scheduled to

dine at seven, but they seldom get around before eight."



By this time Imogen had made out that here the plural

pronoun, third person, always referred to the artists.  As

Hamilton's manner did not spur one to cordial intercourse, and as

his attention seemed directed to Miss Broadwood, insofar as it

could be said to be directed to anyone, she sat down facing the

conservatory and watched him, unable to decide in how far he was

identical with the man who had first met Flavia Malcolm in her

mother's house, twelve years ago.  Did he at all remember having

known her as a little girl, and why did his indifference hurt her

so, after all these years?  Had some remnant of her childish

affection for him gone on living, somewhere down in the sealed

caves of her consciousness, and had she really expected to find

it possible to be fond of him again?  Suddenly she saw a light in

the man's sleepy eyes, an unmistakable expression of

interest and pleasure that fairly startled her.  She turned

quickly in the direction of his glance, and saw Flavia, just

entering, dressed for dinner and lit by the effulgence of her

most radiant manner.  Most people considered Flavia handsome,

and there was no gainsaying that she carried her five-and-thirty

years splendidly.  Her figure had never grown matronly, and her

face was of the sort that does not show wear.  Its blond tints

were as fresh and enduring as enamel--and quite as hard.  Its

usual expression was one of tense, often strained, animation,

which compressed her lips nervously.  A perfect scream of

animation, Miss Broadwood had called it, created and maintained

by sheer, indomitable force of will.  Flavia's appearance on any

scene whatever made a ripple, caused a certain agitation and

recognition, and, among impressionable people, a certain

uneasiness, For all her sparkling assurance of manner, Flavia

was certainly always ill at ease and, even more certainly,

anxious.  She seemed not convinced of the established order of

material things, seemed always trying to conceal her feeling that

walls might crumble, chasms open, or the fabric of her life fly

to the winds in irretrievable entanglement.  At least this was

the impression Imogen got from that note in Flavia which was so

manifestly false.



Hamilton's keen, quick, satisfied glance at his wife had

recalled to Imogen all her inventory of speculations about them. 

She looked at him with compassionate surprise.  As a child she

had never permitted herself to believe that Hamilton cared at all

for the woman who had taken him away from her; and since she had

begun to think about them again, it had never occurred to her

that anyone could become attached to Flavia in that deeply

personal and exclusive sense.  It seemed quite as irrational as

trying to possess oneself of Broadway at noon.



When they went out to dinner Imogen realized the completeness of

Flavia's triumph.  They were people of one name, mostly, like

kings; people whose names stirred the imagination like a romance or

a melody.  With the notable exception of M. Roux, Imogen had seen

most of them before, either in concert halls or lecture rooms; but

they looked noticeably older and dimmer than she remembered them.



Opposite her sat Schemetzkin, the Russian pianist, a short,

corpulent man, with an apoplectic face and purplish skin, his

thick, iron-gray hair tossed back from his forehead.  Next to the

German giantess sat the Italian tenor --the tiniest of men--pale,

with soft, light hair, much in disorder, very red lips, and

fingers yellowed by cigarettes.  Frau Lichtenfeld shone in a gown

of emerald green, fitting so closely as to enhance her natural

floridness.  However, to do the good lady justice, let her attire

be never so modest, it gave an effect of barbaric splendor.  At

her left sat Herr Schotte, the Assyriologist, whose features were

effectually concealed by the convergence of his hair and beard,

and whose glasses were continually falling into his plate.  This

gentleman had removed more tons of earth in the course of his

explorations than had any of his confreres, and his vigorous

attack upon his food seemed to suggest the strenuous nature of

his accustomed toil.  His eyes were small and deeply set, and his

forehead bulged fiercely above his eves in a bony ridge.  His

heavy brows completed the leonine suggestion of his face.  Even

to Imogen, who knew something of his work and greatly respected

it, he was entirely too reminiscent of the Stone Age to be

altogether an agreeable dinner companion.  He seemed, indeed, to

have absorbed something of the savagery of those early types of

life which he continually studied.



Frank Wellington, the young Kansas man who had been two

years out of Harvard and had published three historical novels,

sat next to Mr. Will Maidenwood, who was still pale from his

recent sufferings and carried his hand bandaged.  They took

little part in the general conversation, but, like the lion and

the unicorn, were always at it, discussing, every time they met,

whether there were or were not passages in Mr. Wellington's works

which should be eliminated, out of consideration for the Young

Person.  Wellington had fallen into the hands of a great American

syndicate which most effectually befriended struggling authors

whose struggles were in the right direction, and which had

guaranteed to make him famous before he was thirty.  Feeling the

security of his position he stoutly defended those passages which

jarred upon the sensitive nerves of the young editor of

<i>Woman</i>.  Maidenwood, in the smoothest of voices, urged the

necessity of the author's recognizing certain restrictions at the

outset, and Miss Broadwood, who joined the argument quite without

invitation or encouragement, seconded him with pointed and

malicious remarks which caused the young editor manifest

discomfort.  Restzhoff, the chemist, demanded the attention of the

entire company for his exposition of his devices for manufacturing

ice cream from vegetable oils and for administering drugs in

bonbons.



Flavia, always noticeably restless at dinner, was somewhat

apathetic toward the advocate of peptonized chocolate and was

plainly concerned about the sudden departure of M. Roux, who had

announced that it would be necessary for him to leave tomorrow. 

M. Emile Roux, who sat at Flavia's right, was a man in middle

life and quite bald, clearly without personal vanity, though his

publishers preferred to circulate only those of his portraits

taken in his ambrosial youth.  Imogen was considerably shocked at

his unlikeness to the slender, black-stocked Rolla he had looked

at twenty.  He had declined into the florid, settled heaviness of

indifference and approaching age.  There was, however, a certain

look of durability and solidity about him; the look of a man who

has earned the right to be fat and bald, and even silent at

dinner if he chooses.



Throughout the discussion between Wellington and Will

Maidenwood, though they invited his participation, he remained

silent, betraying no sign either of interest or contempt.  Since

his arrival he had directed most of his conversation to Hamilton,

who had never read one of his twelve great novels.  This

perplexed and troubled Flavia.  On the night of his arrival Jules

Martel had enthusiastically declared, "There are schools and

schools, manners and manners; but Roux is Roux, and Paris sets

its watches by his clock."  Flavia bad already repeated this

remark to Imogen.  It haunted her, and each time she quoted it

she was impressed anew.



Flavia shifted the conversation uneasily, evidently exasperated

and excited by her repeated failures to draw the novelist out.

"Monsieur Roux," she began abruptly, with her most animated smile,

"I remember so well a statement I read some years ago in your 'Mes

Etudes des Femmes' to the effect that you had never met a really

intellectual woman.  May I ask, without being impertinent, whether

that assertion still represents your experience?"



"I meant, madam," said the novelist conservatively, "intellectual

in a sense very special, as we say of men in whom the purely

intellectual functions seem almost independent."



"And you still think a woman so constituted a mythical

personage?" persisted Flavia, nodding her head encouragingly.



"<i>Une Meduse</i>, madam, who, if she were discovered, would

transmute us all into stone," said the novelist, bowing gravely. 

"If she existed at all," he added deliberately, "it was my

business to find her, and she has cost me many a vain pilgrimage. 

Like Rudel of Tripoli, I have crossed seas and penetrated deserts

to seek her out.  I have, indeed, encountered women of learning

whose industry I have been compelled to respect; many who have

possessed beauty and charm and perplexing cleverness; a few with

remarkable information and a sort of fatal facility."



"And Mrs. Browning, George Eliot, and your own Mme.  Dudevant?"

queried Flavia with that fervid enthusiasm with which she could, on

occasion, utter things simply incomprehensible for their

banality--at her feats of this sort Miss Broadwood was wont to sit

breathless with admiration.



"Madam, while the intellect was undeniably present in the

performances of those women, it was only the stick of the rocket. 

Although this woman has eluded me I have studied her conditions

and perturbances as astronomers conjecture the orbits of planets

they have never seen. if she exists, she is probably neither an

artist nor a woman with a mission, but an obscure personage, with

imperative intellectual needs, who absorbs rather than produces."



Flavia, still nodding nervously, fixed a strained glance of

interrogation upon M. Roux.  "Then you think she would be a woman

whose first necessity would be to know, whose instincts would be

satisfied only with the best, who could draw from others;

appreciative, merely?"



The novelist lifted his dull eyes to his interlocutress with

an untranslatable smile and a slight inclination of his

shoulders.  "Exactly so; you are really remarkable, madam," he

added, in a tone of cold astonishment.



After dinner the guests took their coffee in the music room,

where Schemetzkin sat down at the piano to drum ragtime, and give

his celebrated imitation of the boardingschool girl's execution

of Chopin.  He flatly refused to play anything more serious, and

would practice only in the morning, when he had the music room to

himself.  Hamilton and M. Roux repaired to the smoking room to

discuss the necessity of extending the tax on manufactured

articles in France--one of those conversations which particularly

exasperated Flavia.



After Schemetzkin had grimaced and tortured the keyboard

with malicious vulgarities for half an hour, Signor Donati, to

put an end to his torture, consented to sing, and Flavia and

Imogen went to fetch Arthur to play his accompaniments.  Hamilton

rose with an annoyed look and placed his cigarette on the mantel. 

"Why yes, Flavia, I'll accompany him, provided he sings something

with a melody, Italian arias or ballads, and provided the recital

is not interminable."



"You will join us, M. Roux?"



"Thank you, but I have some letters to write," replied the

novelist, bowing.



As Flavia had remarked to Imogen, "Arthur really played

accompaniments remarkably well."  To hear him recalled vividly the

days of her childhood, when he always used to spend his business

vacations at her mother's home in Maine.  He had possessed for

her that almost hypnotic influence which young men sometimes

exert upon little girls.  It was a sort of phantom love affair,

subjective and fanciful, a precocity of instinct, like that

tender and maternal concern which some little girls feel for

their dolls.  Yet this childish infatuation is capable of all the

depressions and exaltations of love itself, it has its bitter

jealousies, cruel disappointments, its exacting caprices.



Summer after summer she had awaited his coming and wept at his

departure, indifferent to the gayer young men who had called her

their sweetheart and laughed at everything she said.  Although

Hamilton never said so, she had been always quite sure that he was

fond of her.  When he pulled her up the river to hunt for fairy

knolls shut about by low, hanging willows, he was often silent for

an hour at a time, yet she never felt he was bored or was

neglecting her.  He would lie in the sand smoking, his eyes

half-closed, watching her play, and she was always conscious that

she was entertaining him.  Sometimes he would take a copy of "Alice

in Wonderland" in his pocket, and no one could read it as he could,

laughing at her with his dark eyes, when anything amused him.  No

one else could laugh so, with just their eyes, and without moving

a muscle of their face.  Though he usually smiled at passages that

seemed not at all funny to the child, she always laughed gleefully,

because he was so seldom moved to mirth that any such demonstration

delighted her and she took the credit of it entirely to herself Her

own inclination had been for serious stories, with sad endings,

like the Little Mermaid, which he had once told her in an unguarded

moment when she had a cold, and was put to bed early on her

birthday night and cried because she could not have her party.  But

he highly disapproved of this preference, and had called it a

morbid taste, and always shook his finger at her when she asked for

the story.  When she had been particularly good, or particularly

neglected by other people, then he would sometimes melt and tell

her the story, and never laugh at her if she enjoyed the "sad

ending" even to tears.  When Flavia had taken him away and he came

no more, she wept inconsolably for the space of two weeks, and

refused to learn her lessons.  Then she found the story of the

Little Mermaid herself, and forgot him.



Imogen had discovered at dinner that he could still smile at

one secretly, out of his eyes, and that he had the old manner of

outwardly seeming bored, but letting you know that he was not. 

She was intensely curious about his exact state of feeling toward

his wife, and more curious still to catch a sense of his final

adjustment to the conditions of life in general.  This, she could

not help feeling, she might get again--if she could have him alone

for an hour, in some place where there was a little river and a

sandy cove bordered by drooping willows, and a blue sky seen

through white sycamore boughs.



That evening, before retiring, Flavia entered her husband's

room, where be sat in his smoking jacket, in one of his favorite

low chairs.



"I suppose it's a grave responsibility to bring an ardent,

serious young thing like Imogen here among all these fascinating

personages," she remarked reflectively.  "But, after all, one can

never tell.  These grave, silent girls have their own charm, even

for facile people."



"Oh, so that is your plan?" queried her husband dryly.  "I

was wondering why you got her up here.  She doesn't seem to mix

well with the faciles.  At least, so it struck me."



Flavia paid no heed to this jeering remark, but repeated, "No,

after all, it may not be a bad thing."



"Then do consign her to that shaken reed, the tenor," said

her husband yawning.  "I remember she used to have a taste for

the pathetic."



"And then," remarked Flavia coquettishly, "after all, I owe her

mother a return in kind.  She was not afraid to trifle with

destiny."



But Hamilton was asleep in his chair.





Next morning Imogen found only Miss Broadwood in the breakfast

room.



"Good morning, my dear girl, whatever are you doing up so

early?  They never breakfast before eleven.  Most of them take

their coffee in their room.  Take this place by me."



Miss Broadwood looked particularly fresh and encouraging in

her blue serge walking skirt, her open jacket displaying an

expanse of stiff, white shirt bosom, dotted with some almost

imperceptible figure, and a dark blue-and-white necktie, neatly

knotted under her wide, rolling collar.  She wore a white rosebud

in the lapel of her coat, and decidedly she seemed more than ever

like a nice, clean boy on his holiday.  Imogen was just hoping

that they would breakfast alone when Miss Broadwood exclaimed,

"Ah, there comes Arthur with the children.  That's the reward of

early rising in this house; you never get to see the youngsters

at any other time."



Hamilton entered, followed by two dark, handsome little

boys.  The girl, who was very tiny, blonde like her mother, and

exceedingly frail, he carried in his arms.  The boys came up and

said good morning with an ease and cheerfulness uncommon, even in

well-bred children, but the little girl hid her face on her

father's shoulder.



"She's a shy little lady," he explained as he put her gently

down in her chair.  "I'm afraid she's like her father; she can't

seem to get used to meeting people.  And you, Miss Willard, did

you dream of the White Rabbit or the Little Mermaid?"



"Oh, I dreamed of them all!  All the personages of that

buried civilization," cried Imogen, delighted that his estranged

manner of the night before had entirely vanished and feeling

that, somehow, the old confidential relations had been restored

during the night.



"Come, William," said Miss Broadwood, turning to the younger

of the two boys, "and what did you dream about?"



"We dreamed," said William gravely--he was the more assertive of

the two and always spoke for both--"we dreamed that there were

fireworks hidden in the basement of the carriage house; lots and

lots of fireworks."



His elder brother looked up at him with apprehensive

astonishment, while Miss Broadwood hastily put her napkin to her

lips and Hamilton dropped his eyes.  "If little boys dream

things, they are so apt not to come true," he reflected sadly. 

This shook even the redoubtable William, and he glanced nervously

at his brother.  "But do things vanish just because they have

been dreamed?" he objected.



"Generally that is the very best reason for their vanishing,"

said Arthur gravely.



"But, Father, people can't help what they dream,"

remonstrated Edward gently.



"Oh, come!  You're making these children talk like a

Maeterlinck dialogue," laughed Miss Broadwood.



Flavia presently entered, a book in her hand, and bade them all

good morning.  "Come, little people, which story shall it be this

morning?" she asked winningly.  Greatly excited, the children

followed her into the garden.  "She does then, sometimes," murmured

Imogen as they left the breakfast room.



"Oh, yes, to be sure," said Miss Broadwood cheerfully.  "She

reads a story to them every morning in the most picturesque part

of the garden.  The mother of the Gracchi, you know.  She does so

long, she says, for the time when they will be intellectual

companions for her.  What do you say to a walk over the hills?"



As they left the house they met Frau Lichtenfeld and the

bushy Herr Schotte--the professor cut an astonishing figure in

golf stockings--returning from a walk and engaged in an animated

conversation on the tendencies of German fiction.



"Aren't they the most attractive little children," exclaimed

Imogen as they wound down the road toward the river.



"Yes, and you must not fail to tell Flavia that you think

so.  She will look at you in a sort of startled way and say,

'Yes, aren't they?' and maybe she will go off and hunt them up

and have tea with them, to fully appreciate them.  She is awfully

afraid of missing anything good, is Flavia.  The way those

youngsters manage to conceal their guilty presence in the House

of Song is a wonder."



"But don't any of the artist-folk fancy children?" asked Imogen.



"Yes, they just fancy them and no more.  The chemist remarked the

other day that children are like certain salts which need not be

actualized because the formulae are quite sufficient for practical

purposes.  I don't see how even Flavia can endure to have that man

about."



"I have always been rather curious to know what Arthur

thinks of it all," remarked Imogen cautiously.



"Thinks of it!" ejaculated Miss Broadwood.  "Why, my dear,

what would any man think of having his house turned into an

hotel, habited by freaks who discharge his servants, borrow his

money, and insult his neighbors?  This place is shunned like a

lazaretto!"



Well, then, why does he--why does he--" persisted Imogen.



"Bah!" interrupted Miss Broadwood impatiently, "why did he

in the first place?  That's the question."



"Marry her, you mean?" said Imogen coloring.



"Exactly so," said Miss Broadwood sharply, as she snapped

the lid of her matchbox.



"I suppose that is a question rather beyond us, and

certainly one which we cannot discuss," said Imogen.  "But his

toleration on this one point puzzles me, quite apart from other

complications."



"Toleration?  Why this point, as you call it, simply is

Flavia.  Who could conceive of her without it?  I don't know where

it's all going to end, I'm sure, and I'm equally sure that, if it

were not for Arthur, I shouldn't care," declared Miss Broadwood,

drawing her shoulders together.



"But will it end at all, now?"



"Such an absurd state of things can't go on indefinitely.  A

man isn't going to see his wife make a guy of herself forever, is

he?  Chaos has already begun in the servants' quarters.  There are

six different languages spoken there now.  You see, it's all on

an entirely false basis.  Flavia hasn't the slightest notion of

what these people are really like, their good and their bad alike

escape her.  They, on the other hand, can't imagine what she is

driving at. Now, Arthur is worse off than either faction; he is

not in the fairy story in that he sees these people exactly as

they are, <i>but</i> he is utterly unable to see Flavia as they see

her.  There you have the situation.  Why can't he see her as we do? 

My dear, that has kept me awake o' nights.  This man who has

thought so much and lived so much, who is naturally a critic,

really takes Flavia at very nearly her own estimate.  But now I am

entering upon a wilderness.  From a brief acquaintance with her

you can know nothing of the icy fastnesses of Flavia's self-

esteem.  It's like St. Peter's; you can't realize its magnitude

at once.  You have to grow into a sense of it by living under its

shadow.  It has perplexed even Emile Roux, that merciless

dissector of egoism.  She has puzzled him the more because be saw

at a glance what some of them do not perceive at once, and what

will be mercifully concealed from Arthur until the trump sounds;

namely, that all Flavia's artists have done or ever will do means

exactly as much to her as a symphony means to an oyster; that

there is no bridge by which the significance of any work of art

could be conveyed to her."



"Then, in the name of goodness, why does she bother?" gasped

Imogen.  "She is pretty, wealthy, well-established; why should

she bother?"



"That's what M. Roux has kept asking himself.  I can't pretend to

analyze it.  She reads papers on the Literary Landmarks of Paris,

the Loves of the Poets, and that sort of thing, to clubs out in

Chicago.  To Flavia it is more necessary to be called clever than

to breathe.  I would give a good deal to know that glum Frenchman's

diagnosis.  He has been watching her out of those fishy eyes of his

as a biologist watches a hemisphereless frog."



For several days after M. Roux's departure Flavia gave an

embarrassing share of her attention to Imogen.  Embarrassing,

because Imogen had the feeling of being energetically and

futilely explored, she knew not for what.  She felt herself under

the globe of an air pump, expected to yield up something.  When

she confined the conversation to matters of general interest

Flavia conveyed to her with some pique that her one endeavor in

life had been to fit herself to converse with her friends upon

those things which vitally interested them.  "One has no right to

accept their best from people unless one gives, isn't it so?  I

want to be able to give--!" she declared vaguely.  Yet whenever

Imogen strove to pay her tithes and plunged bravely into her

plans for study next winter, Flavia grew absent-minded and

interrupted her by amazing generalizations or by such

embarrassing questions as, "And these grim studies really have

charm for you; you are quite buried in them; they make other

things seem light and ephemeral?"



"I rather feel as though I had got in here under false

pretenses," Imogen confided to Miss Broadwood.  "I'm sure I don't

know what it is that she wants of me."



"Ah," chuckled Jemima, "you are not equal to these heart to

heart talks with Flavia.  You utterly fail to communicate to her

the atmosphere of that untroubled joy in which you dwell.  You

must remember that she gets no feeling out of things

herself, and she demands that you impart yours to her by some

process of psychic transmission.  I once met a blind girl, blind

from birth, who could discuss the peculiarities of the Barbizon

school with just Flavia's glibness and enthusiasm.  Ordinarily

Flavia knows how to get what she wants from people, and her

memory is wonderful.  One evening I heard her giving Frau

Lichtenfeld some random impressions about Hedda Gabler which she

extracted from me five years ago; giving them with an impassioned

conviction of which I was never guilty.  But I have known other

people who could appropriate  your stories and opinions; Flavia

is infinitely more subtle than that; she can soak up the very

thrash and drift of  your daydreams, and take the very thrills

off your back, as it were."



After some days of unsuccessful effort, Flavia withdrew

herself, and Imogen found Hamilton ready to catch her when she

was tossed afield.  He seemed only to have been awaiting this

crisis, and at once their old intimacy reestablished itself as a

thing inevitable and beautifully prepared for.  She convinced

herself that she had not been mistaken in him, despite all the

doubts that had come up in later years, and this renewal of faith

set more than one question thumping in her brain.  "How did he,

how can he?" she kept repeating with a tinge of her childish

resentment, "what right had he to waste anything so fine?"



When Imogen and Arthur were returning from a walk before

luncheon one morning about a week after M. Roux's departure, they

noticed an absorbed group before one of the hall windows.  Herr

Schotte and Restzhoff sat on the window seat with a newspaper

between them, while Wellington, Schemetzkin, and Will Maidenwood

looked over their shoulders.  They seemed intensely interested,

Herr Schotte occasionally pounding his knees with his fists in

ebullitions of barbaric glee.  When imogen entered the hall,

however, the men were all sauntering toward the breakfast room

and the paper was lying innocently on the divan.  During luncheon

the personnel of that window group were unwontedly animated and

agreeable all save Schemetzkin, whose stare was blanker than

ever, as though Roux's mantle of insulting indifference

had fallen upon him, in addition to his own oblivious self-

absorption.  Will Maidenwood seemed embarrassed and annoyed; the

chemist employed himself with making polite speeches to Hamilton.

Flavia did not come down to lunch--and there was a malicious

gleam under Herr Schotte's eyebrows.  Frank Wellington announced

nervously that an imperative letter from his protecting syndicate

summoned him to the city.



After luncheon the men went to the golf links, and Imogen,

at the first opportunity, possessed herself of the newspaper

which had been left on the divan.  One of the first things that

caught her eye was an article headed "Roux on Tuft Hunters; The

Advanced American Woman as He Sees Her; Aggressive, Superficial,

and Insincere."  The entire interview was nothing more nor less

than a satiric characterization of Flavia, aquiver with

irritation and vitriolic malice.  No one could mistake it; it was

done with all his deftness of portraiture.  Imogen had not finished

the article when she heard a footstep, and clutching the paper she

started precipitately toward the stairway as Arthur entered.  He

put out his hand, looking critically at her distressed face.



"Wait a moment, Miss Willard," he said peremptorily, "I want

to see whether we can find what it was that so interested our

friends this morning.  Give me the paper, please."



Imogen grew quite white as he opened the journal.  She

reached forward and crumpled it with her hands.  "Please don't,

please don't," she pleaded; "it's something I don't want you to

see.  Oh, why will you? it's just something low and despicable

that you can't notice."



Arthur had gently loosed her hands, and he pointed her to a chair. 

He lit a cigar and read the article through without comment.  When

he had finished it he walked to the fireplace, struck a match, and

tossed the flaming journal between the brass andirons.



"You are right," he remarked as he came back, dusting his

hands with his handkerchief.  "It's quite impossible to comment. 

There are extremes of blackguardism for which we have no name. 

The only thing necessary is to see that Flavia gets no

wind of this.  This seems to be my cue to act; poor girl."



Imogen looked at him tearfully; she could only murmur, "Oh,

why did you read it!"



Hamilton laughed spiritlessly.  "Come, don't you worry about

it.  You always took other people's troubles too seriously.  When

you were little and all the world was gay and everybody happy,

you must needs get the Little Mermaid's troubles to grieve over. 

Come with me into the music room.  You remember the musical

setting I once made you for the Lay of the Jabberwock?  I was

trying it over the other night, long after you were in bed, and I

decided it was quite as fine as the Erl-King music.  How I wish I

could give you some of the cake that Alice ate and make you a

little girl again.  Then, when you had got through the glass door

into the little garden, you could call to me, perhaps, and tell

me all the fine things that were going on there.  What a pity it

is that you ever grew up!" he added, laughing; and Imogen, too,

was thinking just that.



At dinner that evening, Flavia, with fatal persistence,

insisted upon turning the conversation to M. Roux.  She had been

reading one of his novels and had remembered anew that Paris set

its watches by his clock.  Imogen surmised that she was tortured

by a feeling that she had not sufficiently appreciated him while

she had had him.  When she first mentioned his name she was

answered only by the pall of silence that fell over the company. 

Then everyone began to talk at once, as though to correct a false

position.  They spoke of him with a fervid, defiant admiration,

with the sort of hot praise that covers a double purpose.  Imogen

fancied she could see that they felt a kind of relief at what the

man had done, even those who despised him for doing it; that they

felt a spiteful hate against Flavia, as though she had tricked

them, and a certain contempt for themselves that they had been

beguiled.  She was reminded of the fury of the crowd in the fairy

tale, when once the child had called out that the king was in his

night clothes.  Surely these people knew no more about Flavia

than they had known before, but the mere fact that the

thing had been said altered the situation.  Flavia, meanwhile,

sat chattering amiably, pathetically unconscious of her nakedness.



Hamilton lounged, fingering the stem of his wineglass,

gazing down the table at one face after another and studying the

various degrees of self-consciousness they exhibited.  Imogen's

eyes followed his, fearfully.  When a lull came in the spasmodic

flow of conversation, Arthur, leaning back in his chair, remarked

deliberately, "As for M. Roux, his very profession places him

in that class of men whom society has never been able to accept

unconditionally because it has never been able to assume that

they have any ordered notion of taste.  He and his ilk remain,

with the mountebanks and snake charmers, people indispensable to

our civilization, but wholly unreclaimed by it; people whom we

receive, but whose invitations we do not accept."



Fortunately for Flavia, this mine was not exploded until

just before the coffee was brought.  Her laughter was pitiful to

hear; it echoed through the silent room as in a vault, while she

made some tremulously light remark about her husband's drollery,

grim as a jest from the dying.  No one responded and she sat

nodding her head like a mechanical toy and smiling her white, set

smile through her teeth, until Alcee Buisson and Frau Lichtenfeld

came to her support.



After dinner the guests retired immediately to their rooms,

and Imogen went upstairs on tiptoe, feeling the echo of breakage

and the dust of crumbling in the air.  She wondered whether

Flavia's habitual note of uneasiness were not, in a manner,

prophetic, and a sort of unconscious premonition, after all.  She

sat down to write a letter, but she found herself so nervous, her

head so hot and her hands so cold, that she soon abandoned the

effort. just as she was about to seek Miss Broadwood, Flavia

entered and embraced her hysterically.



"My dearest girl," she began, "was there ever such an

unfortunate and incomprehensible speech made before?  Of course

it is scarcely necessary to explain to you poor Arthur's lack of

tact, and that he meant nothing.  But they!  Can they be

expected to understand?  He will feel wretchedly about it when

he realizes what he has done, but in the meantime?  And M. Roux,

of all men!  When we were so fortunate as to get him, and he made

himself so unreservedly agreeable, and I fancied that, in his way,

Arthur quite admired him.  My dear, you have no idea what that

speech has done.  Schemetzkin and Herr Schotte have already sent

me word that they must leave us tomorrow.  Such a thing from a

host!"  Flavia paused, choked by tears of vexation and despair.



Imogen was thoroughly disconcerted; this was the first time

she had ever seen Flavia betray any personal emotion which was

indubitably genuine.  She replied with what consolation she

could.  "Need they take it personally at all?  It was a mere

observation upon a class of people--"



"Which he knows nothing whatever about, and with whom he has

no sympathy," interrupted Flavia.  "Ah, my dear, you could not be

<i>expected</i> to understand.  You can't realize, knowing Arthur

as you do, his entire lack of any aesthetic sense whatever.  He is

absolutely <i>nil</i>, stone deaf and stark blind, on that side. 

He doesn't mean to be brutal, it is just the brutality of utter

ignorance.  They always feel it--they are so sensitive to

unsympathetic influences, you know; they know it the moment they

come into the house.  I have spent my life apologizing for him

and struggling to conceal it; but in spite of me, he wounds them;

his very attitude, even in silence, offends them.  Heavens!  Do I

not know?  Is it not perpetually and forever wounding me?  But

there has never been anything so dreadful as this--never!  If I

could conceive of any possible motive, even!"



"But, surely, Mrs. Hamilton, it was, after all, a mere

expression of opinion, such as we are any of us likely to venture

upon any subject whatever.  It was neither more personal nor more

extravagant than many of M. Roux's remarks."



"But, Imogen, certainly M. Roux has the right.  It is a part

of his art, and that is altogether another matter.  Oh, this is

not the only instance!" continued Flavia passionately, "I've

always had that narrow, bigoted prejudice to contend with.  It

has always held me back.  But this--!"



"I think you mistake his attitude," replied Imogen, feeling

a flush that made her ears tingle.  "That is, I fancy he is more

appreciative than he seems.  A man can't be very demonstrative

about those things--not if he is a real man.  I should not think

you would care much about saving the feelings of people who are

too narrow to admit of any other point of view than their own."

She stopped, finding herself in the impossible position of

attempting to explain Hamilton to his wife; a task which, if once

begun, would necessitate an entire course of enlightenment which

she doubted Flavia's ability to receive, and which she could

offer only with very poor grace.



"That's just where it stings most"--here Flavia began pacing

the floor--"it is just because they have all shown such tolerance

and have treated Arthur with such unfailing consideration that I

can find no reasonable pretext for his rancor.  How can he fail

to see the value of such friendships on the children's account,

if for nothing else!  What an advantage for them to grow up among

such associations!  Even though he cares nothing about these

things himself he might realize that.  Is there nothing I could

say by way of explanation?  To them, I mean?  If someone were to

explain to them how unfortunately limited he is in these

things--"



"I'm afraid I cannot advise you," said Imogen decidedly,

"but that, at least, seems to me impossible."



Flavia took her hand and glanced at her affectionately,

nodding nervously.  "Of course, dear girl, I can't ask you to be

quite frank with me.  Poor child, you are trembling and your

hands are icy.  Poor Arthur!  But you must not judge him by this

altogether; think how much he misses in life.  What a cruel shock

you've had.  I'll send you some sherry, Good night, my dear."



When Flavia shut the door Imogen burst into a fit of nervous

weeping.



Next morning she awoke after a troubled and restless night.  At

eight o'clock Miss Broadwood entered in a red and white striped

bathrobe.



"Up, up, and see the great doom's image!" she cried, her

eyes sparkling with excitement.  "The hall is full of

trunks, they are packing.  What bolt has fallen?  It's you, <i>ma

cherie</i>, you've brought Ulysses home again and the slaughter has

begun!" she blew a cloud of smoke triumphantly from her lips and

threw herself into a chair beside the bed.



Imogen, rising on her elbow, plunged excitedly into the

story of the Roux interview, which Miss Broadwood heard with the

keenest interest, frequently interrupting her with exclamations

of delight.  When Imogen reached the dramatic scene which

terminated in the destruction of the newspaper, Miss Broadwood

rose and took a turn about the room, violently switching the

tasselled cords of her bathrobe.



"Stop a moment," she cried, "you mean to tell me that he had

such a heaven-sent means to bring her to her senses and didn't

use it--that he held such a weapon and threw it away?"



"Use it?" cried Imogen unsteadily.  "Of course he didn't!  He

bared his back to the tormentor, signed himself over to

punishment in that speech he made at dinner, which everyone

understands but Flavia.  She was here for an hour last night and

disregarded every limit of taste in her maledictions."



"My dear!" cried Miss Broadwood, catching her hand in

inordinate delight at the situation, "do you see what he has

done?  There'll be no end to it.  Why he has sacrificed himself to

spare the very vanity that devours him, put rancors in the

vessels of his peace, and his eternal jewel given to the common

enemy of man, to make them kings, the seed of Banquo kings!  He is

magnificent!"



"Isn't he always that?" cried Imogen hotly.  "He's like a

pillar of sanity and law in this house of shams and swollen

vanities, where people stalk about with a sort of madhouse

dignity, each one fancying himself a king or a pope.  If you

could have heard that woman talk of him!  Why, she thinks him

stupid, bigoted, blinded by middleclass prejudices.  She talked

about his having no aesthetic sense and insisted that her artists

had always shown him tolerance.  I don't know why it should get

on my nerves so, I'm sure, but her stupidity and assurance are

enough to drive one to the brink of collapse."



"Yes, as opposed to his singular fineness, they are

calculated to do just that," said Miss Broadwood gravely, wisely

ignoring Imogen's tears.  "But what has been is nothing to what

will be.  Just wait until Flavia's black swans have flown!  You

ought not to try to stick it out; that would only make it harder

for everyone.  Suppose you let me telephone your mother to wire

you to come home by the evening train?"



"Anything, rather than have her come at me like that again.  It

puts me in a perfectly impossible position, and he <i>is</i> so

fine!"



"Of course it does," said Miss Broadwood sympathetically,

"and there is no good to be got from facing it.  I will stay

because such things interest me, and Frau Lichtenfeld will stay

because she has no money to get away, and Buisson will stay

because he feels somewhat responsible.  These complications are

interesting enough to cold-blooded folk like myself who have an

eye for the dramatic element, but they are distracting and

demoralizing to young people with any serious purpose in life."



Miss Broadwood's counsel was all the more generous seeing

that, for her, the most interesting element of this denouement

would be eliminated by Imogen's departure.  "If she goes now,

she'll get over it," soliloquized Miss Broadwood.  "If she stays,

she'll be wrung for him and the hurt may go deep enough to last. 

I haven't the heart to see her spoiling things for herself."  She

telephoned Mrs. Willard and helped Imogen to pack.  She even took

it upon herself to break the news of Imogen's going to Arthur,

who remarked, as he rolled a cigarette in his nerveless fingers:



"Right enough, too.  What should she do here with old cynics

like you and me, Jimmy?  Seeing that she is brim full of dates and

formulae and other positivisms, and is so girt about with

illusions that she still casts a shadow in the sun.  You've been

very tender of her, haven't you?  I've watched you.  And to think

it may all be gone when we see her next.  'The common fate of all

things rare,' you know.  What a good fellow you are, anyway,

Jimmy," he added, putting his hands affectionately on her

shoulders.



Arthur went with them to the station.  Flavia was so

prostrated by the concerted action of her guests that she was

able to see Imogen only for a moment in her darkened sleeping

chamber, where she kissed her hysterically, without lifting her

head, bandaged in aromatic vinegar.  On the way to the station

both Arthur and Imogen threw the burden of keeping up appearances

entirely upon Miss Broadwood, who blithely rose to the occasion. 

When Hamilton carried Imogen's bag into the car, Miss Broadwood

detained her for a moment, whispering as she gave her a large,

warm handclasp, "I'll come to see you when I get back to town;

and, in the meantime, if you meet any of our artists, tell them

you have left Caius Marius among the ruins of Carthage."



End
