


	The Marriage of Phaedra




The sequence of events was such that MacMaster did not make his

pilgrimage to Hugh Treffinger's studio until three years after that

painter's death.  MacMaster was himself a painter, an American of

the Gallicized type, who spent his winters in New York, his summers

in Paris, and no inconsiderable amount of time on the broad waters

between.  He had often contemplated stopping in London on one of

his return trips in the late autumn, but he had always deferred

leaving Paris until the prick of necessity drove him home by the

quickest and shortest route.



Treffinger was a comparatively young man at the time of his

death, and there had seemed no occasion for haste until haste was

of no avail.  Then, possibly, though there had been some

correspondence between them, MacMaster felt certain qualms about

meeting in the flesh a man who in the flesh was so diversely

reported.  His intercourse with Treffinger's work had been so

deep and satisfying, so apart from other appreciations, that he

rather dreaded a critical juncture of any sort.  He had always

felt himself singularly inept in personal relations, and in this

case he had avoided the issue until it was no longer to be feared

or hoped for.  There still remained, however, Treffinger's great

unfinished picture, the <i>Marriage of Phaedra</i>, which had never

left his studio, and of which MacMaster's friends had now and again

brought report that it was the painter's most characteristic

production.



The young man arrived in London in the evening, and the next

morning went out to Kensington to find Treffinger's studio.  It

lay in one of the perplexing bystreets off Holland Road, and the

number he found on a door set in a high garden wall, the top of

which was covered with broken green glass and over which

a budding lilac bush nodded.  Treffinger's plate was still there,

and a card requesting visitors to ring for the attendant.  In

response to MacMaster's ring, the door was opened by a cleanly

built little man, clad in a shooting jacket and trousers that had

been made for an ampler figure.  He had a fresh complexion, eyes

of that common uncertain shade of gray, and was closely shaven

except for the incipient muttonchops on his ruddy cheeks.  He

bore himself in a manner strikingly capable, and there was a sort

of trimness and alertness about him, despite the too-generous

shoulders of his coat.  In one hand he held a bulldog pipe, and

in the other a copy of <i>Sporting Life</i>.  While MacMaster was

explaining the purpose of his call he noticed that the man surveyed

him critically, though not impertinently.  He was admitted into a

little tank of a lodge made of whitewashed stone, the back door

and windows opening upon a garden.  A visitor's book and a pile

of catalogues lay on a deal table, together with a bottle of ink

and some rusty pens.  The wall was ornamented with photographs

and colored prints of racing favorites.



"The studio is h'only open to the public on Saturdays and Sundays,"

explained the man--he referred to himself as "Jymes"--"but of

course we make exceptions in the case of pynters.  Lydy Elling

Treffinger 'erself is on the Continent, but Sir 'Ugh's orders was

that pynters was to 'ave the run of the place."  He selected a key

from his pocket and threw open the door into the studio which, like

the lodge, was built against the wall of the garden.



MacMaster entered a long, narrow room, built of smoothed

planks, painted a light green; cold and damp even on that fine

May morning.  The room was utterly bare of furniture--unless a

stepladder, a model throne, and a rack laden with large leather

portfolios could be accounted such--and was windowless, without

other openings than the door and the skylight, under which hung

the unfinished picture itself.  MacMaster had never seen so many

of Treffinger's paintings together.  He knew the painter had

married a woman with money and had been able to keep such of his

pictures as he wished.  These, with all of <i>182</i> his

replicas and studies, he had left as a sort of common legacy to

the younger men of the school he had originated.



As soon as he was left alone MacMaster sat down on the edge

of the model throne before the unfinished picture.  Here indeed

was what he had come for; it rather paralyzed his receptivity for

the moment, but gradually the thing found its way to him.



At one o'clock he was standing before the collection of studies

done for <i>Boccaccio's Garden</i> when he heard a voice at his

elbow.



"Pardon, sir, but I was just about to lock up and go to

lunch.  Are you lookin' for the figure study of Boccaccio

'imself?" James queried respectfully.  "Lydy Elling Treffinger

give it to Mr. Rossiter to take down to Oxford for some lectures

he's been agiving there."



"Did he never paint out his studies, then?" asked MacMaster

with perplexity.  "Here are two completed ones for this picture. 

Why did he keep them?"



"I don't know as I could say as to that, sir," replied James,

smiling indulgently, "but that was 'is way.  That is to say, 'e

pynted out very frequent, but 'e always made two studies to stand;

one in watercolors and one in oils, before 'e went at the final

picture--to say nothink of all the pose studies 'e made in pencil

before he begun on the composition proper at all.  He was that

particular.  You see, 'e wasn't so keen for the final effect as for

the proper pyntin' of 'is pictures.  'E used to say they ought to

be well made, the same as any other h'article of trade.  I can lay

my 'and on the pose studies for you, sir."  He rummaged in one of

the portfolios and produced half a dozen drawings, "These three,"

he continued, "was discarded; these two was the pose he finally

accepted; this one without alteration, as it were.



"That's in Paris, as I remember," James continued reflectively. 

"It went with the <i>Saint Cecilia</i> into the Baron H---'s

collection.  Could you tell me, sir, 'as 'e it still?  I

don't like to lose account of them, but some 'as changed 'ands

since Sir 'Ugh's death."



"H---'s collection is still intact, I believe," replied MacMaster. 

"You were with Treffinger long?"



"From my boyhood, sir," replied James with gravity.  "I was

a stable boy when 'e took me."



"You were his man, then?"



"That's it, sir.  Nobody else ever done anything around the studio. 

I always mixed 'is colors and 'e taught me to do a share of the

varnishin'; 'e said as 'ow there wasn't a 'ouse in England as could

do it  proper.  You ayn't looked at the <i>Marriage</i> yet, sir?"

he asked abruptly, glancing doubtfully at MacMaster, and indicating

with his thumb the picture under the north light.



"Not very closely.  I prefer to begin with something simpler;

that's rather appalling, at first glance," replied MacMaster.



"Well may you say that, sir," said James warmly.  "That one regular

killed Sir 'Ugh; it regular broke 'im up, and nothink will ever

convince me as 'ow it didn't bring on 'is second stroke."



When MacMaster walked back to High Street to take his bus

his mind was divided between two exultant convictions.  He felt

that he had not only found Treffinger's greatest picture, but

that, in James, he had discovered a kind of cryptic index to the

painter's personality--a clue which, if tactfully followed, might

lead to much.



Several days after his first visit to the studio, MacMaster

wrote to Lady Mary Percy, telling her that he would be in London

for some time and asking her if he might call.  Lady Mary was an

only sister of Lady Ellen Treffinger, the painter's widow, and

MacMaster had known her during one winter he spent at Nice.  He

had known her, indeed, very well, and Lady Mary, who was

astonishingly frank and communicative upon all subjects, had been

no less so upon the matter of her sister's unfortunate marriage.



In her reply to his note Lady Mary named an afternoon when

she would be alone.  She was as good as her word, and when

MacMaster arrived he found the drawing room empty.  Lady Mary

entered shortly after he was announced.  She was a tall woman,

thin and stiffly jointed, and her body stood out under the folds

of her gown with the rigor of cast iron.  This rather metallic

suggestion was further carried out in her heavily knuckled hands,

her stiff gray hair, and her long, bold-featured face,

which was saved from freakishness only by her alert eyes.



"Really," said Lady Mary, taking a seat beside him and

giving him a sort of military inspection through her nose

glasses, "really, I had begun to fear that I had lost you

altogether.  It's four years since I saw you at Nice, isn't it?  I

was in Paris last winter, but I heard nothing from you."



"I was in New York then."



"It occurred to me that you might be.  And why are you in London?"



"Can you ask?" replied MacMaster gallantly.



Lady Mary smiled ironically.  "But for what else, incidentally?"



"Well, incidentally, I came to see Treffinger's studio and

his unfinished picture.  Since I've been here, I've decided to

stay the summer.  I'm even thinking of attempting to do a

biography of him."



"So that is what brought you to London?"



"Not exactly.  I had really no intention of anything so serious

when I came.  It's his last picture, I fancy, that has rather

thrust it upon me.  The notion has settled down on me like a thing

destined."



"You'll not be offended if I question the clemency of such a

destiny," remarked Lady Mary dryly.  "Isn't there rather a

surplus of books on that subject already?"



"Such as they are.  Oh, I've read them all"--here MacMaster

faced Lady Mary triumphantly.  "He has quite escaped your amiable

critics," he added, smiling.



"I know well enough what you think, and I daresay we are not

much on art," said Lady Mary with tolerant good humor.  "We leave

that to peoples who have no physique.  Treffinger made a stir for

a time, but it seems that we are not capable of a sustained

appreciation of such extraordinary methods.  In the end we go

back to the pictures we find agreeable and unperplexing.  He was

regarded as an experiment, I fancy; and now it seems that he was

rather an unsuccessful one.  If you've come to us in a missionary

spirit, we'll tolerate you politely, but we'll laugh in our

sleeve, I warn you."



"That really doesn't daunt me, Lady Mary," declared

MacMaster blandly.  "As I told you, I'm a man with a mission."



Lady Mary laughed her hoarse, baritone laugh.  "Bravo!  And

you've come to me for inspiration for your panegyric?"



MacMaster smiled with some embarrassment.  "Not altogether

for that purpose.  But I want to consult you, Lady Mary, about

the advisability of troubling Lady Ellen Treffinger in the

matter.  It seems scarcely legitimate to go on without asking her

to give some sort of grace to my proceedings, yet I feared the

whole subject might be painful to her.  I shall rely wholly upon

your discretion."



"I think she would prefer to be consulted," replied Lady

Mary judicially.  "I can't understand how she endures to have the

wretched affair continually raked up, but she does.  She seems to

feel a sort of moral responsibility.  Ellen has always been

singularly conscientious about this matter, insofar as her light

goes,--which rather puzzles me, as hers is not exactly a

magnanimous nature.  She is certainly trying to do what she

believes to be the right thing.  I shall write to her, and you

can see her when she returns from Italy."



"I want very much to meet her.  She is, I hope, quite

recovered in every way," queried MacMaster, hesitatingly.



"No, I can't say that she is.  She has remained in much the

same condition she sank to before his death.  He trampled over

pretty much whatever there was in her, I fancy.  Women don't

recover from wounds of that sort--at least, not women of Ellen's

grain.  They go on bleeding inwardly."



"You, at any rate, have not grown more reconciled," MacMaster

ventured.



"Oh I give him his dues.  He was a colorist, I grant you;

but that is a vague and unsatisfactory quality to marry to; Lady

Ellen Treffinger found it so."



"But, my dear Lady Mary," expostulated MacMaster, "and just

repress me if I'm becoming too personal--but it must, in the

first place, have been a marriage of choice on her part as well

as on his."



Lady Mary poised her glasses on her large forefinger and

assumed an attitude suggestive of the clinical lecture room as

she replied.  "Ellen, my dear boy, is an essentially

romantic person.  She is quiet about it, but she runs deep.  I

never knew how deep until I came against her on the issue of that

marriage.  She was always discontented as a girl; she found

things dull and prosaic, and the ardor of his courtship was

agreeable to her.  He met her during her first season in town. 

She is handsome, and there were plenty of other men, but I grant

you your scowling brigand was the most picturesque of the lot. 

In his courtship, as in everything else, he was theatrical to the

point of being ridiculous, but Ellen's sense of humor is not her

strongest quality.  He had the charm of celebrity, the air of a

man who could storm his way through anything to get what he

wanted.  That sort of vehemence is particularly effective with

women like Ellen, who can be warmed only by reflected heat, and

she couldn't at all stand out against it. He convinced her of his

necessity; and that done, all's done."



"I can't help thinking that, even on such a basis, the marriage

should have turned out better," MacMaster remarked reflectively.



"The marriage," Lady Mary continued with a shrug, "was made

on the basis of a mutual misunderstanding.  Ellen, in the nature

of the case, believed that she was doing something quite out of

the ordinary in accepting him, and expected concessions which,

apparently, it never occurred to him to make.  After his marriage

he relapsed into his old habits of incessant work, broken by

violent and often brutal relaxations.  He insulted her friends

and foisted his own upon her--many of them well calculated to

arouse aversion in any well-bred girl.  He had Ghillini

constantly at the house--a homeless vagabond, whose conversation

was impossible.  I don't say, mind you, that he had not

grievances on his side.  He had probably overrated the girl's

possibilities, and he let her see that he was disappointed in

her.  Only a large and generous nature could have borne with him,

and Ellen's is not that.  She could not at all understand that

odious strain of plebeian pride which plumes itself upon not

having risen above its sources.



As MacMaster drove back to his hotel he reflected that Lady

Mary Percy had probably had good cause for dissatisfaction

with her brother-in-law.  Treffinger was, indeed, the last man who

should have married into the Percy family.  The son of a small

tobacconist, he had grown up a sign-painter's apprentice; idle,

lawless, and practically letterless until he had drifted into the

night classes of the Albert League, where Ghillini sometimes

lectured.  From the moment he came under the eye and influence of

that erratic Italian, then a political exile, his life had swerved

sharply from its old channel.  This man had been at once incentive

and guide, friend and master, to his pupil.  He had taken the raw

clay out of the London streets and molded it anew.  Seemingly he

had divined at once where the boy's possibilities lay, and had

thrown aside every canon of orthodox instruction in the training of

him.  Under him Treffinger acquired his superficial, yet facile,

knowledge of the classics; had steeped himself in the monkish Latin

and medieval romances which later gave his work so naive and remote

a quality.  That was the beginning of the wattle fences, the cobble

pave, the brown roof beams, the cunningly wrought fabrics that gave

to his pictures such a richness of decorative effect.



As he had told Lady Mary Percy, MacMaster had found the imperative

inspiration of his purpose in Treffinger's unfinished picture, the

<i>Marriage of Phaedra</i>.  He had always believed that the key to

Treffinger's individuality lay in his singular education; in the

<i>Roman de la Rose</i>, in Boccaccio, and Amadis, those works

which had literally transcribed themselves upon the blank soul of

the London street boy, and through which he had been born into the

world of spiritual things.  Treffinger had been a man who lived

after his imagination; and his mind, his ideals and, as MacMaster

believed, even his personal ethics, had to the last been colored by

the trend of his early training.  There was in him alike the

freshness and spontaneity, the frank brutality and the religious

mysticism, which lay well back of the fifteenth century.  In the

<i>Marriage of Phaedra</i> MacMaster found the ultimate expression

of this spirit, the final word as to Treffinger's point of view.



As in all Treffinger's classical subjects, the conception

was wholly medieval.  This Phaedra, just turning from her husband

and maidens to greet her husband's son, giving him her

first fearsome glance from under her half-lifted veil, was no

daughter of Minos.  The daughter of <i>heathenesse</i> and the

early church she was; doomed to torturing visions and scourgings,

and the wrangling of soul with flesh.  The venerable Theseus

might have been victorious Charlemagne, and Phaedra's maidens

belonged rather in the train of Blanche of Castile than at the

Cretan court.  In the earlier studies Hippolytus had been done

with a more pagan suggestion; but in each successive drawing the

glorious figure bad been deflowered of something of its serene

unconsciousness, until, in the canvas under the skylight, he

appeared a very Christian knight.  This male figure, and the face

of Phaedra, painted with such magical preservation of tone under

the heavy shadow of the veil, were plainly Treffinger's highest

achievements of craftsmanship.  By what labor he had reached the

seemingly inevitable composition of the picture--with its twenty

figures, its plenitude of light and air, its restful distances

seen through white porticoes--countless studies bore witness.



From James's attitude toward the picture MacMaster could

well conjecture what the painter's had been.  This picture was

always uppermost in James's mind; its custodianship formed, in

his eyes, his occupation.  He was manifestly apprehensive when

visitors--not many came nowadays--lingered near it.  "It was the

<i>Marriage</i> as killed 'im," he would often say, "and for the

matter 'o that, it did like to 'av been the death of all of us."



By the end of his second week in London MacMaster had begun the

notes for his study of Hugh Treffinger and his work.  When his

researches led him occasionally to visit the studios of

Treffinger's friends and erstwhile disciples, he found their

Treffinger manner fading as the ring of Treffinger's personality

died out in them.  One by one they were stealing back into the

fold of national British art; the hand that had wound them up was

still.  MacMaster despaired of them and confined himself more and

more exclusively to the studio, to such of Treffinger's letters

as were available--they were for the most part singularly negative

and colorless--and to his interrogation of Treffinger's man.



He could not himself have traced the successive steps

by which he was gradually admitted into James's confidence. 

Certainly most of his adroit strategies to that end failed

humiliatingly, and whatever it was that built up an understanding

between them must have been instinctive and intuitive on both

sides.  When at last James became anecdotal, personal, there was

that in every word he let fall which put breath and blood into

MacMaster's book.  James had so long been steeped in that

penetrating personality that he fairly exuded it.  Many of his

very phrases, mannerisms, and opinions were impressions that he

had taken on like wet plaster in his daily contact with

Treffinger.  Inwardly he was lined with cast-off epitheliums, as

outwardly he was clad in the painter's discarded coats.  If the

painter's letters were formal and perfunctory, if his expressions

to his friends had been extravagant, contradictory, and often

apparently insincere--still, MacMaster felt himself not entirely

without authentic sources.  It was James who possessed

Treffinger's legend; it was with James that he had laid aside his

pose.  Only in his studio, alone, and face to face with his work,

as it seemed, had the man invariably been himself.  James had

known him in the one attitude in which he was entirely honest;

their relation had fallen well within the painter's only

indubitable integrity.  James's report of Treffinger was

distorted by no hallucination of artistic insight, colored by no

interpretation of his own.  He merely held what he had heard and

seen; his mind was a sort of camera obscura.  His very

limitations made him the more literal and minutely accurate.



One morning, when MacMaster was seated before the <i>Marriage

of Phaedra</i>, James entered on his usual round of dusting.



"I've 'eard from Lydy Elling by the post, sir," he remarked,

"an' she's give h'orders to 'ave the 'ouse put in readiness.  I

doubt she'll be 'ere by Thursday or Friday next."



"She spends most of her time abroad?" queried MacMaster; on

the subject of Lady Treffinger James consistently maintained a

very delicate reserve.



"Well, you could 'ardly say she does that, sir.  She finds

the 'ouse a bit dull, I daresay, so durin' the season she stops

mostly with Lydy Mary Percy, at Grosvenor Square.  Lydy

Mary's a h'only sister."  After a few moments he continued,

speaking in jerks governed by the rigor of his dusting: "H'only

this morning I come upon this scarfpin," exhibiting a very

striking instance of that article, "an' I recalled as 'ow Sir

'Ugh give it me when 'e was acourting of Lydy Elling.  Blowed if

I ever see a man go in for a 'oman like 'im!  'E was that gone,

sir.  'E never went in on anythink so 'ard before nor since,

till 'e went in on the <i>Marriage</i> there--though 'e mostly

went in on things pretty keen; 'ad the measles when 'e was

thirty, strong as cholera, an' come close to dyin' of 'em. 

'E wasn't strong for Lydy Elling's set; they was a bit too stiff

for 'im.  A free an' easy gentleman, 'e was; 'e liked 'is dinner

with a few friends an' them jolly, but 'e wasn't much on what you

might call big affairs.  But once 'e went in for Lydy Elling 'e

broke 'imself to new paces; He give away 'is rings an' pins, an'

the tylor's man an' the 'aberdasher's man was at 'is rooms

continual.  'E got 'imself put up for a club in Piccadilly; 'e

starved 'imself thin, an' worrited 'imself white, an' ironed

'imself out, an' drawed 'imself tight as a bow string.  It was a

good job 'e come a winner, or I don't know w'at'd 'a been to

pay."



The next week, in consequence of an invitation from Lady

Ellen Treffinger, MacMaster went one afternoon to take tea with

her.  He was shown into the garden that lay between the residence

and the studio, where the tea table was set under a gnarled pear

tree.  Lady Ellen rose as he approached--he was astonished to

note how tall she was-and greeted him graciously, saying that she

already knew him through her sister.  MacMaster felt a certain

satisfaction in her; in her reassuring poise and repose, in the

charming modulations of her voice and the indolent reserve of her

full, almond eyes.  He was even delighted to find her face so

inscrutable, though it chilled his own warmth and made the open

frankness he had wished to permit himself impossible.  It was a

long face, narrow at the chin, very delicately featured, yet

steeled by an impassive mask of self-control.  It was behind just

such finely cut, close-sealed faces, MacMaster reflected, that

nature sometimes hid astonishing secrets.  But in spite of this

suggestion of hardness he felt that the unerring taste that

Treffinger had always shown in larger matters had not deserted

him when he came to the choosing of a wife, and he admitted that

he could not himself have selected a woman who looked more as

Treffinger's wife should look.



While he was explaining the purpose of his frequent visits

to the studio she heard him with courteous interest.  "I have

read, I think, everything that has been published on Sir Hugh

Treffinger's work, and it seems to me that there is much left to

be said," he concluded.



"I believe they are rather inadequate," she remarked vaguely.  She

hesitated a moment, absently fingering the ribbons of her gown,

then continued, without raising her eyes; "I hope you will not

think me too exacting if I ask to see the proofs of such chapters

of your work as have to do with Sir Hugh's personal life.  I have

always asked that privilege."



MacMaster hastily assured her as to this, adding, "I mean to touch

on only such facts in his personal life as have to do directly with

his work--such as his monkish education under Ghillini."



"I see your meaning, I think," said Lady Ellen, looking at

him with wide, uncomprehending eyes.



When MacMaster stopped at the studio on leaving the house he

stood for some time before Treffinger's one portrait of himself,

that brigand of a picture, with its full throat and square head;

the short upper lip blackened by the close-clipped mustache, the

wiry hair tossed down over the forehead, the strong white teeth

set hard on a short pipestem.  He could well understand what

manifold tortures the mere grain of the man's strong red and

brown flesh might have inflicted upon a woman like Lady Ellen. 

He could conjecture, too, Treffinger's impotent revolt against

that very repose which had so dazzled him when it first defied

his daring; and how once possessed of it, his first instinct had

been to crush it, since he could not melt it.



Toward the close of the season Lady Ellen Treffinger left

town.  MacMaster's work was progressing rapidly, and he and James

wore away the days in their peculiar relation, which by this time

had much of friendliness.  Excepting for the regular visits of a

Jewish picture dealer, there were few intrusions upon their

solitude.  Occasionally a party of Americans rang at the

little door in the garden wall, but usually they departed speedily

for the Moorish hall and tinkling fountain of the great show

studio of London, not far away.



This Jew, an Austrian by birth, who had a large business in

Melbourne, Australia, was a man of considerable discrimination,

and at once selected the <i>Marriage of Phaedra</i> as the object

of his especial interest.  When, upon his first visit, Lichtenstein

had declared the picture one of the things done for time, MacMaster

had rather warmed toward him and had talked to him very freely. 

Later, however, the man's repulsive personality and innate

vulgarity so wore upon him that, the more genuine the Jew's

appreciation, the more he resented it and the more base he somehow

felt it to be.  It annoyed him to see Lichtenstein walking up and

down before the picture, shaking his head and blinking his watery

eyes over his nose glasses, ejaculating: "Dot is a chem, a chem! 

It is wordt to gome den dousant miles for such a bainting, eh?  To

make Eurobe abbreciate such a work of ardt it is necessary to take

it away while she is napping.  She has never abbreciated until she

has lost, but," knowingly, "she will buy back."



James had, from the first, felt such a distrust of the man

that he would never leave him alone in the studio for a moment. 

When Lichtenstein insisted upon having Lady Ellen Treffinger's

address James rose to the point of insolence.  "It ayn't no use

to give it, noway.  Lydy Treffinger never has nothink to do with

dealers."  MacMaster quietly repented his rash confidences,

fearing that he might indirectly cause Lady Ellen annoyance from

this merciless speculator, and he recalled with chagrin that

Lichtenstein had extorted from him, little by little, pretty much

the entire plan of his book, and especially the place in it which

the <i>Marriage of Phaedra</i> was to occupy.



By this time the first chapters of MacMaster's book were in

the hands of his publisher, and his visits to the studio were

necessarily less frequent.  The greater part of his time was now

employed with the engravers who were to reproduce such of

Treffinger's pictures as he intended to use as illustrations.



He returned to his hotel late one evening after a long

and vexing day at the engravers to find James in his room, seated

on his steamer trunk by the window, with the outline of a great

square draped in sheets resting against his knee.



"Why, James, what's up?" he cried in astonishment, glancing

inquiringly at the sheeted object.



"Ayn't you seen the pypers, sir?" jerked out the man.



"No, now I think of it, I haven't even looked at a paper.  I've

been at the engravers' plant all day.  I haven't seen anything."



James drew a copy of the <i>Times</i> from his pocket and handed it

to him, pointing with a tragic finger to a paragraph in the

social column.  It was merely the announcement of Lady Ellen

Treffinger's engagement to Captain Alexander Gresham.



"Well, what of it, my man?  That surely is her privilege."



James took the paper, turned to another page, and silently pointed

to a paragraph in the art notes which stated that Lady Treffinger

had presented to the X--gallery the entire collection of paintings

and sketches now in her late husband's studio, with the exception

of his unfinished picture, the <i>Marriage Of Phaedra</i>, which

she had sold for a large sum to an Australian dealer who had come

to London purposely to secure some of Treffinger's paintings.



MacMaster pursed up his lips and sat down, his overcoat

still on.  "Well, James, this is something of a--something of a

jolt, eh?  It never occurred to me she'd really do it."



"Lord, you don't know 'er, sir," said James bitterly, still

staring at the floor in an attitude of abandoned dejection.



MacMaster started up in a flash of enlightenment, "What on

earth have you got there, James?  It's not-surely it's not--"



Yes, it is, sir," broke in the man excitedly.  "It's the

<i>Marriage</i> itself.  It ayn't agoing to H'Australia, no'ow!"



"But man, what are you going to do with it?  It's

Lichtenstein's property now, as it seems."



It ayn't, sir, that it ayn't.  No, by Gawd, it ayn't!"

shouted James, breaking into a choking fury.  He controlled

himself with an effort and added supplicatingly: "Oh, sir, you

ayn't agoing to see it go to H'Australia, w'ere they send

convic's?"  He unpinned and flung aside the sheets as though to

let <i>Phaedra</i> plead for herself.



MacMaster sat down again and looked sadly at the doomed

masterpiece.  The notion of James having carried it across London

that night rather appealed to his fancy.  There was certainly a

flavor about such a highhanded proceeding.  "However did you get

it here?" he queried.



"I got a four-wheeler and come over direct, sir.  Good job I

'appened to 'ave the chaynge about me."



"You came up High Street, up Piccadilly, through the

Haymarket and Trafalgar Square, and into the Strand?" queried

MacMaster with a relish.



"Yes, sir.  Of course, sir, " assented James with surprise.



MacMaster laughed delightedly.  "It was a beautiful idea,

James, but I'm afraid we can't carry it any further."



"I was thinkin' as 'ow it would be a rare chance to get you to take

the <i>Marriage</i> over to Paris for a year or two, sir, until the

thing blows over?" suggested James blandly.



"I'm afraid that's out of the question, James.  I haven't

the right stuff in me for a pirate, or even a vulgar smuggler,

I'm afraid."  MacMaster found it surprisingly difficult to say

this, and he busied himself with the lamp as he said it. He heard

James's hand fall heavily on the trunk top, and he discovered

that he very much disliked sinking in the man's estimation.



"Well, sir," remarked James in a more formal tone, after a

protracted silence; "then there's nothink for it but as 'ow I'll

'ave to make way with it myself."



"And how about your character, James?  The evidence would be

heavy against you, and even if Lady Treffinger didn't prosecute

you'd be done for."



"Blow my character!--your pardon, sir," cried James, starting to

his feet.  "W'at do I want of a character?  I'll chuck the 'ole

thing, and damned lively, too.  The shop's to be sold out, an' my

place is gone any'ow.  I'm agoing to enlist, or try the gold

fields.  I've lived too long with h'artists; I'd never give

satisfaction in livery now.  You know 'ow it is yourself, sir;

there ayn't no life like it, no'ow."



For a moment MacMaster was almost equal to abetting James in

his theft.  He reflected that pictures had been whitewashed, or

hidden in the crypts of churches, or under the floors of palaces

from meaner motives, and to save them from a fate less

ignominious.  But presently, with a sigh, he shook his head.



"No, James, it won't do at all.  It has been tried over and

over again, ever since the world has been agoing and pictures

amaking.  It was tried in Florence and in Venice, but the

pictures were always carried away in the end.  You see, the

difficulty is that although Treffinger told you what was not to

be done with the picture, he did not say definitely what was to

be done with it.  Do you think Lady Treffinger really understands

that he did not want it to be sold?"



"Well, sir, it was like this, sir," said James, resuming his seat

on the trunk and again resting the picture against his knee.  "My

memory is as clear as glass about it.  After Sir 'Ugh got up from

'is first stroke, 'e took a fresh start at the <i>Marriage</i>. 

Before that 'e 'ad been working at it only at night for a while

back; the <i>Legend</i> was the big picture then, an' was under the

north light w'ere 'e worked of a morning.  But one day 'e bid me

take the <i>Legend</i> down an' put the <i>Marriage</i> in its

place, an' 'e says, dashin' on 'is jacket, 'Jymes, this is a start

for the finish, this time.'



"From that on 'e worked at the night picture in the mornin'--a

thing contrary to 'is custom.  The <i>Marriage</i> went wrong, and

wrong--an' Sir 'Ugh agettin' seedier an' seedier every day.  'E

tried models an' models, an' smudged an' pynted out on account of

'er face goin' wrong in the shadow.  Sometimes 'e layed it on the

colors, an' swore at me an' things in general.  He got that

discouraged about 'imself that on 'is low days 'e used to say to

me: 'Jymes, remember one thing; if anythink 'appens to me, the

<i>Marriage</i> is not to go out of 'ere unfinished.  It's worth

the lot of 'em, my boy, an' it's not agoing to go shabby for lack

of pains.' 'E said things to that effect repeated.



"He was workin' at the picture the last day, before 'e went

to 'is club.  'E kept the carriage waitin' near an hour while 'e

put on a stroke an' then drawed back for to look at it, an' then

put on another, careful like.  After 'e 'ad 'is gloves on,

'e come back an' took away the brushes I was startin' to clean, an'

put in another touch or two.  'It's acomin', Jymes,' 'e says, 'by

gad if it ayn't.' An' with that 'e goes out.  It was cruel sudden,

w'at come after.



"That night I was lookin' to 'is clothes at the 'ouse when

they brought 'im 'ome.  He was conscious, but w'en I ran

downstairs for to 'elp lift 'im up, I knowed 'e was a finished

man.  After we got 'im into bed 'e kept lookin' restless at me

and then at Lydy Elling and ajerkin' of 'is 'and.  Finally 'e

quite raised it an' shot 'is thumb out toward the wall.  'He

wants water; ring, Jymes,' says Lydy Elling, placid.  But I

knowed 'e was pointin' to the shop.



"'Lydy Treffinger,' says I, bold, 'he's pointin' to the studio.  He

means about the <i>Marriage</i>; 'e told me today as 'ow 'e never

wanted it sold unfinished.  Is that it, Sir 'Ugh?'



"He smiled an' nodded slight an' closed 'is eyes.  'Thank

you, Jymes,' says Lydy Elling, placid.  Then 'e opened 'is eyes

an' looked long and 'ard at Lydy Elling.



"'Of course I'll try to do as you'd wish about the picture,

'Ugh, if that's w'at's troublin' you,' she says quiet.  With that

'e closed 'is eyes and 'e never opened 'em.  He died unconscious

at four that mornin'.



"You see, sir, Lydy Elling was always cruel 'ard on the

<i>Marriage</i>.  From the first it went wrong, an' Sir 'Ugh was

out of temper pretty constant.  She came into the studio one day

and looked at the picture an 'asked 'im why 'e didn't throw it up

an' quit aworriting 'imself.  He answered sharp, an' with that she

said as 'ow she didn't see w'at there was to make such a row

about, no'ow.  She spoke 'er mind about that picture, free; an'

Sir 'Ugh swore 'ot an' let a 'andful of brushes fly at 'is study,

an' Lydy Elling picked up 'er skirts careful an' chill, an'

drifted out of the studio with 'er eyes calm and 'er chin 'igh. 

If there was one thing Lydy Elling 'ad no comprehension of, it

was the usefulness of swearin'.  So the <i>Marriage</i> was a sore

thing between 'em.  She is uncommon calm, but uncommon bitter, is

Lydy Elling.  She's never come anear the studio since that day she

went out 'oldin' up of 'er skirts.  W'en 'er friends goes over she

excuses 'erself along o' the strain.  Strain--Gawd!"  James ground

his wrath short in his teeth.



"I'll tell you what I'll do, James, and it's our only hope.  I'll

see Lady Ellen tomorrow.  The <i>Times</i> says she returned today.

You take the picture back to its place, and I'll do what I can

for it.  If anything is done to save it, it must be done through

Lady Ellen Treffinger herself, that much is clear.  I can't think

that she fully understands the situation.  If she did, you know,

she really couldn't have any motive--" He stopped suddenly. 

Somehow, in the dusky lamplight, her small, close-sealed face

came ominously back to him.  He rubbed his forehead and knitted

his brows thoughtfully.  After a moment he shook his head and

went on: "I am positive that nothing can be gained by highhanded

methods, James.  Captain Gresham is one of the most popular men

in London, and his friends would tear up Treffinger's bones if he

were annoyed by any scandal of our making--and this scheme you

propose would inevitably result in scandal.  Lady Ellen has, of

course, every legal right to sell the picture.  Treffinger made

considerable inroads upon her estate, and, as she is about to

marry a man without income, she doubtless feels that she has a

right to replenish her patrimony."



He found James amenable, though doggedly skeptical.  He went

down into the street, called a carriage, and saw James and his

burden into it.  Standing in the doorway, he watched the carriage

roll away through the drizzling mist, weave in and out among the

wet, black vehicles and darting cab lights, until it was

swallowed up in the glare and confusion of the Strand.  "It is

rather a fine touch of irony," he reflected, "that he, who is so

out of it, should be the one to really care.  Poor Treffinger,"

he murmured as, with a rather spiritless smile, he turned back

into his hotel.  "Poor Treffinger; <i>sic transit gloria</i>."



The next afternoon MacMaster kept his promise.  When he

arrived at Lady Mary Percy's house he saw preparations for a

function of some sort, but he went resolutely up the steps,

telling the footman that his business was urgent.  Lady Ellen

came down alone, excusing her sister.  She was dressed for

receiving, and MacMaster had never seen one so beautiful. 

The color in her cheeks sent a softening glow over her small,

delicately cut features.



MacMaster apologized for his intrusion and came unflinchingly

to the object of his call.  He had come, he said, not only to offer

her his warmest congratulations, but to express his regret that a

great work of art was to leave England.



Lady Treffinger looked at him in wide-eyed astonishment. 

Surely, she said, she had been careful to select the best of the

pictures for the X--- gallery, in accordance with Sir Hugh

Treffinger's wishes.



"And did he--pardon me, Lady Treffinger, but in mercy set my

mind at rest--did he or did he not express any definite wish

concerning this one picture, which to me seems worth all the

others, unfinished as it is?"



Lady Treffinger paled perceptibly, but it was not the pallor

of confusion.  When she spoke there was a sharp tremor in her

smooth voice, the edge of a resentment that tore her like pain. 

"I think his man has some such impression, but I believe it to be

utterly unfounded.  I cannot find that he ever expressed any wish

concerning the disposition of the picture to any of his friends. 

Unfortunately, Sir Hugh was not always discreet in his remarks to

his servants."



"Captain Gresham, Lady Ellingham, and Miss Ellingham,"

announced a servant, appearing at the door.



There was a murmur in the hall, and MacMaster greeted the

smiling Captain and his aunt as he bowed himself out.



To all intents and purposes the <i>Marriage of Phaedra</i> was

already entombed in a vague continent in the Pacific, somewhere

on the other side of the world.



End
