



                                     TYPEE


                               by Herman Melville





                          PREFACE



    MORE than three years have elapsed since the occurrence of the

events recorded in this volume. The interval, with the exception of

the last few months, has been chiefly spent by the author tossing

about on the wide ocean. Sailors are the only class of men who

now-a-days see anything like stirring adventure; and many things which

to fire-side people appear strange and romantic, to them seem as

commonplace as a jacket out at elbows. Yet, notwithstanding the

familiarity of sailors with all sorts of curious adventure, the

incidents recorded in the following pages have often served, when

"spun as a yarn," not only to relieve the weariness of many a

night-watch at sea, but to excite the warmest sympathies of the

author's shipmates. He has been, therefore, led to think that his

story could scarcely fail to interest those who are less familiar than

the sailor with a life of adventure.

    In his account of the singular and interesting people among whom

he was thrown, it will be observed that he chiefly treats of their

more obvious peculiarities; and, in describing their customs, refrains

in most cases from entering into explanations concerning their

origin and purposes. As writers of travels among barbarous communities

are generally very diffuse on these subjects, he deems it right to

advert to what may be considered a culpable omission. No one can be

more sensible than the author of his deficiencies in this and many

other respects; but when the very peculiar circumstances in which he

was placed are understood, he feels assured that all these omissions

will be excused.

    In very many published narratives no little degree of attention is

bestowed upon dates; but as the author lost all knowledge of the

days of the week, during the occurrence of the scenes herein

related, he hopes that the reader will charitably pass over his

shortcomings in this particular.

    In the Polynesian words used in this volume- except in those cases

where the spelling has been previously determined by others- that form

of orthography has been employed which might be supposed most easily

to convey their sound to a stranger. In several works descriptive of

the islands in the Pacific, many of the most beautiful combinations of

vocal sounds have been altogether lost to the ear of the reader by

an over-attention to the ordinary rules of spelling.

    There are some things related in the narrative which will be

sure to appear strange, or perhaps entirely incomprehensible, to the

reader; but they cannot appear more so to him than they did to the

author at the time. He has stated such matters just as they

occurred, and leaves every one to form his own opinion concerning

them, trusting that his anxious desire to speak the unvarnished

truth will gain for him the confidence of his readers.

