




XVIII





Anna Leath, from the terrace, watched the return of the

little group.



She looked down on them, as they advanced across the garden,

from the serene height of her unassailable happiness.  There

they were, coming toward her in the mild morning light, her

child, her step-son, her promised husband: the three beings

who filled her life.  She smiled a little at the happy

picture they presented, Effie's gambols encircling it in a

moving frame within which the two men came slowly forward in

the silence of friendly understanding.  It seemed part of

the deep intimacy of the scene that they should not be

talking to each other, and it did not till afterward strike

her as odd that neither of them apparently felt it necessary

to address a word to Sophy Viner.



Anna herself, at the moment, was floating in the mid-current

of felicity, on a tide so bright and buoyant that she seemed

to be one with its warm waves.  The first rush of bliss had

stunned and dazzled her; but now that, each morning, she

woke to the calm certainty of its recurrence, she was

growing used to the sense of security it gave.



"I feel as if I could trust my happiness to carry me; as if

it had grown out of me like wings."  So she phrased it to

Darrow, as, later in the morning, they paced the garden-

paths together.  His answering look gave her the same

assurance of safety.  The evening before he had seemed

preoccupied, and the shadow of his mood had faintly

encroached on the great golden orb of their blessedness; but

now it was uneclipsed again, and hung above them high and

bright as the sun at noon.



Upstairs in her sitting-room, that afternoon, she was

thinking of these things.  The morning mists had turned to

rain, compelling the postponement of an excursion in which

the whole party were to have joined.  Effie, with her

governess, had been despatched in the motor to do some

shopping at Francheuil; and Anna had promised Darrow to join

him, later in the afternoon, for a quick walk in the rain.



He had gone to his room after luncheon to get some belated

letters off his conscience; and when he had left her she had

continued to sit in the same place, her hands crossed on her

knees, her head slightly bent, in an attitude of brooding

retrospection.  As she looked back at her past life, it

seemed to her to have consisted of one ceaseless effort to

pack into each hour enough to fill out its slack folds; but

now each moment was like a miser's bag stretched to bursting

with pure gold.



She was roused by the sound of Owen's step in the gallery

outside her room.  It paused at her door and in answer to

his knock she called out "Come in!"



As the door closed behind him she was struck by his look of

pale excitement, and an impulse of compunction made her say:

"You've come to ask me why I haven't spoken to your

grandmother!"

He sent about him a glance vaguely reminding her of the

strange look with which Sophy Viner had swept the room the

night before; then his brilliant eyes came back to her.



"I've spoken to her myself," he said.



Anna started up, incredulous.



"You've spoken to her?  When?"



"Just now.  I left her to come here."



Anna's first feeling was one of annoyance.  There was really

something comically incongruous in this boyish surrender to

impulse on the part of a young man so eager to assume the

responsibilities of life.  She looked at him with a faintly

veiled amusement.



"You asked me to help you and I promised you I would. It was

hardly worth while to work out such an elaborate plan of

action if you intended to take the matter out of my hands

without telling me."



"Oh, don't take that tone with me!" he broke out, almost

angrily.



"That tone?  What tone?" She stared at his quivering face.

"I might," she pursued, still half-laughing, "more properly

make that request of YOU!"



Owen reddened and his vehemence suddenly subsided.



"I meant that I HAD to speak--that's all.  You don't

give me a chance to explain..."



She looked at him gently, wondering a little at her own

impatience.



"Owen!  Don't I always want to give you every chance?  It's

because I DO that I wanted to talk to your grandmother

first--that I was waiting and watching for the right

moment..."



"The right moment?  So was I.  That's why I've spoken."  His

voice rose again and took the sharp edge it had in moments

of high pressure.



His step-mother turned away and seated herself in her sofa-

corner.  "Oh, my dear, it's not a privilege to quarrel over!

You've taken a load off my shoulders. Sit down and tell me

all about it."



He stood before her, irresolute.  "I can't sit down," he

said.



"Walk about, then.  Only tell me: I'm impatient."



His immediate response was to throw himself into the

armchair at her side, where he lounged for a moment without

speaking, his legs stretched out, his arms locked behind his

thrown-back head.  Anna, her eyes on his face, waited

quietly for him to speak.



"Well--of course it was just what one expected."



"She takes it so badly, you mean?"



"All the heavy batteries were brought up: my father, Givre,

Monsieur de Chantelle, the throne and the altar. Even my

poor mother was dragged out of oblivion and armed with

imaginary protests."



Anna sighed out her sympathy.  "Well--you were prepared for

all that?"



"I thought I was, till I began to hear her say it. Then it

sounded so incredibly silly that I told her so."



"Oh, Owen--Owen!"



"Yes: I know.  I was a fool; but I couldn't help it."



"And you've mortally offended her, I suppose?  That's exactly

what I wanted to prevent."  She laid a hand on his shoulder.

"You tiresome boy, not to wait and let me speak for you!"



He moved slightly away, so that her hand slipped from its

place.  "You don't understand," he said, frowning.



"I don't see how I can, till you explain.  If you thought

the time had come to tell your grandmother, why not have

asked me to do it?  I had my reasons for waiting; but if

you'd told me to speak I should have done so, naturally."



He evaded her appeal by a sudden turn.  "What WERE your

reasons for waiting?"



Anna did not immediately answer.  Her step-son's eyes were

on her face, and under his gaze she felt a faint

disquietude.



"I was feeling my way...I wanted to be absolutely sure..."



"Absolutely sure of what?"



She delayed again for a just perceptible instant. "Why,

simply of OUR side of the case."



"But you told me you were, the other day, when we talked it

over before they came back from Ouchy."



"Oh, my dear--if you think that, in such a complicated

matter, every day, every hour, doesn't more or less modify

one's surest sureness!"



"That's just what I'm driving at.  I want to know what has

modified yours."



She made a slight gesture of impatience.  "What does it

matter, now the thing's done?  I don't know that I could give

any clear reason..."



He got to his feet and stood looking down on her with a

tormented brow.  "But it's absolutely necessary that you

should."



At his tone her impatience flared up.  "It's not necessary

that I should give you any explanation whatever, since

you've taken the matter out of my hands.  All I can say is

that I was trying to help you: that no other thought ever

entered my mind."  She paused a moment and then added: "If

you doubted it, you were right to do what you've done."



"Oh, I never doubted YOU!" he retorted, with a fugitive

stress on the pronoun.  His face had cleared to its old look

of trust.  "Don't be offended if I've seemed to," he went

on.  "I can't quite explain myself, either...it's all a kind

of tangle, isn't it?  That's why I thought I'd better speak

at once; or rather why I didn't think at all, but just

suddenly blurted the thing out----"



Anna gave him back his look of conciliation.  "Well, the how

and why don't much matter now.  The point is how to deal

with your grandmother.  You've not told me what she means to

do."



"Oh, she means to send for Adelaide Painter."



The name drew a faint note of mirth from him and relaxed

both their faces to a smile.



"Perhaps," Anna added, "it's really the best thing for us

all."



Owen shrugged his shoulders.  "It's too preposterous and

humiliating.  Dragging that woman into our secrets----!"



"This could hardly be a secret much longer."



He had moved to the hearth, where he stood pushing about the

small ornaments on the mantel-shelf; but at her answer he

turned back to her.



"You haven't, of course, spoken of it to any one?"



"No; but I intend to now."



She paused for his reply, and as it did not come she

continued: "If Adelaide Painter's to be told there's no

possible reason why I shouldn't tell Mr. Darrow."

Owen abruptly set down the little statuette between his

fingers.  "None whatever: I want every one to know."



She smiled a little at his over-emphasis, and was about to

meet it with a word of banter when he continued, facing her:

"You haven't, as yet, said a word to him?"



"I've told him nothing, except what the discussion of our

own plans--his and mine--obliged me to: that you were

thinking of marrying, and that I wasn't willing to leave

France till I'd done what I could to see you through."



At her first words the colour had rushed to his forehead;

but as she continued she saw his face compose itself and his

blood subside.



"You're a brick, my dear!" he exclaimed.



"You had my word, you know."



"Yes; yes--I know."  His face had clouded again.  "And that's

all--positively all--you've ever said to him?"



"Positively all.  But why do you ask?"



He had a moment's embarrassed hesitation.  "It was

understood, wasn't it, that my grandmother was to be the

first to know?"



"Well--and so she has been, hasn't she, since you've told

her?"



He turned back to his restless shifting of the knick-knacks.



"And you're sure that nothing you've said to Darrow could

possibly have given him a hint----?"



"Nothing I've said to him--certainly."



He swung about on her.  "Why do you put it in that way?"



"In what way?"



"Why--as if you thought some one else might have spoken..."



"Some one else?  Who else?" She rose to her feet.  "What on

earth, my dear boy, can you be driving at?"



"I'm trying to find out whether you think he knows anything

definite."



"Why should I think so?  Do YOU?"



"I don't know.  I want to find out."



She laughed at his obstinate insistence.  "To test my

veracity, I suppose?" At the sound of a step in the gallery

she added: "Here he is--you can ask him yourself."



She met Darrow's knock with an invitation to enter, and he

came into the room and paused between herself and Owen.  She

was struck, as he stood there, by the contrast between his

happy careless good-looks and her step-son's frowning

agitation.



Darrow met her eyes with a smile.  "Am I too soon?  Or is our

walk given up?"



"No; I was just going to get ready."  She continued to linger

between the two, looking slowly from one to the other.  "But

there's something we want to tell you first: Owen is engaged

to Miss Viner."



The sense of an indefinable interrogation in Owen's mind

made her, as she spoke, fix her eyes steadily on Darrow.



He had paused just opposite the window, so that, even in the

rainy afternoon light, his face was clearly open to her

scrutiny.  For a second, immense surprise was alone visible

on it: so visible that she half turned to her step-son, with

a faint smile for his refuted suspicions.  Why, she

wondered, should Owen have thought that Darrow had already

guessed his secret, and what, after all, could be so

disturbing to him in this not improbable contingency?  At any

rate, his doubt must have been dispelled: there was nothing

feigned about Darrow's astonishment.  When her eyes turned

back to him he was already crossing to Owen with

outstretched hand, and she had, through an unaccountable

faint flutter of misgiving, a mere confused sense of their

exchanging the customary phrases.  Her next perception was

of Owen's tranquillized look, and of his smiling return of

Darrow's congratulatory grasp.  She had the eerie feeling of

having been overswept by a shadow which there had been no

cloud to cast...



A moment later Owen had left the room and she and Darrow

were alone.  He had turned away to the window and stood

staring out into the down-pour.



"You're surprised at Owen's news?" she asked.



"Yes: I am surprised," he answered.



"You hadn't thought of its being Miss Viner?"



"Why should I have thought of Miss Viner?"



"You see now why I wanted so much to find out what you knew

about her."  He made no comment, and she pursued: "Now that

you DO know it's she, if there's anything----"



He moved back into the room and went up to her.  His face

was serious, with a slight shade of annoyance. "What on

earth should there be?  As I told you, I've never in my life

heard any one say two words about Miss Viner."



Anna made no answer and they continued to face each other

without moving.  For the moment she had ceased to think

about Sophy Viner and Owen: the only thought in her mind was

that Darrow was alone with her, close to her, and that, for

the first time, their hands and lips had not met.



He glanced back doubtfully at the window.  "It's pouring.

Perhaps you'd rather not go out?"



She hesitated, as if waiting for him to urge her.  "I

suppose I'd better not.  I ought to go at once to my mother-

in-law--Owen's just been telling her," she said.



"Ah."  Darrow hazarded a smile.  "That accounts for my

having, on my way up, heard some one telephoning for Miss

Painter!"



At the allusion they laughed together, vaguely, and Anna

moved toward the door.  He held it open for her and followed

her out.

