





XX





For a second, as she approached him, the quick tremor of her

glance showed her all intent on the same thought as himself.

He transmitted his instructions with mechanical precision,

and she answered in the same tone, repeating his words with

the intensity of attention of a child not quite sure of

understanding. Then she disappeared up the stairs.



Darrow lingered on in the hall, not knowing if she meant to

return, yet inwardly sure she would.  At length he saw her

coming down in her hat and jacket. The rain still streaked

the window panes, and, in order to say something, he said:

"You're not going to the lodge yourself?"



"I've sent one of the men ahead with the things; but I

thought Mrs. Leath might need me."



"She didn't ask for you," he returned, wondering how he

could detain her; but she answered decidedly: "I'd better

go."



He held open the door, picked up his umbrella and followed

her out.  As they went down the steps she glanced back at

him.  "You've forgotten your mackintosh."



"I sha'n't need it."



She had no umbrella, and he opened his and held it out to

her.  She rejected it with a murmur of thanks and walked on

through the thin drizzle, and he kept the umbrella over his

own head, without offering to shelter her.



Rapidly and in silence they crossed the court and began to

walk down the avenue.  They had traversed a third of its

length before Darrow said abruptly: "Wouldn't it have been

fairer, when we talked together yesterday, to tell me what

I've just heard from Mrs. Leath?"



"Fairer----?" She stopped short with a startled look.



"If I'd known that your future was already settled I should

have spared you my gratuitous suggestions."



She walked on, more slowly, for a yard or two.  "I couldn't

speak yesterday.  I meant to have told you today."



"Oh, I'm not reproaching you for your lack of confidence.

Only, if you HAD told me, I should have been more sure

of your really meaning what you said to me yesterday."



She did not ask him to what he referred, and he saw that her

parting words to him lived as vividly in her memory as in

his.



"Is it so important that you should be sure?" she finally

questioned.



"Not to you, naturally," he returned with involuntary

asperity.  It was incredible, yet it was a fact, that for

the moment his immediate purpose in seeking to speak to her

was lost under a rush of resentment at counting for so

little in her fate.  Of what stuff, then, was his feeling

for her made?  A few hours earlier she had touched his

thoughts as little as his senses; but now he felt old

sleeping instincts stir in him...

A rush of rain dashed against his face, and, catching

Sophy's hat, strained it back from her loosened hair. She

put her hands to her head with a familiar gesture...He came

closer and held his umbrella over her...



At the lodge he waited while she went in.  The rain

continued to stream down on him and he shivered in the

dampness and stamped his feet on the flags.  It seemed to

him that a long time elapsed before the door opened and she

reappeared.  He glanced into the house for a glimpse of

Anna, but obtained none; yet the mere sense of her nearness

had completely altered his mood.



The child, Sophy told him, was doing well; but Mrs. Leath

had decided to wait till the surgeon came.  Darrow, as they

turned away, looked through the gates, and saw the doctor's

old-fashioned carriage by the roadside.



"Let me tell the doctor's boy to drive you back," he

suggested; but Sophy answered: "No; I'll walk," and he moved

on toward the house at her side.  She expressed no surprise

at his not remaining at the lodge, and again they walked on

in silence through the rain.  She had accepted the shelter

of his umbrella, but she kept herself at such a carefully

measured distance that even the slight swaying movements

produced by their quick pace did not once bring her arm in

touch with his; and, noticing this, he perceived that every

drop of her blood must be alive to his nearness.



"What I meant just now," he began, "was that you ought to

have been sure of my good wishes."



She seemed to weigh the words.  "Sure enough for what?"



"To trust me a little farther than you did."



"I've told you that yesterday I wasn't free to speak."



"Well, since you are now, may I say a word to you?"



She paused perceptibly, and when she spoke it was in so low

a tone that he had to bend his head to catch her answer.  "I

can't think what you can have to say."



"It's not easy to say here, at any rate.  And indoors I

sha'n't know where to say it."  He glanced about him in the

rain.  "Let's walk over to the spring-house for a minute."



To the right of the drive, under a clump of trees, a little

stucco pavilion crowned by a balustrade rose on arches of

mouldering brick over a flight of steps that led down to a

spring.  Other steps curved up to a door above.  Darrow

mounted these, and opening the door entered a small circular

room hung with loosened strips of painted paper whereon

spectrally faded Mandarins executed elongated gestures.

Some black and gold chairs with straw seats and an unsteady

table of cracked lacquer stood on the floor of red-glazed

tile.



Sophy had followed him without comment.  He closed the door

after her, and she stood motionless, as though waiting for

him to speak.



"Now we can talk quietly," he said, looking at her with a

smile into which he tried to put an intention of the

frankest friendliness.



She merely repeated: "I can't think what you can have to

say."



Her voice had lost the note of half-wistful confidence on

which their talk of the previous day had closed, and she

looked at him with a kind of pale hostility.  Her tone made

it evident that his task would be difficult, but it did not

shake his resolve to go on.  He sat down, and mechanically

she followed his example.  The table was between them and

she rested her arms on its cracked edge and her chin on her

interlocked hands.  He looked at her and she gave him back

his look.



"Have you nothing to say to ME?" he asked at length.



A faint smile lifted, in the remembered way, the left corner

of her narrowed lips.



"About my marriage?"



"About your marriage."



She continued to consider him between half-drawn lids. "What

can I say that Mrs. Leath has not already told you?"



"Mrs. Leath has told me nothing whatever but the fact--and

her pleasure in it."



"Well; aren't those the two essential points?"



"The essential points to YOU?  I should have thought----"



"Oh, to YOU, I meant," she put in keenly.



He flushed at the retort, but steadied himself and rejoined:

"The essential point to me is, of course, that you should be

doing what's really best for you."



She sat silent, with lowered lashes.  At length she

stretched out her arm and took up from the table a little

threadbare Chinese hand-screen.  She turned its ebony stem

once or twice between her fingers, and as she did so Darrow

was whimsically struck by the way in which their evanescent

slight romance was symbolized by the fading lines on the

frail silk.



"Do you think my engagement to Mr. Leath not really best for

me?" she asked at length.



Darrow, before answering, waited long enough to get his

words into the tersest shape--not without a sense, as he did

so, of his likeness to the surgeon deliberately poising his

lancet for a clean incision.  "I'm not sure," he replied,

"of its being the best thing for either of you."



She took the stroke steadily, but a faint red swept her face

like the reflection of a blush.  She continued to keep her

lowered eyes on the screen.



"From whose point of view do you speak?"



"Naturally, that of the persons most concerned."



"From Owen's, then, of course?  You don't think me a good

match for him?"



"From yours, first of all.  I don't think him a good match

for you."



He brought the answer out abruptly, his eyes on her face.

It had grown extremely pale, but as the meaning of his words

shaped itself in her mind he saw a curious inner light dawn

through her set look.  She lifted her lids just far enough

for a veiled glance at him, and a smile slipped through them

to her trembling lips.  For a moment the change merely

bewildered him; then it pulled him up with a sharp jerk of

apprehension.



"I don't think him a good match for you," he stammered,

groping for the lost thread of his words.



She threw a vague look about the chilly rain-dimmed room.

"And you've brought me here to tell me why?"



The question roused him to the sense that their minutes were

numbered, and that if he did not immediately get to his

point there might be no other chance of making it.



"My chief reason is that I believe he's too young and

inexperienced to give you the kind of support you need."



At his words her face changed again, freezing to a tragic

coldness.  She stared straight ahead of her, perceptibly

struggling with the tremor of her muscles; and when she had

controlled it she flung out a pale-lipped pleasantry.  "But

you see I've always had to support myself!"



"He's a boy," Darrow pushed on, "a charming, wonderful boy;

but with no more notion than a boy how to deal with the

inevitable daily problems...the trivial stupid unimportant

things that life is chiefly made up of."

"I'll deal with them for him," she rejoined.



"They'll be more than ordinarily difficult."



She shot a challenging glance at him.  "You must have some

special reason for saying so."



"Only my clear perception of the facts."



"What facts do you mean?"



Darrow hesitated.  "You must know better than I," he

returned at length, "that the way won't be made easy to

you."



"Mrs. Leath, at any rate, has made it so."



"Madame de Chantelle will not."



"How do YOU know that?" she flung back.



He paused again, not sure how far it was prudent to reveal

himself in the confidence of the household. Then, to avoid

involving Anna, he answered: "Madame de Chantelle sent for

me yesterday."



"Sent for you--to talk to you about me?" The colour rose to

her forehead and her eyes burned black under lowered brows.

"By what right, I should like to know?  What have you to do

with me, or with anything in the world that concerns me?"



Darrow instantly perceived what dread suspicion again

possessed her, and the sense that it was not wholly

unjustified caused him a passing pang of shame.  But it did

not turn him from his purpose.



"I'm an old friend of Mrs. Leath's.  It's not unnatural that

Madame de Chantelle should talk to me."



She dropped the screen on the table and stood up, turning on

him the same small mask of wrath and scorn which had glared

at him, in Paris, when he had confessed to his suppression

of her letter.  She walked away a step or two and then came

back.



"May I ask what Madame de Chantelle said to you?"



"She made it clear that she should not encourage the

marriage."



"And what was her object in making that clear to YOU?"



Darrow hesitated.  "I suppose she thought----"



"That she could persuade you to turn Mrs. Leath against me?"



He was silent, and she pressed him: "Was that it?"

"That was it."



"But if you don't--if you keep your promise----"



"My promise?"



"To say nothing...nothing whatever..."  Her strained look

threw a haggard light along the pause.



As she spoke, the whole odiousness of the scene rushed over

him.  "Of course I shall say nothing...you know that..."  He

leaned to her and laid his hand on hers.  "You know I

wouldn't for the world..."



She drew back and hid her face with a sob.  Then she sank

again into her seat, stretched her arms across the table and

laid her face upon them.  He sat still, overwhelmed with

compunction.  After a long interval, in which he had

painfully measured the seconds by her hard-drawn breathing,

she looked up at him with a face washed clear of bitterness.



"Don't suppose I don't know what you must have thought of

me!"



The cry struck him down to a lower depth of self-abasement.

"My poor child," he felt like answering, "the shame of it is

that I've never thought of you at all!" But he could only

uselessly repeat: "I'll do anything I can to help you."



She sat silent, drumming the table with her hand.  He saw

that her doubt of him was allayed, and the perception made

him more ashamed, as if her trust had first revealed to him

how near he had come to not deserving it.  Suddenly she

began to speak.



"You think, then, I've no right to marry him?"



"No right?  God forbid!  I only meant----"



"That you'd rather I didn't marry any friend of yours."  She

brought it out deliberately, not as a question, but as a

mere dispassionate statement of fact.



Darrow in turn stood up and wandered away helplessly to the

window.  He stood staring out through its small discoloured

panes at the dim brown distances; then he moved back to the

table.



"I'll tell you exactly what I meant.  You'll be wretched if

you marry a man you're not in love with."



He knew the risk of misapprehension that he ran, but he

estimated his chances of success as precisely in proportion

to his peril.  If certain signs meant what he thought they

did, he might yet--at what cost he would not stop to think--

make his past pay for his future.



The girl, at his words, had lifted her head with a movement

of surprise.  Her eyes slowly reached his face and rested

there in a gaze of deep interrogation. He held the look for

a moment; then his own eyes dropped and he waited.



At length she began to speak.  "You're mistaken--you're

quite mistaken."



He waited a moment longer.  "Mistaken----?"



"In thinking what you think.  I'm as happy as if I deserved

it!" she suddenly proclaimed with a laugh.



She stood up and moved toward the door.  "NOW are you

satisfied?" she asked, turning her vividest face to him from

the threshold.

