




XXI





Down the avenue there came to them, with the opening of the

door, the voice of Owen's motor.  It was the signal which

had interrupted their first talk, and again, instinctively,

they drew apart at the sound.  Without a word Darrow turned

back into the room, while Sophy Viner went down the steps

and walked back alone toward the court.



At luncheon the presence of the surgeon, and the non-

appearance of Madame de Chantelle--who had excused herself

on the plea of a headache--combined to shift the

conversational centre of gravity; and Darrow, under shelter

of the necessarily impersonal talk, had time to adjust his

disguise and to perceive that the others were engaged in the

same re-arrangement.  It was the first time that he had seen

young Leath and Sophy Viner together since he had learned of

their engagement; but neither revealed more emotion than

befitted the occasion.  It was evident that Owen was deeply

under the girl's charm, and that at the least sign from her

his bliss would have broken bounds; but her reticence was

justified by the tacitly recognized fact of Madame de

Chantelle's disapproval.  This also visibly weighed on

Anna's mind, making her manner to Sophy, if no less kind,

yet a trifle more constrained than if the moment of final

understanding had been reached.  So Darrow interpreted the

tension perceptible under the fluent exchange of

commonplaces in which he was diligently sharing.  But he was

more and more aware of his inability to test the moral

atmosphere about him: he was like a man in fever testing

another's temperature by the touch.



After luncheon Anna, who was to motor the surgeon home,

suggested to Darrow that he should accompany them. Effie was

also of the party; and Darrow inferred that Anna wished to

give her step-son a chance to be alone with his betrothed.

On the way back, after the surgeon had been left at his

door, the little girl sat between her mother and Darrow, and

her presence kept their talk from taking a personal turn.

Darrow knew that Mrs. Leath had not yet told Effie of the

relation in which he was to stand to her.  The premature

divulging of Owen's plans had thrown their own into the

background, and by common consent they continued, in the

little girl's presence, on terms of an informal

friendliness.



The sky had cleared after luncheon, and to prolong their

excursion they returned by way of the ivy-mantled ruin which

was to have been the scene of the projected picnic.  This

circuit brought them back to the park gates not long before

sunset, and as Anna wished to stop at the lodge for news of

the injured child Darrow left her there with Effie and

walked on alone to the house.  He had the impression that

she was slightly surprised at his not waiting for her; but

his inner restlessness vented itself in an intense desire

for bodily movement.  He would have liked to walk himself

into a state of torpor; to tramp on for hours through the

moist winds and the healing darkness and come back

staggering with fatigue and sleep.  But he had no pretext

for such a flight, and he feared that, at such a moment, his

prolonged absence might seem singular to Anna.



As he approached the house, the thought of her nearness

produced a swift reaction of mood.  It was as if an intenser

vision of her had scattered his perplexities like morning

mists.  At this moment, wherever she was, he knew he was

safely shut away in her thoughts, and the knowledge made

every other fact dwindle away to a shadow.  He and she loved

each other, and their love arched over them open and ample

as the day: in all its sunlit spaces there was no cranny for

a fear to lurk. In a few minutes he would be in her presence

and would read his reassurance in her eyes.  And presently,

before dinner, she would contrive that they should have an

hour by themselves in her sitting-room, and he would sit by

the hearth and watch her quiet movements, and the way the

bluish lustre on her hair purpled a little as she bent above

the fire.



A carriage drove out of the court as he entered it, and in

the hall his vision was dispelled by the exceedingly

substantial presence of a lady in a waterproof and a tweed

hat, who stood firmly planted in the centre of a pile of

luggage, as to which she was giving involved but lucid

directions to the footman who had just admitted her.  She

went on with these directions regardless of Darrow's

entrance, merely fixing her small pale eyes on him while she

proceeded, in a deep contralto voice, and a fluent French

pronounced with the purest Boston accent, to specify the

destination of her bags; and this enabled Darrow to give her

back a gaze protracted enough to take in all the details of

her plain thick-set person, from the square sallow face

beneath bands of grey hair to the blunt boot-toes protruding

under her wide walking skirt.



She submitted to this scrutiny with no more evidence of

surprise than a monument examined by a tourist; but when the

fate of her luggage had been settled she turned suddenly to

Darrow and, dropping her eyes from his face to his feet,

asked in trenchant accents: "What sort of boots have you got

on?"



Before he could summon his wits to the consideration of this

question she continued in a tone of suppressed indignation:

"Until Americans get used to the fact that France is under

water for half the year they're perpetually risking their

lives by not being properly protected.  I suppose you've

been tramping through all this nasty clammy mud as if you'd

been taking a stroll on Boston Common."



Darrow, with a laugh, affirmed his previous experience of

French dampness, and the degree to which he was on his guard

against it; but the lady, with a contemptuous snort,

rejoined: "You young men are all alike----"; to which she

appended, after another hard look at him: "I suppose you're

George Darrow?  I used to know one of your mother's cousins,

who married a Tunstall of Mount Vernon Street.  My name is

Adelaide Painter.  Have you been in Boston lately?  No?  I'm

sorry for that.  I hear there have been several new houses

built at the lower end of Commonwealth Avenue and I hoped

you could tell me about them.  I haven't been there for

thirty years myself."



Miss Painter's arrival at Givre produced the same effect as

the wind's hauling around to the north after days of languid

weather.  When Darrow joined the group about the tea-table

she had already given a tingle to the air.  Madame de

Chantelle still remained invisible above stairs; but Darrow

had the impression that even through her drawn curtains and

bolted doors a stimulating whiff must have entered.



Anna was in her usual seat behind the tea-tray, and Sophy

Viner presently led in her pupil.  Owen was also there,

seated, as usual, a little apart from the others, and

following Miss Painter's massive movements and equally

substantial utterances with a smile of secret intelligence

which gave Darrow the idea of his having been in clandestine

parley with the enemy.  Darrow further took note that the

girl and her suitor perceptibly avoided each other; but this

might be a natural result of the tension Miss Painter had

been summoned to relieve.



Sophy Viner would evidently permit no recognition of the

situation save that which it lay with Madame de Chantelle to

accord; but meanwhile Miss Painter had proclaimed her tacit

sense of it by summoning the girl to a seat at her side.



Darrow, as he continued to observe the newcomer, who was

perched on her arm-chair like a granite image on the edge of

a cliff, was aware that, in a more detached frame of mind,

he would have found an extreme interest in studying and

classifying Miss Painter.  It was not that she said anything

remarkable, or betrayed any of those unspoken perceptions

which give significance to the most commonplace utterances.

She talked of the lateness of her train, of an impending

crisis in international politics, of the difficulty of

buying English tea in Paris and of the enormities of which

French servants were capable; and her views on these

subjects were enunciated with a uniformity of emphasis

implying complete unconsciousness of any difference in their

interest and importance.  She always applied to the French

race the distant epithet of "those people", but she betrayed

an intimate acquaintance with many of its members, and an

encyclopaedic knowledge of the domestic habits, financial

difficulties and private complications of various persons of

social importance.  Yet, as she evidently felt no

incongruity in her attitude, so she revealed no desire to

parade her familiarity with the fashionable, or indeed any

sense of it as a fact to be paraded.  It was evident that

the titled ladies whom she spoke of as Mimi or Simone or

Odette were as much "those people" to her as the bonne

who tampered with her tea and steamed the stamps off her

letters ("when, by a miracle, I don't put them in the box

myself.")  Her whole attitude was of a vast grim tolerance

of things-as-they-came, as though she had been some

wonderful automatic machine which recorded facts but had not

yet been perfected to the point of sorting or labelling

them.



All this, as Darrow was aware, still fell short of

accounting for the influence she obviously exerted on the

persons in contact with her.  It brought a slight relief to

his state of tension to go on wondering, while he watched

and listened, just where the mystery lurked.  Perhaps, after

all, it was in the fact of her blank insensibility, an

insensibility so devoid of egotism that it had no hardness

and no grimaces, but rather the freshness of a simpler

mental state.  After living, as he had, as they all had, for

the last few days, in an atmosphere perpetually tremulous

with echoes and implications, it was restful and fortifying

merely to walk into the big blank area of Miss Painter's

mind, so vacuous for all its accumulated items, so echoless

for all its vacuity.



His hope of a word with Anna before dinner was dispelled by

her rising to take Miss Painter up to Madame de Chantelle;

and he wandered away to his own room, leaving Owen and Miss

Viner engaged in working out a picture-puzzle for Effie.



Madame de Chantelle--possibly as the result of her friend's

ministrations--was able to appear at the dinner-table,

rather pale and pink-nosed, and casting tenderly reproachful

glances at her grandson, who faced them with impervious

serenity; and the situation was relieved by the fact that

Miss Viner, as usual, had remained in the school-room with

her pupil.



Darrow conjectured that the real clash of arms would not

take place till the morrow; and wishing to leave the field

open to the contestants he set out early on a solitary walk.

It was nearly luncheon-time when he returned from it and

came upon Anna just emerging from the house.  She had on her

hat and jacket and was apparently coming forth to seek him,

for she said at once: "Madame de Chantelle wants you to go

up to her."



"To go up to her?  Now?"



"That's the message she sent.  She appears to rely on you to

do something."  She added with a smile: "Whatever it is,

let's have it over!"



Darrow, through his rising sense of apprehension, wondered

why, instead of merely going for a walk, he had not jumped

into the first train and got out of the way till Owen's

affairs were finally settled.



"But what in the name of goodness can I do?" he protested,

following Anna back into the hall.



"I don't know.  But Owen seems so to rely on you, too----"



"Owen!  Is HE to be there?"



"No.  But you know I told him he could count on you."



"But I've said to your mother-in-law all I could."



"Well, then you can only repeat it."



This did not seem to Darrow to simplify his case as much as

she appeared to think; and once more he had a movement of

recoil.  "There's no possible reason for my being mixed up

in this affair!"



Anna gave him a reproachful glance.  "Not the fact that

I am?" she reminded him; but even this only stiffened his

resistance.



"Why should you be, either--to this extent?"



The question made her pause.  She glanced about the hall, as

if to be sure they had it to themselves; and then, in a

lowered voice: "I don't know," she suddenly confessed; "but,

somehow, if THEY'RE not happy I feel as if we shouldn't

be."



"Oh, well--" Darrow acquiesced, in the tone of the man who

perforce yields to so lovely an unreasonableness. Escape

was, after all, impossible, and he could only resign himself

to being led to Madame de Chantelle's door.



Within, among the bric-a-brac and furbelows, he found Miss

Painter seated in a redundant purple armchair with the

incongruous air of a horseman bestriding a heavy mount.

Madame de Chantelle sat opposite, still a little wan and

disordered under her elaborate hair, and clasping the

handkerchief whose visibility symbolized her distress.  On

the young man's entrance she sighed out a plaintive welcome,

to which she immediately appended: "Mr. Darrow, I can't help

feeling that at heart you're with me!"



The directness of the challenge made it easier for Darrow to

protest, and he reiterated his inability to give an opinion

on either side.



"But Anna declares you have--on hers!"



He could not restrain a smile at this faint flaw in an

impartiality so scrupulous.  Every evidence of feminine

inconsequence in Anna seemed to attest her deeper subjection

to the most inconsequent of passions.  He had certainly

promised her his help--but before he knew what he was

promising.



He met Madame de Chantelle's appeal by replying: "If there

were anything I could possibly say I should want it to be in

Miss Viner's favour."



"You'd want it to be--yes!  But could you make it so?"



"As far as facts go, I don't see how I can make it either

for or against her.  I've already said that I know nothing

of her except that she's charming."



"As if that weren't enough--weren't all there OUGHT to

be!" Miss Painter put in impatiently.  She seemed to address

herself to Darrow, though her small eyes were fixed on her

friend.



"Madame de Chantelle seems to imagine," she pursued, "that a

young American girl ought to have a dossier--a police-

record, or whatever you call it: what those awful women in

the streets have here.  In our country it's enough to know

that a young girl's pure and lovely: people don't

immediately ask her to show her bank-account and her

visiting-list."



Madame de Chantelle looked plaintively at her sturdy

monitress.  "You don't expect me not to ask if she's got a

family?"



"No; nor to think the worse of her if she hasn't.  The fact

that she's an orphan ought, with your ideas, to be a merit.

You won't have to invite her father and mother to Givre!"



"Adelaide--Adelaide!" the mistress of Givre lamented.



"Lucretia Mary," the other returned--and Darrow spared an

instant's amusement to the quaint incongruity of the name--

"you know you sent for Mr. Darrow to refute me; and how can

he, till he knows what I think?"



"You think it's perfectly simple to let Owen marry a girl we

know nothing about?"



"No; but I don't think it's perfectly simple to prevent

him."



The shrewdness of the answer increased Darrow's interest in

Miss Painter.  She had not hitherto struck him as being a

person of much penetration, but he now felt sure that her

gimlet gaze might bore to the heart of any practical

problem.



Madame de Chantelle sighed out her recognition of the

difficulty.



"I haven't a word to say against Miss Viner; but she's

knocked about so, as it's called, that she must have been

mixed up with some rather dreadful people.  If only Owen

could be made to see that--if one could get at a few facts,

I mean.  She says, for instance, that she has a sister; but

it seems she doesn't even know her address!"



"If she does, she may not want to give it to you.  I daresay

the sister's one of the dreadful people.  I've no doubt that

with a little time you could rake up dozens of them: have

her 'traced', as they call it in detective stories.  I don't

think you'd frighten Owen, but you might: it's natural

enough he should have been corrupted by those foreign ideas.

You might even manage to part him from the girl; but you

couldn't keep him from being in love with her.  I saw that

when I looked them over last evening.  I said to myself:

'It's a real old-fashioned American case, as sweet and sound

as home-made bread.' Well, if you take his loaf away from

him, what are you going to feed him with instead?  Which of

your nasty Paris poisons do you think he'll turn to?

Supposing you succeed in keeping him out of a really bad

mess--and, knowing the young man as I do, I rather think

that, at this crisis, the only way to do it would be to

marry him slap off to somebody else--well, then, who, may I

ask, would you pick out?  One of your sweet French

ingenues, I suppose?  With as much mind as a minnow and as

much snap as a soft-boiled egg.  You might hustle him into

that kind of marriage; I daresay you could--but if I know

Owen, the natural thing would happen before the first baby

was weaned."



"I don't know why you insinuate such odious things against

Owen!"



"Do you think it would be odious of him to return to his

real love when he'd been forcibly parted from her?  At any

rate, it's what your French friends do, every one of them!

Only they don't generally have the grace to go back to an

old love; and I believe, upon my word, Owen would!"



Madame de Chantelle looked at her with a mixture of awe and

exultation.  "Of course you realize, Adelaide, that in

suggesting this you're insinuating the most shocking things

against Miss Viner?"



"When I say that if you part two young things who are dying

to be happy in the lawful way it's ten to one they'll come

together in an unlawful one?  I'm insinuating shocking things

against YOU, Lucretia Mary, in suggesting for a moment

that you'll care to assume such a responsibility before your

Maker.  And you wouldn't, if you talked things straight out

with him, instead of merely sending him messages through a

miserable sinner like yourself!"



Darrow expected this assault on her adopted creed to provoke

in Madame de Chantelle an explosion of pious indignation;

but to his surprise she merely murmured: "I don't know what

Mr. Darrow'll think of you!"



"Mr. Darrow probably knows his Bible as well as I do," Miss

Painter calmly rejoined; adding a moment later, without the

least perceptible change of voice or expression: "I suppose

you've heard that Gisele de Folembray's husband accuses her

of being mixed up with the Duc d'Arcachon in that business

of trying to sell a lot of imitation pearls to Mrs. Homer

Pond, the Chicago woman the Duke's engaged to?  It seems the

jeweller says Gisele brought Mrs. Pond there, and got

twenty-five per cent--which of course she passed on to

d'Arcachon. The poor old Duchess is in a fearful state--so

afraid her son'll lose Mrs. Pond!  When I think that Gisele

is old Bradford Wagstaff's grand-daughter, I'm thankful he's

safe in Mount Auburn!"

