




BOOK III



XVII





At dinner that evening Madame de Chantelle's slender

monologue was thrown out over gulfs of silence.  Owen was

still in the same state of moody abstraction as when Darrow

had left him at the piano; and even Anna's face, to her

friend's vigilant eye, revealed not, perhaps, a personal

preoccupation, but a vague sense of impending disturbance.



She smiled, she bore a part in the talk, her eyes dwelt on

Darrow's with their usual deep reliance; but beneath the

surface of her serenity his tense perceptions detected a

hidden stir.



He was sufficiently self-possessed to tell himself that it

was doubtless due to causes with which he was not directly

concerned.  He knew the question of Owen's marriage was soon

to be raised, and the abrupt alteration in the young man's

mood made it seem probable that he was himself the centre of

the atmospheric disturbance, For a moment it occurred to

Darrow that Anna might have employed her afternoon in

preparing Madame de Chantelle for her grandson's impending

announcement; but a glance at the elder lady's unclouded

brow showed that he must seek elsewhere the clue to Owen's

taciturnity and his step-mother's concern.  Possibly Anna

had found reason to change her own attitude in the matter,

and had made the change known to Owen.  But this, again, was

negatived by the fact that, during the afternoon's shooting,

young Leath had been in a mood of almost extravagant

expansiveness, and that, from the moment of his late return

to the house till just before dinner, there had been, to

Darrow's certain knowledge, no possibility of a private talk

between himself and his step-mother.



This obscured, if it narrowed, the field of conjecture; and

Darrow's gropings threw him back on the conclusion that he

was probably reading too much significance into the moods of

a lad he hardly knew, and who had been described to him as

subject to sudden changes of humour.  As to Anna's fancied

perturbation, it might simply be due to the fact that she

had decided to plead Owen's cause the next day, and had

perhaps already had a glimpse of the difficulties awaiting

her.  But Darrow knew that he was too deep in his own

perplexities to judge the mental state of those about him.

It might be, after all, that the variations he felt in the

currents of communication were caused by his own inward

tremor.



Such, at any rate, was the conclusion he had reached when,

shortly after the two ladies left the drawing-room, he bade

Owen good-night and went up to his room. Ever since the

rapid self-colloquy which had followed on his first sight of

Sophy Viner, he had known there were other questions to be

faced behind the one immediately confronting him.  On the

score of that one, at least, his mind, if not easy, was

relieved.  He had done what was possible to reassure the

girl, and she had apparently recognized the sincerity of his

intention.  He had patched up as decent a conclusion as he

could to an incident that should obviously have had no

sequel; but he had known all along that with the securing of

Miss Viner's peace of mind only a part of his obligation was

discharged, and that with that part his remaining duty was

in conflict.  It had been his first business to convince the

girl that their secret was safe with him; but it was far

from easy to square this with the equally urgent obligation

of safe-guarding Anna's responsibility toward her child.

Darrow was not much afraid of accidental disclosures.  Both

he and Sophy Viner had too much at stake not to be on their

guard. The fear that beset him was of another kind, and had

a profounder source.  He wanted to do all he could for the

girl, but the fact of having had to urge Anna to confide

Effie to her was peculiarly repugnant to him. His own ideas

about Sophy Viner were too mixed and indeterminate for him

not to feel the risk of such an experiment; yet he found

himself in the intolerable position of appearing to press it

on the woman he desired above all others to protect...



Till late in the night his thoughts revolved in a turmoil of

indecision.  His pride was humbled by the discrepancy

between what Sophy Viner had been to him and what he had

thought of her.  This discrepancy, which at the time had

seemed to simplify the incident, now turned out to be its

most galling complication.  The bare truth, indeed, was that

he had hardly thought of her at all, either at the time or

since, and that he was ashamed to base his judgement of her

on his meagre memory of their adventure.



The essential cheapness of the whole affair--as far as his

share in it was concerned--came home to him with humiliating

distinctness.  He would have liked to be able to feel that,

at the time at least, he had staked something more on it,

and had somehow, in the sequel, had a more palpable loss to

show.  But the plain fact was that he hadn't spent a penny

on it; which was no doubt the reason of the prodigious score

it had since been rolling up.  At any rate, beat about the

case as he would, it was clear that he owed it to Anna--and

incidentally to his own peace of mind--to find some way of

securing Sophy Viner's future without leaving her installed

at Givre when he and his wife should depart for their new

post.



The night brought no aid to the solving of this problem; but

it gave him, at any rate, the clear conviction that no time

was to be lost.  His first step must be to obtain from Miss

Viner the chance of another and calmer talk; and he resolved

to seek it at the earliest hour.



He had gathered that Effie's lessons were preceded by an

early scamper in the park, and conjecturing that her

governess might be with her he betook himself the next

morning to the terrace, whence he wandered on to the gardens

and the walks beyond.



The atmosphere was still and pale.  The muffled sunlight

gleamed like gold tissue through grey gauze, and the beech

alleys tapered away to a blue haze blent of sky and forest.

It was one of those elusive days when the familiar forms of

things seem about to dissolve in a prismatic shimmer.



The stillness was presently broken by joyful barks, and

Darrow, tracking the sound, overtook Effie flying down one

of the long alleys at the head of her pack.  Beyond her he

saw Miss Viner seated near the stone-rimmed basin beside

which he and Anna had paused on their first walk to the

river.



The girl, coming forward at his approach, returned his

greeting almost gaily.  His first glance showed him that she

had regained her composure, and the change in her appearance

gave him the measure of her fears.  For the first time he

saw in her again the sidelong grace that had charmed his

eyes in Paris; but he saw it now as in a painted picture.



"Shall we sit down a minute?" he asked, as Effie trotted

off.



The girl looked away from him.  "I'm afraid there's not much

time; we must be back at lessons at half-past nine."



"But it's barely ten minutes past.  Let's at least walk a

little way toward the river."



She glanced down the long walk ahead of them and then back

in the direction of the house.  "If you like," she said in a

low voice, with one of her quick fluctuations of colour; but

instead of taking the way he proposed she turned toward a

narrow path which branched off obliquely through the trees.



Darrow was struck, and vaguely troubled, by the change in

her look and tone.  There was in them an undefinable appeal,

whether for help or forbearance he could not tell.  Then it

occurred to him that there might have been something

misleading in his so pointedly seeking her, and he felt a

momentary constraint.  To ease it he made an abrupt dash at

the truth.



"I came out to look for you because our talk of yesterday

was so unsatisfactory.  I want to hear more about you--about

your plans and prospects.  I've been wondering ever since

why you've so completely given up the theatre."



Her face instantly sharpened to distrust.  "I had to live,"

she said in an off-hand tone.



"I understand perfectly that you should like it here--for a

time."  His glance strayed down the gold-roofed windings

ahead of them.  "It's delightful: you couldn't be better

placed.  Only I wonder a little at your having so completely

given up any idea of a different future."



She waited for a moment before answering: "I suppose I'm

less restless than I used to be."



"It's certainly natural that you should be less restless

here than at Mrs. Murrett's; yet somehow I don't seem to see

you permanently given up to forming the young."



"What--exactly--DO you seem to see me permanently given

up to?  You know you warned me rather emphatically against

the theatre."  She threw off the statement without

impatience, as though they were discussing together the fate

of a third person in whom both were benevolently interested.

Darrow considered his reply.  "If I did, it was because you

so emphatically refused to let me help you to a start."



She stopped short and faced him "And you think I may let you

now?"



Darrow felt the blood in his cheek.  He could not understand

her attitude--if indeed she had consciously taken one, and

her changes of tone did not merely reflect the involuntary

alternations of her mood.  It humbled him to perceive once

more how little he had to guide him in his judgment of her.

He said to himself: "If I'd ever cared a straw for her I

should know how to avoid hurting her now"--and his

insensibility struck him as no better than a vulgar

obtuseness.  But he had a fixed purpose ahead and could only

push on to it.



"I hope, at any rate, you'll listen to my reasons. There's

been time, on both sides, to think them over since----" He

caught himself back and hung helpless on the "since":

whatever words he chose, he seemed to stumble among

reminders of their past.



She walked on beside him, her eyes on the ground. "Then I'm

to understand--definitely--that you DO renew your

offer?" she asked



"With all my heart!  If you'll only let me----"



She raised a hand, as though to check him.  "It's extremely

friendly of you--I DO believe you mean it as a friend--

but I don't quite understand why, finding me, as you say, so

well placed here, you should show more anxiety about my

future than at a time when I was actually, and rather

desperately, adrift."



"Oh, no, not more!"



"If you show any at all, it must, at any rate, be for

different reasons.--In fact, it can only be," she went on,

with one of her disconcerting flashes of astuteness, "for

one of two reasons; either because you feel you ought to

help me, or because, for some reason, you think you owe it

to Mrs. Leath to let her know what you know of me."



Darrow stood still in the path.  Behind him he heard Effie's

call, and at the child's voice he saw Sophy turn her head

with the alertness of one who is obscurely on the watch.

The look was so fugitive that he could not have said wherein

it differed from her normal professional air of having her

pupil on her mind.



Effie sprang past them, and Darrow took up the girl's

challenge.



"What you suggest about Mrs. Leath is hardly worth

answering.  As to my reasons for wanting to help you, a good

deal depends on the words one uses to define rather

indefinite things.  It's true enough that I want to help

you; but the wish isn't due to...to any past kindness on

your part, but simply to my own interest in you.  Why not

put it that our friendship gives me the right to intervene

for what I believe to be your benefit?"



She took a few hesitating steps and then paused again.

Darrow noticed that she had grown pale and that there were

rings of shade about her eyes.



"You've known Mrs. Leath a long time?" she asked him

suddenly.



He paused with a sense of approaching peril.  "A long time--

yes."



"She told me you were friends--great friends"



"Yes," he admitted, "we're great friends."



"Then you might naturally feel yourself justified in telling

her that you don't think I'm the right person for Effie."

He uttered a sound of protest, but she disregarded it.  "I

don't say you'd LIKE to do it. You wouldn't: you'd hate

it.  And the natural alternative would be to try to persuade

me that I'd be better off somewhere else than here.  But

supposing that failed, and you saw I was determined to stay?

THEN you might think it your duty to tell Mrs. Leath."



She laid the case before him with a cold lucidity.  "I

should, in your place, I believe," she ended with a little

laugh.



"I shouldn't feel justified in telling her, behind your

back, if I thought you unsuited for the place; but I should

certainly feel justified," he rejoined after a pause, "in

telling YOU if I thought the place unsuited to you."



"And that's what you're trying to tell me now?"



"Yes; but not for the reasons you imagine."



"What, then, are your reasons, if you please?"



"I've already implied them in advising you not to give up

all idea of the theatre.  You're too various, too gifted,

too personal, to tie yourself down, at your age, to the

dismal drudgery of teaching."



"And is THAT what you've told Mrs. Leath?"



She rushed the question out at him as if she expected to

trip him up over it.  He was moved by the simplicity of the

stratagem.



"I've told her exactly nothing," he replied.



"And what--exactly--do you mean by 'nothing'?  You and she

were talking about me when I came into her sitting-room

yesterday."



Darrow felt his blood rise at the thrust.



"I've told her, simply, that I'd seen you once or twice at

Mrs. Murrett's."



"And not that you've ever seen me since?"



"And not that I've ever seen you since..."



"And she believes you--she completely believes you?"



He uttered a protesting exclamation, and his flush reflected

itself in the girl's cheek.



"Oh, I beg your pardon!  I didn't mean to ask you that."  She

halted, and again cast a rapid glance behind and ahead of

her.  Then she held out her hand.  "Well, then, thank you--

and let me relieve your fears.  I sha'n't be Effie's

governess much longer."



At the announcement, Darrow tried to merge his look of

relief into the expression of friendly interest with which

he grasped her hand.  "You really do agree with me, then?

And you'll give me a chance to talk things over with you?"



She shook her head with a faint smile.  "I'm not thinking of

the stage.  I've had another offer: that's all."



The relief was hardly less great.  After all, his personal

responsibility ceased with her departure from Givre.



"You'll tell me about that, then--won't you?"



Her smile flickered up.  "Oh, you'll hear about it soon...I

must catch Effie now and drag her back to the blackboard."



She walked on for a few yards, and then paused again and

confronted him.  "I've been odious to you--and not quite

honest," she broke out suddenly.



"Not quite honest?" he repeated, caught in a fresh wave of

wonder.



"I mean, in seeming not to trust you.  It's come over me

again as we talked that, at heart, I've always KNOWN I

could..."



Her colour rose in a bright wave, and her eyes clung to his

for a swift instant of reminder and appeal.  For the same

space of time the past surged up in him confusedly; then a

veil dropped between them.



"Here's Effie now!" she exclaimed.



He turned and saw the little girl trotting back to them, her

hand in Owen Leath's.

Even through the stir of his subsiding excitement Darrow was

at once aware of the change effected by the young man's

approach.  For a moment Sophy Viner's cheeks burned redder;

then they faded to the paleness of white petals.  She lost,

however, nothing of the bright bravery which it was her way

to turn on the unexpected.  Perhaps no one less familiar

with her face than Darrow would have discerned the tension

of the smile she transferred from himself to Owen Leath, or

have remarked that her eyes had hardened from misty grey to

a shining darkness.  But her observer was less struck by

this than by the corresponding change in Owen Leath.  The

latter, when he came in sight, had been laughing and talking

unconcernedly with Effie; but as his eye fell on Miss Viner

his expression altered as suddenly as hers.



The change, for Darrow, was less definable; but, perhaps for

that reason, it struck him as more sharply significant.

Only--just what did it signify?  Owen, like Sophy Viner, had

the kind of face which seems less the stage on which

emotions move than the very stuff they work in.  In moments

of excitement his odd irregular features seemed to grow

fluid, to unmake and remake themselves like the shadows of

clouds on a stream.  Darrow, through the rapid flight of the

shadows, could not seize on any specific indication of

feeling: he merely perceived that the young man was

unaccountably surprised at finding him with Miss Viner, and

that the extent of his surprise might cover all manner of

implications.



Darrow's first idea was that Owen, if he suspected that the

conversation was not the result of an accidental encounter,

might wonder at his step-mother's suitor being engaged, at

such an hour, in private talk with her little girl's

governess.  The thought was so disturbing that, as the three

turned back to the house, he was on the point of saying to

Owen: "I came out to look for your mother."  But, in the

contingency he feared, even so simple a phrase might seem

like an awkward attempt at explanation; and he walked on in

silence at Miss Viner's side.  Presently he was struck by

the fact that Owen Leath and the girl were silent also; and

this gave a new turn to his thoughts. Silence may be as

variously shaded as speech; and that which enfolded Darrow

and his two companions seemed to his watchful perceptions to

be quivering with cross-threads of communication.  At first

he was aware only of those that centred in his own troubled

consciousness; then it occurred to him that an equal

activity of intercourse was going on outside of it.

Something was in fact passing mutely and rapidly between

young Leath and Sophy Viner; but what it was, and whither it

tended, Darrow, when they reached the house, was but just

beginning to divine...


