





XIX





He left her at the door of Madame de Chantelle's sitting-

room, and plunged out alone into the rain.



The wind flung about the stripped tree-tops of the avenue

and dashed the stinging streams into his face. He walked to

the gate and then turned into the high-road and strode along

in the open, buffeted by slanting gusts.  The evenly ridged

fields were a blurred waste of mud, and the russet coverts

which he and Owen had shot through the day before shivered

desolately against a driving sky.



Darrow walked on and on, indifferent to the direction he was

taking.  His thoughts were tossing like the tree-tops.

Anna's announcement had not come to him as a complete

surprise: that morning, as he strolled back to the house

with Owen Leath and Miss Viner, he had had a momentary

intuition of the truth.  But it had been no more than an

intuition, the merest faint cloud-puff of surmise; and now

it was an attested fact, darkening over the whole sky.



In respect of his own attitude, he saw at once that the

discovery made no appreciable change.  If he had been bound

to silence before, he was no less bound to it now; the only

difference lay in the fact that what he had just learned had

rendered his bondage more intolerable.  Hitherto he had felt

for Sophy Viner's defenseless state a sympathy profoundly

tinged with compunction.  But now he was half-conscious of

an obscure indignation against her.  Superior as he had

fancied himself to ready-made judgments, he was aware of

cherishing the common doubt as to the disinterestedness of

the woman who tries to rise above her past.  No wonder she

had been sick with fear on meeting him!  It was in his power

to do her more harm than he had dreamed...



Assuredly he did not want to harm her; but he did

desperately want to prevent her marrying Owen Leath. He

tried to get away from the feeling, to isolate and

exteriorize it sufficiently to see what motives it was made

of; but it remained a mere blind motion of his blood, the

instinctive recoil from the thing that no amount of arguing

can make "straight."  His tramp, prolonged as it was, carried

him no nearer to enlightenment; and after trudging through

two or three sallow mud-stained villages he turned about and

wearily made his way back to Givre.  As he walked up the

black avenue, making for the lights that twinkled through

its pitching branches, he had a sudden realisation of his

utter helplessness.  He might think and combine as he would;

but there was nothing, absolutely nothing, that he could

do...



He dropped his wet coat in the vestibule and began to mount

the stairs to his room.  But on the landing he was overtaken

by a sober-faced maid who, in tones discreetly lowered,

begged him to be so kind as to step, for a moment, into the

Marquise's sitting-room. Somewhat disconcerted by the

summons, he followed its bearer to the door at which, a

couple of hours earlier, he had taken leave of Mrs. Leath.

It opened to admit him to a large lamp-lit room which he

immediately perceived to be empty; and the fact gave him

time to note, even through his disturbance of mind, the

interesting degree to which Madame de Chantelle's apartment

"dated" and completed her.  Its looped and corded curtains,

its purple satin upholstery, the Sevres jardinieres, the

rosewood fire-screen, the little velvet tables edged with

lace and crowded with silver knick-knacks and simpering

miniatures, reconstituted an almost perfect setting for the

blonde beauty of the 'sixties.  Darrow wondered that Fraser

Leath's filial respect should have prevailed over his

aesthetic scruples to the extent of permitting such an

anachronism among the eighteenth century graces of Givre;

but a moment's reflection made it clear that, to its late

owner, the attitude would have seemed exactly in the

traditions of the place.



Madame de Chantelle's emergence from an inner room snatched

Darrow from these irrelevant musings.  She was already

beaded and bugled for the evening, and, save for a slight

pinkness of the eye-lids, her elaborate appearance revealed

no mark of agitation; but Darrow noticed that, in

recognition of the solemnity of the occasion, she pinched a

lace handkerchief between her thumb and forefinger.



She plunged at once into the centre of the difficulty,

appealing to him, in the name of all the Everards, to

descend there with her to the rescue of her darling.  She

wasn't, she was sure, addressing herself in vain to one

whose person, whose "tone," whose traditions so brilliantly

declared his indebtedness to the principles she besought him

to defend.  Her own reception of Darrow, the confidence she

had at once accorded him, must have shown him that she had

instinctively felt their unanimity of sentiment on these

fundamental questions.  She had in fact recognized in him

the one person whom, without pain to her maternal piety, she

could welcome as her son's successor; and it was almost as

to Owen's father that she now appealed to Darrow to aid in

rescuing the wretched boy.



"Don't think, please, that I'm casting the least reflection

on Anna, or showing any want of sympathy for her, when I say

that I consider her partly responsible for what's happened.

Anna is 'modern'--I believe that's what it's called when you

read unsettling books and admire hideous pictures.  Indeed,"

Madame de Chantelle continued, leaning confidentially

forward, "I myself have always more or less lived in that

atmosphere: my son, you know, was very revolutionary.  Only

he didn't, of course, apply his ideas: they were purely

intellectual.  That's what dear Anna has always failed to

understand.  And I'm afraid she's created the same kind of

confusion in Owen's mind--led him to mix up things you read

about with things you do...You know, of course, that she

sides with him in this wretched business?"



Developing at length upon this theme, she finally narrowed

down to the point of Darrow's intervention. "My grandson,

Mr. Darrow, calls me illogical and uncharitable because my

feelings toward Miss Viner have changed since I've heard

this news.  Well!  You've known her, it appears, for some

years: Anna tells me you used to see her when she was a

companion, or secretary or something, to a dreadfully vulgar

Mrs. Murrett.  And I ask you as a friend, I ask you as one

of US, to tell me if you think a girl who has had to

knock about the world in that kind of position, and at the

orders of all kinds of people, is fitted to be Owen's wife

I'm not implying anything against her!  I LIKED the girl,

Mr. Darrow...But what's that got to do with it?  I don't want

her to marry my grandson.  If I'd been looking for a wife

for Owen, I shouldn't have applied to the Farlows to find me

one.  That's what Anna won't understand; and what you must

help me to make her see."



Darrow, to this appeal, could oppose only the repeated

assurance of his inability to interfere.  He tried to make

Madame de Chantelle see that the very position he hoped to

take in the household made his intervention the more

hazardous.  He brought up the usual arguments, and sounded

the expected note of sympathy; but Madame de Chantelle's

alarm had dispelled her habitual imprecision, and, though

she had not many reasons to advance, her argument clung to

its point like a frightened sharp-clawed animal.



"Well, then," she summed up, in response to his repeated

assertions that he saw no way of helping her, "you can, at

least, even if you won't say a word to the others, tell me

frankly and fairly--and quite between ourselves--your

personal opinion of Miss Viner, since you've known her so

much longer than we have."



He protested that, if he had known her longer, he had known

her much less well, and that he had already, on this point,

convinced Anna of his inability to pronounce an opinion.



Madame de Chantelle drew a deep sigh of intelligence. "Your

opinion of Mrs. Murrett is enough!  I don't suppose you

pretend to conceal THAT?  And heaven knows what other

unspeakable people she's been mixed up with.  The only

friends she can produce are called Hoke...Don't try to

reason with me, Mr. Darrow.  There are feelings that go

deeper than facts...And I KNOW she thought of studying

for the stage..."  Madame de Chantelle raised the corner of

her lace handkerchief to her eyes.  "I'm old-fashioned--like

my furniture," she murmured.  "And I thought I could count

on you, Mr. Darrow..."





When Darrow, that night, regained his room, he reflected

with a flash of irony that each time he entered it he

brought a fresh troop of perplexities to trouble its serene

seclusion.  Since the day after his arrival, only forty-

eight hours before, when he had set his window open to the

night, and his hopes had seemed as many as its stars, each

evening had brought its new problem and its renewed

distress.  But nothing, as yet, had approached the blank

misery of mind with which he now set himself to face the

fresh questions confronting him.



Sophy Viner had not shown herself at dinner, so that he had

had no glimpse of her in her new character, and no means of

divining the real nature of the tie between herself and Owen

Leath.  One thing, however, was clear: whatever her real

feelings were, and however much or little she had at stake,

if she had made up her mind to marry Owen she had more than

enough skill and tenacity to defeat any arts that poor

Madame de Chantelle could oppose to her.



Darrow himself was in fact the only person who might

possibly turn her from her purpose: Madame de Chantelle, at

haphazard, had hit on the surest means of saving Owen--if to

prevent his marriage were to save him!  Darrow, on this

point, did not pretend to any fixed opinion; one feeling

alone was clear and insistent in him: he did not mean, if he

could help it, to let the marriage take place.



How he was to prevent it he did not know: to his tormented

imagination every issue seemed closed.  For a fantastic

instant he was moved to follow Madame de Chantelle's

suggestion and urge Anna to withdraw her approval.  If his

reticence, his efforts to avoid the subject, had not escaped

her, she had doubtless set them down to the fact of his

knowing more, and thinking less, of Sophy Viner than he had

been willing to admit; and he might take advantage of this

to turn her mind gradually from the project.  Yet how do so

without betraying his insincerity?  If he had had nothing to

hide he could easily have said: "It's one thing to know

nothing against the girl, it's another to pretend that I

think her a good match for Owen."  But could he say even so

much without betraying more?  It was not Anna's questions, or

his answers to them, that he feared, but what might cry

aloud in the intervals between them.  He understood now that

ever since Sophy Viner's arrival at Givre he had felt in

Anna the lurking sense of something unexpressed, and perhaps

inexpressible, between the girl and himself...When at last

he fell asleep he had fatalistically committed his next step

to the chances of the morrow.



The first that offered itself was an encounter with Mrs.

Leath as he descended the stairs the next morning. She had

come down already hatted and shod for a dash to the park

lodge, where one of the gatekeeper's children had had an

accident.  In her compact dark dress she looked more than

usually straight and slim, and her face wore the pale glow

it took on at any call on her energy: a kind of warrior

brightness that made her small head, with its strong chin

and close-bound hair, like that of an amazon in a frieze.



It was their first moment alone since she had left him, the

afternoon before, at her mother-in-law's door; and after a

few words about the injured child their talk inevitably

reverted to Owen.



Anna spoke with a smile of her "scene" with Madame de

Chantelle, who belonged, poor dear, to a generation when

"scenes" (in the ladylike and lachrymal sense of the term)

were the tribute which sensibility was expected to pay to

the unusual.  Their conversation had been, in every detail,

so exactly what Anna had foreseen that it had clearly not

made much impression on her; but she was eager to know the

result of Darrow's encounter with her mother-in-law.



"She told me she'd sent for you: she always 'sends for'

people in emergencies.  That again, I suppose, is de

l'epoque.  And failing Adelaide Painter, who can't get here

till this afternoon, there was no one but poor you to turn

to."



She put it all lightly, with a lightness that seemed to his

tight-strung nerves slightly, undefinably over-done.  But he

was so aware of his own tension that he wondered, the next

moment, whether anything would ever again seem to him quite

usual and insignificant and in the common order of things.



As they hastened on through the drizzle in which the storm

of the night was weeping itself out, Anna drew close under

his umbrella, and at the pressure of her arm against his he

recalled his walk up the Dover pier with Sophy Viner.  The

memory gave him a startled vision of the inevitable

occasions of contact, confidence, familiarity, which his

future relationship to the girl would entail, and the

countless chances of betrayal that every one of them

involved.



"Do tell me just what you said," he heard Anna pleading; and

with sudden resolution he affirmed: "I quite understand your

mother-in-law's feeling as she does."



The words, when uttered, seemed a good deal less significant

than they had sounded to his inner ear; and Anna replied

without surprise: "Of course.  It's inevitable that she

should.  But we shall bring her round in time."  Under the

dripping dome she raised her face to his.  "Don't you

remember what you said the day before yesterday?  'Together

we can't fail to pull it off for him!' I've told Owen that,

so you're pledged and there's no going back."



The day before yesterday!  Was it possible that, no longer

ago, life had seemed a sufficiently simple business for a

sane man to hazard such assurances?



"Anna," he questioned her abruptly, "why are you so anxious

for this marriage?"



She stopped short to face him.  "Why?  But surely I've

explained to you--or rather I've hardly had to, you seemed

so in sympathy with my reasons!"



"I didn't know, then, who it was that Owen wanted to marry."



The words were out with a spring and he felt a clearer air

in his brain.  But her logic hemmed him in.



"You knew yesterday; and you assured me then that you hadn't

a word to say----"



"Against Miss Viner?" The name, once uttered, sounded on and

on in his ears.  "Of course not.  But that doesn't

necessarily imply that I think her a good match for Owen."



Anna made no immediate answer.  When she spoke it was to

question: "Why don't you think her a good match for Owen?"



"Well--Madame de Chantelle's reasons seem to me not quite as

negligible as you think."



"You mean the fact that she's been Mrs. Murrett's secretary,

and that the people who employed her before were called

Hoke?  For, as far as Owen and I can make out, these are the

gravest charges against her."



"Still, one can understand that the match is not what Madame

de Chantelle had dreamed of."



"Oh, perfectly--if that's all you mean."

The lodge was in sight, and she hastened her step.  He

strode on beside her in silence, but at the gate she checked

him with the question: "Is it really all you mean?"



"Of course," he heard himself declare.



"Oh, then I think I shall convince you--even if I can't,

like Madame de Chantelle, summon all the Everards to my

aid!" She lifted to him the look of happy laughter that

sometimes brushed her with a gleam of spring.



Darrow watched her hasten along the path between the

dripping chrysanthemums and enter the lodge.  After she had

gone in he paced up and down outside in the drizzle, waiting

to learn if she had any message to send back to the house;

and after the lapse of a few minutes she came out again.



The child, she said, was badly, though not dangerously,

hurt, and the village doctor, who was already on hand, had

asked that the surgeon, already summoned from Francheuil,

should be told to bring with him certain needful appliances.

Owen had started by motor to fetch the surgeon, but there

was still time to communicate with the latter by telephone.

The doctor furthermore begged for an immediate provision of

such bandages and disinfectants as Givre itself could

furnish, and Anna bade Darrow address himself to Miss Viner,

who would know where to find the necessary things, and would

direct one of the servants to bicycle with them to the

lodge.



Darrow, as he hurried off on this errand, had at once

perceived the opportunity it offered of a word with Sophy

Viner.  What that word was to be he did not know; but now,

if ever, was the moment to make it urgent and conclusive.

It was unlikely that he would again have such a chance of

unobserved talk with her.



He had supposed he should find her with her pupil in the

school-room; but he learned from a servant that Effie had

gone to Francheuil with her step-brother, and that Miss

Viner was still in her room.  Darrow sent her word that he

was the bearer of a message from the lodge, and a moment

later he heard her coming down the stairs.

