




Selected Stories



by Bret Harte









INTRODUCTION



The life of Bret Harte divides itself, without adventitious

forcing, into four quite distinct parts.  First, we have the

precocious boyhood, with its eager response to the intellectual

stimulation of cultured parents; young Bret Harte assimilated Greek

with amazing facility; devoured voraciously the works of

Shakespeare, Dickens, Irving, Froissart, Cervantes, Fielding; and,

with creditable success, attempted various forms of composition.

Then, compelled by economic necessity, he left school at thirteen,

and for three years worked first in a lawyer's office, and then in

a merchant's counting house.



The second period, that of his migration to California, includes

all that is permanently valuable of Harte's literary output.

Arriving in California in 1854, he was, successively, a school-

teacher, drug-store clerk, express messenger, typesetter, and

itinerant journalist.  He worked for a while on the NORTHERN

CALIFORNIA (from which he was dismissed for objecting editorially

to the contemporary California sport of murdering Indians), then on

the GOLDEN ERA, 1857, where he achieved his first moderate acclaim.

In this latter year he married Anne Griswold of New York.  In 1864

he was given the secretaryship of the California mint, a virtual

sinecure, and he was enabled do a great deal of writing.  The first

volume of his poems, THE LOST GALLEON AND OTHER TALES, CONDENSED

NOVELS (much underrated parodies), and THE BOHEMIAN PAPERS were

published in 1867.  One year later, THE OVERLAND MONTHLY, which had

aspirations of becoming "the ATLANTIC MONTHLY of the West," was

established, and Harte was appointed its first editor.  For it, he

wrote most of what still remains valid as literature--THE LUCK OF

ROARING CAMP, THE OUTCASTS OF POKER FLAT, PLAIN LANGUAGE FROM

TRUTHFUL JAMES, among others.  The combination of Irvingesque

romantic glamor and Dickensian bitter-sweet humor, applied to

picturesquely novel material, with the addition of a trick ending,

was fantastically popular.  Editors began to clamor for his

stories; the University of California appointed him Professor of

recent literature; and the ATLANTIC MONTHLY offered him the

practically unprecedented sum of $10,000 for exclusive rights to

one year's literary output.  Harte's star was, briefly, in the

ascendant.



However, Harte had accumulated a number of debts, and his editorial

policies, excellent in themselves, but undiplomatically executed,

were the cause of a series of arguments with the publisher of the

OVERLAND MONTHLY.  Fairly assured of profitable pickings in the

East, he left California (permanently, as it proved).  The East,

however, was financially unappreciative.  Harte wrote an

unsuccessful novel and collaborated with Mark Twain on an

unremunerative play.  His attempts to increase his income by

lecturing were even less rewarding.  From his departure from

California in 1872 to his death thirty years later, Harte's

struggles to regain financial stability were unremitting: and to

these efforts is due the relinquishment of his early ideal of "a

peculiarly characteristic Western American literature."  Henceforth

Harte accepted, as Prof. Hicks remarks, "the role of entertainer,

and as an entertainer he survived for thirty years his death as an

artist."



The final period extends from 1878, when he managed to get himself

appointed consul to Crefeld in Germany, to 1902, when he died of a

throat cancer.  He left for Crefeld without his wife or son--

perhaps intending, as his letters indicate, to call them to him

when circumstances allowed; but save for a few years prior to his

death, the separation, for whatever complex of reasons, remained

permanent.  Harte, however, continued to provide for them as

liberally as he was able.  In Crefeld Harte wrote A LEGEND OF

SAMMERSTANDT, VIEWS FROM A GERMAN SPION, and UNSER KARL.  In 1880

he transferred to the more lucrative consulship of Glasgow, and

ROBIN GRAY, a tale of Scottish life, is the product of his stay

there.  In 1885 he was dismissed from his consulship, probably for

political reasons, though neglect of duty was charged against him.

He removed to London where he remained, for most part, until his

death.



Bret Harte never really knew the life of the mining camp.  His

mining experiences were too fragmentary, and consequently his

portraits of mining life are wholly impressionistic.  "No one,"

Mark Twain wrote, "can talk the quartz dialect correctly without

learning it with pick and shovel and drill and fuse."  Yet, Twain

added elsewhere, "Bret Harte got his California and his

Californians by unconscious absorption, and put both of them into

his tales alive."  That is, perhaps, the final comment.  Much could

be urged against Harte's stories: the glamor they throw over the

life they depict is largely fictitious; their pathetic endings are

obviously stylized; their technique is overwhelmingly derivative.

Nevertheless, so excellent a critic as Chesterton maintained that

"There are more than nine hundred and ninety-nine excellent reasons

which we could all have for admiring the work of Bret Harte."  The

figure is perhaps exaggerated, but there are many reasons for

admiration.  First, Harte originated a new and incalculably

influential type of story: the romantically picturesque "human-

interest" story.  "He created the local color story," Prof.

Blankenship remarks, "or at least popularized it, and he gave new

form and intent to the short story."  Character motivating action

is central to this type of story, rather than mood dominating

incident.  Again Harte's style is really an eminently skilful one,

admirably suited to his subjects.  He can manage the humorous or

the pathetic excellently, and his restraint in each is more

remarkable than his excesses.  His sentences have both force and

flow; his backgrounds are crisply but carefully sketched; his

characters and caricatures have their own logical consistency.

Finally, granted the desirability of the theatric finale, it is

necessary to admit that Harte always rings down his curtain

dramatically and effectively.



ARTHUR ZEIGER, M.A.

