




	NOTE TO GENERAL PREFACE, p. <? p19>.<! p494>

	THE PUBLICATION OF WAVERLEY.

	From Lockhart's _Memoirs of Scott._

  [``There appeared in The Scots Magazine for February 1st, 1814, an
announcement, that `Waverley; or, 'tis Sixty Years Since, a novel, in 3
vols. 12mo,' would be published in March. And before Scott came into
Edinburgh, at the close of the Christmas vacation, on the 12th of January,
Mr. Erskine had perused the greater part of the first volume, and expressed
his decided opinion that Waverley would prove the most popular of all his
friend's writings. The MS. was forthwith copied by John Ballantyne, and
sent to press.''


  In a letter to his friend J. B. S. Morritt of Rokeby, dated July 9, 1814,
Sir Walter says:---

  ``Now, to go from one important subject to another, I must account for
my own laziness, which I do by referring you to a small anonymous sort
of a novel, in three volumes, Waverley, which you will receive by the mail
of this day. It was a very old attempt of mine to embody some traits of
those characters and manners peculiar to Scotland, the last remnants of
which vanished during my own youth, so that few or no traces now remain.
I had written great part of the first volume, and sketched other passages,
when I mislaid the MS., and only found it by the merest accident as I was
rummaging the drawers of an old cabinet; and I took the fancy of finishing
it, which I did so fast, that the last two volumes were written in three
weeks.''


  Again, in a subsequent note, he adds---

  ``As to Waverley, I will play Sir Fretful for once, and assure you that
I left the story to flag in the first volume on purpose; the second and
third have rather more bustle and interest. I wished (with what success
Heaven knows) to avoid the ordinary error of novel writers, whose first
volume is usually their best. But since it has served to amuse Mrs. Morritt
and you _usque ab initio,_ I have no doubt you will tolerate it even unto the
end.''


  The above statement respecting the time occupied in the composition of
the two last volumes is borne out by the following anecdote, told by his
future son-in-law, J. G. Lockhart:---

  ``Happening to pass through Edinburgh in June 1814, I dined one day
with William Menzies (afterwards Judge at the Cape of Good Hope), whose
residence was then in George Street, situated very near to and within sight
of the back windows of Scott's house in North Castle Street. It was a party
of very young persons, most of them, like Menzies and myself, destined for
the Bar of Scotland, all gay and thoughtless, enjoying the first flush of
manhood, with little remembrance of the yesterday, or care of the morrow.

  ``When my companion's worthy father and uncle, after seeing two or
three bottles go round, left the juveniles to themselves, the weather being
hot, we adjourned to a library which had one large window looking north-wards.
After carousing here for an hour or more, I observed that a shade
had come over the aspect of my friend, who happened to be placed immediately
opposite to myself, and said something that intimated a fear of his
being unwell. `No,' said he, `I shall be well enough presently, if you
will only let me sit where you are, and take my chair; for there is a confounded
hand in sight of me here, which has often bothered me before,
and now it won't let me fill my glass with a good will.' I rose to change
places with him accordingly, and he pointed out to me this hand which,
like the writing on Belshazzar's wall, disturbed his hour of hilarity. `Since
we sat down,' he said, `I have been watching it---it fascinates my eye---it
never stops---page after page is finished and thrown on that heap of MS.,
and still it goes on unwearied---and so it will be till candles are brought in,
and God knows how long after that. It is the same every night---I can't
stand a sight of it when I am not at my books.'---`Some stupid, dogged,
engrossing clerk, probably,' exclaimed myself, or some other giddy youth
in our society. `No, boys,' said our host, `I well know what hand it is
---'tis Walter Scott's.' This was the hand that, in the evenings of three
summer weeks, wrote the two last volumes of Waverley.''---From the
_Memoirs of Sir Walter Scott_ by J. G. Lockhart.]

			------

	(AUTHOR'S DEDICATION---ABBOTSFORD, 1829.)

	=To the King's Most Gracious Majesty.=

  =Sire=---The Author of this Collection of Works of Fiction would not have presumed
to solicit for them your Majesty's august Patronage were it not that the
perusal has been supposed in some instances to have succeeded in amusing hours
of relaxation, or relieving those of languor, pain, or anxiety, and therefore must have
so far aided the warmest wish of Your Majesty's heart, by contributing in however
small a degree to the happiness of your People.

  They are therefore humbly dedicated to your Majesty, agreeably to your Gracious
Permission, by your Majesty's dutiful subject

							=Walter Scott.=
