




	PREFACE
	TO
	THE THIRD EDITION.
	OCTOBER 1814.


  To this slight attempt at a sketch of ancient Scottish manners the
public have been more favourable than the Author durst have hoped
or expected. He has heard, with a mixture of satisfaction and
humility, his work ascribed to more than one respectable name.
Considerations, which seem weighty in his particular situation, prevent
his releasing those gentlemen from suspicion by placing his own
name in the title-page; so that, for the present at least, it must remain
uncertain whether Waverley be the work of a poet or a
critic, a lawyer or a clergyman, or whether the writer, to use Mrs
Malaprop's phrase, be, ``like Cerberus---three gentlemen at once.''
The Author, as he is unconscious of anything in the work itself
(except, perhaps, its frivolity) which prevents its finding an acknowledged
father, leaves it to the candour of the public to choose among
the many circumstances peculiar to different situations in life, such
may induce him to suppress his name on the present occasion.
He may be a writer new to publication, and unwilling to avow a
character to which he is unaccustomed; or he may be a hackneyed
author who is ashamed of too frequent appearance, and employs this
mystery, as the heroine of the old comedy used her mask to attract
the attention of those to whom her face had become too familiar.
He may be a man of a grave profession, to whom the reputation of
being a novel-writer might be prejudicial; or he may be a man of
fashion, to whom writing of any kind might appear pedantic. He
may be too young to assume the character of an author, or so old as
to make it advisable to lay it aside.

  The Author of Waverley has heard it objected to this novel that
in the character of Callum Beg, and in the account given by the
Baron of Bradwardine of the petty trespasses of the Highlanders
upon trifling articles of property, he has borne hard, and unjustly
so, upon their national character. Nothing could be farther from
his wish or intention. The character of Callum Beg is that of a
spirit naturally turned to daring evil, and determined, by the circumstances
of his situation, to a particular species of mischief.
Those who have perused the curious Letters from the Highlands,
published about 1726, will find instances of such atrocious characters
which fell under the writer's own observation, though it would be
most unjust to consider such villains as representatives of the Highlanders
of that period, any more than the murderers of Marr and
Williamson can be supposed to represent the English of the present
day. As for the plunder supposed to have been picked up by some
of the insurgents in 1745, it must be remembered that, although the
way of that unfortunate little army was neither marked by devastation
nor bloodshed, but, on the contrary, was orderly and quiet in a
most wonderful degree, yet no army marches through a country
in a hostile manner without committing some depredations; and
several to the extent and of the nature jocularly imputed to them by
the Baron, were really laid to the charge of the Highland insurgents;
for which many traditions, and particularly one respecting the
Knight of the Mirror, may be quoted as good evidence.<*><! p4>

* See note, Author's Address to all in General p. <? p469>.
