The Fortunes & Misfortunes



of the Famous



Moll Flanders



&c.



Who was Born in Newgate, and during a Life of 

continu'd Variety for Threescore Years, besides her 

Childhood, was Twelve Year a Whore, five times a 

Wife (whereof once to her own Brother), Twelve Year 

a Thief, Eight Year a Transported Felon in Virginia, 

at last grew Rich, liv'd Honest, and dies a Penitent.  

Written from her own Memorandums . . .



by Daniel Defoe





THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE



The world is so taken up of late with novels and romances, 

that it will be hard for a private history to be taken for genuine, 

where the names and other circumstances of the person are 

concealed, and on this account we must be content to leave 

the reader to pass his own opinion upon the ensuing sheet, 

and take it just as he pleases.



The author is here supposed to be writing her own history, 

and in the very beginning of her account she gives the reasons 

why she thinks fit to conceal her true name, after which there 

is no occasion to say any more about that.



It is true that the original of this story is put into new words, 

and the style of the famous lady we here speak of is a little 

altered; particularly she is made to tell her own tale in modester 

words that she told it at first, the copy which came first to 

hand having been written in language more like one still in 

Newgate than one grown penitent and humble, as she 

afterwards pretends to be.



The pen employed in finishing her story, and making it what 

you now see it to be, has had no little difficulty to put it into 

a dress fit to be seen, and to make it speak language fit to be 

read.  When a woman debauched from her youth, nay, even 

being the offspring of debauchery and vice, comes to give an 

account of all her vicious practices, and even to descend to the 

particular occasions and circumstances by which she ran through 

in threescore years, an author must be hard put to it wrap it 

up so clean as not to give room, especially for vicious readers, 

to turn it to his disadvantage.



All possible care, however, has been taken to give no lewd 

ideas, no immodest turns in the new dressing up of this story; 

no, not to the worst parts of  her expressions.  To this purpose 

some of the vicious part of her life, which could not be 

modestly told, is quite left out, and several other parts are 

very much shortened.  What is left 'tis hoped will not offend 

the chastest reader or the modest hearer; and as the best use 

is made even of the worst story, the moral 'tis hoped will keep 

the reader serious, even where the story might incline him to 

be otherwise.  To give the history of a wicked life repented of, 

necessarily requires that thewicked part should be make as 

wicked as the real history of it will bear, to illustrate and give 

a beauty to the penitent part, which is certainly the best and 

brightest, if related with equal spirit and life.



It is suggested there cannot be the same life, the same brightness 

and beauty, in relating the penitent part as is in the criminal 

part.  If there is any truth in that suggestion, I must be allowed 

to say 'tis because there is not the same taste and relish in the 

reading, and indeed it is to true that the difference lies not in 

the real worth of the subject so much as in the gust and palate 

of the reader.



But as this work is chiefly recommended to those who know 

how to read it, and how to make the good uses of it which the 

story all along recommends to them, so it is to be hoped that 

such readers will be more leased with the moral than the fable, 

with the application than with the relation, and with the end 

of the writer than with the life of the person written of.



There is in this story abundance of delightful incidents, and 

all of them usefully applied.  There is an agreeable turn artfully 

given them in the relating, that naturally instructs the reader, 

either one way or other.  The first part of her lewd life with the 

young gentleman at Colchester has so many happy turns given 

it to expose the crime, and warn all whose circumstances are 

adapted to it, of the ruinous end of such things, and the foolish, 

thoughtless, and abhorred conduct of both the parties, that it 

abundantly atones for all the lively description she gives of her 

folly and wickedness.



The repentance of her lover at the Bath, and how brought by 

the just alarm of his fit of sickness to abandon her; the just 

caution given there against even the lawful intimacies of the 

dearest friends, and how unable they are to preserve the most 

solemn resolutions of virtue without divine assistance; these 

are parts which, to a just discernment, will appear to have 

more real beauty in them all the amorous chain of story which 

introduces it.



In a word, as the whole relation is carefully garbled of all the 

levity and looseness that was in it, so it all applied, and with 

the utmost care, to virtuous and religious uses.  None can, 

without being guilty of manifest injustice, cast any reproach 

upon it, or upon our design in publishing it.



The advocates for the stage have, in all ages, made this the 

great argument to persuade people that their plays are useful, 

and that they ought to be allowed in the most civilised and in 

the most religious government; namely, that they are applied 

to virtuous purposes, and that by the most lively representations, 

they fail not to recommend virtue and generous principles, and 

to discourage and expose all sorts of vice and corruption of 

manners; and were it true that they did so, and that they 

constantly adhered to that rule, as the test of their acting on 

the theatre, much might be said in their favour.



Throughout the infinite variety of this book, this fundamental 

is most strictly adhered to; there is not a wicked action in any 

part of it, but is first and last rendered unhappy and unfortunate; 

there is not a superlative villain brought upon the stage, but 

either he is brought to an unhappy end, or brought to be a 

penitent; there is not an ill thing mentioned but it is condemned, 

even in the relation, nor a virtuous, just thing but it carries its 

praise along with it.  What can more exactly answer the rule 

laid down, to recommend even those representations of things 

which have so many other just objections leaving against them? 

namely, of example, of bad company, obscene language, and 

the like.



Upon this foundation this book is recommended to the reader 

as a work from every part of which something may be learned, 

and some just and religious inference is drawn, by which the 

reader will have something of instruction, if he pleases to make 

use of it.

 

All the exploits of this lady of fame, in her depredations upon 

mankind, stand as so many warnings to honest people to 

beware of them, intimating to them by what methods innocent 

people are drawn in, plundered and robbed, and by consequence 

how to avoid them.  Her robbing a little innocent child, dressed 

fine by the vanity of the mother, to go to the dancing-school, 

is a good memento to such people hereafter, as is likewise her 

picking the gold watch from the young lady's side in the Park. 



Her getting a parcel from a hare-brained wench at the coaches 

in St. John Street; her booty made at the fire, and again at 

Harwich, all give us excellent warnings in such cases to be 

more present to ourselves in sudden surprises of every sort. 



Her application to a sober life and industrious management at 

last in Virginia, with her transported spouse, is a story fruitful 

of instruction to all the unfortunate creatures who are obliged 

to seek their re-establishment abroad, whether by the misery 

of transportation or other disaster; letting them know that 

diligence and application have their due encouragement, even 

in the remotest parts of the world, and that no case can be so 

low, so despicable, or so empty of  prospect, but that an 

unwearied industry will go a great way to deliver us from it, 

will in time raise the meanest creature to appear again the 

world, and give him a new case for his life.



There are a few of the serious inferences which we are led 

by the hand to in this book, and these are fully sufficient to 

justify any man in recommending it to the world, and much 

more to justify the publication of it.



There are two of the most beautiful parts still behind, which 

this story gives some idea of, and lets us into the parts of them, 

but they are either of them too long to be brought into the same 

volume, and indeed are, as I may call them, whole volumes of  

themselves, viz.: 1. The life of her governess, as she calls her,  

who had run through, it seems, in a few years, all the eminent  

degrees of a gentlewoman, a whore, and a bawd; a midwife 

and a midwife-keeper, as they are called; a pawnbroker, a 

childtaker, a receiver of thieves, and of thieves' purchase, 

that is to say, of stolen goods; and in a word, herself a thief, 

a breeder up of thieves and the like, and yet at last a penitent.



The second is the life of her transported husband, a highwayman, 

who it seems, lived a twelve years' life of successful villainy 

upon the road, and even at last came off so well as to be a 

volunteer transport, not a convict; and in whose life there is 

an incredible variety.



But, as I have said, these are things too long to bring in here, 

so neither can I make a promise of the coming out by 

themselves.



We cannot say, indeed, that this history is carried on quite to 

the end of the life of this famous Moll Flanders, as she calls 

herself, for nobody can write their own life to the full end of it, 

unless they can write it after they are dead.  But her husband's 

life, being written by a third hand, gives a full account of them 

both, how long they lived together in that country, and how 

they both came to England again, after about eight years, in 

which time they were grown very rich, and where she lived, 

it seems, to be very old, but was not so extraordinary a penitent 

as she was at first; it seems only that indeed she always spoke 

with abhorrence of her former life, and of every part of it.



In her last scene, at Maryland and Virginia, many pleasant 

things happened, which makes that part of her life very  

agreeable, but they are not told with the same elegancy as those 

accounted for by herself; so it is still to the more advantage that 

we break off here.





My true name is so well known in the records or registers 

at Newgate, and in the Old Bailey, and there are some things 

of such consequence still depending there, relating to my 

particular conduct, that it is not be expected I should set my 

name or the account of my family to this work; perhaps, after 

my death, it may be better known; at present it would not be 

proper, no not though a general pardon should be issued, even 

without exceptions and reserve of persons or crimes.



It is enough to tell you, that as some of my worst comrades, 

who are out of the way of doing me harm (having gone out of 

the world by the steps and the string, as I often expected to go ),

knew me by the name of Moll Flanders, so you may give me 

leave to speak of myself under that name till I dare own who 

I have been, as well as who I am.



I have been told that in one of neighbour nations, whether it 

be in France or where else I know not, they have an order from 

the king, that when any criminal is condemned, either to die, 

or to the galleys, or to be transported, if they leave any children, 

as such are generally unprovided for, by the poverty or forfeiture 

of their parents, so they are immediately taken into the care of  

the Government, and put into a hospital called the House of  

Orphans, where they are bred up, clothed, fed, taught, and 

when fit to go out, are placed out to trades or to services, so 

as to be well able to provide for themselves by an honest, 

industrious behaviour.



Had this been the custom in our country, I had not been left 

a poor desolate girl without friends, without clothes, without 

help or helper in the world, as was my fate; and by which I 

was not only exposed to very great distresses, even before I 

was capable either of understanding my case or how to amend 

it, but brought into a course of life which was not only scandalous 

in itself, but which in its ordinary course tended to the swift 

destruction both of soul and body.



But the case was otherwise here.  My mother was convicted 

of felony for a certain petty theft scarce worth naming, viz. 

having an opportunity of borrowing three pieces of fine holland 

of a certain draper in Cheapside.  The circumstances are too 

long to repeat, and I have heard them related so many ways, 

that I can scarce be certain which is the right account.



However it was, this they all agree in, that my mother pleaded 

her belly, and being found quick with child, she was respited 

for about seven months; in which time having brought me into 

the world, and being about again, she was called down, as they 

term it, to her former judgment, but obtained the favour of 

being transported to the plantations, and left me about half a 

year old; and in bad hands, you may be sure.



This is too near the first hours of my life for me to relate 

anything of myself but by hearsay; it is enough to mention, 

that as I was born in such an unhappy place, I had no parish 

to have recourse to for my nourishment in my infancy; nor 

can I give the least account how I was kept alive, other than 

that, as I have been told, some relation of my mother's took 

me away for a while as a nurse, but at whose expense, or by 

whose direction, I know nothing at all of it.



The first account that I can recollect, or could ever learn of  

myself, was that I had wandered among a crew of those people 

they call gypsies, or Egyptians; but I believe it was but a very 

little while that I had been among them, for I had not had my 

skin discoloured or blackened, as they do very young to all the 

children they carry about with them; nor can I tell how I came 

among them, or how I got from them.



It was at Colchester, in Essex, that those people left me; and 

I have a notion in my head that I left them there (that is, that 

I hid myself and would not go any farther with them), but I am 

not able to be particular in that account; only this I remember, 

that being taken up by some of the parish officers of Colchester, 

I gave an account that I came into the town with the gypsies, 

but that I would not go any farther with them, and that so they 

had left me, but whither they were gone that I knew not, nor 

could they expect it of me; for though they send round the 

country to inquire after them, it seems they could not be found. 



I was now in a way to be provided for; for though I was not a 

parish charge upon this or that part of the town by law, yet as 

my case came to be known, and that I was too young to do any 

work, being not above three years old, compassion moved the 

magistrates of the town to order some care to be taken of me, 

and I became one of their own as much as if I had been born 

in the place.



In the provision they made for me, it was my good hap to be 

put to nurse, as they call it, to a woman who was indeed poor 

but had been in better circumstances, and who got a little 

livelihood by taking such as I was supposed to be, and keeping 

them with all necessaries, till they were at a certain age, in 

which it might be supposed they might go to service or get 

their own bread.



This woman had also had a little school, which she kept to 

teach children to read and to work; and having, as I have said, 

lived before that in good fashion, she bred up the children she 

took with a great deal of art, as well as with a great deal of care.



But that which was worth all the rest, she bred them up very 

religiously, being herself a very sober, pious woman, very house- 

wifely and clean, and very mannerly, and with good behaviour.  

So that in a word, expecting a plain diet, coarse lodging, and 

mean clothes, we were brought up as mannerly and as genteelly

as if we had been at the dancing-school.



I was continued here till I was eight years old, when I was 

terrified with news that the magistrates (as I think they called 

them) had ordered that I should go to service.  I was able to 

do but very little service wherever I was to go, except it was 

to run of errands and be a drudge to some cookmaid, and this 

they told me of often, which put me into a great fright; for I 

had a thorough aversion to going to service, as they called it 

(that is, to be a servant), though I was so young; and I told my 

nurse, as we called her, that I believed I could get my living 

without going to service, if she pleased to let me; for she had 

taught me to work with my needle, and spin worsted, which 

is the chief trade of that city, and I told her that if she would 

keep me, I would work for her, and I would work very hard.



I talked to her almost every day of working hard; and, in short, 

I did nothing but work and cry all day, which grieved the good, 

kind woman so much, that at last she began to be concerned 

for me, for she loved me very well.



One day after this, as she came into the room where all we 

poor children were at work, she sat down just over against me, 

not in her usual place as mistress, but as if she set herself on 

purpose to observe me and see me work.  I was doing something 

she had set me to; as I remember, it was marking some shirts 

which she had taken to make, and after a while she began to 

talk to me.  'Thou foolish child,' says she, 'thou art always 

crying (for I was crying then); 'prithee, what dost cry for?'  

'Because they will take me away,' says I, 'and put me to service, 

and I can't work housework.'  'Well, child,' says she, 'but 

though you can't work housework, as you call it, you will learn 

it in time, and they won't put you to hard things at first.'  'Yes, 

they will,' says I, 'and if I can't do it they will beat me, and the 

maids will beat me to make me do great work, and I am but a 

little girl and I can't do it'; and then I cried again, till I could 

not speak any more to her.



This moved my good motherly nurse, so that she from that 

time resolved I should not go to service yet; so she bid me not 

cry, and she would speak to Mr. Mayor, and I should not go to 

service till I was bigger.



Well, this did not satisfy me, for to think of going to service 

was such a frightful thing to me, that if she had assured me I 

should not have gone till I was twenty years old, it would have 

been the same to me; I should have cried, I believe, all the 

time, with the very apprehension of its being to be so at last.



When she saw that I was not pacified yet, she began to be 

angry with me.  'And what would you have?' says she; 'don't 

I tell you that you shall not go to service till your are bigger?'  

'Ay,' said I, 'but then I must go at last.'  'Why, what?' said she; 

'is the girl mad?  What would you be -- a gentlewoman?' 

'Yes,' says I, and cried heartily till I roard out again.



This set the old gentlewoman a-laughing at me, as you may be 

sure it would.  'Well, madam, forsooth,' says she, gibing at me, 

'you would be a gentlewoman; and pray how will you come to 

be a gentlewoman?  What! will you do it by your fingers' end?' 



'Yes,' says I again, very innocently.



'Why, what can you earn?' says she; 'what can you get at your 

work?'



'Threepence,' said I, 'when I spin, and fourpence when I work 

plain work.'



'Alas! poor gentlewoman,' said she again, laughing, 'what will 

that do for thee?'



'It will keep me,' says I, 'if you will let me live with you.'  And 

this I said in such a poor petitioning tone, that it made the poor 

woman's heart yearn to me, as she told me afterwards.



'But,' says she, 'that will not keep you and buy you clothes 

too; and who must buy the little gentlewoman clothes?' says 

she, and smiled all the while at me.



'I will work harder, then,' says I, 'and you shall have it all.' 



'Poor child! it won't keep you,' says she; 'it will hardly keep 

you in victuals.'



'Then I will have no victuals,' says I, again very innocently; 

'let me but live with you.'



'Why, can you live without victuals?' says she.



'Yes,' again says I, very much like a child, you may be sure,

and still I cried heartily.



I had no policy in all this; you may easily see it was all nature; 

but it was joined with so much innocence and so much passion 

that, in short, it set the good motherly creature a-weeping too, 

and she cried at last as fast as I did, and then took me and led 

me out of the teaching-room.  'Come,' says she, 'you shan't 

go to service; you shall live with me'; and this pacified me 

for the present.



Some time after this, she going to wait on the Mayor, and 

talking of such things as belonged to her business, at last my 

story came up, and my good nurse told Mr. Mayor the whole 

tale.  He was so pleased with it, that he would call his lady 

and his two daughters to hear it, and it made mirth enough 

among them, you may be sure.



However, not a week had passed over, but on a sudden comes 

Mrs. Mayoress and her two daughters to the house to see my 

old nurse, and to see her school and the children.  When they 

had looked about them a little, 'Well, Mrs.----,' says the 

Mayoress to my nurse, 'and pray which is the little lass that 

intends to be a gentlewoman?'  I heard her, and I was terribly 

frighted at first, though I did not know why neither; but Mrs. 

Mayoress comes up to me.  'Well, miss,' says she, 'and what 

are you at work upon?'  The word miss was a language that 

had hardly been heard of in our school, and I wondered what 

sad name it was she called me.  However, I stood up, made a 

curtsy, and she took my work out of my hand, looked on it, 

and said it was very well; then she took up one of the hands.  

'Nay,' says she, 'the child may come to be a gentlewoman for 

aught anybody knows; she has a gentlewoman's hand,' says she.  

This pleased me mightily, you may be sure; but Mrs. Mayoress 

did not stop there, but giving me my work again, she put her 

hand in her pocket, gave me a shilling, and bid me mind my 

work, and learn to work well, and I might be a gentlewoman 

for aught she knew.



Now all this while my good old nurse, Mrs. Mayoress, and all 

the rest of them did not understand me at all, for they meant 

one sort of thing by the word gentlewoman, and I meant quite 

another; for alas! all I understood by being a gentlewoman was 

to be able to work for myself, and get enough to keep me 

without that terrible bugbear going to service, whereas they 

meant to live great, rich and high, and I know not what.



Well, after Mrs. Mayoress was gone, her two daughters came 

in, and they called for the gentlewoman too, and they talked 

a long while to me, and I answered them in my innocent way; 

but always, if they asked me whether I resolved to be a 

gentlewoman, I answered Yes.  At last one of them asked me 

what a gentlewoman was?  That puzzled me much; but, 

however, I explained myself negatively, that it was one that 

did not go to service, to do housework.  They were pleased 

to be familiar with me, and like my little prattle to them, which, 

it seems, was agreeable enough to them, and they gave me 

money too.



As for my money, I gave it all to my mistress-nurse, as I called 

her, and told her she should have all I got for myself when I 

was a gentlewoman, as well as now.  By this and some other 

of my talk, my old tutoress began to understand me about what 

I meant by being a gentlewoman, and that I understood by it 

no more than to be able to get my bread by my own work; and 

at last she asked me whether it was not so.



I told her, yes, and insisted on it, that to do so was to be a 

gentlewoman; 'for,' says I, 'there is such a one,' naming a 

woman that mended lace and washed the ladies' laced-heads; 

'she,' says I, 'is a gentlewoman, and they call her madam.'



"Poor child,' says my good old nurse, 'you may soon be such 

a gentlewoman as that, for she is a person of ill fame, and has 

had two or three bastards.'



I did not understand anything of that; but I answered, 'I am 

sure they call her madam, and she does not go to service nor 

do housework'; and therefore I insisted that she was a 

gentlewoman, and I would be such a gentlewoman as that.



The ladies were told all this again, to be sure, and they made 

themselves merry with it, and every now and then the young 

ladies, Mr. Mayor's daughters, would come and see me, and 

ask where the little gentlewoman was, which made me not a 

little proud of myself.



This held a great while, and I was often visited by these young 

ladies, and sometimes they brought others with them; so that I 

was known by it almost all over the town.



I was now about ten years old, and began to look a little  

womanish, for I was mighty grave and humble, very mannerly, 

and as I had often heard the ladies say I was pretty, and would 

be a very handsome woman, so you may be sure that hearing 

them say so made me not a little proud.  However, that pride 

had no ill effect upon me yet; only, as they often gave me 

money, and I gave it to my old nurse, she, honest woman, 

was so just to me as to lay it all out again for me, and gave 

me head-dresses, and linen, and gloves, and ribbons, and I 

went very neat, and always clean; for that I would do, and if 

I had rags on, I would always be clean, or else I would dabble 

them in water myself; but, I say, my good nurse, when I had 

money given me, very honestly laid it out for me, and would 

always tell the ladies this or that was bought with their money; 

and this made them oftentimes give me more, till at last I was 

indeed called upon by the magistrates, as I understood it, to 

go out to service; but then I was come to be so good a 

workwoman myself, and the ladies were so kind to me, that it 

was plain I could maintain myself--that is to say, I could earn 

as much for my nurse as she was able by it to keep me--so she 

told them that if they would give her leave, she would keep 

the gentlewoman, as she called me, to be her assistant and 

teach the children, which I was very well able to do; for I was 

very nimble at my work, and had a good hand with my needle, 

though I was yet very young.



But the kindness of the ladies of the town did not end here, 

for when they came to understand that I was no more maintained 

by the public allowance as before, they gave me money oftener 

than formerly; and as I grew up they brought me work to do 

for them, such as linen to make, and laces to mend, and heads 

to dress up, and not only paid me for doing them, but even 

taught me how to do them; so that now I was a gentlewoman 

indeed, as I understood that word, I not only found myself 

clothes and paid my nurse for my keeping, but got money in 

my pocket too beforehand.



The ladies also gave me clothes frequently of their own or 

their children's; some stockings, some petticoats, some gowns, 

some one thing, some another, and these my old woman 

managed for me like a mere mother, and kept them for me, 

obliged me to mend them, and turn them and twist them to 

the best advantage, for she was a rare housewife.



At last one of the ladies took so much fancy to me that she 

would have me home to her house, for a month, she said, to 

be among her daughters.



Now, though this was exceeding kind in her, yet, as my old 

good woman said to her, unless she resolved to keep me for 

good and all, she would do the little gentlewoman more harm 

than good.  'Well,' says the lady, 'that's true; and therefore I'll 

only take her home for a week, then, that I may see how my 

daughters and she agree together, and how I like her temper, 

and then I'll tell you more; and in the meantime, if anybody 

comes to see her as they used to do, you may only tell them 

you have sent her out to my house.'



This was prudently managed enough, and I went to the lady's 

house; but I was so pleased there with the young ladies, and 

they so pleased with me, that I had enough to do to come away, 

and they were as unwilling to part with me.



However, I did come away, and lived almost a year more with 

my honest old woman, and began now to be very helpful to 

her; for I was almost fourteen years old, was tall of my age, 

and looked a little womanish; but I had such a taste of genteel 

living at the lady's house that I was not so easy in my old 

quarters as I used to be, and I thought it was fine to be a 

gentlewoman indeed, for I had quite other notions of a 

gentlewoman now than I had before; and as I thought, I say, 

that it was fine to be a gentlewoman, so I loved to be among 

gentlewomen, and therefore I longed to be there again.



About the time that I was fourteen years and a quarter old, 

my good nurse, mother I rather to call her, fell sick and died.  

I was then in a sad condition indeed, for as there is no great 

bustle in putting an end to a poor body's family when once 

they are carried to the grave, so the poor good woman being 

buried, the parish children she kept were immediately removed 

by the church-wardens; the school was at an end, and the 

children of it had no more to do but just stay at home till they 

were sent somewhere else; and as for what she left, her daughter, 

a married woman with six or seven children, came and swept 

it all away at once, and removing the goods, they had no more 

to say to me than to jest with me, and tell me that the little 

gentlewoman might set up for herself if she pleased.



I was frighted out of my wits almost, and knew not what to do, 

for I was, as it were, turned out of doors to the wide world, and 

that which was still worse, the old honest woman had two-and-

twenty shillings of mine in her hand, which was all the estate the 

little gentlewoman had in the world; and when I asked the 

daughter for it, she huffed me and laughed at me, and told me 

she had nothing to do with it.



It was true the good, poor woman had told her daughter of it, 

and that it lay in such a place, that it was the child's money, 

and  had called once or twice for me to give it me, but I was, 

unhappily, out of the way somewhere or other, and when I 

came back she was past being in a condition to speak of it.  

However, the daughter was so honest afterwards as to give it 

me, though at first she used me cruelly about it.



Now was I a poor gentlewoman indeed, and I was just that 

very night to be turned into the wide world; for the daughter 

removed all the goods, and I had not so much as a lodging to 

go to, or a bit of bread to eat.  But it seems some of the neighbours, 

who had known my circumstances, took so much compassion 

of me as to acquaint the lady in whose family I had been a week, 

as I mentioned above; and immediately she sent her maid to 

fetch me away, and two of her daughters came with the maid 

though unsent.  So I went with them, bag and baggage, and 

with a glad heart, you may be sure.  The fright of my condition 

had made such an impression upon me, that I did not want now 

to be a gentlewoman, but was very willing to be a servant, and 

that any kind of servant they thought fit to have me be.



But my new generous mistress, for she exceeded the good 

woman I was with before, in everything, as well as in the 

matter of estate; I say, in everything except honesty; and for 

that, though this was a lady most exactly just, yet I must not 

forget to say on all occasions, that the first, though poor, was 


as uprightly honest as it was possible for any one to be.



I was no sooner carried away, as I have said, by this good 

gentlewoman, but the first lady, that is to say, the Mayoress 

that was, sent her two daughters to take care of me; and another 

family which had taken notice of me when I was the little 

gentlewoman, and had given me work to do, sent for me after 

her, so that I was mightily made of, as we say; nay, and they 

were not a little angry, especially madam the Mayoress, that 

her friend had taken me away from her, as she called it; for, 

as she said, I was hers by right, she having been the first that 

took any notice of me.  But they that had me would not part 

with me; and as for me, though I should have been very well 

treated with any of the others, yet I could not be better than 

where I was.



Here I continued till I was between seventeen and eighteen 

years old, and here I had all the advantages for my education 

that could be imagined; the lady had masters home to the 

house to teach her daughters to dance, and to speak French, 

and to write, and other to teach them music; and I was always 

with them, I learned as fast as they; and though the masters 

were not appointed to teach me, yet I learned by imitation and 

inquiry all that they learned by instruction and direction; so 

that, in short, I learned to dance and speak French as well as 

any of them, and to sing much better, for I had a better voice 

than any of them.  I could not so readily come at playing on 

the harpsichord or spinet, because I had no instrument of my 

own to practice on, and could only come at theirs in the intervals 

when they left it, which was uncertain; but yet I learned tolerably 

well too, and the young ladies at length got two instruments, 

that is to say, a harpsichord and a spinet too, and then they 

taught me themselves.  But as to dancing, they could hardly 

help my learning country-dances, because they always wanted 

me to make up even number; and, on the other hand, they were 

as heartily willing to learn me everything that they had been 

taught themselves, as I could be to take the learning.



By this means I had, as I have said above, all the advantages 

of education that I could have had if I had been as much a 

gentlewoman as they were with whom I lived; and in some 

things I had the advantage of my ladies, though they were my 

superiors; but they were all the gifts of nature, and which all 

their fortunes could not furnish.  First, I was apparently 

handsomer than any of them; secondly, I was better shaped; 

and, thirdly, I sang better, by which I mean I had a better voice; 

in all which you will, I hope, allow me to say, I do not speak 

my own conceit of myself, but the opinion of all that knew 

the family.



I had with all these the common vanity of my sex, viz. that 

being really taken for very handsome, or, if you please, for a 

great beauty, I very well knew it, and had as good an opinion 

of myself as anybody else could have of me; and particularly 

I loved to hear anybody speak of it, which could not but happen 

to me sometimes, and was a great satisfaction to me.



Thus far I have had a smooth story to tell of myself, and in all 

this part of my life I not only had the reputation of living in a 

very good family, and a family noted and respected everywhere 

for virtue and sobriety, and for every valuable thing; but I had 

the character too of a very sober, modest, and virtuous young 

woman, and such I had always been; neither had I yet any 

occasion to think of anything else, or to know what a temptation 

to wickedness meant.



But that which I was too vain of was my ruin, or rather my 

vanity was the cause of it.  The lady in the house where I was 

had two sons, young gentlemen of very promising parts and 

of extraordinary behaviour, and it was my misfortune to be 

very well with them both, but they managed themselves with 

me in a quite different manner.



The eldest, a gay gentleman that knew the town as well as the 

country, and though he had levity enough to do an ill-natured 

thing, yet had too much judgment of things to pay too dear 

for his pleasures; he began with the unhappy snare to all 

women, viz. taking notice upon all occasions how pretty I was, 

as he called it, how agreeable, how well-carriaged, and the 

like; and this he contrived so subtly, as if he had known as 

well how to catch a woman in his net as a partridge when he 

went a-setting; for he would contrive to be talking this to his 

sisters when, though I was not by, yet when he knew I was 

not far off but that I should be sure to hear him.  His sisters 

would return softly to him, 'Hush, brother, she will hear you; 

she is but in the next room.'  Then he would put it off and talk 

softlier, as if he had not know it, and begin to acknowledge he 

was wrong; and then, as if he had forgot himself, he would 

speak aloud again, and I, that was so well pleased to hear it, 

was sure to listen for it upon all occasions.



After he had thus baited his hook, and found easily enough 

the method how to lay it in my way, he played an opener game; 

and one day, going by his sister's chamber when I was there, 

doing something about dressing her, he comes in with an air 

of gaiety.  'Oh, Mrs. Betty,' said he to me, 'how do you do, 

Mrs. Betty?  Don't your cheeks burn, Mrs. Betty?'  I made a 

curtsy and blushed, but said nothing.  'What makes you talk so, 

brother?' says the lady.  'Why,' says he, 'we have been talking 

of her below-stairs this half-hour.'  'Well,' says his sister, 

'you can say no harm of her, that I am sure, so 'tis no matter 

what you have been talking about.' 'Nay,' says he, ''tis so far 

from talking harm of her, that we have been talking a great 

deal of good, and a great many fine things have been said of 

Mrs. Betty, I assure you; and particularly, that she is the 

handsomest young woman in Colchester; and, in short, they 

begin to toast her health in the town.'



'I wonder at you, brother,' says the sister.  Betty wants but one 

thing, but she had as good want everything, for the market is 

against our sex just now; and if a young woman have beauty, 

birth, breeding, wit, sense, manners, modesty, and all these to 

an extreme, yet if she have not money, she's nobody, she had 

as good want them all for nothing but money now recommends

a woman; the men play the game all into their own hands.'



Her younger brother, who was by, cried, 'Hold, sister, you run 

too fast; I am an exception to your rule.  I assure you, if I find 

a woman so accomplished as you talk of, I say, I assure you, I 

would not trouble myself about the money.'



'Oh,' says the sister, 'but you will take care not to fancy one, 

then, without the money.'



'You don't know that neither,' says the brother.



'But why, sister,' says the elder brother, 'why do you exclaim 

so at the men for aiming so much at the fortune?  You are none 

of them that want a fortune, whatever else you want.'



'I understand you, brother,' replies the lady very smartly; 'you 

suppose I have the money, and want the beauty; but as times 

go now, the first will do without the last, so I have the better 

of my neighbours.'



'Well,' says the younger brother, 'but your neighbours, as you 

call them, may be even with you, for beauty will steal a husband 

sometimes in spite of money, and when the maid chances to be 

handsomer than the mistress, she oftentimes makes as good a 

market, and rides in a coach before her.'



I thought it was time for me to withdraw and leave them, and 

I did so, but not so far but that I heard all their discourse, in 

which I heard abundance of the fine things said of myself, 

which served to prompt my vanity, but, as I soon found, was 

not the way to increase my interest in the family, for the sister 

and the younger brother fell grievously out about it; and as he 

said some very disobliging things to her upon my account, so 

I could easily see that she resented them by her future conduct 

to me, which indeed was very unjust to me, for I had never 

had the least thought of what she suspected as to her younger 

brother; indeed, the elder brother, in his distant, remote way, 

had said a great many things as in jest, which I had the folly 

to believe were in earnest, or to flatter myself with the hopes 

of what I ought to have supposed he never intended, and 

perhaps never thought of.



It happened one day that he came running upstairs, towards 

the room where his sisters used to sit and work, as he often 

used to do; and calling to them before he came in, as was his 

way too, I, being there alone, stepped to the door, and said, 

'Sir, the ladies are not here, they are walked down the garden.'  

As I stepped forward to say this, towards the door, he was just 

got to the door, and clasping me in his arms, as if it had been 

by chance, 'Oh, Mrs. Betty,' says he, 'are you here?  That's 

better still; I want to speak with you more than I do with them'; 

and then, having me in his arms, he kissed me three or four times.



I struggled to get away, and yet did it but faintly neither, and 

he held me fast, and still kissed me, till he was almost out of 

breath, and then, sitting down, says, 'Dear Betty, I am in love 

with you.'



His words, I must confess, fired my blood; all my spirits flew 

about my heart and put me into disorder enough, which he 

might easily have seen in my face.  He repeated it afterwards 

several times, that he was in love with me, and my heart spoke 

as plain as a voice, that I liked it; nay, whenever he said, 'I am 

in love with you,' my blushes plainly replied, 'Would you 

were, sir.'



However, nothing else passed at that time; it was but a sur-

prise, and when he was gone I soon recovered myself again.  

He had stayed longer with me, but he happened to look out 

at the window and see his sisters coming up the garden, so 

he took his leave, kissed me again, told me he was very serious, 

and I should hear more of him very quickly, and away he went, 

leaving me infinitely pleased, though surprised; and had there 

not been one misfortune in it, I had been in the right, but the 

mistake lay here, that Mrs. Betty was in earnest and the 

gentleman was not.



From this time my head ran upon strange things, and I may 

truly say I was not myself; to have such a gentleman talk to 

me of being in love with me, and of my being such a charming 

creature, as he told me I was; these were things I knew not 

how to bear, my vanity was elevated to the last degree.  It is 

true I had my head full of pride, but, knowing nothing of the 

wickedness of the times, I had not one thought of my own 

safety or of my virtue about me; and had my young master 

offered it at first sight, he might have taken any liberty he 

thought fit with me; but he did not see his advantage, which 

was my happiness for that time.



After this attack it was not long but he found an opportunity 

to catch me again, and almost in the same posture; indeed, it 

had more of design in it on his part, though not on my part.  It 

was thus:  the young ladies were all gone a-visiting with their 

mother; his brother was out of town; and as for his father, he 

had been in London for a week before.  He had so well watched 

me that he knew where I was, though I did not so much as know 

that he was in the house; and he briskly comes up the stairs and, 

seeing me at work, comes into the room to me directly, and 

began just as he did before, with taking me in his arms, and 

kissing me for almost a quarter of an hour together.



It was his younger sister's chamber that I was in, and as there 

was nobody in the house but the maids below-stairs, he was, 

it may be, the ruder; in short, he began to be in earnest with me 

indeed.  Perhaps he found me a little too easy, for God knows 

I made no resistance to him while he only held me in his arms 

and kissed me; indeed, I was too well pleased with it to resist 

him much.



However, as it were, tired with that kind of work, we sat down, 

and there he talked with me a great while; he said he was 

charmed with me, and that he could not rest night or day till 

he had told me how he was in love with me, and, if I was able 

to love him again, and would make him happy, I should be the 

saving of his life, and many such fine things.  I said little to 

him again, but easily discovered that I was a fool, and that I 

did not in the least perceive what he meant.




End of Part 1
